HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOTHERAPY INTEGRATION

Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration Third Edition

Edited by John C. Norcross Marvin R. Goldfried

1

1 Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford.
It furthers the University's objective of excellence in research,
scholarship, and education by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a
registered trade mark of Oxford University Press in the UK and certain
other countries. Published in the United States of America by Oxford
University Press 198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States
of America. © John C. Norcross and Marvin R. Goldfried 2019 All rights
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without
the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as
expressly permitted by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the
appropriate reproduction rights organization. Inquiries concerning
reproduction outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights
Department, Oxford University Press, at the address above. You must not
circulate this work in any other form and you must impose this same
condition on any acquirer. Library of Congress Cataloging-​in-​Publication
Data Names: Norcross, John C., 1957-- editor. \| Goldfried, Marvin R.,
editor. Title: Handbook of psychotherapy integration / edited by John C.
Norcross and Marvin R. Goldfried. Description: Third edition. \| New
York, NY : Oxford University Press, \[2019\] \| Includes bibliographical
references and index. Identifiers: LCCN 2018056131 (print) \| LCCN
2018057695 (ebook) \| ISBN 9780190690472 (UPDF) \| ISBN 9780190690489
(EPUB) \| ISBN 9780190690465 (hardcover : alk. paper) Subjects: LCSH:
Eclectic psychotherapy. Classification: LCC RC489.E24 (ebook) \| LCC
RC489.E24 H36 2019 (print) \| DDC 616.89/14---dc23 LC record available
at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018056131 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Printed by Sheridan
Books, Inc., United States of America

Contents

Preface vii Summary Outline xiii The Editors xv The Contributors xvii
Part I: Conceptual and Historical Perspectives 1. A Primer on
Psychotherapy Integration 3 John C. Norcross and Erin F. Alexander 2. A
History of Psychotherapy Integration 28 Marvin R. Goldfried, John E.
Pachankis, and Brien J. Goodwin Part II: Integrative Psychotherapy
Models A. Common Factors/​Processes 3. Integration of Common Factors and
Specific Ingredients 69 Bruce E. Wampold and Pål G. Ulvenes 4. A
Principle-​Based Approach to Psychotherapy Integration 88 Catherine F.
Eubanks and Marvin R. Goldfried 5. Feedback Informed Treatment 105
Cynthia L. Maeschalck, David S. Prescott, and Scott D. Miller B.
Technical Eclecticism 6. Multimodal Therapy 125 Clifford N. Lazarus and
Arnold A. Lazarus 7. Systematic Treatment Selection 141 Andrés J.
Consoli and Larry E. Beutler

vi

Contents

C. Theoretical Integration 8. The Transtheoretical Approach 161 James O.
Prochaska and Carlo C. DiClemente   9. Cyclical Psychodynamics and
Integrative Relational Psychotherapy 184 Paul L. Wachtel and Gregory J.
Gagnon D. Assimilative Integration 10. Assimilative Psychodynamic
Psychotherapy 207 George Stricker and Jerry Gold 11.
Cognitive-​Behavioral Assimilative Integration 228 Louis G. Castonguay,
Michelle G. Newman, and Martin grosse Holtforth Part III: Integrative
Psychotherapies for Specific Disorders and Populations A. Specific
Disorders 12. Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Borderline Personality
Disorder 257 Heidi L. Heard and Marsha M. Linehan 13. Integrative
Psychotherapy for Generalized Anxiety Disorder 284 Henny A. Westra and
Michael J. Constantino 14. Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of
Psychotherapy for Chronic Depression 303 James P. McCullough, Jr. and
Elisabeth Schramm B. Specific Populations and Modalities 15. Integrative
Psychotherapy with Culturally Diverse Clients 325 Jeff E. Harris,
Natasha Shukla, and Allen E. Ivey 16. Integrative Psychotherapy with
Children 341 Athena A. Drewes and John W. Seymour 17. Integrating
Self-​Help and Psychotherapy 357 Amanda Edwards-​Stewart and John C.
Norcross Part IV: Training, Research, International, and Future
Directions 18. Training and Supervision in Psychotherapy Integration 377
John C. Norcross and Marcella Finnerty 19. Outcome Research on
Psychotherapy Integration 405 James F. Boswell, Michelle G. Newman, and
Lata K. McGinn 20. Integrating Research and Practice 432 Louis G.
Castonguay, Michael J. Constantino, and Henry Xiao 21. International
Themes in Psychotherapy Integration 448 Beatriz Gómez, Shigeru Iwakabe,
and Alexandre Vaz 22. Future Directions in Psychotherapy Integration 474
Catherine F. Eubanks, Marvin R. Goldfried, and John C. Norcross Name
Index 487 Subject Index 509

Preface

From its beginnings, psychotherapy integration has been characterized by
a dissatisfaction with single-​school approaches and the concomitant
desire to look across and beyond school boundaries to see what can be
learned---​and how patients can benefit---​from other forms of behavior
change. Improving the efficacy, efficiency, and applicability of
psychotherapy is the raison d'etre of integration. The 28 years between
publication of the inaugural edition of the Handbook of Psychotherapy
Integration and this third edition have been marked by memorable growth.
In 1992, psychotherapy integration was relatively new and novel, just
entering its pre-​teen years. Integration had only recently crystallized
into a formal movement. Our original Handbook was the first compilation
of the major integrative approaches (in the English language) and was
hailed by one reviewer as "the bible of the integration movement." Few
empirical studies had

yet been conducted on the comparative effectiveness of integrative or
eclectic approaches. The formal integration movement was small and
concentrated in the United States. In 2019, psychotherapy integration
has entered young adulthood, no longer an immature or novel approach to
clinical work. Integration---​or the older term, eclecticism---​is now
well established as the modal orientation of mental health
professionals, and this book is now only one of many volumes on the
subject. Literally hundreds of books around the globe are now published
with the term integrative in their titles. Research evidence attesting
to the effectiveness of integrative psychotherapies has mushroomed.
Integration has grown into a mature and international movement. For
these and related reasons, the second edition of the Handbook of
Psychotherapy Integration became dated and incomplete. It was time for a
new edition.

vii

viii

Preface

OUR AIM What has not materially changed is the purpose of our book. The
aim of this third edition continues to be a state-​of-​the-​art,
comprehensive description of psychotherapy integration and its clinical
practices by some of its distinguished proponents. Along with these
integrative approaches, we feature the concepts, history, training,
research, international themes, and future of psychotherapy integration
as well. Our intended audiences are practitioners, students, and
researchers. Psychotherapists of all persuasions and professions will be
attracted to these premier integrative psychotherapies and integrative
treatments. Earlier editions of the Handbook were widely adopted for
courses and seminars on psychotherapy integration, and we anticipate
that this version will again serve this purpose. The contributors' use
of Chapter Guidelines and our Summary Outline facilitate a systematic
and comparative analysis of the integrative approaches. We worked hard
to maintain the delicate balance between authors' individual preferences
and readers' desire for uniformity in chapter content and format. And
researchers will find that each chapter summarizes the outcome research
associated with that particular approach. THE CHANGES The contents of
this third edition reflect both the evolution of psychotherapy
integration and the continuation of our original aims. We have deleted
several dated chapters that appeared in the earlier edition, and all
remaining chapters have been revised and updated. We added six new
chapters: common factors therapy, principle-​based integration,
integrative psychotherapy with children, mixing psychotherapy and self-​
help, integrating research and practice, and international themes. The
latter two chapters constitute contemporary thrusts in the integration
movement: blending research and practice and recognizing its
international nature. We have also purposefully added more diversity in
our contributors: fully half of the

authors are now women, and many authors represent countries beyond North
America. Additionally, we updated the Chapter Guidelines (see below) in
two significant ways. First, we required in each chapter a new section
on diversity considerations to address how integrative approaches
operate in a multicultural world. Second, we revised the section
headings and the desired content on research in the chapters to
highlight the outcome research; that is, research on the success (and
failures) of the integrative treatments, especially in comparison to
alternative forms of psychotherapy. All these welcome changes reflect
the maturation of psychotherapy integration itself. CONTENT AND
ORGANIZATION The Handbook is divided into four substantive parts. Part I
presents the concepts (Norcross and Alexander) and history (Goldfried,
Pachankis, and Goodwin) of psychotherapy integration. Part II features
exemplars of each of the movement's four predominant thrusts: common
factors/​processes (Wampold and Ulvenes; Eubanks and Goldfried;
Maeschalck, Prescott, and Miller), technical eclecticism (Lazarus and
Lazarus; Consoli and Beutler), theoretical integration (Prochaska and
DiClemente; Wachtel and Gagnon), and assimilative integration (Stricker
and Gold; Castonguay, Newman, and Holtforth). Part III presents
integrative psychotherapies for specific disorders, populations, and
modalities: borderline personality (Heard and Linehan), anxiety (Westra
and Constantino), chronic depression (McCullough and Schramm),
culturally diverse clients (Harris, Shukla, and Ivey), children (Drewes
and Seymour), and self-​ help (Stewart and Norcross). Part IV concludes
the volume by addressing clinical training (Norcross and Finnerty),
outcome research (Boswell, Newman, and McGinn), synthesis of research
and practice (Castonguay, Constantino, and Xiao), international
considerations (Gómez, Iwakabe, and Vaz), and future directions in
integration (Eubanks, Goldfried, and Norcross).

Preface

ix

No single volume---​even a hefty one like ◆ How does your integrative
approach prove this---​can canvass all consequential concerns more
effective than single-​system therapies? or clinical situations. Two
regrettable gaps in our coverage are the absence of chapters Assessment
and Formulation on integrating pharmacotherapy and psycho- Aim: To
describe the methods used to undertherapy and on blending therapy
formats/​ stand patient functioning, to construct a case modalities
(individual, couple, family, group). formulation, and to track client
progress. Moreover, space considerations restricted us to five examples
of integrative therapies for spe- ◆ What are the formal and informal
systems cific disorders and populations. In making the for diagnosing or
typing patients? precarious choices of which material would re- ◆ Do you
employ tests or questionnaires in ceive coverage and which would be
passed over, your assessment? we opted to keep the book clinically
useful and ◆ What major client and/​or environmental student accessible.
variables are assessed? ◆ At which levels (e.g., individual, dyadic,
system) are the assessments made? CHAPTER GUIDELINES ◆ What role does
case formulation play in the approach? Contributors to Part II
(Integrative ◆ How do you select and prioritize Psychotherapy Models)
and Part III (Integrative treatment goals? Psychotherapies for Specific
Disorders and ◆ How do you monitor or track client progress Populations)
addressed the same central topics over the course of therapy? in their
chapters. We constructed Chapter ◆ How do you integrate assessment and
Guidelines to facilitate comparative analyses treatment? and to ensure
comprehensiveness. As expected, the authors did not cover every item in
the Applicability and Structure guidelines, but all authors used the
suggested Aim: To describe those clinical situations and headings and
all addressed the requested patients for which the approach is relevant.
topics. The Chapter Guidelines were: The Integrative Approach ◆ For
which types of patients (e.g., diagnostic Aim: To outline the historical
development and types, client characteristics) is the approach guiding
principles of the approach. useful? ◆ For which types of patients is the
approach ◆ What were the primary influences that not appropriate or of
uncertain relevance? contributed to the development of the ◆ For what
situations (e.g., clinical settings, approach (e.g., people,
experiences, time limitations) is/​is not the approach research, books,
conferences)? relevant? ◆ What were the direct antecedents of the ◆ What
are the clinical settings for the approach? approach? Are there any
contraindicated ◆ What are the guiding principles and central settings?
tenets of your approach? ◆ What is the typical frequency and length of ◆
Are some theoretical orientations more sessions? prominent contributors
to your approach ◆ Is the therapy typically time-​limited or than others?
unlimited? What is the typical duration ◆ What is the basis for
selecting therapy of therapy (mean number and range of interventions
(e.g., proven efficacy, sessions)? theoretical considerations, clinical
◆ Are combined therapy formats used (e.g., experience, patient
characteristics)? individual therapy plus family therapy)?

x ◆

Preface

Where and when does psychotropic medication fit into the approach?

Processes of Change Aim: To identify the mechanisms or processes that
produce changes in therapy and to assess their relative impact. What are
the central mechanisms of change in your approach? ◆ What is the
relative importance of insight/​ awareness, skill/​action acquisition,
transference analysis, and the therapeutic relationship in the approach?
◆ What are the relative contributions of "common" factors to outcome? ◆
Does the therapist's personality and psychological health play an
important role? ◆ What other therapist factors influence the course and
outcome of therapy? ◆ Which patient variables enhance or limit the
probability of successful treatment? ◆

Therapy Relationship Aim: To depict the ideal therapeutic relationship
in the approach and the therapist behaviors contributing to it. How do
you view the therapeutic relationship (e.g., as a precondition of
change, as a mechanism of change, as content to be changed)? ◆ What are
the most important ingredients of the therapy relationship in the
approach? ◆ On what grounds is the therapy relationship adjusted or
tailored to the individual patient? ◆ Does the therapist's role change
as therapy progresses? ◆

Methods and Techniques Aim: To delineate the methods and techniques
frequently employed in the approach. What are some of the interventions
used to engage patients? ◆ What is the therapist's work in treatment?
What is the client's work in treatment?

What therapy methods are typically employed? Which would typically not
be used? ◆ How do you deal with resistances and blocks in treatment? ◆
What are the most common and the most serious technical errors a
therapist can make in your approach? ◆ How active and directive is the
therapist in the approach? ◆ How are maintenance sessions and relapse
prevention addressed in the approach? ◆

Diversity Considerations Aim: To outline the treatment considerations
and potential adaptations for clients of historically marginalized
ethnic/​racial, gender, sexual, and other dimensions of diversity. How
does the approach apply to diverse patients in a multicultural world? ◆
Are there any particular adaptations for clients of diverse cultural
identities? ◆ What are the most common culturally competent and
culturally challenging elements of your approach? ◆

Case Example Aim: To illustrate the initiation, process, and outcome of
the integrative approach with a single case example. ◆

To maintain comparability among the examples, the cases in Part II
should deal with the treatment of a client with general anxiety and
unipolar depression (psychological distress). The case example should
illustrate and discuss the initiation of treatment, patient assessment,
case formulation, treatment methods, therapy relationship, termination,
and outcome. Cases in Part III will pertain, of course, to the specific
disorder and population discussed in the respective chapters.

◆

Outcome Research Aim: To summarize the outcome research on the
integrative approach.

Preface

What research has been conducted on process--​outcome linkages of the
approach? ◆ What outcome research has been performed on the approach? ◆
Does any controlled outcome research suggest that the integrative
approach is comparable or superior to other forms of psychotherapy? ◆
What are the average percentages of dropouts and negative outcomes? ◆

Future Directions Aim: To explicate the future directions and needs of
the approach. What further work (clinical, research, theoretical,
training) is required to advance your approach? ◆ In what directions is
your integrative approach heading in the next decade? ◆

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS A large and integrative volume of this nature requires
considerable collaboration. Our efforts have been aided immeasurably by
our families and our Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy
Integration (SEPI) colleagues;

xi

the former giving us time and inspiration, the latter providing
intellectual stimulation and professional affirmation. We are deeply
indebted to the contributors. Most of them are SEPI members, and all are
eminent psychotherapists in their own right. They are "beyond
category"---​a phrase that Duke Ellington used as a high form of praise
for artists who transcend the normal theoretical boundaries. We are
pleased to be in their company and to privilege their integrative work.
We also appreciate the dozens of emails and letters with advice on
preparing the third edition of this Handbook. In particular, we are
grateful for Gary VandenBos's detailed feedback on the second edition.
Thank you to his 2016 and 2017 Integrative Psychotherapy students at
Uniformed Services University for their systematic feedback. Last, we
reciprocally acknowledge each other for the pleasure and success of our
editorial collaboration. We have a long history of collaborating on
multiple projects and consider ourselves fortunate to continue to do so.
John C. Norcross Clarks Summit, PA Marvin R. Goldfried Stony Brook, NY

Integrative Approach

Assessment and Formulation

Applicability and Structure

Processes of Change

Therapy Relationship

Methods and Techniques

Diversity Considerations

Case Example

Outcome Research

Future Directions

Summary Outline (for Parts II and III)

Common Factors plus Specific Ingredients

70

77

77

71

71

78

78

78

80

80

Principle-Based Integration

88

89

92

92

96

92

96

97

100

101

Feedback-Informed Treatment

106

108

110

111

111

111

112

113

117

118

Multimodal Therapy

125

127

131

132

133

133

135

135

137

138

Systematic Treatment Selection

141

142

143

145

147

148

150

151

153

154

Transtheoretical Therapy

162

168

170

172

171

172

173

177

179

Cyclical Psychodynamics

185

188

190

191

191

191

195

198

Assimilative Psychodynamic Therapy

207

209

211

212

214

216

218

219

223

223

Assimilative CBT Integration

229

230

232

233

234

235

241

241

243

246

Common Factors/Processes

Technical Eclecticism

Theoretical Integration

Assimilative Integration

xiii

Methods and Techniques

Diversity Considerations

Case Example

Outcome Research

Future Directions

258

262, 261, 272 263 265

273

268

274

275

277

279

Generalized Anxiety

284

286

288

288

290

291

293

293

297

298

Chronic Depression

303

306

308

310

312

312

315

315

318

319

Culturally Diverse Clients

325

327

328

329

330

331

335

336

337

Integrative Therapy with Children

342

346

348

349

349

350

352

352

Processes of Change

Borderline Personality

Integrative Approach

Therapy Relationship

Applicability and Structure

Summary Outline Assessment and Formulation

xiv

Disorders and Populations

350

The Editors

John C. Norcross, PhD, ABPP, is Distinguished Professor of Psychology at
the University of Scranton, Adjunct Professor of Psychiatry at SUNY
Upstate Medical University, and a board-​ certified clinical psychologist
in limited independent practice. Dr. Norcross has co-​written or edited
22 books, including Psychotherapy Relationships That Work,
Psychologists' Desk Reference, Clinician's Guide to Evidence-​Based
Practice, Self-​Help That Works, the five-​volume APA Handbook of Clinical
Psychology, Insider's Guide to Graduate Programs in Clinical &
Counseling Psychology, and Systems of Psychotherapy: A Transtheoretical
Analysis, now in its 9th edition. Dr. Norcross has served as president
of the American Psychological Association (APA) Society of Clinical
Psychology, the APA Society for the Advancement of Psychotherapy, the
International Society of Clinical Psychology, and the Society for the
Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration. He edited the Journal of
Clinical Psychology: In

xv

Session for a decade and has been on the editorial boards of a dozen
journals. Dr. Norcross has received multiple professional awards, such
as APA's Distinguished Career Contributions to Education and Training
Award, Pennsylvania Professor of the Year from the Carnegie Foundation,
and election to the National Academies of Practice. Dr. Norcross has
conducted workshops and lectures in 30 countries. He lives in northeast
Pennsylvania. Marvin R. Goldfried, PhD, ABPP, is Distinguished Professor
of Psychology at Stony Brook University. In addition to his teaching,
supervision, and research, he maintains a limited practice of
psychotherapy in New York City. He is a diplomate in clinical psychology
and recipient of distinguished psychologist awards from APA divisions 8,
12, 29, and 44, the APA/​ American Psychological Foundation lifetime
achievement award for the application of

xvi

The Editors

psychology, the Distinguished Career Award from the Society for
Psychotherapy Research, and awards for both education/​training and
clinical contributions from the Association for Behavioral and Cognitive
Therapies. Dr. Goldfried is past president of the Society for
Psychotherapy Research, Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy
Integration, Society of Clinical Psychology, and Society for the
Advancement of Psychotherapy. He is author, co-​author, or editor of
several

books, including Behavior Change Through Self-​ Control, Clinical
Behavior Therapy, Converging Themes in Psychotherapy, From
Cognitive-​Behavior Therapy to Psychotherapy Integration, How Therapists
Change, and Transforming Negative Reactions to Clients. Dr. Goldfried is
cofounder of SEPI, founder of Psychologists Affirming Their Gay,
Lesbian, and Bisexual Family (AFFIRM), and founder of the Two-​ Way
Bridge Between Research and Practice. He lives in New York City.

The Contributors

Erin F. Alexander, BS Department of Psychology, University of Scranton
Department of Psychology, Binghamton University Larry E. Beutler, PhD
Clinical Psychology Program, Palo Alto University (emeritus) School of
Education, University of California, Santa Barbara (emeritus) James F.
Boswell, PhD Department of Psychology, State University of New York at
Albany Louis G. Castonguay, PhD Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania
State University, University Park

Andrés J. Consoli, PhD Counseling, Clinical, and School Psychology,
University of California, Santa Barbara Michael J. Constantino, PhD
Department of Psychological and Brain Science, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst Carlo C. DiClemente, PhD Department of
Psychology, University of Maryland at Baltimore County Athena A. Drewes,
PsyD Astor Services for Children and Families Amanda Edwards-​Stewart,
PhD National Center for Telehealth and Technology Psychological Health
Center of Excellence

xvii

xviii

The Contributors

Catherine F. Eubanks, PhD Ferkauf Graduate School of Psychology, Yeshiva
University Mount Sinai Beth Israel Psychotherapy Research Program, Mount
Sinai School of Medicine

Arnold A. Lazarus, PhD (deceased) Graduate School of Applied and
Professional Psychology, Rutgers University (emeritus)

Marcella Finnerty, DPsych IICP College, Dublin

Marsha M. Linehan, PhD Department of Psychology, University of
Washington Behavioral Tech, Seattle, WA

Gregory J. Gagnon, MPhil Department of Psychology, Graduate Center of
the City University in New York Jerry Gold, PhD Department of
Psychology, Adelphi University Marvin R. Goldfried, PhD Department of
Psychology, Stony Brook University Beatriz Gómez, PhD Aigle Foundation,
Buenos Aires Brien J. Goodwin, BA Department of Psychological and Brain
Science, University of Massachusetts, Amherst Jeff E. Harris, PhD
Department of Psychology and Philosophy, Texas Women's University

Clifford N. Lazarus, PhD The Lazarus Center, New Jersey

Cynthia L. Maeschalck, MA International Center for Clinical Excellence
James P. McCullough, Jr., PhD Departments of Psychology and Psychiatry,
Virginia Commonwealth University Lata K. McGinn, PhD Ferkauf Graduate
School of Psychology, Yeshiva University Scott D. Miller, PhD
International Center for Clinical Excellence Michelle G. Newman, PhD
Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University

Heidi L. Heard, PhD Behavioral Tech, Seattle, WA

John C. Norcross, PhD Department of Psychology, University of Scranton
Department of Psychiatry, SUNY Upstate Medical University

Martin grosse Holtforth, PhD Department of Psychology, University of
Bern

John E. Pachankis, PhD School of Public Health, Yale University

Allen E. Ivey, EdD Department of Counseling, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst (emeritus)

David S. Prescott, LICSW International Center for Clinical Excellence

Shigeru Iwakabe, PhD Faculty of Core Research, Ochanomizu University

James O. Prochaska, PhD Department of Psychology, University of Rhode
Island

The Contributors

Elisabeth Schramm, PhD Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy,
University Medical Center Freiburg John W. Seymour, PhD Department of
Counseling and Student Personnel, Minnesota State University, Mankato
Natasha Shukla, MA Department of Psychology and Philosophy, Texas
Women's University

xix

Alexandre Vaz, MSc ISPA---​University Institute, Portugal Paul L.
Wachtel, PhD Department of Psychology, City College and Graduate Center
of City University in New York Bruce E. Wampold, PhD Research Institute,
Modum Bad Psychiatric Center, Norway Department of Counseling
Psychology, University of Wisconsin--​Madison

George Stricker, PhD Clinical Psychology Program, Argosy University,
Northern Virginia

Henny A. Westra, PhD Department of Psychology, York University

Pål G. Ulvenes, PhD Research Institute, Modum Bad Psychiatric Center,
Norway

Henry Xiao, MS Department of Psychology, Pennsylvania State University,
University Park

HANDBOOK OF PSYCHOTHERAPY INTEGRATION

PART I

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

1 A Primer on Psychotherapy Integration JOHN C. NORCROSS AND ERIN F.
ALEXANDER

Rivalry among theoretical orientations has a long and undistinguished
history in psychotherapy dating back to Freud. In the infancy of the
field, therapy systems, like battling siblings, competed for attention
and affection in a "dogma eat dogma" environment (Larson, 1980).
Clinicians traditionally operated from within their own particular
theoretical frameworks, often to the point of being blind to alternative
conceptualizations and potentially superior interventions. The field was
organized into "tribes" in which therapists derived their identities
from belonging to certain subgroups, identities that often entailed
opposition to other groups (Wachtel, 2017). Mutual antipathy and
exchange of puerile insults between adherents of rival orientations were
very much the order of the day. This ideological Cold War may have been
a necessary developmental stage toward sophisticated attempts at
rapprochement. Thomas

Kuhn (1970) has described this period as a "pre-​ paradigmatic crisis."
Feyerabend (1970, p. 209), another philosopher of science, concluded
that "the interplay between tenacity and proliferation is an essential
feature in the actual development of science. It seems that it is not
the puzzle-​solving activity that is responsible for the growth of our
knowledge, but the active interplay of various tenaciously held views."
As the field of psychotherapy has matured, integration (or eclecticism)
has become a therapeutic mainstay. Since the early 1990s, we have
witnessed both a general decline in ideological struggle and a movement
toward rapprochement. Psychotherapists now widely acknowledge the
inadequacies of any one theoretical system and the potential value of
others. Integration gathers, in the words of Abraham Lincoln, "strange,
discordant, and even, hostile elements from the four winds."

3

4

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

What is distinctive of the present era is tolerance for and assimilation
of formulations that were once viewed as deviant. Indeed, many young
students of psychotherapy express surprise when apprised of the
ideological Cold War of the preceding generations. Psychotherapy
integration has crystallized into a formal movement or, more
dramatically, a "revolution" (Lebow, 1997) and a "metamorphosis" in
mental health (London, 1988; Moultrup, 1986). Although various labels
are applied to this movement---​eclecticism, integration, rapprochement,
convergence---​ the goals are similar. Integration is characterized by
dissatisfaction with single-​school approaches and a concomitant desire
to look across school boundaries to see what can be learned from other
ways of conducting psychotherapy. The ultimate outcome of doing so is to
enhance the efficacy, efficiency, and applicability of psychotherapy.
The latter point deserves reiteration: the goal of integration is to
boost therapeutic success, not for academic or aesthetic satisfaction.
Proposing another integrative treatment or advancing a neglected element
in psychotherapy may prove interesting, but the bottom line is whether
it leads to improved outcomes of some sort. Simply adding elements---​a
"more is better" strategy---​does not necessarily enhance treatment
effectiveness. Psychotherapy integration has come of age since the first
edition of this Handbook in 1992. Any number of indicators attest to the
maturation of psychotherapy integration. Integration or the earlier
preferred term, eclecticism, is the modal theoretical orientation of
English-​speaking psychotherapists and in many countries throughout the
world (see Gómez, Iwakabe, & Vaz, Chapter 21, this volume). Leading
psychotherapy textbooks routinely identify their theoretical persuasion
as integrative, and an integrative or eclectic chapter is regularly
included in compendia of treatment approaches. The publication of books
that synthesize various therapeutic concepts and methods continues
unabated, now numbering in the hundreds. Handbooks on integration, such
as this one, have been published in at least a dozen countries.
Reflecting and engendering

the movement have been the establishment of interdisciplinary
organizations devoted to integration, notably the Society for the
Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI), and of international
publications, including SEPI's Journal of Psychotherapy Integration. And
the integrative fervor will apparently persist well into the 2020s: a
panel of psychotherapy experts portend integration's escalating
popularity (Norcross, Pfund, & Prochaska, 2013). Although psychotherapy
integration has indeed come of age, we have not yet attained consensus
or convergence. As Lazarus and Lazarus (Chapter 6, this volume) note,
the field of psychotherapy is still replete with cult members---​ devoted
followers of a particular school of thought. High priests of
psychological health persist in competitive strife and internecine
battles. These battles have receded but have not been extinguished. A
consensus has been achieved, however, in support of the idea that
neither traditional fragmentation nor premature unification will wisely
serve the field of psychotherapy or its clients. We are in no position
to determine conclusively which single theory, single treatment, or
single unification scheme is best. Although it might be more satisfying
and elegant if the psychotherapy world were not a multiverse but rather
a universe, the pluralists assure us that this quest will not be
realized, at least not soon (Messer, 1992). In the meantime,
psychotherapy is progressing toward integration in the zeitgeist of
informed pluralism. PLAN OF THE CHAPTER This chapter explicates the
broad context of psychotherapy integration and sets the stage for the
subsequent chapters in the volume. As the chapter title indicates, we
offer a primer on integration in the dual sense of a primer (soft i) as
a small introduction to the subject and of a primer (hard i) as a
basecoat or undercoat for the following applications. This chapter
begins by describing the converging reasons for the growth of
psychotherapy integration, after which we review the four primary routes
to integration. This segues into the varieties of

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

integration, which includes summaries of recent studies on the
prevalence, subtypes, and practices of integrative therapists. The
chapter concludes with a discussion of recurrent obstacles to
psychotherapy integration. WHY INTEGRATION NOW? Integration as a point
of view has probably existed as long as philosophy and psychotherapy. In
philosophy, the third-​ century biographer Diogenes Laertius referred to
an eclectic school that flourished in Alexandria in the second century
a.d. (Lunde, 1974). In psychotherapy, Freud consciously struggled with
the selection and integration of diverse methods (Frances, 1988). More
formal ideas on synthesizing the psychotherapies appeared in the
literature as early as the 1930s (Goldfried, Pachankis, & Goodwin,
Chapter 2, this volume). For example, Thomas French (1933) stood before
the 1932 meeting of the American Psychiatric Association and drew
parallels between certain concepts of Freud and Pavlov. In 1936, Sol
Rosenzweig published an article that extracted commonalities among
various systems of psychotherapy. Until recent decades, however,
integration has appeared only as a latent theme (if not conspiratorially
ignored altogether) in a field organized around discrete theoretical
orientations. Although psychotherapists privately recognized

5

that their orientations did not adequately assist them in all they
encountered in practice, a host of political, social, and economic
forces---​ such as professional organizations, training institutes, and
referral networks---​ kept them penned within their own theoretical
school yards and typically led them to avoid clinical contributions from
alternative orientations. It has only been within the past 40 years that
integration has developed into a clearly delineated area of interest.
Indeed, the temporal course of interest in psychotherapy integration, as
indexed by both the number of publications (Arkowitz, 1992) and
development of organizations and journals (Chapter 2), reveals
occasional stirrings before 1970, a growing interest during the 1980s,
and rapidly accelerating interest from 1990 to the present. Figure 1.1
depicts the frequency trends of the three interrelated terms
psychotherapy integration, integrative psychotherapy, and eclectic
psychotherapy from 1960 to 2010 in volumes archived by Google Books. The
frequency graphs have been moderately smoothed for easier
interpretation. The term "eclecticism" experienced its heyday during the
1980s and has gradually declined thereafter. By contrast, "psychotherapy
integration" has become the preferred or at least the most frequently
used terminology. The slopes for both integrative titles continued to
move upward into the late 2010s. The rapid increase in integrative
psychotherapies of late leads one to inquire,

0.00000400% 0.00000350% psychotherapy integration

0.00000300% 0.00000250% 0.00000200% 0.00000150% 0.00000100%

integrative psychotherapy eclectic psychotherapy

0.00000050% 0.00000000% 1960

1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

(click on line/label for focus)

FIGURE 1.1 Frequency of occurrence of "psychotherapy integration,"
"integrative psychotherapy," and "eclectic psychotherapy" in the Google
Books Archive from 1960 to 2010.

6

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

"Why now?" What conditions encouraged the field to give specific
attention and credence of late to an elusive goal that has been around
for more than half a century? At least eight interacting, mutually
reinforcing factors have fostered the development of integration in the
past two decades:

integrative clinicians reveal that their alignment is motivated in part
by disillusionment with single-​therapy systems (Garfield & Kurtz, 1977;
Norcross, Karpiak, & Lister, 2004). The ecumenical spirit reflects the
stark realization that narrow conceptual positions and simple answers to
major questions do not begin to explain current evidence in many areas
of psycho1. Proliferation of therapies therapy (Kazdin, 1984). Clinical
realities have 2. Inadequacy of single theories and treatments come to
demand a more flexible, if not integra3. External socioeconomic
contingencies tive, perspective. 4. Ascendancy of short-​term,
problem-​focused No therapy or therapist is immune to failure. treatments
It is at such times that seasoned clinicians often 5. Opportunity to
observe various treatments, wonder if the clinical methods from
orientations particularly for difficult disorders other than their own
might more appropriately 6. Recognition that therapeutic commonalities
have been included in the treatment---​if anheavily contribute to outcome
other orientation's strength in dealing with 7. Identification of
specific therapist effects the particular therapeutic problems might and
evidence-​based treatments complement the therapist's own orientational
8. Development of a professional network for weakness. The twin
assumptions are that each integration orientation has its particular
domain of expertise and that these domains can be interrelated The sheer
proliferation of diverse schools to minimize their deficits (Pinsof,
1995). has been one important reason for the surge The proliferation of
therapies and the of integration. The field of psychotherapy has
inadequacies of single models were in part been staggered by over-​choice
and fragmented precipitated by a matrix of economic and social by future
shock. Which of 500-​plus therapies pressures. In the 1970s and 1980s,
integration should be studied, taught, or bought (Prochaska was spurred
along by such occurrences as the & Norcross, 2018)? Conflicting and
untested advent of legal accreditation of psychotherapists, theories are
advanced on a regular basis, and no with a resultant surge in
professional practice single theory has cornered the market on utility.
and growth of psychological trade schools; the The hyperinflation of
brand name therapies has destigmatization of psychotherapy, spurred by
produced narcissistic fatigue: "With so many the human potential
movement; the onset of fedbrand names around that no one can recognize,
eral financial support for clinical training; and let alone remember,
and so many competitors insurance companies' financing of psychologdoing
psychotherapy, it is becoming too arduous ical treatment (London, 1983).
Psychotherapy to launch still another new brand" (London, also
experienced mounting pressures from 1988, pp. 5--​6). This might also be
called the such not easily disregarded sources as govern"exhaustion
theory" of integration: Peace among ment policymakers, informed
consumers, and warring schools is the last resort. insurance payors who
started to demand crisp A related and second factor is the growing and
informative answers regarding the effectiveawareness that no one
approach is clinically ade- ness of psychosocial treatments. More
broadly, quate for all patients and situations (Fernandez-​ the culture
of the 1970s and 1980s created Alvarez, Consoli, & Goemez, 2016). The an
intellectual and sociopolitical climate for proliferation of theories is
both a cause and con- psychotherapists in which experimentation and
sequence of the problem---​neither the theories heterodoxy could flower
more easily than at nor the techniques adequately deal with the other
times (Gold, 1990). complexity of psychological problems (Beutler, In
the 1990s, another set of forces weakened 1983). Surveys of
self-​designated eclectic and the field's rigid theoretical boundaries.

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

7

Consumer groups and insurance companies orientations observing and
experimenting were pressuring psychotherapists to demon- with diverse
treatments (Arkowitz, 1992). The strate the efficacy of their methods.
Biologically establishment of specialized clinics for the oriented
psychiatrists questioned the psychoso- treatment of specific disorders
has afforded excial paradigm. The failure of research findings posure to
other theories and therapies. These to demonstrate a consistent
superiority of any clinics are often staffed by professionals of one
school over another and the shifting focus multiple orientations and
disciplines, with to specific clinical problems (often requiring greater
emphasis on their expertise about the expertise of different professions
and the clinical problem than on their theoretorientations) led an
increasing number of ical orientation per se. These clinics focus on
clinicians to search seriously for solutions out- treating patients and
disorders that have not side their own particular paradigm. historically
responded favorably to pure-​form Attacks from outside the mental health
psychotherapies: personality disorders, eating professions started to
propel psychotherapists to- disorders, substance abuse, trauma,
obsessive-​ gether. Without some drastic changes (not the compulsive
disorders, and the severely mentally least of which is integration),
psychotherapists ill, to name a few. to lose prestige, customers, and
money. As Moreover, the publication of detailed treatMahoney (1984) put
it (paraphrasing Benjamin ment manuals and the release of numerous
Franklin), there is something to be said for videotapes of actual
psychotherapy have having the different therapies "hang together"
permitted more accurate comparisons and rather than "hang separately."
contrasts among the therapies. Many clinicians In recent decades, short-​
term, problem-​ reading manuals or watching videotapes focused
psychotherapies have been in the are surprised by the immense
commonality ascendancy. Treatment reviews, tightening in- among
practitioners of diverse orientations in surance reimbursement, and
mandated brief spite of their differing vocabulary (Norcross treatment
began to startle clinical practitioners & VandenBos, 2011). Even when
actual out of their complacency with long-​term treat- differences
remain, in behavioral terms, ment. With 90% of all patients now covered
observing practices of different orientations may by some variant of
managed care, short-​term have induced an informal version of
"theorettherapy has increasingly become the de facto ical exposure":
previously feared and unknown treatment. therapies were approached
gradually, anxiety Short-​term therapy invariably means more dissipated,
and the previously feared therapies problem-​focused therapy. The brief
problem were integrated into the clinical repertoire. focus has brought
formerly different therapies At the same time, controlled research has
recloser together and has created variations of vealed surprisingly few
significant differences in therapies that are more compatible with each
outcome among different therapies. Luborsky other. Integration,
particularly in the form of and associates (1975), borrowing a phrase
from technical eclecticism, responds to the prag- the Dodo bird in Alice
in Wonderland, wryly matic time-​ limited injunction of "whatever observe
that "everybody has won and all must therapy works better---​ and
quicker---​ for this have prizes." Or, in the words of London (1988,
patient with this problem." In one early study p. 7), "Meta-​ analytic
research shows charity of 294 health maintenance organization for all
treatments and malice towards none." (HMO) therapists, for instance, the
prevalence Though there are many interpretations of such of
eclecticism/​integration as a theoretical ori- findings, the two most
common responses seem entation nearly doubled as a function of their to
be a specification of factors common to sucemployment in HMOs favoring
brief therapy cessful treatments and a synthesis of useful (Austad et
al., 1991). methods from disparate therapeutic traditions. A fifth
factor in the promotion of psychoThe recognition that the so-​called
common therapy integration has been clinicians of diverse factors play
major roles in determining therapy

8

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

effectiveness served as another contributor to the rise of integration.
The common factors or change processes most frequently proposed are the
development of a therapeutic alliance, opportunity for catharsis,
acquisition and practice of new behaviors, and clients' positive
expectancies (Grencavage & Norcross, 1990; Tracey et al., 2003).
Empirically speaking, therapy outcome can best be predicted by the
properties of the patient and the therapy relationship (see Norcross &
Lambert, 2019, for reviews): only 10--​ 15% of outcome variance is
generally accounted for by the particular technique. Nonetheless, more
than commonalities are evident across the therapies---​ there are
occasionally specific factors attributable to different treatments and
different therapists (the so-​called therapist effects; Castonguay &
Hill, 2017). Psychotherapy research has demonstrated the differential
effectiveness of a few therapies with specific disorders; for example,
parent management therapy for child conduct disorders, conjoint therapy
for partner conflict, and some form of exposure for trauma disorder.
Psychotherapy research has also demonstrated the differential
effectiveness of particular relationships with specific types of
patients; for example, less directive therapies for highly resistant
patients (Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this volume) and
insight-​oriented therapies for people in the contemplation stage of
change (Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8, this volume). We now have
more information by which to selectively prescribe different treatments,
or combinations of treatments, for some clients and problems.
Practitioners have learned to emphasize those factors common across
therapies while capitalizing on the contributions of specific
treatments. The proper use of common and specific factors in therapy
will probably be most effective for clients and most congenial to
practitioners (Garfield, 1992). We integrate by combining fundamental
similarities and useful differences across the schools. The
identification of specific effects in psychotherapy relates closely to
the recent

promulgation of research-​based treatments in mental health. These tend
to be manualized, single-​theory treatments for specific disorders that
are supported by controlled research in clinical trials. At first blush,
the compilation of single-​theory or pure-​form treatments would seem
antithetical to the integration movement (Glass & Arnkoff, 1996). The
promotion of such compilations might lead to training programs teaching
only the listed pure-​form therapies, insurance companies funding only
these, and practitioners conducting only these. Yet the emergence of
research-​ based treatments in mental health has, paradoxically,
furthered the breakdown of traditional schools and the escalation of
informed pluralism. The particular decision rules for what qualifies as
evidence remain controversial, but the emerging evidence-​based lists
reveal a pragmatic flare for "what works for whom." The clear emphasis
is on "what" works, not on "what theory" applies. The evidence-​based
movement is compatible with theoretical integration and essential to
technical eclecticism (Shoham & Rohrbaugh, 1996). In fact, several
commentators believe that evidence-​ based compilations herald the final
dismantling of traditional theoretical categories and will yield a new
metatheory of therapy (Smith, 1999). Finally, the development of a
professional network has been both a consequence and cause of interest
in psychotherapy integration. In 1983, the interdisciplinary SEPI was
formed to bring together those who were intrigued by the various routes
to rapprochement among the psychotherapies. SEPI promotes the
integrative spirit throughout the therapeutic community through annual
conferences, regional networks, a quarterly journal, and professional
networking. Integrationists (and eclectics) now have a professional
home. FOUR ROUTES TO INTEGRATION There are numerous pathways toward the
integration of the psychotherapies; many roads lead to Rome. The four
most popular routes are

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

technical eclecticism, theoretical integration, common factors, and
assimilative integration. Each of the four routes is embraced by
considerable proportions of self-​identified eclectics and
integrationists but with some definite preferences. Recent research on
SEPI members (Norcross et al., 2017) indicates that the preferred routes
or subtypes entail assimilative integration, theoretical integration,
and common factors, followed by technical eclecticism. That rank order
generally aligns with those of US clinical psychologists (Norcross,
Karpiak, & Lister, 2005), who endorsed theoretical integration (27.5%),
common factors (27.5%), assimilative integration (26%), and technical
eclecticism (19%). In both studies and populations, technical
eclecticism ranked last in frequency. All four routes are characterized
by a general desire to increase therapeutic efficacy, efficiency, and
applicability by looking beyond the confines of single theories and the
restricted techniques traditionally associated with those theories.
However, they do so in different ways and at different levels. Here, we
define each route, comment on its integrative strategy, and consider how
it professes to improve patient outcomes---​the ultimate goal of all
integration. Technical Eclecticism Eclecticism is the least theoretical
of the four routes but should not be construed as either atheoretical or
antitheoretical (Lazarus, Beutler, & Norcross, 1992). Technical
eclectics seek to improve our ability to select the best treatment for
the person and the problem. This search is guided primarily by research
evidence and clinical observation on what has worked best for others in
the past with similar problems and similar characteristics. Eclecticism
focuses on predicting for whom interventions will work: the foundation
is actuarial rather than theoretical. The multimodal therapy of Lazarus
(1989, 1997; Lazarus & Lazarus, Chapter 6, this volume) and the
systematic treatment selection (STS) of Beutler (1983; Beutler &
Clarkin, 1990; Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this volume) exemplify
technical eclecticism.

9

The term eclecticism has acquired an emotionally ambivalent, if not
negative, connotation for some clinicians due to its alleged
disorganized and indecisive nature. In some corners, eclecticism
connotes undisciplined subjectivity, muddle-​headedness, the "last refuge
for mediocrity, the seal of incompetency," or a "classic case of
professional anomie" (quoted in Robertson, 1979). Eysenck (1970, p. 145)
characterized this indiscriminate smorgasbord as a "mish-​mash of
theories, a hugger-​mugger of procedures, a gallimaufry of therapies"
having no proper rationale or empirical verification. Indeed, it is
surprising that so many clinicians admit to being eclectic in their
work, given the negative valence the term has acquired. But much of the
opposition to eclecticism should properly be redirected to syncretism---​
uncritical and unsystematic combinations (Norcross, 1990; Patterson,
1990). This haphazard stew is primarily an outgrowth of pet techniques
and inadequate training, an arbitrary, if not capricious, blend of
methods by default (Smith, 1999). This muddle of idiosyncratic clinical
creations is the antithesis of effective eclecticism. Proponents of
technical eclecticism use procedures drawn from different sources
without necessarily subscribing to the theories that spawned them,
whereas the theoretical integrationist draws from diverse systems that
may be epistemologically or ontologically incompatible. For technical
eclectics, no necessary connection exists between theoretical
underpinnings and techniques. "To attempt a theoretical rapprochement is
as futile as trying to picture the edge of the universe. But to read
through the vast amount of literature on psychotherapy, in search of
techniques, can be clinically enriching and therapeutically rewarding"
(Lazarus, 1967, p. 416). Prescriptive matching of psychotherapy to the
client's goals, problems, and context promises to enhance treatment
outcomes. Historically, the match was a research-​ based method to the
presenting diagnosis or disorder, say, cognitive therapy for depression,
exposure therapy for trauma, communication skills training for couples,
psychodynamic therapy for

10

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

personality disorders. Increasingly, the match is to the patient's
transdiagnostic characteristics, such as adaptations to culture,
preferences, religion/​spirituality, reactance level, and stage of
change. The outcome research generally shows stronger effect sizes for
these transdiagnostic adaptations or responsiveness than to specific
disorders (Norcross & Wampold, 2019). In all cases, the point is to
improve success by fitting or personalizing psychotherapy to the
individual client. Theoretical Integration In the theoretical
integration form of synthesis, two or more therapies are integrated in
the hope that the result will be better than the constituent therapies
alone. As the name implies, there is an emphasis placed on integrating
the underlying theories of psychotherapy ("theory smushing") along with
the integration of therapy techniques from each ("technique melding").
Proposals to integrate psychoanalytic and behavioral theories illustrate
this direction, most notably the cyclical psychodynamics of Wachtel
(1977, 1987; Wachtel & Gagnon, Chapter 9, this volume), as do efforts to
blend cognitive and psychoanalytic therapies, notably Ryle's (1990,
2001) cognitive-​analytic therapy. Grander schemes have been advanced to
meld most of the major systems of psychotherapy, such as the
transtheoretical approach of Prochaska and DiClemente (1984, Chapter 8).
Even more ambitious are proposals for a unified psychotherapy
(Magnavita, 2012; www.unifiedpsychotherapyproject.org), which seeks to
integrate all of psychotherapy and the clinical sciences. Such
unifications claim that they would leave behind the pre-​paradigmatic
past of traditional theoretical orientations to explain many features of
psychopathology and psychotherapy; instead, psychotherapy would graduate
to a paradigmatic clinical science (Melchert, 2016). Theoretical
integration involves a commitment to a conceptual or theoretical
creation beyond a technical blend of methods. The goal is to create a
conceptual framework that synthesizes the best elements of two or more

approaches to therapy. Integration aspires to more than a simple
combination; it seeks an emergent theory that is more than the sum of
its parts and that leads to new directions for practice and research.
The rationale is that such integrative treatments may prove more
effective because they are more adaptable to different types of
patients, address client functioning in multiple ways or levels, or are
more comprehensive than single-​ theory therapies (Wampold, 2005). The
preponderance of professional contention resides in the distinction
between theoretical integration and technical eclecticism. How do they
differ? Which is the more fruitful strategy for knowledge acquisition
and clinical practice? Table 1.1 summarizes the consensual distinctions
between integration and eclecticism. The primary distinction is that
between empirical pragmatism and theoretical flexibility. Integration
refers to a commitment to a conceptual or theoretical creation beyond
eclecticism's pragmatic blending of procedures, or, to take a culinary
metaphor (cited in Norcross & Napolitano, 1986, p. 253): "The eclectic
selects among several dishes to constitute a meal, the integrationist
creates new dishes by combining different ingredients." A corollary to
this distinction, rooted in theoretical integration's earlier stage of
development, is that current practice is largely eclectic; theory
integration represents a promissory note for the future. In the words of
Wachtel (1991, p. 44):

TABLE 1.1 Eclecticism versus integration Eclecticism

Integration

Technical Divergent (differences)

Theoretical Convergent (commonalities) Combining many Creating something
new; blend Unifying the parts More theoretical than empirical More than
sum of parts Idealistic

Choosing from many Applying what is; collection Applying the parts
Atheoretical but empirical Sum of parts Realistic

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration The habits and boundaries associated
with the various schools are hard to eclipse, and for most of us
integration remains more a goal than a daily reality. Eclecticism in
practice and integration in aspiration is an accurate description of
what most of us in the integrative movement do much of the time.

Common Factors The common factors approach seeks to determine the core
ingredients of change that different therapies share in common, with the
eventual goal of creating more parsimonious and efficacious treatments
based on those commonalities. This search is predicated on the belief
that the commonalities are more important in accounting for therapy
success than the unique factors that differentiate among them. The long
considered "noise" in psychotherapy research is now considered by many
as the main "signal" elements of treatment (Omer & London, 1988). The
work of Jerome Frank (1973; Frank & Frank, 1993), Bruce Wampold (2010;
Wampold & Imel, 2015; Wampold & Ulvenes, Chapter 3), and Scott Miller
and colleagues (Hubble, Duncan, & Miller, 1999; Maeschalck, Prescott, &
Miller, Chapter 5, this volume) have been among the most important
contributions to this approach. Commonalities may be expressed in terms
of essential components of psychotherapy, such as the therapeutic
relationship and an active client, or in terms of common principles of
change. In this volume, such a change principle approach is presented by
Eubanks and Goldfried (Chapter 4) and, to a lesser extent, by Consoli
and Beutler (Chapter 7). In his classic Persuasion and Healing, Frank
(1973) posited that all psychotherapeutic methods are elaborations and
variations of age-​ old procedures of psychological healing. The features
that distinguish psychotherapies from each other, however, receive
special emphasis in pluralistic, competitive American society. Because
the prestige and financial security of psychotherapists hinge on their
ability to show that their particular approach is more successful than
that of their rivals, little glory has

11

traditionally been accorded the identification of shared or common
components. It is a familiar rendition of the "tragedy of the
commons"---​ all therapy systems "own" the pantheoretical commonalties
but few care for and tout them. One means of determining common
therapeutic principles is to focus on a level of abstraction somewhere
between theory and technique. This intermediate level of abstraction,
known as a clinical strategy or a change principle, may be thought of as
a heuristic that implicitly guides the efforts of experienced
therapists. Goldfried (1980, p. 996, italics in original) argues that
\[t\]‌ o the extent that clinicians of varying orientations are able to
arrive at a common set of strategies, it is likely that what emerges
will consist of robust phenomena, as they have managed to survive the
distortions imposed by the therapists' varying theoretical biases.

In specifying what is common across disparate orientations, we may also
be selecting what works best among them, be they common factors or
change principles. Assimilative Integration This form of integration
entails a firm grounding in one system of psychotherapy but with a
willingness to selectively incorporate (assimilate) practices and views
from other systems (Messer, 1992). In doing so, assimilative integration
combines the advantages of a single, coherent theoretical system with
the flexibility of a broader range of technical interventions from
multiple systems. A cognitive-​ behavior therapist, for example, might
use the Gestalt two-​ chair dialogue in a course of treatment focusing on
the reevaluation of distorted thinking and maladaptive behavior. In
addition to Messer's (1992, 2001) original explication of it, exemplars
of assimilative integration are Gold and Stricker's assimilative
psychodynamic therapy (Stricker & Gold, 1996, Chapter 10, this volume),
Castonguay and associates' (Castonguay, Newman, & Grosse Holtforth,
Chapter 11, this volume) cognitive-​behavioral assimilative therapy, and
Safran's (1998; Safran

12

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

& Segal, 1990) interpersonal and cognitive assimilative therapies.
Assimilative integration may well prove more efficacious than its
single-​theory base by virtue of combining fidelity with flexibility.
Fidelity to a theoretically cohesive, empirically informed treatment
promises that psychotherapy "works" but not necessarily with that
particular client in that particular context. Flexibility to the
patient's preferences, values, and cultures promises that psychotherapy
"fits" but not necessarily with research support or conceptual
cohesiveness. Borrowing from other systems on occasion can capitalize on
both fidelity and flexibility and can produce the optimal balance for
many practitioners. To its proponents, assimilative integration
represents a realistic waystation to a sophisticated integration; to its
detractors, it is more of a delayed half-​way station for those unwilling
to commit to a full integration. Both camps agree that assimilation is a
tentative step toward an ambitious integration: most therapists have
been trained in a single approach, and most therapists gradually
incorporate parts and methods of other approaches once they discover the
limitations of their original approach. The odysseys of seasoned
psychotherapists (e.g., Dryden & Spurling, 1989; Goldfried, 2001;
Karasu, 2016) suggest that this is how therapists modify their clinical
practice and expand their clinical repertoire. Therapists do not discard
original ideas and practices but rather rework them, augment them, and
cast them all in new form. They gradually, inevitably integrate new
methods into their home theory (and life experiences) to formulate the
most effective approach to the needs of patients. In clinical work, the
distinctions among these four routes to psychotherapy integration are
not so apparent. The distinctions may largely prove semantic and
conceptual, not particularly functional, in practice. Few clients
experiencing an "integrative" therapy would likely distinguish among
them (Norcross & Arkowitz, 1992). Moreover, these integrative strategies
are not mutually exclusive. No technical eclectic can totally disregard
theory, and no theoretical

integrationist can ignore technique. Pluralistic psychotherapy (Cooper &
McLeod, 2011), to take a prominent example from the United Kingdom,
blends the technical eclectic (use the method that works), theoretical
integrative (use a combination of theories), and common factors (use
powerful pantheoretical elements, especially the relationship) pathways.
Systematic treatment selection and the transtheoretical model, to take
prominent examples from the United States, match the individual patient
to a particular treatment by stage of change, reactance level, or coping
level (in the eclectic tradition) while simultaneously emphasizing
change principles (in the common processes/​factors tradition). Without
some commonalities among different schools of therapy, theoretical
integration would prove impossible. Assimilative integrationists and
technical eclectics both believe that synthesis should occur at the
level of practice, as opposed to theory, by incorporating therapeutic
procedures from multiple schools. And even the most ardent proponent of
common factors cannot practice "nonspecifically" or "commonly"; specific
techniques must be applied. DEFINING THE PARAMETERS OF INTEGRATION By
common decree, technical eclecticism, common factors, theoretical
integration, and assimilative integration are all assuredly part of the
integration movement. However, where are the lines to be drawn---​if
drawn at all---​concerning the boundaries of psychotherapy integration?
What about the combination of therapy formats---​individual, couples,
family, group---​ and the combination of medication and psychotherapy? In
both cases, a strong majority of clinicians---​80% plus---​consider these
to be within the legitimate boundaries of psychotherapy integration
(Norcross & Napolitano, 1986). Of course, the inclusion of
psychopharmacology enlarges the scope to integrative or combination
treatment rather than integrative psychotherapy per se. Two recent
thrusts proposed as parts of psychotherapy integration are the infusion
of

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

multicultural theory and self-​help resources into clinical practice.
These are receiving increased attention in the literature and in this
Handbook (see Harris, Shukla, & Ivey, Chapter 15; Edwards-​Stewart &
Norcross, Chapter 17) but probably less so in daily clinical practice.
It routinely takes several years for new developments to be widely
practiced in the field. The integration movement as a whole, and SEPI in
particular, is embracing the synthesis of research and practice in
addition to the blending of diverse schools of psychotherapy.
Integration appears well positioned to narrow the infamous
practice--​research gap and to facilitate their mutual enrichment. This
third edition again features a chapter on outcome research on
psychotherapy integration (Boswell, Newman, & McGinn, Chapter 19) and,
for the first time, a chapter on integrating research and practice
(Castonguay, Constantino, & Xiao, Chapter 20). Psychotherapy
integration, like other maturing movements, is frequently charact­ erized
in a multitude of confusing manners. One routinely encounters references
in the literature and in the classroom to integrating spirituality and
psychotherapy, integrating Occidental and Oriental perspectives,
integrating social justice with psychotherapy, and so on. All are indeed
laudable pursuits, but we restrict ourselves in this volume to the two
meanings of integration as the blending of diverse theoretical
orientations and the synthesis of research and practice.

VARIETIES OF INTEGRATIVE EXPERIENCE Integration, as is now clear, comes
in many guises and manifestations. It is clearly neither a monolithic
entity nor a single operationalized system; to refer to the integrative
therapy is to fall prey to the "uniformity myth" (Kiesler, 1966). The
twin goals of this section are to explicate the immense heterogeneity of
the psychotherapy integration movement and to review studies on self-​
identified integrative therapists.

13

Prevalence of Integration Approximately one-​quarter to one-​half of
contemporary American clinicians disavow an affiliation with a
particular school of therapy and prefer instead the label of integrative
or eclectic. Some variant of integration is routinely the modal
orientation of responding psychotherapists. Reviewing 25 studies
performed in the United States between 1953 and 1990, Jensen et
al. (1990) reported a range from 19% to 68%, the latter high figure
being their own finding. It is difficult to explain these variations in
percentages, but differences in the organizations sampled and in the
methodology used to assess theoretical orientations account for some of
the variability (see Arnkoff, 1995; Poznanski & McLennan, 1995). More
recent studies confirm and extend these results. Table 1.2 summarizes
the prevalence of integration found in 10 English-​ language studies
published during the past decade. The frequency of integration as a
discrete orientation ranged from a low of 18% to a high of 47% in these
studies. The findings make it clear that integration is the most common
or modal orientation in most studies, but not the majority orientation,
as is occasionally (and erroneously) argued. Integration is not
restricted to members of general or secular psychotherapy organizations.
Older surveys of dues-​paying members of orientation-​specific
organizations---​both behavioral (Association for Advancement of Behavior
Therapy) and humanistic (APA Division of Humanistic Psychology)
associations---​ reveal sizable proportions who endorse an eclectic
orientation; 42% in the former and 31% in the latter (Norcross & Wogan,
1983; Swan, 1979). At the same time, cognitive-​ behavioral therapy (CBT)
is rapidly challenging integration for the modal theory, at least in the
United States. CBT lags only a few percentage points behind integration
in several studies or actually supersedes it in other studies. Given
that CBT is the most popular theoretical orientation of core faculty in
US training programs (Norcross et al., 2018), CBT will rival integration
as the modal orientation in the future as well.

14

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

TABLE 1.2 English-​language studies published in the past decade
reporting prevalence of the integrative orientation

Authors Bike, Norcross, and Schatz

Cassin et al.

Garland et al. Goodyear et al.

Year Published

Response Rate (%)

Sample Size

2009

33

232

2007

34 37 NR

234 261 498

Countries

Professional Discipline

Point Prevalence of Integrative/​ Eclectic (%)

United States

Counselors

40

Social workers Psychologists Graduate students in Clinical psychology
Counseling psychology Child therapists Counselling psychologists

39 35

United States

25 27

2010 2016

80 28

96 253

United States Australia

McClure et al.

2005

36 NR NR NR NR NR NR 35

81 47 225 398 124 144 347 279

Canada New Zealand South Africa South Korea Taiwan United Kingdom United
States United States (TX)

Norcross and Karpiak Norcross and Rogan Rihacek and Roubel Thoma and
Cecero Vasco

2012

46

488

United States

2013

43

428

United States

2017

NR

373

Czech Republic

Clinical psychologists Primarily psychologists Multiple

2009

18

209

United States

Multiple

26

2008

22

186

Portugal

Psychologists, psychiatrists and others

18

The studies reviewed so far have directly ascertained the prevalence of
integration by therapist endorsement of a discrete orientation from a
given list. It can also be gleaned indirectly by therapist endorsement
of multiple orientations. For example, among UK counselors, 85--​87% did
not take a pure-​form approach to psychotherapy (Hollanders & McLeod,
1999). Among clinical psychologists in the United States, for another
example, fully 92% of psychologists embraced several orientations
(Norcross & Karpiak, 2012). In a study of New Zealand psychologists, for
a final

Counselors psychologists

25 46 40 35 22 47 37 47 31 30 31 22 25 33

example, 86% indicated that they used multiple theoretical orientations
in the practice of psychotherapy (Kazantis & Deane, 1998). Indeed, very
few therapists adhere tenaciously to a single therapeutic tradition. The
results of the massive collaborative study of the Society for
Psychotherapy Research (SPR) bear this out dramatically (Orlinsky &
Rønnestad, 2005). Nearly 5,000 psychotherapists from 20 countries
completed a detailed questionnaire, including questions on theoretical
orientations. Orientations were assessed from therapist responses to the

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

question "How much is your current therapeutic practice guided by each
of the following theoretical frameworks?" Responses were made to six
orientations on a 0--​5 scale. Twelve percent of the psychotherapists
were uncommitted in that they rated no orientations as 4 or 5; 46% were
focally committed to a single orientation (rating of 4 or 5); 26% were
jointly committed; and 15% were broadly committed, operationally defined
as three or more orientations rated 4 or 5. As the authors conclude
(Orlinsky et al., 1999, p. 140), "While there is a substantial group
whose theoretical orientations are relatively pure, they are a minority
in the present data base." The results point to "a rather extensive
amount of eclecticism" (Orlinsky & Rønnestad, 2005, p. 29). A related
method of determining the relative mix is to have participants assign
percentages on how much a given theoretical orientation comprises their
total approach. One study of 2,156 psychotherapists using this method
found that only 2% identified themselves completely with a single
orientation by rating it 100% (Cook, Biyanova, Elhai, Schnurr, & Coyne,
2010). Few therapists proved purists; 98% were non--​pure form. The
research or measurement method strongly influences the resulting
prevalence of integration. A creative study of 373 Czech therapists
employed four different methods of identifying an "integrative"
therapist. The corresponding percentages ranged from 22% to 99%: 22%
integrative by formal training, 33% integrative by endorsement of
multiple orientations as a 4 or 5 on a scale from 0--​5, 88% integrative
by endorsement of the multiple orientations as 2--​5 on the same scale,
and 99% integrative by use of techniques from several orientations
(Rihacek & Roubal, 2017). Likewise, in a study of Portuguese therapists
(Vasco, 2001), the prevalence of integration varied widely depending on
the way integration is defined. There was a value of 18% when using a
demanding criterion: choosing values above 3 (on a 0--​5 scale)
simultaneously for two or more orientations ("same family" orientations
were not considered; e.g., cognitive and behavioral). If the criterion
was not so demanding, as

15

in rating more than one orientation, the value rose to about 80%! These
results exemplify how the measurement method produces dramatic
differences in the reported popularity of psychotherapy integration. The
prevalence of integration in countries outside North America (see Gómez,
Iwakabe, & Vaz, Chapter 21) also seems to be steadily rising. The
surveys of psychotherapists reviewed in the international chapter show
that integrative psychotherapy is widely endorsed and used across the
globe. It is no longer restricted to the United States and Western
Europe. In many countries, the integration movement gave rise to a great
diversity of models, in many cases within their own training programs.
These multiple methods of determining the prevalence of integration fuel
debate on whether certain brand name therapies can be rightfully called
integrative. CBT is explicitly a hybrid of two approaches, but not all
would characterize it as integrative. If one adds acceptance and
mindfulness approaches to CBT, such as in dialectical behavior therapy
(Heard & Linehan, Chapter 12), then the boundary into integration seems
to have been crossed. The clinical reality is that most theories did not
spring de novo from Zeus's head: they inevitably represent assimilation
of previous theories. Emotion-​focused couples therapy is a case in
point; it proclaims itself an amalgam of experiential, systemic,
person-​centered, relational, and attachment theories (Greenberg &
Johnson, 2010). Although integration's measurement and boundary
permeability may occasionally prove confusing, it does illustrate the
inevitable thrust toward sophisticated integration. Integrative
Therapists With such large proportions of psychotherapists embracing
integration, it would prove informative to identify their distinctive
characteristics or attitudes. Demographically, there do not appear to be
any consistent differences between the two groups, with the exception of
clinical experience in several older studies (Norcross & Prochaska,
1982; Norcross & Wogan,

16

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

1983; Smith, 1982; Walton, 1978). Clinicians ascribing to integration or
eclecticism tended to be older and, concomitantly, more experienced.
Inexperienced therapists are more likely to endorse exclusive
theoretical orientations. Several empirical studies have suggested that
reliance on one theory and a few techniques may be the product of
inexperience or, conversely, that with experience comes diversity and
resourcefulness (see reviews by Auerbach & Johnson, 1977; Beutler,
Machado, & Neufeldt, 1994). In more recent studies (e.g., Mullins et
al., 2003; Norcross et al., 2004), the age and experience differential
of eclectics has disappeared, probably owing to the fact that a greater
percentage of psychotherapists are being explicitly trained as
integrationists in graduate school. Attitudinally, integrative or
eclectic clinicians differ from their nonintegrative colleagues in at
least two respects. First, eclectics report greater dissatisfaction with
their current conceptual frameworks and technical procedures (Norcross &
Prochaska, 1983; Norcross & Wogan, 1983; Vasco, Garcia-​Marques, &
Dryden, 1992). This increased dissatisfaction may serve as an impetus to
create an integrative approach, or it may have resulted from the
elevated expectations that integration has engendered. Second,
practitioners seem to embrace integration more frequently than academic
and training faculty (Friedling, Goldfried, & Stricker, 1984; Norcross
et al., 2004; Tyler & Clark, 1987). Integrationists are more involved in
conducting psychotherapy than are their pure-​ form colleagues. From a
personal-​ historical perspective, Robertson (1979) identified six
factors that may facilitate the choice of eclecticism. The first is the
lack of pressures in training and professional environments to bend to a
doctrinaire position. Also included here would be the absence of a
charismatic figure to emulate. A second factor, which we have already
discussed, is length of clinical experience. As therapists encounter
heterogeneous clients and problems over time, they may be more likely to
reject a single theory. A third factor is the extent to which doing
psychotherapy is making a living or reflecting a philosophy of life;
Robertson asserts

that integration is more likely to follow the former, consistent with
the research reviewed earlier. In the words of several distinguished
scientist-​practitioners (Ricks, Wandersman, & Poppen, 1976, p. 401): So
long as we stay out of the day to day work of psychotherapy, in the
quiet of the study or library, it is easy to think of psychotherapists
as exponents of competing schools. When we actually participate in
psychotherapy, or observe its complexities, it loses this specious
simplicity.

The remaining three factors underlying why some therapists are
integrative seem to be personality variables: an obsessive-​compulsive
drive to pull together all the interventions of the therapeutic
universe, a maverick temperament to move beyond some theoretical camp,
and a skeptical attitude toward the status quo. Although these factors
require further confirmation, they are supported by our training
experiences and the personal histories of prominent clinicians
represented in this volume and elsewhere (see Chapters 3--​ 14;
Goldfried, 2001). Integrative Practices Although it is relatively easy
to ascertain its self-​reported prevalence, it is much more difficult to
determine what "integrative" practice precisely entails. Far more
process research is needed on the conduct of eclectic or integrative
psychotherapies. Such investigations will probably need to make audio,
video, and transcript recordings of the therapy offered in order to
clarify the nature of therapeutic interventions. Definitions of
psychotherapy integration do not tell us what individual
psychotherapists actually do or what it means to be an integrative
therapist. Several studies, however, have attempted to do just that. In
an early survey of psychologists in the United States, Garfield and
Kurtz (1977) discerned 32 different theoretical combinations used by 145
eclectic clinicians. The most popular two-​ orientation combinations, in
descending order of frequency, were

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

17

psychoanalytic and learning theory, neo-​ Over time, the behavioral and
psychoanFreudian and learning theory, neo-​ Freudian alytic combination
as well as the behavioral and Rogerian theory, learning theory and hu-
and humanistic combination have slipped conmanistic theory, and Rogerian
and learning siderably. They have gradually dropped from theory. Most
combinations were blended and the first and third most frequently
combined employed in an idiosyncratic fashion. The theories in 1977 to
the ninth and fourth in 1988 investigators concluded that the
designation of and now to thirteenth and fourteenth in 2004. "eclectic"
covers a wide range of views, some of The behavioral and psychoanalytic
hybrid---​ which are quite distinct from others. accounting for 25% of
the combinations in the Replications of the seminal Garfield and 1970s
and only 1% on the 2000s---​has firmly Kurtz study in 1988 and again in
2004 enlarged been replaced by cognitive hybrids. and updated the
findings. In the most recent This study and other research demonstrate a
study (Norcross et al., 2004), exactly one-​ half preference for both the
term "integration" and of the 187 self-​ identified eclectic/​ integrative
the practice of theoretical or assimilative intepsychologists adhered to
a specific theoretical ori- gration, as opposed to technical
eclecticism. entation before becoming explicitly integrative. Fully 59%
preferred the term "integrative" This 50% is similar to the two previous
studies in compared to 20% who favored "eclecticism." which 58%
(Norcross & Prochaska, 1988) and This preference for integration over
eclecti49% (Garfield & Kurtz, 1977) had previously cism represents a
historical shift. There seems adhered to a single orientation. The
previous the- to have been a theoretical progression analooretical
orientations were varied but were prin- gous to social progression, one
that proceeds cipally psychodynamic (41%), cognitive (19%), from
segregation to desegregation to integraand behavioral (11%). Thus, as
with the earlier tion. Eclecticism represented desegregation, in
findings and other studies (e.g., Jayaratne, 1982; which ideas, methods,
and people from diverse Jensen et al., 1990), the largest shift
continues to theoretical backgrounds mix and intermingle. occur from the
psychodynamic and psychoan- We have now transitioned from desegregation
alytic persuasions and the next largest from the to integration, with
increasing efforts directed cognitive and behavioral traditions. at
discovering viable integrative principles for Integrative psychologists
rated the frequency assimilating and accommodating the best that of the
use of six major theories (behavioral, different systems have to offer.
cognitive, humanistic, interpersonal, psychoSophisticated integrative
practice obviously analytic, and systems, and "other") in their is more
complex than these survey glimpses practice. To permit historical
comparisons with can provide. To echo the authors of the original the
earlier studies, we examined the individual study, "Some value
psychodynamic views more ratings to determine the most widely used than
others, some favor Rogerian and humanistic combinations of two theories.
The most fre- views, others clearly value learning theory, and quent
combinations of theoretical orientations various combinations of these
are used in apparconstituting eclectic/​ integrative practice are ently
different situations by different clinicians" summarized in Table 1.3.
All 15 possible (Garfield & Kurtz, 1977, p. 83). However, eccombinations
of the six theories presented were lecticism has gradually lost some of
its negative endorsed by at least one self-​identified eclectic/​
definition as a nondescript brand name for those integrationist. As seen
in the table, cognitive dissatisfied with orthodox schoolism. Instead,
therapy predominates; in combination with these clinicians actively and
positively endorsed another therapy system, it occupies the first 5
eclecticism/​ integration as much for what it of the 15 combinations and
accounts for 42% offers as for what it avoids. When asked if they of the
combinations. Put differently, cognitive considered
eclecticism/​integration the absence therapy is the most frequently and
most heavily of a theoretical orientation or the endorsement of used
contributor to an integrative practice, at a broader one in its own
right (or both), the vast least in the United States. majority of
eclectics---​85%---​conceptualized

18

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives TABLE 1.3 Most frequent
combinations of theoretical orientations among eclectic and integrative
psychologists in the United States Combination

Behavioral and cognitive Cognitive and humanistic Cognitive and
psychoanalytic Cognitive and interpersonal Cognitive and systems
Humanistic and interpersonal Interpersonal and systems Psychoanalytic
and systems Interpersonal and psychoanalytic Behavioral and
interpersonal Behavioral and systems Humanistic and psychoanalytic
Behavioral and humanistic Behavioral and psychoanalytic Humanistic and
systems

1976

1985

2004

\%

Rank

\%

Rank

\%

Rank

5 NR NR NR NR 3 NR NR NR NR NR NR 11 25 NR

4

12 11 10 \<4 \<4 8 5 4 \<4 \<4 5 \<4 8 4 6

1 2 3 12 14 4 (Tie) 7 (Tie) 9 (Tie) 15 13 7 (Tie) 12 4 (Tie) 9 (Tie) 6

16 7 7 6 6 5 4 3 3 2 2 2 1 \>1 \>1

1 2 (Tie) 2 (Tie) 4 (Tie) 4 (Tie) 6 7 8 (Tie) 8 (Tie) 10 11 (Tie) 11
(Tie) 13 (Tie) 14 (Tie) 14 (Tie)

6

3 1

NR, not reported. a Percentages and ranks were not reported for all
combinations in the 1976 study (Garfield & Kurtz, 1977).

it as the endorsement of a broader orientation actually do in their
sessions. Ratings of (Norcross et al., 2004). In other words, integra-
videotaped demonstration sessions of nine psytion "by design" is
steadily replacing eclecticism chotherapy experts from different
therapeutic "by default." orientations and from different generations
were A host of studies have asked psychotherapists examined to determine
the extent of integration of diverse orientations to self-​ report their
(Solomonov et al., 2016). Psychotherapy intein-​ session activities.
Integrative or eclectic gration was observed in all the demonstration
therapists typically evidence a more compre- sessions, with experts
blending techniques from hensive or balanced profile of therapeutic ac-
other approaches, especially within their own tivity than their
single-​system colleagues. In one family of theories. early study, for
example, on 13 scales of therAnother study of actual in-​ session
beapeutic activity, reported therapy interventions havior analyzed 34
sessions from the APA varied as a function of the therapist's orien-
Psychotherapy Videotape Series (Norcross & tation. Eclectics had either
the highest or VandenBos, 2011). The integrative therapists
second-​highest mean scores on each of the 13 utilized significantly more
cognitive-​behavioral scales, indicating a varied therapeutic arsenal
techniques than the psychodynamic-​ (Wogan & Norcross, 1985). In a more
recent relational therapists, and significantly more study, 24
psychotherapists who were experts psychodynamic-​interpersonal techniques
than in psychotherapy integration completed a the cognitive-​ behavioral
therapists (Pitman 100-​ item psychotherapy process Q sort. The et al.,
2017). Both self-​ report and actual findings demonstrated a diversity of
theoret- behaviors of integrative practitioners suggest a ical
influences and self-​ reported practices wider clinical repertoire and
probably more reamong the experts (Hickman et al., 2009). sponsiveness
to the needs of the individual paIndeed, that is what self-​report study
after study tient and the specific session. reveals: psychotherapists
use a substantial number of techniques from outside their reThe Journey
to Integration spective orientations (Thoma & Cecero, 2009). Several
studies have progressed past self-​ Werner's (1948; Werner & Kaplan,
report to what integrative psychotherapists 1963) organismic-​
developmental theory is

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

instructive for conceptualizing psychotherapists' development of a
sophisticated integrative stance. In the first of three developmental
stages, one perceives or experiences a global whole, with no clear
distinctions among component parts. Unsophisticated laypersons and
undergraduates probably fall into this category. In the second stage,
one perceives or experiences differentiation of the whole into parts,
with a more precise and distinct perspective of components within the
whole. However, one no longer has a perspective on the whole and
subsequently loses the big picture. Most psychotherapy courses,
textbooks, and clinically inexperienced practitioners fall into this
category. In the third stage, the differentiated parts are organized and
integrated into the whole at a higher level. Here, the unity and
complexity of psychotherapy are appreciated. It is to this level, we
believe, that psychotherapy should aspire. Several studies have examined
the process by which psychotherapists arrive at an integrative
orientation. In one study (Rihacek & Danelova, 2016), researchers
analyzed 22 autobiographies published by integrative psychotherapists;
in another study (Rihacek et al., 2012), the same researchers conducted
interviews with seven experienced practitioners. Adoption of an
integrative perspective was found usually to be a consequence of
developing an autonomous personal therapeutic approach rooted in
congruence with the person of the therapist and perceived efficacy of
the approach. The integrationists typically, but not invariably,
progressed through three stages: adherence (to a particular single-​
system therapy), destabilization, and consolidation (in an integrative
therapy). The research findings generally correspond with Werner's
three-​stage theory and attest that, to date, relatively few
psychotherapists have been trained from the beginning in a systematic
integrative model (Chapter 18). Role of Pure-​Form Therapies
Conspicuously absent from this primer on integration has been
acknowledgment of the conventional, "pure-​ form" (or brand name) therapy
systems, such as psychoanalytic, CBT,

19

experiential, and systems. Although it may not be immediately apparent,
pure-​form therapies are part and parcel of the integration movement. In
fact, integration could not occur without the constituent elements
provided by the respective therapies---​their theoretical systems and
clinical methods. In a narrow sense, pure-​ form or single-​ theory
therapies do not contribute to the integration movement because they
have not generated paradigms for synthesizing various interventions and
conceptualizations. But, in broader and more important ways, they add to
our therapeutic armamentarium, enrich our understanding of the clinical
process, and produce the process and outcome research from which
integration draws. One cannot integrate what one does not know. In this
respect, we should be reminded that the so-​ called pure-​ form
psychotherapies are themselves "second-​generation" integrations. In
factor analytic terms, virtually all neo-​Freudian approaches would be
labeled "second-​order" constructs---​a superordinate result of analyzing
and combining the original components (therapies). Just as Freud
necessarily incorporated methods and concepts of his time into
psychoanalysis (Frances, 1988), so do newer therapies. All
psychotherapies may, therefore, be viewed as products of an inevitable
historical integration---​an oscillating process of assimilation and
accommodation (Sollod, 1988). An appreciation of this historical process
can temper the judgmental flavor frequently expressed toward those who
may be antagonistic toward psychotherapy integration. These antagonistic
characterizations---​"rigid," "inveterate," "narrow," "close-​ minded,"
for instance---​ are likely to result in a win-​ lose, zero-​sum encounter
in which the integrative "good guys" seek victory over the separatist
"bad guys." Such an attitude will do little to promote a welcoming
attitude toward integration on the part of the "opposition" and even
less to build on the documented successes of pure-​form therapies. The
objective of the integration movement, as we have repeatedly emphasized,
is to improve the effectiveness of psychotherapy. To obtain this end,
the valuable contributions of pure-​form therapies must be

20

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

collegially acknowledged and their respective strengths collaboratively
enlisted. OBSTACLES TO INTEGRATION Enthusiasts of psychotherapy
integration have not always seriously considered its potential obstacles
and tradeoffs. If we are to avoid uncritical growth in integrative
psychotherapy, then some honest recognition of the barriers we are
likely to encounter is sorely needed. Caught up in the excitement and
potential of the movement, we have neglected the problems---​the "X-​rated
topics" of integration. Healthy maturation, be it for individuals or for
movements, requires self-​ awareness and constructive criticism. What is
stopping psychotherapy integration from progressing? Survey research of
prominent integrationists (e.g., Norcross & Thomas, 1988), special
journal sections (e.g., Norcross & Goldfried, 2005), chapters in this
Handbook, and contributors to the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration
converge in highlighting several obstacles. Probably the most severe
obstruction centers on the partisan zealotry and territorial interests
of "pure" systems psychotherapists. Representative responses in the
survey research (Norcross & Thomas, 1988) were "egocentric, self-​
centered colleagues," "the institutionalization of schools," and
"ideological warfare, factional rivalry." A recent study of Brazilian
therapists from closely related schools of psychotherapy (gestalt and
psychodrama) found that both schools employed an adversarial attitude
and depreciated their "neighboring" school (Vieira & Vandenberghe,
2016). Understanding and overcoming resistance to integration must first
consider the dynamics of in-​group and out-​group tribalism.
Unfortunately, professional reputations are made by emphasizing the new
and different, not the basic and similar. "One's career is advanced by
making history, not knowing it" (Goldfried, 2011, p. 324). In
psychotherapy, as well as in other scientific disciplines, there is far
too much emphasis on the ownership of ideas.

Although the idea of naturally occurring, cooperative efforts among
professionals is engaging, their behavior, realistically, may be
expected to reflect the competition so characteristic of our society at
large (Goldfried, 1980). Inadequate training in integrative therapy is
another recurrent impediment. Training students to competence in
multiple theories and interventions is unprecedented in the history of
psychotherapy. Understandable in light of its exacting nature, the
acquisition of integrative perspectives has occurred quite
idiosyncratically and perhaps serendipitously to date (Norcross &
Finnerty, Chapter 18). Designing an integrative training program is an
arduous task; gathering support for such a program from all faculty
members is probably even more intimidating. A third obstacle concerns
differences in ontological and epistemological issues. These entail
basic and sometimes contradictory assumptions about human nature,
determinants of personality development, and the origins of
psychopathology (Messer, 1992). For instance, are people innately good,
evil, both, or neither? Do phobias represent learned maladaptive habits,
intrapsychic conflicts, both, or neither? Is the primary purpose of
psychotherapy to facilitate insight, restructure relationships, modify
overt behavior, or promote self-​actualization? Interestingly enough, it
may be precisely these diverse worldviews that make psychotherapy
integration interesting, in that it brings together the individual
strengths of these complementary orientations. Profound epistemological
and ontological differences impede rapid or wholesale integration
(Allport, 1968). But even here, most antagonists believe the movement
"deserves a fair hearing and a substantial trial" (Messer, 1983,
p. 132). Another obstacle to a consensually supported
integration---​widely discussed in the 1990s but not lately---​is the
absence of a common language. Each psychotherapeutic tradition has its
own jargon, a clinical shorthand among its adherents, which widens the
chasm between differing orientations. The language problem, as it has
become known, confounds understanding and, in some cases, leads to
active

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

21

avoidance of each other's constructs. Many 30 explicitly integrative
therapies have been a cognitive-​ behaviorist's mind has wandered
subjected to rigorous controlled research. when case discussions turn to
"transference The results consistently and persuasively atissues" and
"warded-​ off conflicts." Similarly, test to their safety, feasibility,
and effectivepsychodynamic therapists typically tune out ness. Several
integrative therapies, including buzzwords like "conditioning
procedures" and the stage-​matching of the transtheoretical
ap"discriminative stimuli." Isolated language sys- proach (Chapter 8)
and the person-​matching tems encourage clinicians to wrap themselves of
systematic treatment selection (Chapter 7), in semantic cocoons from
which they cannot have repeatedly proved superior in efficacy or escape
and which others cannot penetrate. applicability to single-​ system
therapies. Most Before an agreement or a disagreement can of the other
integrative models featured in this be reached on a given matter, it is
necessary to volume prove promising or are in the early ensure that the
same phenomenon is, in fact, phases of comparison to pure-​form
therapies, so being discussed. Punitive superego, negative the jury is
still out on whether they prove equivself-​ statements, and poor self-​
image may in- alent or superior. deed prove similar phenomena, but that
cannot Controlled outcome research is only one be known with certainty
until the constructs form of research evidence, of course, and other are
defined operationally and consensu- research traditions point to the
clinical value of ally. Without a common language, the field
psychotherapy integration. To the extent that resembles a Tower of Babel
(Messer, 1987). an advantage of integrative approaches is that In the
short run, using the vernacular---​ they intentionally emphasize common
factors, descriptive, ordinary, natural language---​might then the
meta-​analytic evidence on the curative suffice (Driscoll, 1987). One
metaphor for a power of the therapeutic relationship is supcommon
metalanguage is the lingua franca that portive indeed (Norcross &
Lambert, 2019). To grows up in marketplaces, where communica- the extent
that integrative treatments are more tion among people of many cultures
and lan- adaptable or responsive to a greater number of guages is honed
down to the essentials needed patients, then other meta-​analyses favor
the infor transacting essential business (Andrews, tegrative path. For
example, a meta-​analysis of 1989). In the long run, the field of psycho-
587 studies on psychotherapy dropout found therapy probably needs a
language system that that integrative therapies experienced the lowest
is tied to a database. Such an evidence-​based rates (Swift & Greenberg,
2014). Phrased posicommon language may hail from cognitive tively,
integrative was the most robust model for psychology or interpersonal
psychology. In the retaining clients of all other therapy approaches
meantime, while the field decides whether and for 11 out of the 12
disorders examined. Or, how it will implement a common language, for
another example, integrative therapists there is much to be learned by
becoming fluent have pioneered the clinical use of research-​ in a number
of current theoretical languages. supported treatment adaptations (or
responMesser (1992) argues that in "this way, we can siveness) to
individual patients. Meta-​analyses better appreciate the concepts,
ideology, and indicate that tailoring therapy to the patient's terms of
other viewpoints. This will surely lead transdiagnostic characteristics
(e.g., culture, to the permeation of ideas from one theory to religion,
preferences, coping style, reactance another" (p. 198). level, stage of
change) demonstrably improves Then there is the glaring obstacle of
differ- patient outcomes compared to nonadapted ential efficacy: What is
to be gained from in- treatments (Norcross & Wampold, 2019). In
tegration in an era of evidence-​based practice? short, psychotherapy
integration is supported Where is the hard proof of integration's incre-
by decades of both clinical experience and remental effectiveness
vis-​à-​vis established single-​ search evidence. system treatments?
(Wampold, 2005). Reviews A final obstacle to be addressed here is the of
the outcome research (Boswell, McGinn, challenge of continually
expanding integrative & Newman, Chapter 19) indicate that at least
therapies to incorporate newer elements and

22

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

clientele. Early eclectic therapies needed to be revamped to include
family systems, feminist, and cognitive therapies, and, in some cases,
narrative or constructivist therapies. Later integrative therapies
needed to reckon with acceptance strategies (as opposed to change
strategies) and gender-​nonconforming patients (as opposed to cisgender
patients). A contemporary case in point is multiculturalism. For too
long, we have treated patients, disorders, and their goals outside the
context of their cultures. Yet most integrative therapies have been slow
in incorporating a multicultural dimension. If the integration movement
ignores these key additions, the end point will be insulated, albeit
newly packaged versions of psychotherapy that do not challenge the
narrow traditions and that do not address the needs of the populations
we serve. CONCLUDING COMMENTS Psychotherapy integration, as presented in
this Handbook, is an intellectually vibrant, clinically popular,
demonstrably effective, and maturing international movement. Integrative
perspectives have been catalytic in the search for new ways of
conceptualizing and conducting psychotherapy that go beyond the confines
of single schools. They have encouraged practitioners and researchers to
work together to examine what other therapies have to offer,
particularly when confronted with difficult cases and therapeutic
failures. Rival systems are increasingly viewed not as adversaries, but
as a welcome diversity (Landsman, 1974); not as contradictory, but as
complementary. Transtheoretical dialogue and cross-​fertilization
fostered by the integrative spirit are very much the order of the day.
Whether considered a revolutionary paradigm shift or an evolutionary arc
of all sciences, psychotherapy integration will most certainly be a
therapeutic mainstay of the twenty-​first century. Centuries ago, Hegel
famously explained the progress of human knowledge by means of thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis. Decades ago, Rotter (1954, p. 14) summarized
the matter as follows: "All systematic thinking involves the

synthesis of pre-​existing points of views. It is not a question of
whether or not to be eclectic but of whether or not to be consistent and
systematic." Integration thus has an illustrious and established
history, now fully established in psychotherapy as well. At the same
time, the ultimate goal of integration to make therapy more effective
has not been realized yet in many of its self-​identified
psychotherapies. Most integrative treatments continue to be promulgated
in the absence of any rigorous outcome research. The calls for
rapprochement prove intellectually and clinically appealing, but in an
era of accountability and evidence-​ based practice, such appeals fall
short of the mark unless accompanied by compelling research attesting to
the effectiveness, efficiency, and applicability of integrative
psychotherapies. Finally, we end the chapter by wondering whether there
will be competition among and proliferation of various schools of
integrative therapy, just as there has been intense competition among
"pure-​ form" schools. Partisanship among integrative models would
largely repeat the same old historical mistakes of psychotherapy.
Integrative therapies could, ironically, become the rigid and
institutionalized perspectives that the movement attempted to counter in
the first place. Rather, our view of---​ and hope for---​ psychotherapy
integration is that it will engender an open system of informed
pluralism, deepening rapprochement, and evidence-​ based practice, one
that leads to improved effectiveness of psychosocial treatments. The
tell-​tale sign of a movement's success is not how long it lasts, but
what it leaves.

References Allport, G. W. (1968). The fruits of eclecticism: Bitter or
sweet? In G. W. Allport (Ed.), The person in psychology. Boston: Beacon.
Andrews, J. D. W. (1989). Integrative languages in therapeutic practice
and training: Promises and pitfalls. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 8, 291--​301. Arkowitz, H. (1992). Integrative theories of
therapy. In D. K. Freedheim (Ed.), History of

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration psychotherapy: A century of change.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Arnkoff, D. B.
(1995). Theoretical orientation and psychotherapy integration: Comment
on Poznanski and McLennan. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 42,
243--​425. Auerbach, A. H., & Johnson, M. (1977). Research on the
therapist's level of experience. In A. S. Gurman & A. M. Razin (Eds.),
Effective psychotherapy: A handbook of research. New York: Pergamon.
Austad, C. S., Sherman, W. O., & Holstein, L. (1991). Psychotherapists
in the HMO. Unpublished manuscript. Beutler, L. E. (1983). Eclectic
psychotherapy: A systematic approach. New York: Pergamon. Beutler, L.
E., & Clarkin, J. (1990). Selective treatment selection: Toward targeted
therapeutic interventions. New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Beutler, L. E.,
Machado, P. P. P., & Neufeldt, S. A. (1994). Therapist variables. In A.
E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and
behavior change (4th ed.). New York: Wiley. Bike, D. H., Norcross, J.
C., & Schatz, D. M. (2009). Processes and outcomes of psychotherapists'
personal therapy: Replication and extension 20 years later.
Psychotherapy Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 46, 19--​31. Cassin,
S. E., Singer, A. R., Dobson, K. S., & Altmaier, E. M. (2007).
Professional interests and career aspirations of graduate students in
professional psychology: An exploratory survey. Training and Education
in Professional Psychology, 1, 26--​37. Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E.
(2017). How and why are some therapists better than others?
Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Cook, J. M., Biyanova, T., Elhai, J., Schnurr, P. P., &
Coyne, J. C. (2010). What do psychotherapists really do in practice? An
internet study of over 2,000 practitioners, Psychotherapy, 47, 260--​267.
Cooper M., & McLeod, J. (2011). Pluralistic counselling and
psychotherapy. London: Sage. Driscoll, R. (1987). Ordinary language as a
common language for psychotherapy. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 6, 184--​194. Dryden, W., & Spurling, L. (Eds.). (1989).
On becoming a psychotherapist. London: Tavistock/​ Routledge. Eysenck, H.
J. (1970). A mish-​ mash of theories. International Journal of
Psychiatry, 9, 140--​146. Fernandez-​Alvarez, H., Consoli, A. J., & Gomez,
B. (2016). Integration in psychotherapy: Reasons

23

and challenges. American Psychologist, 71, 820--​830. Feyerabend, P.
(1970). Consolations for the specialist. In I. Lakatos & A. E. Musgrave
(Eds.), Criticism and the growth of knowledge. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. Frances, A. (1988, May). Sigmund Freud: The first
integrative therapist. Invited address to the fourth annual convention
of the Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration, Boston,
MA. Frank, J. D. (1973). Persuasion and healing (2nd ed.). Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. Frank, J. D., & Frank, J. B. (1993).
Persuasion and healing (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press. French, T. M. (1933). Interrelations between psychoanalysis and
the experimental work of Pavlov. American Journal of Psychiatry, 89,
1165--​1203. Friedling, C., Goldfried, M. R., & Stricker, G. (1984,
April). Convergence in psychodynamic and behavior therapy. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Eastern Psychological
Association, Baltimore, MD. Garfield, S. L. (1992). Eclectic
psychotherapy: A common factors approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration. New York: Basic
Books. Garfield, S. L., & Kurtz, R. (1977). A study of eclectic views.
Journal of Clinical and Consulting Psychology, 45, 78--​83. Garland, A.
F., Brookman-​ Frazee, L., Hurlburt, M. S., Accurso, E. C., Zoffness, R.
J., Haine-​ Schlagel, R., & Ganger, W. (2010). Mental health care for
children with disruptive behavior problems: A view inside therapists'
offices. Psychiatric Services, 61, 788--​795. Glass, C. R., & Arnkoff, D.
B. (1996). Psychotherapy integration and empirically validated
treatments: Introduction to the special series. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 6, 183--​189. Gold, J. R. (1990). The isolationist portrayal
of psychotherapy integration. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 9, 41--​48. Goldfried, M. R. (1980). Toward the
delineation of therapeutic change principles. American Psychologist, 35,
991--​999. Goldfried, M. R. (Ed.). (2001). How therapists change:
Personal and professional reflections. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Goldfried, M. R. (2011). Mindfulness and
acceptance in cognitive behavior therapy: What's new? In J.

24

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

D. Herbert & E. M. Forman (Eds.), Acceptance and mindfulness in
cognitive behavior therapy. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Goodyear, R.,
Lichtenberg, J., Hutman, H., Overland, E., Bedi, R., Christiani, K., . .
. Young, C. (2016). A global portrait of counselling psychologists'
characteristics, perspectives, and professional behaviors. Counselling
Psychology Quarterly, 29, 115--​138. Greenberg, L. S., & Johnson, S. M.
(2010). Emotionally focused therapy for couples. New York: Guilford.
Grencavage, L. M., & Norcross, J. C. (1990). Where are the commonalities
among the therapeutic common factors? Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 21, 372--​378. Hickman, E. E., Arnkoff, D. B., Glass, C.
R., & Schottenbauer, M. A. (2009). Psychotherapy integration as
practiced by experts. Psychotherapy, 46, 486--​491. Hollanders, H., &
McLeod, J. (1999). Theoretical orientation and reported practice: A
survey of eclecticism among counsellors in Britain. British Journal of
Guidance & Counselling, 27, 405--​414. Hubble, M. A., Duncan, B. L., &
Miller, S. D. (Eds.). (1999). The heart and soul of change. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association. Jayaratne, S. (1982).
Characteristics and theoretical orientations of clinical social workers:
A national survey. Journal of Social Service Research, 20, 476--​485.
Jensen, J. P., Bergin, A. E., & Greaves, D. W. (1990). The meaning of
eclecticism: New survey and analysis of components. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 21, 124--​130. Karasu, T. B. (2016).
Life witness: Evolution of the psychotherapist. London: Rowman.
Kazantzis, N., & Deane, F. P. (1998). Theoretical orientations of New
Zealand psychologists: An international comparison. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 8, 97--​113. Kazdin, A. E. (1984). Integration
of psychodynamic and behavioral psychotherapies: Conceptual versus
empirical syntheses. In H. Arkowitz & S. B. Messer (Eds.),
Psychoanalytic therapy and behavior therapy: Is integration possible?
(pp. 139--​170). New York: Plenum. Kiesler, D. J. (1966). Some myths of
psychotherapy research and the search for a paradigm. Psychological
Bulletin, 65, 110--​136. Kuhn, T. S. (1970). The structure of scientific
revolutions (2nd ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Landsman, J. T. (1974, August). Not an adversity but a welcome
diversity. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological
Association, New Orleans, LA. Larson, D. (1980). Therapeutic schools,
styles, and schoolism: A national survey. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 20, 3--​20. Lazarus, A. A. (1967). In support of technical
eclecticism. Psychological Reports, 21, 415--​416. Lazarus, A. A. (1989).
The practice of multimodal therapy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press. Lazarus, A. A. (1997). Brief but comprehensive psychotherapy: The
multimodal way. New York: Springer. Lazarus, A. A., Beutler, L. E., &
Norcross, J. C. (1992). The future of technical eclecticism.
Psychotherapy, 29, 11--​20. Lebow, J. (1997). The integrative revolution
in couple and family therapy. Family Process, 36, 1--​17. London, P.
(1983). Ecumenism in psychotherapy. Contemporary Psychology, 28,
507--​508. London, P. (1988). Metamorphosis in psychotherapy: Slouching
toward integration. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy,
7, 3--​12. Luborsky, L., Singer, B., & Luborsky, L. (1975). Comparative
studies of psychotherapies: Is it true that "everybody has won and all
must have prizes"? Archives of General Psychiatry, 32, 995--​1008. Lunde,
D. T. (1974). Eclectic and integrated theory: Gordon Allport and others.
In A. Burton (Ed.), Operational theories of personality (pp. 381--​404).
New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Magnavita, J. J. (2012). Advancing clinical
science using system theory as the framework for expanding family
psychology with unified psychotherapy. Couple and Family Psychology:
Research and Practice, 1, 3. Mahoney, M. J. (1984). Psychoanalysis and
behaviorism: The yin and yang of determinism. In H. Arkowitz & S. B.
Messer (Eds.), Psychoanalytic therapy and behavior therapy: Is
integration possible? (pp. 303--​326). New York: Plenum. McClure, R. F.,
Livingston, R. B., Harvey Livingston, K., & Gage, R. (2005). A survey of
practicing psychotherapists. Professional Counseling, Practice, Theory,
& Research, 33, 35--​46. Melchert, T. P. (2016). Leaving behind our
preparadigmatic past: Professional psychology as a unified clinical
science. American Psychologist, 71, 486--​496.

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration

25

Messer, S. B. (1983). Integrating psychoanalytic and Norcross, J. C.,
Nolan, B. M., Kosman, D. C., & behavior therapy: Limitations,
possibilities, and Fernández-​ Alvarez, H. (2017). Redefining trade-​offs.
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, the future of SEPI: Member
characteristics, 22, 131--​132. integrative practices, and organizational
Messer, S. B. (1987). Can the Tower of Babel be satisfactions. Journal
of Psychotherapy completed? A critique of the common language
Integration, 27, 3--​12. proposal. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Norcross, J. C., Pfund, R. A., & Prochaska, J. O. Psychotherapy, 6,
195--​199. (2013). Psychotherapy in 2022: A Delphi poll Messer, S. B.
(1992). A critical examination on its future. Professional Psychology:
Research of belief structures in integrative and & Practice, 44,
363--​370. eclectic psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross Norcross, J. C., &
Prochaska, J. O. (1982). A national & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook
of survey of clinical psychologists: Affiliations and psychotherapy
integration (pp. 130--​ 168). orientations. The Clinical Psychologist,
35(3), New York: Basic Books. 1, 4-​6. Messer, S. B. (2001). Introduction
to the special Norcross, J. C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1983). Clinicians'
issue on assimilative integration. Journal of theoretical orientations:
Selection, utilization, Psychotherapy Integration, 11, 1--​4. and
efficacy. Professional Psychology, 14, Moultrup, D. (1986). Integration:
A coming of age. 197--​208. Contemporary Family Therapy, 8, 157--​167.
Norcross, J. C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1988). A study Mullins, L. L.,
Hartman, V. L., Chaney, J. M., of eclectic (and integrative) views
revisited. Balderson, B. H. K., & Hoff, A. L. (2003). Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, Training experiences and theoretical
19, 170--​174. orientations of pediatric psychologists. Journal Norcross,
J. C., & Rogan, J. D. (2013). Psychologists of Pediatric Psychology, 28,
115--​122. conducting psychotherapy in 2012: Current Norcross, J. C.
(1990). Commentary: Eclecticism practices and historical trends among
Division misrepresented and integration misunderstood. 29 members.
Psychotherapy, 50, 490--​495. Psychotherapy, 27, 297--​300. Norcross, J.
C., Sayette, M. A., & Pomerantz, A. M. Norcross, J. C., & Arkowitz, H.
(1992). The evolution (2018). Doctoral training in clinical psychology
and current status of psychotherapy integration. across 23 years:
Continuity and change. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Integrative and eclectic
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 74, 385--​397. psychotherapy: A handbook.
London: Open doi: 10.1002/​jclp.22517 University Press. Norcross, J. C.,
& Thomas, B. L. (1988). What's Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R.
(Eds.). (2005). stopping us now? Obstacles to psychotherapy The future
of psychotherapy integration: A integration. Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic roundtable. Journal of Psychotherapy Psychotherapy, 7, 74--​80.
Integration, 15, 392--​ 471. doi: 10.1037/​ Norcross, J. C., & VandenBos,
G. R. (2011). Training 1053-​0479.15 audiotapes and videotapes. In J. C.
Norcross et al. Norcross, J. C., & Karpiak, C. P. (2012). Clinical
(Eds.), History of psychotherapy: Continuity and psychologists in the
2010s: Fifty years of the change (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American APA
Division of Clinical Psychology. Clinical Psychological Association.
Psychology: Science and Practice, 19, 1--​12. Norcross, J. C., & Wampold,
B. E. (Eds.). (2019). Norcross, J. C., Karpiak, C. P., & Lister, K. M.
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​ (2005). What's an
integrationist? A study of self-​ based responsiveness. (3rd ed., Vol.
2). identified integrative and (occasionally) eclectic New York: Oxford
University Press. psychologists. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
Norcross, J. C., & Wogan, M. (1983). 61, 1587--​1594. American
psychotherapists of diverse Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (Eds.).
(2019). persuasions: Characteristics, theories, practices, Psychotherapy
relationships that work: Evidence-​ and clients. Professional Psychology,
4, 529--​539. based therapist contributions (3rd ed.). Omer, H., &
London, P. (1988). Metamorphosis New York: Oxford University Press. in
psychotherapy: End of the systems era. Norcross, J. C., & Napolitano, G.
(1986). Defining Psychotherapy, 25, 171--​180. our journal and ourselves.
International Journal Orlinsky, D. et al. (1999). Development of of
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 5, 249--​255. psychotherapists: Concepts,
questions, and

26

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

methods of a collaborative international study. Psychotherapy Research,
9, 127--​153. Orlinsky, D. E., & Rønnestad, M. H. (2005). How
psychotherapists develop: A study of therapeutic work and professional
growth. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Patterson,
C. H. (1990). On misrepresentation and misunderstanding. Psychotherapy,
27, 301. Pinsof, W. M. (1995). Integrative IPCT: A synthesis of
biological, individual, and family therapies. New York: Basic Books.
Pitman, S. R., Hilsenroth, M. J., Goldman, R. E., Levy, S. R., Siegel,
D. F., & Miller, R. (2017). Therapeutic technique of APA master
therapists: Areas of difference and integration across theoretical
orientations. Psychotherapy, 48, 156--​166. Poznanski, J. J., & McLennan,
J. (1995). Conceptualizing and measuring counselors' theoretical
orientation. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 42, 411--​422. Prochaska,
J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984). The transtheoretical approach:
Crossing the traditional boundaries of therapy. Homewood, IL: Dow
Jones-​Irvin. Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2018). Systems of
psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (9th ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Ricks, D. F., Wandersman, A., & Poppen, P. J. (1976).
Humanism and behaviorism: Toward new syntheses. In A. Wandersman, P. J.
Poppen, & D. F. Ricks (Eds.), Humanism and behaviorism: Dialogue and
growth. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon. Rihacek, T., & Danelova, E. (2016). The
journey of an integrationist: A grounded theory analysis. Psychotherapy,
53, 78. Rihacek, T., Danelova, E., & Cermak, I. (2012). Psychotherapist
development: Integration as a way to autonomy. Psychotherapy Research,
22, 556--​569. Rihacek, T., & Roubal, J. (2017). The proportion of
integrationists among Czech psychotherapists and counselors: A
comparison of multiple criteria. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration,
27(1), 13--​20. Robertson, M. (1979). Some observations from an eclectic
therapist. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 16, 18--​21.
Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some implicit common factors in diverse methods
of psychotherapy: "At last the Dodo said, 'Everybody has won and all
must have prizes' ". American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412--​415.

Rotter, J. B. (1954). Social learning and clinical psychology. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-​Hall. Ryle, A. (1990). Cognitive analytic therapy:
Active participation in change. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Ryle, A. (2001).
Introduction to Cognitive-Analytic Therapy: Principles and practice.
London: Wiley. Safran, J. D. (1998). Widening the scope of cognitive
therapy. New York: Jason Aronson. Safran, J. D., & Segal Z. V. (1990).
Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic Books.
Shoham, V., & Rohrbaugh, M. (1996). Promises and perils of empirically
supported psychotherapy integration. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 6, 191--​206. Smith, D. (1999). The end of theoretical
orientations? Applied & Preventive Psychology, 8, 269--​280. Smith, D. S.
(1982). Trends in counseling and psychotherapy. American Psychologist,
37, 802--​809. Sollod, R. N. (1988, April). Will the pure forms please
stand up? Paper presented at the 4th annual meeting of the Society for
the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration, Cambridge, MA. Solomonov,
N., Kuprian, N., Zilcha-​ Mano, S., Gorman, B. S., & Barber, J. P.
(2016). What do psychotherapy experts actually do in their sessions? An
analysis of psychotherapy integration in prototypical demonstrations.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 26, 202--​216. Stricker, G., &
Gold, J. R. (1996). Psychotherapy integration: An assimilative,
psychodynamic approach. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 3,
47--​58. Swan, G. E. (1979). On the structure of eclecticism: Cluster
analysis of eclectic behavior therapists. Professional Psychology, 10,
732--​739. Swift, J. K., & Greenberg, R. P. (2014). A treatment by
disorder meta-​ analysis of dropout from psychotherapy. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 24, 193--​207. Thoma, N. C., & Cecero, J. J.
(2009). Is integrative use of techniques in psychotherapy the exception
or the rule? Results of a national survey of doctoral-​ level
practitioners. Psychotherapy, 46, 405--​417. Tracey, T. J. G.,
Lichtenberg, J. W., Goodyear, R. K., Claiborn, C. D., & Wampold, B. E.
(2003). Concept mapping of therapeutic common factors. Psychotherapy
Research, 13, 401--​413. Tyler, J. D., & Clark, J. A. (1987). Clinical
psychologists reflect on the usefulness of various components of
graduate training. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 18,
381--​384.

Primer on Psychotherapy Integration Vasco, A B. (2001). Eclectic
tendencies among Portuguese therapists: Comparisons with a previous
study. Psicologia, 15(2), 289--​298. Vasco, A. B. (2008). Psychotherapy
integration in Portugal. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 18,
70--​73. Vasco, A. B., Garcia-​Marques, L., & Dryden, W. (1992). Eclectic
trends among Portuguese psychologists. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 2, 321--​331. Vieira, E. D., & Vandenbergbhe, L. (2016).
Difficult dialogue between next of kin: A Brazilian perspective on
obstacles to integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 26,
288--​299. Wachtel, P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy:
Toward integration. New York: Basic Books. Wachtel, P. L. (1987). Action
and insight. New York: Guilford. Wachtel, P. L. (1991). From eclecticism
to synthesis: Toward a more seamless psychotherapeutic integration.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 43--​54. Wachtel, P. L. (2018).
Pathways to progress for integrative psychotherapy: Perspectives on
practice and research. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 28(2),
202--​212. http://​dx.doi.org/​ 10.1037/​int0000089

27

Walton, D. E. (1978). An exploratory study: Personality factors and
theoretical orientations of therapists. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research,
and Practice, 15, 390--​395. Wampold, B. E. (2005). Locating and
describing psychotherapy integration: How much longer until we are
there? Contemporary Psychology: APA Review of Books, 50(32), article 1.
Wampold, B. E. (2010). The basics of psychotherapy: An introduction to
theory and practice. Washington DC: American Psychological Association.
Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. E. (2015). The great psychotherapy debate:
The research evidence for what works in psychotherapy (2nd ed.). New
York: Routledge. Werner, H. (1948). Comparative psychology of mental
development. Chicago: Follett. Werner, H., & Kaplan, B. (1963). Symbol
formation: An organismic-​ developmental approach to language and the
expression of thought. New York: Wiley. Wogan, M., & Norcross, J. C.
(1985). Dimensions of psychotherapeutic skills and techniques: Empirical
identification, therapist correlates, and predictive utility.
Psychotherapy, 22, 63--​74.

2 A History of Psychotherapy Integration MARVIN R. GOLDFRIED, JOHN E.
PACHANKIS, AND BRIEN J. GOODWIN

The progress of science is the work of creative minds. Every creative
mind that contributes to scientific advances works, however, with two
limitations. It is limited, first, by ignorance, for one discovery waits
upon that other which opens the way for it. Discovery and its acceptance
are, however, limited also by the habits of thought that pertain to the
culture of any region and period, that is to say, by the Zeitgeist: an
idea too strange or preposterous to be thought in one period of Western
civilization may be readily accepted as true only a century or two
later. ---​Edwin G. Boring (1950)

Although the idea of attempting to integrate different therapeutic
approaches met with mixed enthusiasm in the twentieth century, it has
received far greater acceptance in recent years. Indeed, on entering the
term "integrative psychotherapy" to explore available books on the
Amazon website, no fewer than 460 published books appear. Although the
term "integration" might not always accurately reflect attempts to blend
diverse therapies, it nonetheless illustrates that the concept enjoys
widespread acceptance. What follows in this third edition of the
Handbook is not a revision of history, but an update of the status of
psychotherapy integration in the twenty-​first century. As is the case
with any attempt to trace the historical origins of contemporary
thought, one never knows for certain the influence that earlier
contributions have had on later thinking. More often than not, as Edwin
G. Boring noted

in the epigraph, innovative ideas and findings are initially ignored
only to become assimilated into the mainstream at a later point in time
(Barber, 1961). It is possible that the ultimate contribution of an idea
lies in its consciousness-​ raising function. Thus, quite apart from
their specific merits, new ideas sensitize us to otherwise neglected
areas of thought. With regard to psychotherapy, some notions have
continued to live on over the years, whereas others have failed to pass
the test of time. Still others disappear after their introduction only
to reappear at a later time when the zeitgeist has become more
hospitable. The marked interest in developing a rapprochement across the
psychotherapies dramatically illustrates the latter phenomenon. In this
chapter, we begin with a historical review of past efforts at
psychotherapy integration, covering in detail the work that has been
done during the twentieth century. We highlight

28

History of Psychotherapy Integration

29

the development of professional networks and scholarly journals whose
purpose is to support continued work in this area. Finally, we conclude
with a brief overview of several key developments in the twenty-​first
century.

is here an attempt to point out, regardless of structure and gross
pathology, that while dealing with extremely complex functional units
both in the physiological laboratory and in the clinic, we can yet
reduce them to comparatively simple phenomena. (French, 1933,
pp. 1198--​1199)

EARLY ATTEMPTS AT INTEGRATION

It is of significance that French not only proposed a rapprochement
between two seemingly different conceptual orientations, but also
highlighted a possible bridge between clinical practice and research
findings. In an extension of French's attempts, Kubie (1934) maintained
that certain aspects of psychoanalytic technique itself could be
explained in terms of the conditioned reflex. Noting that Pavlov
hypothesized that certain associations might exist outside of an
individual's awareness because they took place under a state of
inhibition, Kubie suggested that free association might serve to remove
the inhibition and allow such unconscious association to emerge. In
1936, Rosenzweig published a brief article in which he argued that the
effectiveness of multiple therapeutic approaches probably had more to do
with their common elements than with their theoretical explanations. In
this article, which had as its subtitle, "At last the Dodo said,
'Everybody has won and all must have prizes,' " Rosenzweig suggested
three common factors: (1) the therapist's personality has much to do
with the effectiveness of the change process as it may function to
inspire hope in patients or clients, (2) interpretations are helpful
because they provide alternative and perhaps more plausible ways of
understanding a particular problem, and (3) even though varying
theoretical orientations may focus on different aspects of human
functioning, they can all be effective because of the synergistic
effects that one area of functioning may have on another. At the 1940
meeting of the American Orthopsychiatric Association (Watson, 1940), a
small group of therapists got together to discuss areas of agreement in
psychotherapy. Commenting on the points of commonality (e.g., the
importance of the therapeutic interaction), Watson astutely observed
that "if we were

In what represented one of the earliest attempts at integrating the
psychotherapies, French delivered an address at the 1932 meeting of the
American Psychiatric Association in which he drew certain parallels
between psychoanalysis and Pavlovian conditioning (e.g., the
similarities between repression and extinction). The following year, the
text of French's presentation was published, together with comments by
members of the original audience (French, 1933). As one might expect,
French's presentation resulted in a mixed reaction from his audience.
One of the most unabashedly negative responses acknowledged that I was
tempted to call for a bell-​boy and ask him to page John B. Watson, Ivan
Pavlov, and Sigmund Freud, while Dr. French was reading his paper. I
think Pavlov would have exploded; and what would have happened to Watson
is scandalous to contemplate, since the whole of his behavioristic
school is founded on the condition reflex . . . Freud . . . would be
scandalized by such a rapprochement made by one of his pupils, reading a
paper of this kind. (Meyerson, in French, 1933, p. 1201)

Adolph Meyer was not nearly as unsympathetic. Although he stated that
the field should encourage separate lines of inquiry and should not
attempt to substitute any one for another too prematurely, Meyer
nonetheless suggested that one should "enjoy the convergences which show
in such discussions as we have had this morning" (French, 1933,
p. 1201). Gregory Zilboorg, who was also in the audience at the time,
took an even more favorable stand, noting that I do not believe that
these two lines of investigation could be passed over very lightly. . .
. There

30

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

to apply to our colleagues the distinction, so important with patients,
between what they tell us and what they do, we might find that agreement
is greater in practice than in theory" (p. 708). In his book Active
Psychotherapy, Herzberg (1945) described how systematically prescribed
"homework" assignments might be used within the context of psychodynamic
therapy. Anticipating an important behavioral contribution to the field
by more than a decade, Herzberg proposed the use of graded tasks,
particularly in those cases where the clients' avoidance behavior was
based on anxiety. Woodworth's 1948 text, Contemporary Schools of
Psychology, explored the development and substantive content of the then
existing schools of psychological thought, such as behaviorism, gestalt
psychology, and the psychoanalytic schools. He recognized that although
each school had made gains in its own respective chosen direction, "no
one \[school\] is good enough" (p. 255). Observing that psychology was
advancing in many directions, Woodworth wondered "whether synthesis of
the different lines of advance \[might\] not sometime prove to be
possible" (p. 10). Close on the heels of this thesis was a landmark work
in the history of psychotherapy integration, namely Dollard and Miller's
Personality and Psychotherapy, published in 1950 and dedicated to "Freud
and Pavlov and their students." Although behavior therapists have argued
that Dollard and Miller's thinking had little impact on the development
of behavior therapy, the fact that the work is continually referenced
suggests that it has widely been read. In their work, Dollard and Miller
described in detail how such psychoanalytic concepts as regression,
anxiety, repression, and displacement can be understood within the
framework of learning theory. For the most part, Dollard and Miller
merely translated one language system into another. Nonetheless, they
did point to certain factors that may well prove common to all
therapeutic approaches, such as the need for the therapist to support an
individual's attempt at changing by expressing empathy, interest, and
approval for such attempts.

Even though Dollard and Miller (1950) stayed fairly close to the
interventions associated with psychoanalytic therapy, they made
continual reference to principles and procedures on which contemporary
behavior therapy is based. Thus, Dollard and Miller suggest the value of
modeling procedures (e.g., "watching a demonstration of the correct
response may enable the student to perform perfectly on the first
trial," pp. 37--​38), the use of hierarchically arranged tasks (e.g.,
"the ideal of the therapist is to set up a series of graded situations
where the patient can learn," p. 350), reinforcement of gradual
approximations toward a goal (e.g., "if a long and complex habit must be
learned, the therapist should reward the subunits of the habit as they
occur," p. 350), the principle of reciprocal inhibition (e.g., "like any
other response, fear apparently can be inhibited by responses that are
incompatible with it," p. 74), the significance of the reinforcing
characteristic of the therapist (e.g., "the therapist uses approval to
reward good effort on the part of the patient," p. 395), the importance
of teaching the individual self-​control or coping skills to be used
after therapy (e.g., "it is theoretically possible that special practice
in self-​study might be given during the latter part of a course of
therapeutic interviews. The patient might be asked to practice solving
particular problems . . . \[under conditions\] as similar as possible to
those to be used after therapy," p. 438), the treatment of orgasmic
dysfunctions via masturbation (e.g., "at one point in a therapeutic
sequence, the therapist might have to reward masturbation so that the
patients may experience the sexual orgasm for the first time" p. 350),
and the importance of environmental contingencies for maintaining
behavior change (e.g., "the conditions of real life must be favorable if
new responses are to become strong habits," p. 427). Unlike Dollard and
Miller (1950), whose primary emphasis was on the integration of two
orientations, Frederick Thorne (1950) was interested in pursuing
integration on the basis of what we know empirically about how people
function and change. From the time that he was a medical student, Thorne
was struck by the fact that medicine was not divided up into

History of Psychotherapy Integration

schools of thought, but rather that basic principles of bodily
functioning guided clinical practice. Like Thorne, Garfield has long
been interested in an empirically based approach to therapy, and in 1957
he outlined what appeared to be common points among the psychotherapies.
In an introductory clinical psychology text, Garfield noted such
universal factors as an understanding and supportive therapist, the
opportunity for emotional catharsis, and the provision of
self-​understanding.

MORE RECENT TRENDS TOWARD RAPPROCHEMENT The topic of therapeutic
rapprochement was seriously addressed by only a handful of writers in
the 1950s, due, no doubt, to the fact that no single approach to
psychotherapy had yet gained enough momentum to challenge psychoanalytic
therapy. Perhaps it was also the conservative social and political
climate of the 1950s that discouraged therapists from questioning their
paradigms. The 1960s, along with the broad array of societal challenges
that came with them, brought a sharp increase in the number of books and
articles dealing with rapprochement. The 1960s Probably the most
significant contribution to the integration of psychotherapies made in
the early 1960s was Jerome Frank's (1961) Persuasion and Healing. This
book addressed itself to commonalities cutting across attempts at
personal influence and healing in general. Similar change processes,
Frank observed, can be seen in such diverse methods as religious
conversion, primitive healing, brainwashing, and the placebo effects
that occur in medicine. When distressed individuals are placed in any of
these contexts, an expectancy for improvement and an arousal of hope
result in a concomitant increase in self-​esteem and improved
functioning. Frank continued, in his later writings, to stress common
factors across the

31

psychotherapies, but in one of his later reviews of the field (Frank,
1979), he also acknowledged that certain clinical problems (e.g., fears,
phobias, compulsive rituals) may effectively be dealt with by methods
that go beyond the general nature of the therapeutic interaction. Thirty
years after the publication of French's landmark article, a colleague of
his, Alexander (1963), suggested that psychoanalytic therapy might
profitably be understood in terms of learning theory. Based on an
analysis of tape recordings of psychoanalytic therapy sessions,
Alexander concluded that many of the therapeutic changes that occurred
"can best be understood in terms of learning theory. Particularly the
principle of reward and punishment and also the influence of repetitive
experiences can be clearly recognized" (p. 446). Alexander suggested
that "we are witnessing the beginnings of a most promising integration
of psychoanalytic theory with learning theory, which may lead to
unpredictable advances in the theory and practice of the
psychotherapies" (p. 448). A year later, Marmor, involved in the same
program of psychotherapy research, described in detail the learning
principles that he believed to underlie psychoanalytic therapy (Marmor,
1964). About this time, Carl Rogers (1963) published an article dealing
with the current status of psychotherapy. He noted that the field was
"in a mess" and that the theoretical orientations within which
therapists had typically functioned were starting to break down. He
stated that the field was now ready to shed itself of the limitations
inherent in specific orientations---​including client-​centered
therapy---​and that it was essential to observe more directly exactly
what transpires during the course of psychotherapy. London (1964), in a
short but insightful book entitled The Modes and Morals of
Psychotherapy, pointed to the inherent limitations associated with both
the psychodynamic and behavioral orientations. He suggested that
\[t\]‌here is a quiet blending of techniques by artful therapists of
either school: a blending that takes account of the fact that people are
considerably

32

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

simpler than the Insight schools give them credit for, but that they are
also more complicated than the Action therapists would like to believe.
(p. 39)

Other clinicians and researchers began comparing and integrating
behavior therapy and psychodynamic procedures. Although acknowledging
their common ground, Marks and Gelder (1966) also underscored certain
differences. They suggested that the two approaches should be viewed as
potentially contributing to each other, rather than necessarily being
antagonistic in nature. Arguing for the integration of learning theory
with psychoanalysis, Wolf (1966) suggested that "their integration is
sooner or later inevitable, however passionately some or many of us may
choose to resist it" (p. 535). The influential concept of "technical
eclecticism" was introduced in 1967 by Arnold Lazarus, who maintained
that clinicians could use techniques from multiple therapeutic systems
without necessarily accepting their theoretical underpinnings. Starting
from this pragmatic point of view, Lazarus maintained that the ultimate
standard of utility should rest on empirical, not theoretical grounds.
His views were eventually expanded and revised into the development of
multimodal therapy (Lazarus, 1989; Lazarus & Lazarus, Chapter 6, this
volume). Appearing in that same year as Lazarus's landmark paper were
several articles of integrative import. One (Patterson, 1967) outlined
divergent and convergent elements across the psychotherapies; another
(Whitehouse, 1967) identified the generic principles underlying
therapeutic interventions; and another (Weitzman, 1967) on how
systematic desensitization could profitably be used within a
psychoanalytic context. Brady (1968), responding to the practical
demands of doing actual clinical work, argued that behavioral and
psychodynamic treatments were not necessarily contradictory in nature
but could, in certain cases, be used in combination. He described the
treatment of a preorgasmic woman with systematic desensitization and
short-​term psychodynamic therapy

focusing on the woman's relationship with her husband. Colleagues
similarly described successfully treating anxiety with combined
behavioral and insight-​ oriented interventions (e.g., Leventhal, 1968).
Developing this line of reasoning, Bergin (1968) asserted that
systematic desensitization could be made into an even more powerful
treatment if accompanied by therapist warmth, empathy, and moderate
interpretation. Bergin reasoned that such extra-​ behavioral activities
were important because they elicited cognitive and emotional responses
intimately tied to the behavioral situations addressed in the
desensitization hierarchies. He maintained that a theory of therapy that
addressed a more universal set of psychological events would be less
likely to lead therapists to conceptual dead ends in the face of complex
cases. In the following year, Sloane (1969) maintained that common
factors ran through psychoanalytic, behavioral, and client-​centered
therapy and that the underlying process of therapeutic change probably
involved principles of learning. Commenting on Sloane's paper, Marmor
(1969) agreed that all therapies involve some application of learning
principles, either directly or unwittingly, but argued that the simple
stimulus-​ response (S-​ R) model could not explain some of the more
complex aspects of human functioning. Moreover, like London (1964),
Marks and Gelder (1966), Lazarus (1967), Brady (1968), Bergin (1968),
and others, Marmor concluded that behavioral and psychodynamic therapies
are probably best viewed as complementary in nature, with neither model
being applicable to all cases. The 1970s The year 1970 marked the
inauguration of a new journal, Behavior Therapy. Interestingly enough,
editors and contributors devoted serious attention to theories and
therapies that were not strictly "behavioral." Thus, one article
described two clinical cases to illustrate the potential integration of
behavior therapy with psychodynamic theory (Birk, 1970). Bergin (1970a)
followed his earlier treatise on

History of Psychotherapy Integration

nonbehavioral "adjuncts" to systematic desensitization with an article
that claimed that desensitization proper was, in fact, much more than a
simple counterconditioning process, drawing heavily on cognitive and
relationship variables. Bergin (1970b, p. 207), in applauding the recent
introduction of cognitive methods into behavior therapy, observed that
\[t\]‌ he sociological and historical importance of the movement should
not be underestimated for it has three important consequences. It
significantly reduces barriers to progress due to narrow school
allegiances, it brings the energies of a highly talented and
experimentally sophisticated group to bear upon the intricate and often
baffling problems of objectifying and managing the subjective, and it
underscores the notion that a pure behavior therapy does not exist.

As it turned out, Bergin's observations were very much on the mark; many
of the behavior therapists who became involved in the development of
cognitive procedures (e.g., Davison, Goldfried, Lazarus, Mahoney,
Meichenbaum) later moved on to an interest in therapeutic integration.
In a consideration of the importance of the therapeutic relationship
within a behavioral approach, humanistic therapists noted that the
successful procedures of behavior therapy were not being delivered in an
interpersonal vacuum. Although Truax and Mitchell (1971) lamented the
evident difficulties involved in conducting research on the therapy
interaction, they suggested---​ as Rosenzweig (1936) had done some 35
years earlier---​that there existed key therapist characteristics that
contributed to the change process, regardless of theoretical
orientation. Marmor published an article on therapeutic integration in
that same year (1971, p. 26), in which he suggested that \[t\]‌he
research on the nature of the psychotherapeutic process in which I
participated with Franz Alexander, beginning in 1958, has convinced me
that all psychotherapy, regardless of the techniques used, is a learning
process. . . . Dynamic psychotherapies and behavior therapies simply

33

represent different teaching techniques, and their differences are based
in part on differences in their goals and in part on their assumptions
of the nature of psychopathology.

Most contemporary behavior therapists probably would now agree with
Marmor's clinical observation that not only simple conditioning but also
cognitive learning occurs during the course of therapy. In a scholarly
review of the psychotherapy outcome literature, Bergin (1971) recognized
the important empirical contributions that behavior therapy had begun to
make. Nonetheless, he concluded that the field needed to remain open to
the "many fertile leads yet to be extracted from traditional therapy"
(p. 254). Responding to Bergin's observations that behavior therapy
alone was not always effective clinically, Lazarus (1971) described in
Behavior Therapy and Beyond a wide array of both behavioral and
nonbehavioral techniques that may be employed by broad-​spectrum behavior
therapists. In the same year, Woody (1971) also published a book
integrating behavioral and insight-​oriented procedures; Woody suggested
that the practicing clinician is capable of selecting and integrating
procedures from varying sources based purely on pragmatic grounds. An
edited book---​After the Turn On, What?---​ described the experiences of
seven researchers and practitioners who spent a weekend together in an
encounter group (Houts & Serber, 1972). Ranging from radical behaviorism
to cognitive learning in orientation, the participants described what
they saw to be both assets and liabilities of their group experience. As
a part of a larger project to try to determine the future course of
psychotherapy research, Bergin and Strupp (1972) reported on their
contacts with researchers throughout the country. Among those
interviewed was Neal Miller, who predicted that as behavior therapy
began to become involved with more complicated types of cases, and as
psychodynamic therapy focused more on ego mechanisms and the working-​
through process, the two therapeutic approaches would eventually start
to converge in some interesting ways.

34

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

In a provocative article on the "end of ideology" in behavior therapy,
London (1972) asked his behavioral colleagues to declare a truce in
their strife with other orientations and to look more realistically and
pragmatically at what we are able to do clinically. Perennially the
pragmatist, London cautioned against becoming overly enamored with
theories, noting that "the first issue, scientifically as well as
clinically, is the factual one---​do they work? On whom? When? The how
and why come later" (p. 919). Other efforts at therapeutic integration
that appeared in 1972 included a book that attempted to integrate
learning theory with client-​centered therapy (Martin, 1972), a
description of universal healing processes as seen among
psychotherapists and witch doctors alike (Torrey, 1972), and a set of
papers dealing with the theoretical and clinical aspects of the
integration of psychodynamic and behavior therapies (Feather & Rhoads,
1972a, 1972b). Feather and Rhoads (1972a) argued that in psychology, as
in medicine, the existence of many treatments for a given disorder
probably signaled a poor understanding of the disorder and that none of
the separate treatments was likely to prove adequate. Commenting on one
of Feather and Rhoads's articles appearing in the previous year, Birk
(1973) noted that one area of complementarity between the behavioral and
psychodynamic approaches was that the former dealt more with external
stimuli, whereas the latter tended to focus on stimuli that are more
internal in nature. Strupp (1973), stressing the common elements
underlying all psychotherapies, underscored the therapeutic relationship
as a vehicle for change through providing the patient with a corrective
learning experience. Thoresen (1973) suggested that many of the
philosophical underpinnings of behaviorism and humanism were in
agreement and that it was possible to view a behavioral approach as
providing the technology by which certain humanistic goals might be
achieved. A fair number of articles appeared in 1974 on the issue of
therapeutic rapprochement. In an intriguing discussion of behavioral and

psychodynamic approaches as "complementary" rather than mutually
exclusive, Ferster (1974)---​a well-​known Skinnerian---​described what he
considered to be some of the merits of psychoanalytic therapy. The
complementary nature of different approaches was demonstrated in the
treatment of an obsessive-​ compulsive disorder (Lambley, 1974). Birk and
Brinkley-​Birk (1974) offered a conceptual integration of psychoanalysis
and behavior therapy, suggesting that insight sets the stage for change,
whereas behavior therapy provides the actual procedures by which the
change process may be brought about. Kaplan (1974), in her book The New
Sex Therapy, outlined how psychodynamic therapy could be integrated with
performance-​ based methods. Likewise, Sollod's (1975) article expounded
on the merits of this structured and synergistic integrative approach to
sex therapy. In that same year, suggestions resurfaced that there is
much to learn from "other approaches that can make (unmodified)
psychoanalytic treatment more effective" (Silverman, 1974, p. 305). In a
paper delivered at the 1974 meeting of the American Psychological
Association (APA), Landsman (1974) urged his humanistic colleagues to
attend to the contributions of behavior therapy, such as "attention to
specifics, to details, careful quantification, modesty in claims,
demonstrable results" (p. 15). In his incisive book, Misunderstandings
of the Self, Raimy (1975), like Frank (1961), suggested that various
therapies all seem directed toward changing clients' misconceptions of
themselves and others. All therapies are alike in that they "present
evidence" to assist individuals in changing these misconceptions; the
type of evidence and the way it is presented, however, differ across
therapeutic orientations. An article by the German psychologist Bastine
(1975), amplified upon a few years later (Bastine, 1978), likewise
outlined common strategies together with the techniques by which they
may be implemented. In his book on the therapeutic change process, Egan
(1975) modified his original humanistic orientation to acknowledge that
although the contributions of Rogers (1963) and others are essential for
establishing

History of Psychotherapy Integration

the therapeutic relationship in which change can take place, behavior
therapy offers methods to implement specific action programs. Also in
1975, Sloane, Staples, Cristol, Yorston, and Whipple published the
results of their influential comparative trial of psychodynamic and
behavior therapists. The results showed that therapists from both
orientations demonstrated comparable degrees of warmth and positive
regard and that patients of both types of therapists exhibited the same
depth of self-​exploration and experienced similar treatment outcomes.
Paul Wachtel (1975), in the first of his many writings on therapy
integration, cited the contributions made to psychodynamic therapy by
Alexander, Horney, and Sullivan as evidence that behavioral approaches,
which deal directly with problematic behaviors, could readily be
incorporated into a psychodynamic framework. This is a two-​way street,
argued Wachtel, in that many instances of relapse following behavior
therapy might possibly be linked to the client's maladaptive patterns
that might more readily be identified when viewed from within a
psychodynamic framework. Wachtel (1977) went on to explore such
integration at greater length in his well-​known and challenging book,
Psychoanalysis and Behavior Therapy, in which he maintained that the
convergence of clinical procedures from each orientation would likely
enhance clinical effectiveness. In 1976, a number of publications
touched on therapeutic integration or directly endorsed it. Several
prominent psychoanalytic clinicians criticized psychoanalytic therapy
for not keeping up with the times, using therapeutic procedures more on
the basis of faith than data (Strupp, 1976). Many underscored the need
for psychotherapy to be predicated on research findings and noted that,
with added clinical experience, even the most orthodox of psychoanalysts
learn that other methods are needed to facilitate change (Grinker,
1976). As a practicing psychoanalyst with personal experience in the
human potential movement, Appelbaum (1976) suggested that some gestalt
therapy methods may complement more traditional psychoanalytic
techniques. Appelbaum's

35

excursions into more humanistically oriented activities were described
in fascinating detail in a later book (Appelbaum, 1979). In that same
year, two edited books provided multitheoretical discussions and
acknowledged points of potential integration: Humanism and Behaviorism
(Wandersman, Poppen, & Ricks, 1976) and What Makes Behavior Change
Possible? (Burton, 1976). In their book Clinical Behavior Therapy,
Goldfried and Davison (1976) maintained that behavior therapy need no
longer assume an antagonistic stance vis-​à-​vis other orientations.
Acknowledging that there is much that clinicians of different
orientations have to say to each other, they suggested: "It is time for
behavior therapists to stop regarding themselves as an outgroup and
instead to enter into serious and hopefully mutually fruitful dialogues
with their nonbehavioral colleagues" (p. 15). That many clinicians were
in effect already doing this was reflected in Garfield and Kurtz's
(1976) findings that most clinical psychologists in the United States
considered themselves eclectic. Most frequently used in combination were
the psychodynamic and learning orientations, a combination that was
based on the pragmatics of doing clinical work (Garfield & Kurtz, 1977).
Integration at a clinical level was also dealt with in several articles
(e.g., Lambley, 1976; Levay, Weissberg, & Blaustein, 1976; Murray, 1976;
Segraves & Smith, 1976). Lazarus's (1976) book, Multimodal Behavior
Therapy, extended and refined his broad-​ spectrum approach to behavior
therapy to systematically take into account the individual's behaviors,
affects, sensations, images, cognitions, interpersonal relationships,
and drugs/​physiological states. In the following year, Lazarus (1977),
then having practiced behavior therapy for approximately 20 years,
questioned whether behavior therapy, as a delimited school of thought,
had "outlived its usefulness." He recognized the need to "transcend the
constraints of factionalism, where cloistered adherents of rival
schools, movements, and systems each cling to their separate illusions"
(p. 11). An editorial comment appearing in the Journal of Humanistic
Psychology (Greening,

36

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

1978) applauded Lazarus's 1977 paper and urged readers of the journal to
      be open to such suggestions for rapprochement. Increasingly in the
      1970s, psychotherapists acknowledged that no single orientation
      can deal successfully with all clinical cases (Hunt, 1976) and
      challenged the usefulness of approaching a psychological problem
      through the eyes of any single theory. Underscoring what we all
      too often forget, Gurman (1978) suggested that "Therapy is not
      viewed as a reified set of procedures, but as an evolving science"
      (p. 131). Diamond, Havens, and Jones

<!-- -->

(1978) independently came to the same conclusion, stressing the need for
       eclecticism that would be tied to research and theory, yet be
       flexible enough to provide highly individualized treatment. In
       that same year, Fischer (1978) outlined an eclectic approach to
       social casework, and O'Leary and Turkewitz (1978) described how a
       communications analysis of marital interaction might be used
       within the context of behavioral marital therapy. Some of the
       points of overlap between behavior therapy and Zen Buddhism were
       outlined as well (Mikulas, 1978; Shapiro, 1978). In a 1978
       article entitled "Are Psychoanalytic Therapists Beginning to
       Practice Cognitive Behavior Therapy or Is Behavior Therapy
       Turning Psychoanalytic?" Strupp (1983) commented on several
       converging trends occurring within each of these orientations. In
       a reanalysis of agoraphobia, Goldstein and Chambless (1978)
       described some of the complicating features in dealing with this
       problem clinically, outlining a comprehensive treatment plan that
       went beyond the straightforward behavioral methods. Also in the
       same year, Ryle (1978) suggested that experimental cognitive
       psychology might provide a common language for the
       psychotherapies. That paper instigated and reinforced years of
       scholarly literature on the search and value for a generic
       language or Esperanto for psychotherapists to enhance
       communication across theories. Prochaska (1979), in a textbook
       describing the diverse systems of psychotherapy, concluded with a
       chapter that made the case for ultimately developing a
       transtheoretical model that would encompass what may have been
       found to be

effective across different approaches to psychotherapy. In that same
year, Knobloch and Knobloch (1979) presented their integrated
psychotherapy in a book. Presenting some interesting parallels between
cognitive therapy and psychodynamic therapy, Sarason (1979) suggested
that experimental cognitive psychology may provide a conceptual system
for understanding both orientations. Goldfried (1979) proposed that
cognitive-​behavior therapy might be construed as often dealing with an
individual's implicit meaning structures and that use of association
techniques from experimental cognitive psychology to study such
phenomena should be equally acceptable to psychodynamic practitioners.
It is interesting to note that Sarason and Goldfried drew their
conclusions independently and without any apparent knowledge of Ryle's
(1978) similar conclusion made the year before. Robertson (1979)
speculated on some of the reasons for the existence of eclecticism, such
as lack of pressures in one's training or professional setting to take a
given viewpoint and a therapeutic orientation reaching a point where
"the bloom is off the rose." Related to this last point were the results
of Mahoney's (1979) survey of leading cognitive and noncognitive
behavior therapists. Among the several questions asked of the
respondents was: "I feel satisfied with the adequacy of my current
understanding of human behavior." Using a 7-​ point scale, Mahoney found
that the average rating of satisfaction was less than 2! The 1980s
During the 1980s, psychotherapy integration made a significant advance
as a defined area of interest---​indeed, a movement. There was a
geometric increase in the number of publications and presentations on
the topic, making it unwieldy and impractical for us to offer an
adequate description of the hundreds of publications that appeared
during this decade and the one that followed. In an oft-​ cited article
published in the American Psychologist, Goldfried (1980) argued that a
fruitful level of abstraction for a

History of Psychotherapy Integration

comparative analysis of psychotherapy would be somewhere between the
specific technique and its theoretical explanation. He maintained that
it is at this intermediate level of abstraction---​ at the level of
clinical strategy---​ that points of overlap may exist. One clinical
strategy that may very well cut across orientations entails providing
the patient with "corrective experiences," particularly with regard to
fear-​ related activities. For example, Fenichel (1941, p. 83), on the
topic of fear reduction, noted that when a person is afraid but
experiences a situation in which what was feared occurs without any harm
resulting, he will not immediately trust the outcome of his new
experience; however, the second time he will have a little less fear,
the third time still less.

The same conclusion was reached by Bandura (1969, p. 414), who observed
that \[e\]‌ xtinction of avoidance behavior is achieved by repeated
exposure to subjectively threatening stimuli under conditions designed
to ensure that neither the avoidance responses nor the anticipated
adverse consequences occur.

Relevant to this general theme was Nielsen's (1980) description of how
certain psychoanalytic concepts are reflected in the practice of gestalt
therapy. In a 1980 special issue of Cognitive Therapy and Research,
therapists of various orientations answered a set of questions about
what they believed to be the most effective ingredients in therapeutic
change (Brady et al., 1980). Dryden (1980) discussed the differences in
therapeutic styles across orientations, particularly as they relate to
the concept of transference, Bastine (1980) observed that a problem-​
oriented approach to intervention is likely to facilitate psychotherapy
integration, and Linsenhoff, Bastine, and Kommer (1980) emphasized that
the field of psychotherapy could benefit most from an integration that
would be both theoretical and practical. Messer and Winokur (1980), in
an article examining the potential benefits and pitfalls of
psychotherapy integration, suggested that

37

both action-​ oriented and insight-​ oriented approaches may be combined
to help patients to translate their insights into action. Mahoney (1980)
noted that behaviorists had begun not only to adopt a position that
accepted a person's thoughts as useful data, but also to pay attention
to "implicit" cognitions. In this manner, cognitive-​ behavioral
theorists and therapists were beginning to examine "unconscious" events.
Marmor and Woods's (1980) edited book, The Interface Between the
Psychodynamic and Behavioral Therapies, illustrated the theme that no
single approach to therapy can deal with all of human functioning. This
theme was reflected in a case report (Cohen & Pope, 1980), in which a
single client was significantly helped by two cooperating therapists,
one behavioral and the other analytic. A national survey found that
although therapists typically used a single orientation as their primary
reference point, 65% acknowledged that their clinical work included
contributions from a number of other therapeutic approaches (Larson,
1980). Ryle (1980) reported the findings of a series of cases in which
an integrated, cognitive-​dynamic intervention was found to be clinically
effective. Garfield (1980), drawing on different therapeutic
orientations in his Psychotherapy: An Eclectic Approach, described an
empirically oriented view of psychotherapy. Like Bergin before him, he
viewed the introduction of cognitive variables into behavior therapy as
a particularly important advance. In 1981, a number of writers furthered
the argument that each orientation presents distinctive strengths that
can be combined into a more broad-​based and useful approach. For
example, Arnkoff (1981) reported combining cognitive therapy with the
gestalt empty-​ chair technique to increase affect and to elicit
meaningful cognitions from the patient. The multimodal therapy of
Lazarus (1981) essentially maintained that the therapist's choice of
therapy techniques must be data-​ driven, not theory-​driven. Individual
therapists were not the only mental health professionals subject to the
integrative fervor. Group psychotherapists were moving toward "technical
and theoretical

38

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

eclecticism" in increasing numbers (Schwartz, the publication of a
number of books on the 1981). Gurman (1981) described how different
topic authored by clinicians and researchers orientations may be fitted
into a multifaceted from diverse backgrounds. In Converging empirical
approach to marital therapy that Themes in Psychotherapy, Goldfried
(1982) enhances effectiveness. provided a compendium of articles dealing
As the discussion of therapeutic integration with the issue of
rapprochement together with was becoming increasingly widespread, it be-
an overview of the current status and future came desirable for
concerned professionals directions in psychotherapy integration. In to
arrange meetings to facilitate a more effi- Resistance, Wachtel (1982)
elicited the views cient and meaningful exchange of views. For of
experienced and well-​ known therapists in example, in 1981, a small
group of clinicians an attempt to explore the possibility that a synand
researchers (Garfield, Goldfried, Horowitz, thesis of the psychodynamic
and behavioral Imber, Kendall, Strupp, Wachtel, and Wolfe) approaches
might shed light on resistance held an informal, 2-​day conference to
deter- to therapeutic change. In Psychotherapy: A mine whether
clinicians of different orientations Cognitive Integration of Theory and
Practice, could communicate about actual clinical mate- Ryle (1982)
assimilated theories and methods rial. This group did not attempt to
generate any of a heterogeneous set of orientations into a particular
product; their primary objective was common language system---​ cognitive
psyto initiate a dialogue with each other. chology. Fensterheim and
Glazer (1983), in Communication between psychotherapy Behavioral
Psychotherapy, highlighted the practitioners and researchers of diverse
complementarity of psychoanalytic and behavorientations became a
worldwide phenomenon ioral treatment methods. in the following years.
For example, in 1982, In Marital Therapy, Segraves (1982), like the
Adler Society for Individual Psychology ded- Ryle, attempted to
integrate elements of seemicated their World Congress (held in Vienna)
to ingly disparate theoretical systems by translating the exchange of
views between representatives them into the language of cognitive social
psyof the major therapy models. The following chology. The utility of
his cognitive-​ social year, an International Congress in Bogota,
psychology terminology is exemplified by the Colombia, led by Augosto
Perez Gomez, fo- persuasive presentation of the concept of "incused on
the prospects for the convergence terpersonal schemas," analogous to the
analytic of psychotherapies and a cross-​ fertilization concept of
"transference," to explain the influof ideas. ence of early-​life
significant relationships on a As a way of illustrating how such
rapproche- person's perceptions of his or her spouse. ment might be
implemented, multiple authors In 1983, the frequently asked question of
launched proposals for theoretical hybrids: in- "what therapy activities
are most appropriate tegration of interpersonal and cognitive-​ for what
type of problem, by which therapist, behavioral constructs (Anchin,
1982), points for what kind of client/​patient?" was addressed of overlap
between cognitive and humanistic by Beutler in his book, Eclectic
Psychotherapy. therapy (Bohart, 1982), and how rational-​ This volume
suggested ways of maximizing emotive therapy had selected techniques
from therapeutic effectiveness by reviewing what is other orientations
(Dryden, 1982). Goldfried known about the optimal matching of patients
and Padawer (1982) argued that the activities of to therapists and
techniques. Also appearing psychotherapists of differing theories are
quite in this year was a book on psychotherapy similar even though their
conceptualizations of integration in German (Textor, 1983) recases may
be articulated quite differently. Their flecting the growth of the
movement on an review of the literature revealed a number of
international level. strategies that seem to guide the efforts of most
Evidence of a rapprochement between therapists. biological and
psychological approaches to In 1982 and 1983, the issue of theoretical
in- therapy appeared in the work of Gevins (1983) tegration acquired
still greater visibility through and in the theme of the 1983 meeting of
the

History of Psychotherapy Integration

Society of Biological Psychiatry---​"The Biology of Information
Processing." The following year, several psychiatrists (e.g., Beck,
1984; Beitman & Klerman, 1984) presented guidelines for integrating
psychotherapy and pharmacotherapy. A number of authors began to suggest
that the field of psychotherapy needed to develop a new, higher order
theory that would help us to better understand the connections between
cognitive, affective, and behavioral systems (Beck, 1984; Greenberg &
Safran, 1984; Mahoney, 1984; Ryle, 1984; Safran, 1984). These writers
maintained that attempts to answer the question of how affective,
behavioral, and cognitive systems interact would move the field toward
the development of a more adequate, unified paradigm. Systemic
therapists soon followed in their insistence that any thoughtful
integration necessarily included family and societal forces and in their
synthesis of therapeutic formats/​ modalities, such as individual and
family therapy. This thrust was typified by dozens of books and articles
in the 1980s (e.g., Allen, 1988; Beach & O'Leary, 1986; Duhl & Duhl,
1981; Feldman, 1979, 1989; Feldman & Pinsof, 1982; Friedman, 1980a,
1980b, 1981; Grebstein, 1986; Gurman, 1981; Hatcher, 1978; Lebow, 1984;
Pinsof, 1983; Rosenberg, 1978; Segraves, 1982; Steinfeld, 1980; Wachtel
& Wachtel, 1986). A common phenomenon these authors discussed was the
vicious cycle that results when a member of an interpersonal system
expects and assumes the worst about a significant other, resulting in
acting in such a way to provoke the very negative reactions from the
significant other that "confirm" the original dysfunctional belief. As
testimony to the momentum the preceding works have gathered, a special
interest group within the American Family Therapy Association was
organized to support these integrative efforts. Another framework for
organizing and integrating various approaches to psychotherapy was
presented by Driscoll (1984) in Pragmatic Psychotherapy. Substituting
the vernacular for theoretical jargon, Driscoll presents a method (the
pragmatic "survey") by which any given psychological problem can be
elucidated and conceptualized in a diversity of ways.

39

In Arkowitz and Messer's (1984) edited volume, Psychoanalytic Therapy
and Behavior Therapy: Is Integration Possible?, they, along with 10
contributing authors, explore the clinical, theoretical, and empirical
issues of a serious attempt at rapprochement. Although there was no
clear consensus, the book provided a valuable opportunity for the
exchange of fruitful philosophical and practical ideas toward the
advancement of the field as a whole. In addition to the aforementioned
books, numerous others on therapeutic integration appeared at this time
(e.g., Guidano & Liotti, 1983; Hart, 1983; Meyer, 1982; Palmer, 1980;
Papajohn, 1982; Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984; Wittman, 1981). Moreover,
journals started to feature discussions on this topic. A special 1982
issue of Behavior Therapy contained a series of articles examining the
potential benefits and drawbacks of complementing a behavioral approach
with those of other orientations, and a 1983 issue of the British
Journal of Clinical Psychology presented spirited "point--​counterpoint"
commentary on the subject of the plausibility of psychotherapy
integration. A significant event in the history of psychotherapy
integration was the formation of an international organization devoted
specifically to this endeavor. Formed in 1983, the Society for the
Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI, n.d.) was established as
a way of bringing together the growing number of professionals
interested in this area. An interdisciplinary organization that has
grown international in scope, SEPI holds yearly conferences at which
both clinicians and researchers present their current work and where
attendees discuss and exchange ideas. We shall have more to say about
SEPI later in this chapter. In the mid to late 1980s, it became apparent
that the integration movement had succeeded in reaching a broadening and
receptive audience. There was a significant increase in the number of
authors who contributed to the advancement of the field. To provide
forums for these many voices, new journals appeared that directly
addressed clinical and research issues pertinent to integration. One
such journal was the International Journal of Eclectic

40

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

Psychotherapy, later renamed the Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy in 1987. In 1985, Mahoney cast a critical eye on the
sociopolitics of academia, saying in effect that current systems foster
and reward conformity and static viewpoints. He vehemently argued that
knowledge would best be advanced by an openness to views that went
beyond mainstream thinking. The movement toward psychotherapy
integration was presented as an important new area of exploration that
the field would do well to support. In the following year, Messer (1986)
drew a comparison between psychoanalytic and behavioral approaches to
treatment, using various clinical choice points to highlight where they
were similar and where they differed. Thus, when dealing with a
patient's distorted view of the world, the psychodynamic therapist would
focus more on the nature of the distortion, whereas the behavior
therapist would be quicker to help the patient to incorporate the
reality. Which of these two strategies is more effective clinically
remains to be demonstrated empirically. Dealing with the psychotherapy
research findings, Stiles, Shapiro, and Elliott (1986) concluded that
the failure to find consistent superiority of any one approach over
another should lead us to carry out more work on studying common
processes of change. This point was similarly made by Goldfried and
Safran (1986), who pointed to future research directions in
psychotherapy integration. If the movement toward psychotherapy
integration is to help the entire field to progress, it becomes vital to
define clearly the parameters of such a therapeutic approach and to
suggest methods and modes of teaching the therapy to trainees (Halgin,
1985). An edited volume by Norcross (1986) made valuable headway in this
regard. Contributing authors spelled out their conceptualizations of
eclectic psychotherapy and shared their views on how to teach students
the vast amount of information needed to understand and integrate
various models. Also in 1986, a special issue of the International
Journal of Eclectic Psychotherapy was devoted to a discussion of the
training and supervision of integrative/​eclectic psychotherapists
(Norcross et al., 1986). It was clear that this would be a

formidable task with which to grapple and that ongoing development would
be necessary to approach satisfactory answers. Therefore, later issues
of the same publication, the newly named Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, would carry on the dialogue on training and
supervision (Beutler et al., 1987; Halgin, 1988; Norcross, 1988). A
glance at some of the major books on integration in 1987 reminds us that
interest in this area had become worldwide. From Italy, we had Guidano's
(1987) Complexity of the Self: A Developmental Approach to Psychotherapy
and Theory. From English-​ speaking Canada, Greenberg and Safran (1987)
published Emotion in Psychotherapy; from French-​ speaking Canada, we see
LeCompte and Castonguay's (1987) edited work, Rapprochement and
Integration in Psychotherapy, and from the United States came Wachtel's
(1987) Insight and Action, Beitman's (1987) The Structure of Individual
Psychotherapy, and Norcross's (1987) Casebook of Eclectic Psychotherapy.
Beitman (1987) presented a four-​stage model of therapy that cut across
orientations and used a common language, and Orlinksy and Howard (1987)
described a generic model of therapy on the basis of their review of
therapy research. A 1987 issue of the Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy addressed the problem of overcoming the
theoretical language barrier that would otherwise impede communication
and collaborative study between clinicians and researchers of differing
theoretical training backgrounds (Messer, 1987). A number of writers
expounded on the merits of such language systems as the vernacular
(Driscoll, 1987), experimental cognitive psychology (Goldfried, 1987;
Ryle, 1987), and interpersonal theory (Strong, 1987). Elaborating on the
theme that diverse therapeutic orientations are needed for a
multidimensional method of intervention, Bergin (1988) pointed out that
nobody attempting to understand the workings of the human body would
ever try to invoke a single set of rules. For example, principles of
fluid mechanics are needed to understand how the heart operates, whereas
electrochemical principles are needed for an understanding of neural
transmission. A true rapprochement across the

History of Psychotherapy Integration

psychotherapies is needed, suggested Bergin, if we are to deal
effectively with those complex human problems requiring
psychotherapeutic intervention. In 1988, Norcross and Prochaska updated
Garfield and Kurtz's 1977 study on eclectic views. The results
demonstrated that the majority of clinical psychologists now preferred
the label of integrative over eclectic. Although the
integrative/​eclectic orientation continued to be the modal orientation
among American psychotherapists, the frequency of theoretical
contributions was changing. Whereas the most frequent combination in the
1970s was psychoanalytic and behavioral, the most common combinations in
the 1980s were cognitive and behavioral and then humanistic and
cognitive. The authors observed that "integration by design is steadily
replacing eclecticism by default" (p. 173). Another series of articles
on the subject of psychotherapy integration appeared in Psychiatric
Annals in 1988. The contributions addressed the dual use of
psychotherapy and psychotropic medication (Rhoads, 1988), pointed out
that many behavioral interventions will provoke clinically meaningful
emotional and cognitive insights (Babcock, 1988; Powell, 1988), argued
that cognitive therapies represent viable integrative therapies in and
of themselves (London & Palmer, 1988), and reminded us of the need to
explore the integration of individual psychotherapy with marital and
family therapy (Birk, 1988). Toward the end of the 1980s, the call for
the development of an empirical methodology for the study of
psychotherapy integration became quite pronounced (e.g., Goldfried &
Safran, 1986; Norcross & Grencavage, 1989; Norcross & Thomas, 1988;
Safran, Greenberg, & Rice, 1988; Wolfe & Goldfried, 1988), whereas
others (e.g., Messer, Sass, & Woolfolk, 1988) underscored the benefits
of alternate epistemological approaches to understanding the therapy
process. Safran, Greenberg, and Rice (1988) posited that
psychotherapists ultimately would learn more about the process of
therapy via the intensive study of successful and unsuccessful cases
rather than through the extensive study of groups of clients categorized

41

by broad diagnostic labels. Cashdan (1988) described the role of the
therapeutic relationship within an object relations framework, Andrews
(1988, 1989) offered a model of change that emphasized self-​confirming
feedback cycles, Glass and Arnkoff (1988) found evidence for common as
well as specific factors in clients' explanations for change, and Omer
and London (1988) concluded that the nonspecific variables in therapy
were no longer "noise" but had achieved the status of "signal." The
National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH, n.d.) held a research
conference dealing with psychotherapy integration (Wolfe & Goldfried,
1988). The conferees stated that the establishment and growth of an
accessible archive of tapes and transcripts would be a major boon to
empirical studies relevant to integration. Another subtheme related to
the need for integration to be based in empirical findings was the call
for a better, more unified understanding of psychopathology (Arkowitz,
1989; Guidano, 1987; Wolfe, 1989; Wolfe & Goldfried, 1988). One of the
first research programs specifically designed to develop a new
methodology for the advancement of psychotherapy integration began to
emerge from the work of Goldfried and his associates (e.g., Castonguay,
Goldfried, Hayes, & Kerr, 1989; Goldfried, Newman, & Hayes, 1989). These
authors developed a coding system, composed in the language of the
vernacular, to compare and contrast the feedback that
cognitive-​behavioral and psychodynamic therapists give their patients.
Their database comprised transcripts and audiotapes of actual therapy
sessions, thus facilitating the study of what the therapists actually do
in session (Goldfried & Newman, 1986). Another issue that gained
momentum in the late 1980s was the examination of the narrowing gap
between cognitive-​behavioral and psychodynamic viewpoints on the nature
of the therapeutic relationship (Goldfried & Hayes, 1989). For example,
dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder
characterized the therapeutic relationship as being central to the
success of the treatment (Heard & Linehan, 2005; Linehan, 1987).
Westen's (1988) intriguing article conceptualized the transference

42

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

phenomenon in terms of information proInterpersonal Process in Cognitive
Therapy cessing while acknowledging its vital emotional by Safran and
Segal (1990) outlined how the component. Newman (1989) authored a trea-
clinical effectiveness of cognitive therapy tise on the phenomenon of
countertransfer- could be enhanced by incorporating prinence as
experienced and conceptualized from ciples and techniques associated
with interthe perspective of the cognitive-​ behavioral personal theory.
In their UK edited volume, therapist. Eclecticism and Integration in
Counseling and In 1989, Lazarus published a revision of his
Psychotherapy, Dryden and Norcross (1990) influential book, The Practice
of Multimodal included a consideration of potential obstacles Therapy,
while International Psychotherapy, to integration as well as emerging
themes that a book that took cross-​cultural factors into ac- could
potentially lead to contention, noting count in examining the process of
therapy, that since integration was still in its early stages addressed
elements of successful interpersonal of development, different
authorities have had helping that appear to be universal (Simek-​
different views. In another edited book, Client-​ Downing, 1989).
Mahrer's The Integration of Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in
Psychotherapies (1989) expressed the sentiment the Nineties (Lietaer,
Rombauts, & VanBalen, that "integrationists are dealing with many of
1990), Bohart contributed a chapter in which the crucial questions for
our field" and spelled he brought an integrative approach to client-​ out
his recommended responsibilities for the centered therapy, describing
the common integrative therapist, teacher, supervisor, and underlying
factors in psychotherapy and how researcher. Beitman, Goldfried, and
Norcross's these are related to client-​centered therapy. In (1989)
overview article on psychotherapy inte- their review of the burgeoning
common-​factors gration in the American Journal of Psychiatry literature,
Grencavage and Norcross (1990) underscored the importance of research
discerned that these factors could be classified findings on this topic
so that "prescriptive treat- according to client characteristics,
therapist ment \[could be\] based primarily on patient attributes,
change processes, treatment strucneed and empirical evidence rather than
on ture, and therapy relationship. The latter was, theoretical
predisposition" (p. 141). Beginning by far, the most frequently proposed
commonwork in this area came from Sheffield, England ality across the
psychotherapies. (Barkham, Shapiro, & Firth-​ Cozens, 1989), Several
psychotherapists admitted that thewhere it was found that a combined
inter- oretical integration may offer the greatest invention that went
from psychodynamic to tellectual appeal, but technical eclecticism
cognitive-​behavior therapy (insight to action) may be the more practical
solution, allowing worked better than one in which the sequence the
clinician to avoid having to find a conwas reversed. nection between
techniques and theoretical underpinnings (Duncan, Parks, & Rusk, 1990).
As one prominent example, Beutler The 1990s and Clarkin (1990) proposed
a systematic If the 1980s witnessed the establishment of in- eclectic
therapy that allows for the selectegration as a movement, then the 1990s
saw tion of a treatment approach based on client its ideas embraced,
recognized, and adopted predisposing variables, such as problem comby a
wide variety of researchers and clinicians plexity/​severity,
motivational distress, coping alike. Indeed, integrative themes became
part style, and resistance level. Discussing their of the prevailing
zeitgeist and were increas- identification as a technical eclectic and a
ingly incorporated into mainstream writing. common-​ factors
integrationist, respectively, Multiple surveys found again that a
majority of Lazarus (1990) and Beitman (1990) debated psychotherapists
subscribed to integrative/​ ec- their differing stances. lectic forms of
therapy (e.g., Jensen, Bergin, & Expanding on work begun in the 1980s,
Ryle Greaves, 1990). (1990) discussed how cognitive-​analytic therapy

History of Psychotherapy Integration

integrates aspects of cognitive, psychodynamic, and behavior therapies.
Also in 1990, Lazarus urged integrationists to avoid training students
in one particular approach to therapy and instead to present them with
various options in an unbiased manner so that they could learn to
recognize the values of each approach. Two landmark books appeared in
1991. One (Frank & Frank, 1991) was a revision of the classic Persuasion
and Healing by Frank that was published three decades earlier (Frank,
1961) and the other a comprehensive analysis by Mahoney (1991) on the
process of change. Also of particular significance in 1991, SEPI began
publishing its own journal, the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration.
The goal of the journal was to offer a forum for articles that moved
beyond the confines of single-​ school approaches to psychotherapy and
behavior change. Much of the work in the area of integration throughout
the 1990s was published in this journal. The first articles published in
the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration dealt with the current state
and trends of psychotherapy integration. In a dialogue between Lazarus
and Messer (1991), Lazarus lamented the fragmentation that exists among
psychotherapies and called for "fewer theories and more facts" (p. 146),
arguing for a data-​based technical eclecticism rather than an
integration that is informed solely by theory. Messer countered by
noting that all data are informed by theory but also acknowledged that
imported techniques must be tried out in their new contexts and be
validated through use and experimentation. Writing about multicultural
counseling and therapy, Ramirez (1991) observed the regular use of
contributions from different orientations. Alford (1991) called for
integrationists to find the various systems that are worthy of
integration, noting a continued lack of consensus regarding criteria for
the selection and incorporation of elements from various therapies.
Horowitz (1991) proposed "deep" formulations such as emotionality,
relationships, self-​control, and development that may potentially offer
an entry to integration. Wachtel (1991) similarly proposed moving beyond
simply combining

43

elements, suggesting that we try to achieve a more seamless
psychotherapeutic integration. Goldfried (1991) proposed a research
enterprise that could lead to such an integration. He described
"desegregation" research across pure-​ form treatment modalities, one
that involves a comparative analysis of the change process. He proposed
that by focusing on clinical principles that are common across
orientations, research would have a greater likelihood of focusing on
the most important mechanisms of change. Commenting on this article,
Shoham-​Salomon (1991) added that only therapies that are different from
each other in clearly identifiable ways can be integrated. Writing in
1991, Schacht suggested that the manner in which clinicians learn
therapy influences their ability to employ integrative concepts,
observing that integration has different meanings for beginning
therapists than for expert therapists. He proposed that those who train
students in integrative approaches need to take note of the
developmental path that therapists follow as they move from novice to
expert therapists. In the same year, Mahoney and Craine reported on a
survey of 177 members of SEPI and the Society for Psychotherapy Research
(SPR) regarding optimal therapeutic practice. The only difference found
among theoretical orientations was that behaviorists rated psychological
change as less difficult than did nonbehaviorists. Of particular
interest was the finding that most psychotherapists exhibited
considerable belief change over the course of their careers. In an
edited volume, History of Psychotherapy: A Century of Change (Freedheim
et al., 1992), Arkowitz presented a chapter that traced the development
of psychotherapy integration across the twentieth century. Significant
was the reality that inclusion of such a chapter was regarded as
essential for a complete portrayal of the past 100 years of
psychotherapy. In the same volume, Arnkoff and Glass (1992) devoted a
substantial portion of their chapter on cognitive therapy to
psychotherapy integration, noting that the development of cognitive
therapy sparked interest in eclectic and integrative approaches to
therapy.

44

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

Integration was met with receptivity in the early 1990s. As an example,
Duncan (1992) offered the use of integrative techniques for ameliorating
the criticisms of strategic family therapy, suggesting ways for
improving strategic therapy that are clearly integrative in nature.
Writing in the same year, Norcross and Newman (1992) discussed the
multitude of factors that contributed to the growing interest in
psychotherapy integration. These entailed (1) the proliferation of
different schools of thought within psychotherapy, which led to
increasing fragmentation and confusion; (2) the realization that no
theoretical orientation was sufficient to handle all clinical issues;
(3) the rise of managed healthcare and the consequent pressure for
accountability and consensus; (4) the growing focus on specific clinical
problems and practical ways of dealing with them; (5) increasing
opportunities to observe and experiment with clinical approaches other
than one's own; (6) the interest in common factors that cuts across all
forms of treatment; and (7) SEPI, which provides an educational,
clinical, and scientific forum in which to consider integration.
Commensurate with its maturation, psychotherapy integration began to
differentiate more clearly into separate paths or subtypes: common
factors, theoretical integration, and technical eclecticism (Arkowitz,
1992). In a special issue of Psychotherapy devoted to the future,
Goldfried and Castonguay (1992) opined on the future of theoretical
integration, while Lazarus, Beutler, and Norcross (1992) discussed the
future of technical eclecticism. In the early 1990s, eclecticism became
a more deliberate combination of interventions stemming from more
appropriate training in various orientations, a systematic assessment of
client needs, and a use of outcome research. The first edition of the
Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration, edited by Norcross and Goldfried
(1992), offered a comprehensive examination of the theory and practice
of integrative psychotherapy, including a conceptual and historical
perspective, models of psychotherapy integration, approaches to specific
clinical problems, different modalities

of intervention, and issues related to training, research, and future
directions. Norcross and Goldfried concluded that it was unlikely that
the psychotherapy integration movement would provide the field with a
grand, overarching theoretical orientation. Instead, they proposed that
integrative efforts can lead to increased consensus on the interventions
that are indicated for certain clinical problems. They called for
process and outcome studies of both pure-​form and integrative
interventions to be complemented by research findings on the
determinants of specific clinical disorders. In the same year, Dryden
(1992) edited a volume on clinical and research contributions to
integration in the United Kingdom and included a valuable bibliography
of relevant articles appearing in British journals between 1966 and
1990. During the next year, Stricker and Gold (1993) published their
Comprehensive Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration. It included
contributions on a variety of topics such as individual approaches to
integration, the integration of traditional and nontraditional
approaches, psychotherapy integration for specific disorders and
specific populations, teaching psychotherapy integration, and a review
of relevant research. That same year, the Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration featured a roundtable discussion by prominent
scientist-​practitioners (Norcross, 1993). The panelists (Glass, Arnkoff,
Lambert, Shoham, Stiles, Shapiro, Barkham, and Strupp) dealt with the
two central influences in the current integration movement: common
factors and technical eclecticism. They covered the empirical
investigation of therapeutic commonalities, the value of research
programs determining "treatments of choice," and alternatives to
comparative designs. They concluded by proposing additional research
directions to advance integration. One such study reported on both the
similarities and differences in therapy methods between cognitive-​
behavioral and psychodynamic therapy (Jones & Pulos, 1993). Other
studies compared these same two orientations with regard to the working
alliance (Raue,

History of Psychotherapy Integration

Castonguay, & Goldfried, 1993) and client emotional experiencing (Wiser
& Goldfried, 1993). Castonguay (1993) called attention to the
unfortunate tendency to equate "nonspecific" factors with "common"
factors. The former refers to unspecified relational contributions,
whereas the latter refers to techniques (e.g., reinforcement) or
strategies (i.e., facilitating corrective experiences) that are shared
by different orientations. Gradually, over the 1990s and 2000s, the
global accumulation of common factors was unpacked to delineate
principles, processes, and strategies shared by many theoretical
approaches. Mahoney, also writing in 1993, maintained that the goal of
integration is not to eliminate differences among the various approaches
to therapy, but to consolidate the unique aspects of each school of
therapy (1993a). Given the complexity of human nature, he suggested that
it is necessary and, in fact, unavoidable to establish an integrative
movement that can allow for both a common factors approach as well as a
more dialectical integration. In a separate article that same year,
Mahoney (1993b) traced the theoretical developments in cognitive
psychology since the 1950s. As others had indicated before him, he noted
the large involvement of cognitive therapists in the integration
movement. Schwartz (1993) considered his work on social cognition and
cognitive-​affective balance in the development of psychopathology as an
integrative construct. He discussed how balance is an ideal central
construct for an integrative cognitive-​dynamic therapy and noted that
dialectical behavior therapy attempts such balance in teaching clients
to transcend artificial polarities through the dialectical process. It
was also in 1993 that Linehan published her landmark book on dialectical
behavior therapy, in which she describes in detail how this approach can
be implemented clinically. In the edited book Beyond Carl Rogers
(Brazier, 1993), several contributors discussed the frequent move toward
eclecticism by therapists trained in a client-​centered mode. Clinicians
trained in an "antidogmatic" approach such as Rogers's may naturally
seek out integration in order to buttress the effectiveness

45

of their therapy (Hutterer, 1993). Goldfried and Castonguay (1993)
suggested that this openness also characterized practicing behavior
therapists, who have been shown to complement behavioral methods with
contributions from other orientations. Integrative theories of
personality and psychopathology were popular in the 1990s as well.
Writing about the feasibility of integrative approaches to the study of
personality, Millon, Everly, and Davis (1993) suggested that
psychotherapy integration is a sign of a mature clinical science that
allows for a coherent taxonomy of personality disorders. Along with
Gaston (1995), the authors called for such an integrative model of
personality. Others (e.g., Goldfried, 1993) suggested that
psychopathology research can inform integrative therapy by uncovering
relevant determining variables associated with mental disorders. The
clinician can then use these determinants to understand the core issues
that need to be addressed in therapy. Dutch psychologists Lemmens,
deRidder, and vanLieshout (1994) discussed empirical, conceptual, and
linguistic strategies of psychotherapeutic integration. They propose
that these strategies offer ways to approach integration from a neutral
stance. The empirical strategy seeks to find common factors through
research, the conceptual strategy attempts to develop superordinate
constructs, and the linguistic strategy is rooted in the notion that a
common language must exist across orientations to better understand
psychotherapy. The potential for integration inherent in contemporary
behaviorism was a repeated theme (e.g., Jacobson, 1994). Several
integrative therapies derived from a behavioral orientation---​
acceptance and commitment therapy, dialectical behavior therapy, and
functional analytic psychotherapy. In this regard, Goldfried and
Davison's (1976) integration-​ friendly Clinical Behavior Therapy was
reissued in an expanded edition (Goldfried & Davison, 1994). Further
calls came for the integration of psychotherapy into the science of
psychology. Sechrest and Smith (1994) held up behavior

46

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

therapy as a fitting example of the successful in- Davison (1995), an
important figure in the tegration of a psychotherapeutic approach into
history of cognitive-​behavior therapy, similarly mainstream psychology.
They went on to say offered a personal and professional account of that
the successful integration of psychotherapy the past 20 years of his
career. He elaborated into the broader field of psychology would ad- on
the therapeutic benefits of taking a broader dress the conceptual and
scientific limits of therapeutic approach and discussed how his
psychotherapy. early cases may have had better outcomes if Weinberger
(1995) criticized technical ec- such a perspective had been taken.
lecticism as lacking a theoretical base, which Two important books to
psychotherapy inBeutler (1995) countered by stating that the tegration
were published in 1995. One was absence of a single theory of
psychopathology McCullough's (1995) manual for his cognitive and
therapeutic change is indeed a strength, behavioral analytic system of
psychotherapy, not a weakness. He also stated that traditional an
intervention developed to treat chronic detheories do not adequately
address mechanisms pression. It comprises a clinically sophisticated of
change and that individual theories within integration of cognitive,
behavioral, and interpera larger theoretical framework vary too much.
sonal approaches (McCullough, 2000) with emAlso in response to
Weinberger, Gaston (1995) pirical support. The other was the publication
of noted that theoretical (not technical) eclec- Pinsof's Integrative
Problem-​ Centered Therapy, ticism has the ability to "fuel conceptual
cre- in which he describes an approach for inteativity" by encouraging
therapists to learn all grating theoretical approaches associated with
major theoretical approaches. individual, family, and biological
interventions. Proponents of individual theories continued In the
mid-​1990s, there was evidence that to experiment with the select
incorporation of psychiatry continued to take notice of the psymethods
from other, once rival, orientations. chotherapy integration movement.
As one exIn his volume on rational-​ emotive behavior ample, Albeniz and
Holmes (1996) noted in therapy, for example, Dryden (1995) discussed the
British Journal of Psychiatry that integration the issues that
rational-​emotive therapists con- at the level of practice is common and
desirsider when choosing to undertake more in- able and called for more
clarification of intetegrative approaches. With regard to gestalt
grative principles at the level of theory. They therapy, Resnick (1995)
maintained that inte- concluded that the different orientations should
gration is intrinsic to the approach. Greenberg work closely together
while retaining their sepa(1995) pointed out that Wolfe's (1995) self-​
rate identities. psychopathology can serve as a potential At about the
same time, proponents of intebasis for psychotherapy integration in that
it gration began to speak out against wholesale incontains a set of
integrative treatment princi- corporation of lists of manualized,
"empirically ples for repairing various forms of pathologies supported"
therapies. Integration may prove that are conceptualized as being rooted
in is- difficult for clinicians working from a manual sues involving the
self (see Wolfe, 2005). (e.g., Goldfried & Wolfe, 1996; Stricker, 1996),
Acknowledging the importance of promoting and empirically supported
treatments that use integration at the training level, Robertson such
manuals have the potential to obstruct (1995) published a text designed
to assist those the integration movement (Fensterheim & who are involved
in training clinicians within Raw, 1996). All of these authors suggested
a theoretically and pedagogically integrative that because empirically
supported treatments framework. have little to do with actual clinical
practice, Goldfried's (1995) book, From Cognitive-​ the flexibility (and
potentially integrative Behavior Therapy to Psychotherapy Integration:
stance) of the clinician is undermined by such An Evolving View, traced
the development treatments. of cognitive-​ behavior approaches and their
Several other integration enthusiasts (e.g., eventual implications for
therapy integration. Rigazio-​ Digilio, Goncalves, & Ivey, 1996)

History of Psychotherapy Integration

re-​ emphasized the need for the integration movement to include cultural
and interdisciplinary domains (see Harris, Shukla, & Ivey, this volume).
Historically, individuals interested in psychotherapy integration have
failed to address such issues, and authors suggested that this
constitutes a vital next step for the movement (Perez, 1999). Books with
integrative themes continued to appear in 1996. These included Gold's
(1996) review of key concepts on psychotherapy integration and Gilbert
and Shmukler's (1996) volume on how humanistic, psychodynamic, and
behavioral contributions may be used in couples therapy. In addition,
the topic of psychotherapy integration became increasingly salient in
books on psychotherapy theory and technique (e.g., Patterson & Watkins,
1996). In a survey of 268 members of SEPI, respondents ranked the
provision of a forum for the systematic investigation and discussion of
integrative themes as the central priority of that organization (Figured
& Norcross, 1996). In addition to continuing as is, the most frequent
recommendations for SEPI were to increase its membership, advocate for
integration, offer training, and produce more research. Overall, the
results revealed that although different benefits of SEPI were endorsed,
members were largely satisfied with both SEPI and its journal. In 1997,
Safran and Messer discussed trends in the integration movement from the
perspective of pluralism and contextualism. They noted that because
therapeutic approaches are rooted in a particular framework, these
concepts might not make sense once they are removed from their context.
Thus, they proposed that the proper goal of integration is to maintain
an ongoing dialogue among the proponents of diverse orientations while
allowing for the discussion and clarification of differences. Patterson
(1997) argued for the use of an integrative approach to ameliorate the
divisiveness that characterizes family therapy. Specifically, he uses
integrative concepts to establish a substrate upon which various
techniques can be added in a coherent fashion. He suggested that doing
so can allow the public and third-​party

47

insurers to understand family therapy more clearly. The multiple goals
of integration came into clearer relief as the movement developed. Some
saw the movement as advancing the integration of science and practice,
maintaining that the psychotherapy integration model is a step toward
the reduction in the incommensurability of science and practice (e.g.,
Stricker, 1997). Yet Norcross (1997), writing that same year in a more
pragmatic tone, observed that although integration is the most common
theoretical orientation among psychotherapists, it continues to lack
practical coherence. He underscored the need for outcome research to
establish the effectiveness of integrative treatments, for training
programs that ensured competence in integrative approaches, and for a
clearer delineation of the integration movement's mission and goals.
Integrative therapy with children also gained traction in the 1990s.
Lewis (1997) emphasized interpersonal and experiential aspects in his
discussion of integrated psychodynamic therapy with children. He noted
that the use of nonpsychodynamic methods does not minimize the
psychodynamic theme but instead enhances it. Likewise, Shirk (1999) drew
from the empirical literature to propose the utility of integrative
child therapy. In a commentary on a special section on psychotherapy
integration with children in the Journal of Clinical Child Psychology,
Goldfried (1998) lamented the fact that integrationist work did not
always reflect a broader historical and conceptual perspective, thereby
at times "rediscovering the wheel." Still, the significance that an
entire issue of such a journal was devoted to integrative approaches was
noteworthy. Alford and Beck (1997) provided an entire volume on
cognitive therapy as an integrative paradigm for psychotherapy. They
maintained that it had evolved into a multidimensional approach that
incorporates interpersonal, behavioral, and psychodynamic techniques. In
Wachtel's (1997) update of his original book, Psychoanalysis and
Behavior Therapy, he offered an integrative construct, cyclical
psychodynamics, which addresses fundamentals of

48

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

both psychoanalytic and behavioral orientations psychology of
psychotherapy and integration, (see Wachtel & Gagnon, Chapter 9, this
integrationists might find that they have herevolume). The expanded
book, Psychoanalysis, tofore been exaggerating the progress of
inteBehavior Therapy, and the Relational World, gration. Some
integrationists took umbrage at deals with how behavior therapy may
usefully Jacobson's article (Cullari, 1999; Goldfried, complement the
intrapersonal and interper- 1999), noting that his perspective was
tainted sonal contributions of psychoanalytic therapy. with a
pessimistic view of the potential for Into the later part of the decade,
the call human change and contained a misunderfor more research
continued, with relatively standing of the goal of integration. little
evidence that it was being undertaken. Smith (1999) noted that the
growing emGlass, Arnkoff, and Rodriquez (1998) noted phasis placed on
evidenced-​based treatments that empirical research in psychotherapy in-
might paradoxically lead to a breakdown of trategration seriously lagged
behind the wide- ditional theoretical approaches. He stated that spread
clinical and theoretical interest that it this could have the advantage
of yielding a new had received. They observed that even though kind of
"meta-​theory" of therapy, which will some of the theoretically
integrative treatments increase the applicability of clinical research.
are based on research, the effectiveness of the Beitman and Yue (1999)
presented such a data-​ therapeutic models remains, for the most part,
based approach to therapy in a training manual. unsubstantiated by
empirical investigation. They mentioned four promising integrative
Development of a Professional Network approaches that have received
initial empirical support: the transtheoretical approach, cog-
Recognizing the need to provide a reference nitive analytic therapy,
process-​ experiential/​ group oriented toward rapprochement among
emotion-​focused therapy, and eye movement the therapies, Goldfried and
Strupp, in 1979, desensitization and reprocessing. However, compiled a
list of professionals who were likely just a few years later, the same
authors noted to be interested in efforts toward therapeutic inthat
there had recently been a dramatic in- tegration and wrote to all of
these individuals, crease in outcome research on psychotherapy inviting
them to add their names to an inintegration. They nominated more than a
formal "professional network." Little was done dozen research-​based or
"evidence-​based" in- with this list until 1982, when Wachtel and
tegrative treatments (Schottenbauer, Glass, & Goldfried polled those in
the network about Arnkoff, 2005). potential directions. The respondents
expressed Toward the end of the 1990s, integrative their continued
interest in rapprochement and themes continued to take root internation-
offered their views on what should be done ally. For instance, 87% of
counselors in the next: namely, the establishment of a newsletter United
Kingdom do not take a pure-​ forms and the formation of an organization.
approach to therapy (Hollanders & McLeod, In the summer of 1983, an
organizing 1999). Trijsburg, Colijn, Collumbien, and committee,
consisting of Lee Birk, Marvin Lietaer (1998), writing from The
Netherlands; Goldfried, Jeanne Phillips, George Stricker, Paul Eagle
(1998), writing from South Africa; Wachtel, and Barry Wolfe, met to
discuss the Carere-​Comes (1999) and Giusti, Montanari, results of the
questionnaire. It was immediately and Montanarella (1995), writing from
apparent that the time was ripe to do something Italy; Christoph-​ Lemke
(1999), writing from with this rapidly growing network, and it was
Germany; and Caro (1998), writing from Spain, agreed that a newsletter
and organization were in all proffered integrative perspectives from an
in- order. As later noted by Goldfried and Wachtel ternational
perspective. (1983, p. 3), "It was concluded that we needed to In 1999,
Jacobson presented an outsider's achieve a delicate balance: a formal
organization perspective on psychotherapy integration. that would
facilitate informal contacts among the He suggested that by taking note
of the social members." Hence, SEPI was formed.

History of Psychotherapy Integration

49

SEPI (sepiweb.org) has evolved into an in- two with the term
"integration" in their titles. terdisciplinary and international
organization Many of these have been noted in our historical with annual
conferences, a quarterly Journal overview. of Psychotherapy Integration,
and a quarterly Other publication outlets founded in the newsletter, The
Integrative Therapist. SEPI twentieth century within the integrative
tradihas also been integral in the development of tion consist of
journals dedicated to that puravenues of communication among individuals
pose. In addition to the Journal of Psychotherapy in the same
geographical areas who are inter- Integration, there is Integrative
Psychiatry and In ested in psychotherapy integration through its
Session, which appears quarterly as part of the Regional Network
Program. Some meet reg- Journal of Clinical Psychology. In Session
offers a ularly, and these meetings are open to all in- state-​of-​the-​art
overview of research and clinical terested therapists, researchers, and
scholars advances on various topics (e.g., posttraumatic in their
geographical area. Others are made stress disorder, anger, coping with
infertility, up of preexisting groups of mental health panic disorder,
resistance, therapeutic alliance). professionals from clinics,
universities, and re- A particularly unique feature is that it not only
search institutes. There are now SEPI Regional describes and illustrates
different approaches to Networks operating in four states and some 19 a
given clinical problem, but it also highlights countries. the potential
for integrating research findings A recent electronic survey of all SEPI
and clinical practice---​a theme that has become members (55% response
rate) found an in- more salient in the twenty-​first century. creasingly
demographically and internationally diverse association (53% women, 39%
non-​ US members) of mental health professionals DEVELOPMENTS IN THE
employed largely in university settings and in- TWENTY-​F IRST CENTURY
dependent practices. Psychodynamic, humanistic, and cognitive-​
behavioral theories most Extending French's recommendation in 1932,
influenced respondents' integrative practices. the twenty-​first century
saw a renewed attention The most frequent subtypes of integration to the
possibility of closing the gap between were assimilative integration,
theoretical in- research and practice and its relevance to psytegration,
and common factors. Members chotherapy integration. As will be described
in expressed satisfaction with progress on most greater detail later,
this concern was addressed priorities, including providing a "home" for
in- by a renewed call for practice-​ oriented retegration (88% member
satisfaction), supplying search and increased involvement of therapists
a forum for discussion (82%), promoting ex- at every level of the
research process. To these change of information among integration ends,
task forces were formed, often in collabenthusiasts (77%), and offering
conferences and oration between different psychotherapy orworkshops
(75%; Norcross, Nolan, Kosman, & ganizations, to foster clinical
research, glean Fernández-​Alvarez, 2017). transtheoretical change
mechanisms, and proAlthough the notion of lowering the vide pragmatic
heuristic recommendations for boundaries that have existed among
different therapists As well, psychotherapy integration schools of
thought had been a latent theme has expanded to countries well beyond
North for some 50 years, the formation of SEPI has America. Finally,
there were a number of conprovided the impetus for psychotherapy in-
ceptual developments in psychotherapy intetegration to become
established as a definite gration, and these new approaches stretched
and visible movement. It is no longer novel to the definition of
integration beyond its four hear mental health professionals acknowledge
traditional types (i.e., common factors, techthe value of psychotherapy
integration. As in- nical eclecticism, theoretical integration, and
dicated at the outset of this chapter, books have assimilative
integration; see Chapter 1 for fuller routinely been published in the
past decade or description).

50

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

The integration of practice and research has been repeatedly advanced by
interspeciality and To address the science--​practice gulf, the
inteinterdisciplinary cooperation. Here, we briefly gration movement has
increasingly expanded review three such collaborative efforts: the its
purview beyond the synthesis of diverse two-​ way bridge initiative, the
evidence-​ based schools of psychotherapy to the integration
relationships task forces, and the Penn State of practice and research.
There have been Conferences. To foster collaboration between renewed
calls for clinically relevant research therapists and researchers, a
two-​way bridge inithat positions therapists as integral collaborators
tiative sought to develop a mechanism through in the research process.
Castonguay (2013) which therapists can provide feedback about offered a
comprehensive review of the diftheir experiences using empirically
supported ferent approaches within the umbrella category treatments
modeled after the US Food and Drug of practice-​oriented research, which
has been Administration's (FDA's) feedback system that updated in
Chapter 20 of this Handbook. facilitates the sharing of physician's
experiences Practitioners and researchers from using approved drugs in
the treatment of their around the globe offered their experiences in
patients (Goldfried et al., 2014). In 2011, this conducting
practice-​oriented research in a spetwo-​way bridge initiative became a
collaborative cial issue of Psychotherapy Research (vol. 25). effort
between Division 12 and Division 29 of Following are several ideas for
narrowing the the APA. research--​practice gap. For example, Boswell, As
part of this two-​ way bridge initiative, Kraus, Miller and Lambert
(2015) described therapists were surveyed about their frontline their
experiences implementing routine experiences delivering empirically
supported outcomes monitoring and providing feedback psychotherapeutic
treatments to their clients and tools to therapists to improve treatment
out(Goldfried et al., 2014). The first of these come. Fernández-​Alvarez,
Gómez, and García surveys focused on therapist's experiences pro(2015)
offered their experiences in developing viding psychotherapy for panic
disorder, social a patient-​oriented research program within a anxiety
disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, naturalistic setting where
psychotherapy is proand obsessive-​compulsive disorder. vided and
psychotherapists are trained through A similar venture among the
psychotherapy, international collaboration with researchers, clinical,
and counseling divisions of the APA therapists, agencies, and
universities. was designed to reduce the practice--​research With the
same goal of bridging the practice--​ gulf by identifying and
disseminating efresearch gap, the Journal of Psychotherapy fective
therapy relationships. Virtually all Integration began a recurring
series of practice-​ practitioners agree that the therapeutic
relaoriented evidence reviews. The goal of this tionship proves crucial
to treatment success, series is to glean both clinical and research but
few can reliably identify those relationimplications from basic research
findings in ship elements that contribute to and predict such areas as
psychopathology, cognitive scithat success. A series of interdivisional
APA ence, and social psychology. Articles in this series task forces on
Evidence-​Based Psychotherapy connected research findings with clinical
pracRelationships and Responsiveness produced tice. For example,
Andersen and Przybylinski original meta-​ analyses on (1) what works
(2014) reviewed the research on the social-​ in the therapy relationship
in general and cognitive process of interpersonal perception (2) what
works in psychotherapy for particand the clinical implications of this
process in ular patients (adaptations/​responsiveness). The addressing
maladaptive interpersonal patterns research results and clinical
practices were in therapy. Pinel, Bernecker, and Rampy (2015) widely
disseminated in multiple editions of the reviewed the social psychology
research on I-​ ensuing book Psychotherapy Relationships that sharing as
a means to ameliorate existential Work (Norcross, 2011; Norcross &
Lambert, isolation and how findings from this body of lit2019), several
special issues of journals erature can be applied in clinical practice.
Minding the Gap

History of Psychotherapy Integration

51

(Psychotherapy, Journal of Clinical Psychology), (2008) approach, which
seeks to integrate and hundreds of presentations and workshops. seven
theoretical approaches (cognitive, behavAs a final example, Castonguay
and Hill ioral, experiential-​humanistic, biopsychosocial, organized a
series of conferences at Penn psychodynamic-​interpersonal, systematic-​
State University to spark meaningful debate constructivist, and
multicultural-​ feminist) in about principles of change between
clinicians conceptualizing and treating individual clients. and
researchers of differing orientations He argues that synergistic
relationships be(Castonguay, 2011). Each of the three-​ tween these seven
orientations originate in their conference series focused on a specific
change foci on different dimensions of psychological process. The first
series focused on insight, functioning. For example, cognitive therapy
culminating in the publication of Castonguay focuses on thoughts, while
the focus of behavand Hill's (2007) Insight in Psychotherapy. ioral
therapy is actions. Experiential therapy The second Penn State
Conference focused focuses on feelings, while multicultural therapy on
corrective experiences as a principle of focuses on cultural contexts.
Brooks-​ Harris change, with the capstone publication of describes 100
strategies drawn from these seven Transformation in Psychotherapy:
Corrective theories that therapists can use in response to Experiences
Across Cognitive Behavioral, strategy markers. Humanistic, and
Psychodynamic Approaches. In the pragmatic spirit of determining what
Emerging from the third Penn State conference works best for whom,
conceptual development was How and Why Are Some Therapists Better and
empirical research continue to identify Than Others?: Understanding
Therapist Effects specific client behaviors and transdiagnostic
(Castonguay & Hill, 2017), which explored the markers that call for
specific therapist methods. often contentious topic of therapist
effects. The best known and researched in this tradition are the
transtheoretical model (DiClemente & Prochaska, Chapter 8, this volume)
and Conceptual Developments systematic treatment selection (Consoli & In
accordance with a shifting research climate, Beutler, Chapter 7, this
volume). The former conceptual developments seek to incorporate
emphasizes tailoring the change processes and findings from the broad
science knowledge therapeutic relationship to the patient's stage base.
As one example, Magnavita (2008) called of change; in the past 20 years,
hundreds of for a new type of integrative psychotherapy---​ studies have
demonstrated that stage-​matching the Unified Psychotherapy Project.
Magnavita enhances the effectiveness of self-​help and psysought to widen
the scope of sources of know- chotherapy. The latter adapts
psychotherapy to ledge beyond clinical psychology to incorporate
multiple patient features, such as coping style, findings from all
realms of clinical science, in- reactance level, and functional
impairment; cluding developmental psychology, psycho- recently, it
became the first integrative treattherapy research, neuroscience, and
personality ment (to our knowledge) to demonstrate supsychology. To
further this project, an online perior client outcomes of trainees
specifically Journal of Unified Psychotherapy and Clinical supervised in
and following its principles. Science was started in 2012, committed to
forging In this tradition, Constantino and connections between different
realms of clinical colleagues developed a clinical marker--​driven
science. In addition, a web-​ based Wikipedia transdiagnostic modular
approach to psychocalled Psychotherapedia was created where therapy
integration, context-​responsive psyresearchers and therapists can
document current chotherapy integration (CRPI; Constantino,
psychotherapeutic techniques with the ultimate Boswell, Bernecker, &
Castonguay, 2013). goal of creating a public database for therapists,
CRPI provides a model with which therapists researchers, and academics
(Magnavita, 2014). can adjust their treatment approach to the Another
conceptual development in psy- specific client's characteristics,
psychopachotherapy integration has been Brooks-​Harris thology, and
clinical scenarios that emerge

52

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

moment to moment during treatment. Five common markers are alliance
ruptures, low client outcomes, client resistance, client self-​
strivings, and information garnered through routine outcomes monitoring.
CRPI does not require that a therapist alter her theoretical orientation
or make major changes to her clinical approach, but allows for
assimilation of specific modules into her existing practice. For
example, it may be prudent for a therapist, when faced with client
negative beliefs about treatment outcome, to employ evidence-​ based
strategies to foster client outcome expectation. Or, when faced with a
client's ambivalence about change and/​or resistance, the treatment
course may benefit from integrating motivational interviewing
strategies---​ before returning to the primary treatment. The efficacy of
this latter modular strategy (if client ambivalence/​resistance, then
motivational interviewing techniques) has been successfully tested in
small pilot studies (Westra, Aviram, & Doell, 2011) and in a randomized
controlled clinical trial for severe generalized anxiety disorder
(Westra, Constantino, & Antony, 2016). International Growth In what was
primarily started by mental health professionals in the United States as
a need to break down the conceptual and clinical boundaries that
separated different schools of thought, the psychotherapy integration
movement has become international in scope. Indeed, an increasing number
of mental health professional throughout Europe, Latin American, Asia,
Australia, and Africa have become actively involved in psychotherapy
integration. A detailed description of this goes well beyond the scope
of our overview of what is happening in the twenty-​first century, but
international efforts are described in detail by Gomez, Iwakabe, and Vaz
in Chapter 21 of this volume. CONCLUSION It is now well over eight
decades since Thomas French stood before the 1932 meeting of the
American Psychiatric Association and suggested

that it might be time to integrate different theoretical approaches and
to draw on empirical research to inform practice. Over the years, his
call for integration has been slow to develop momentum. However, the
field has clearly come a long way, and an increasing number of
professionals are actively pursuing this goal. The zeitgeist is clearly
more receptive to integrative efforts than it has ever been before.
Indeed, psychotherapy integration is no longer an idea that is "too
strange or preposterous" to consider (cf. Boring, 1950). It is our hope
that, within this hospitable context, significant advances will
continue.

References Albeniz, A., & Holmes, J. (1996). Psychotherapy integration:
Its implications for psychiatry. British Journal of Psychiatry, 169,
563--​570. Alexander, F. (1963). The dynamics of psychotherapy in light
of learning theory. American Journal of Psychiatry, 120, 440--​448.
Alford, B. (1991). Integration of scientific criteria into the
psychotherapy integration movement. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Experimental Psychiatry, 22, 211--​216. Alford, B. A., & Beck, A. T.
(1997). Therapeutic interpersonal support in cognitive therapy. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 7, 105--​117. Allen, D. M. (1988). Unifying
individual and family therapies. San Francisco: Jossey-​Bass. Anchin, J.
C. (1982). Sequence, pattern, and style: Integration and treatment
implications of some interpersonal concepts. In J. C. Anchin & D. J.
Kiesler (Eds.), Handbook of interpersonal psychotherapy (pp. 95--​ 131).
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon. Andersen, S. M., & Przybylinski, E. (2014).
Cognitive distortion in interpersonal relations: Clinical implications
of social cognitive research on person perception. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 24, 13--​24. doi:10.1037/​a0035968 Andrews, J.
(1988). Self-​ confirmation theory: A paradigm for psychotherapy
integration. Part I. Content analysis of therapeutic styles. Journal of
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 359--​384. Andrews, J. (1989).
Psychotherapy of depression: A self-​confirmation model. Psychological
Review, 96, 576--​607.

History of Psychotherapy Integration Appelbaum, S. A. (1976). A
psychoanalyst looks at gestalt therapy. In C. Hatcher & P. Himmelstein
(Eds.), The handbook of gestalt therapy (pp. 215--​232). New York: Jason
Aronson. Appelbaum, S. A. (1979). Out in inner space: A psychoanalyst
explores the therapies. Garden City, NY: Anchor. Arkowitz, H. (1989).
The role of theory in psychotherapy integration. Journal of Integrative
and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 8, 8--​16. Arkowitz, H. (1992). Integrative
theories of therapy. In D. K. Freedheim & H. J. Freudenberger (Eds.),
History of psychotherapy: A century of change (pp. 261--​ 303).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Arkowitz, H., &
Messer, S. B. (Eds.). (1984). Psychoanalytic and behavior therapy: Is
integration possible? New York: Plenum. Arnkoff, D. B. (1981).
Flexibility in practicing cognitive therapy. In G. Emery, S. D. Hollon,
& R. C. Bedrosian (Eds.), New directions in cognitive therapy
(pp. 203--​223). New York: Guilford. Arnkoff, D. B., & Glass, C. R.
(1992). Cognitive therapy and psychotherapy integration. In D. K.
Freedheim & H. J. Freudenberger (Eds.), History of psychotherapy: A
century of change (pp. 657--​ 694). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Babcock, H. H. (1988). Integrative
psychotherapy: Collaborative aspects of behavioral and psychodynamic
therapies. Psychiatric Annals, 18, 271--​272. Bandura, A. (1969).
Principles of behavior modification. New York: Holt, Rinehart, &
Winston. Barber, B. (1961). Resistance by scientists to scientific
discovery. Science, 134, 596--​602. Barkham, M., Shapiro, D. A., & Firth-​
Cozens, J. (1989). Personal questionnaire changes in prescriptive
vs. exploratory psychotherapy. British Journal of Clinical Psychology,
28, 97--​107. Bastine, R. (1975). Auf dem Wege zu einer integrierten
Psychotherapie. Psychologie Heute, 7, 53--​58. Bastine, R. (1978).
Strategien psychotherapeutischen Handelns. In F. Reimer (Ed.),
Moglichkeiten und Grenzen der Psychotherapie im psychiatrischen
Krankenhaus. (pp. 59--​66). Stuttgart: Thieme. Bastine, R. (1980).
Ausbildungen in psychothera­ peutischen: Methoden und strategien. In V.
Birtsch & D. Tscheulin (Eds.), Ausbildung in klinischer psychologie und
psychotherapie (pp. 71--​85). Weinheim, Germany: Beltz.

53

Beach, S. H., & O'Leary, K. D. (1986). The treatment of depression
occurring in the context of marital discord. Behavior Therapy, 17,
43--​49. Beck, A. T. (1984). Cognitive therapy, behavior therapy,
psychoanalysis, and pharmacotherapy: The cognitive continuum. In J. B.
W. Williams & R. L. Spitzer (Eds.), Psychotherapy research: Where are we
and where should we go? (pp. 114--​135). New York: Guilford. Beitman, B.
D. (1987). The structure of individual psychotherapy. New York:
Guilford. Beitman, B. D. (1990). Why I am an integrationist (not an
eclectic). In W. Dryden & J. C. Norcross (Eds.), Eclecticism and
integration in counseling and psychotherapy (pp. 51--​ 70). Loughton, UK:
Gale Centre Publications. Beitman, B. D., Goldfried, M. R., & Norcross,
J. C. (1989). The movement toward integrating the psychotherapies: An
overview. American Journal of Psychiatry, 146, 138--​147. Beitman, B. D.,
& Klerman, G. L. (Eds.) (1984). Combining pharmacotherapy and
psychotherapy in clinical practice. New York: Spectrum. Beitman, B. D.,
& Yue, D. (1999). Learning psychotherapy: A time-​efficient,
research-​based and outcome-​measured psychotherapy training program. New
York: Norton. Bergin, A. E. (1968). Technique for improving
desensitization via warmth, empathy, and emotional re-​ experiencing of
hierarchy events. In R. Rubin & C. M. Franks (Eds.), Advances in
behavior therapy (pp. 117--​ 130). New York: Academic Press. Bergin, A.
E. (1970a). A note on dream changes following desensitization. Behavior
Therapy, 1, 546--​549. Bergin, A. E. (1970b). Cognitive therapy and
behavior therapy: Foci for a multidimensional approach to treatment.
Behavior Therapy, 1, 205--​212. Bergin, A. E. (1971). The evaluation of
therapeutic outcomes. In A. E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook
of psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 217--​270). New York: Wiley.
Bergin, A. E. (1988). Three contributions of the spiritual perspective
to counseling, psychotherapy and behavior change. Counseling and Values,
32, 21--​31. Bergin, A. E., & Strupp, H. H. (1972). Changing frontiers in
the science of psychotherapy. Chicago: Aldine-​Atherton. Beutler, L. E.
(1983). Eclectic psychotherapy: A systematic approach. Elmsford, NY:
Pergamon.

54

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

Beutler, L. E. (1995). Common factors and specific effects. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 2, 79--​82. Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin,
J. F. (1990). Systematic treatment selection: Toward targeted
therapeutic interventions. Philadelphia: Brunner/​Mazel. Beutler, L. E.,
Mahoney, M. J., Norcross, J. C., Prochaska, J. O., Robertson, M. H., &
Sollod, R. N. (1987). Training integrative/​ eclectic psychotherapists
II. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6, 296--​332.
Birk, L. (1970). Behavior therapy: Integration with dynamic psychiatry.
Behavior Therapy, 1, 522--​526. Birk, L. (1973). Psychoanalysis and
behavioral analysis: Natural resonance and complement­ arity.
International Journal of Psychiatry, 11, 160--​166. Birk, L. (1988).
Behavioral/​ psychoanalytic psychotherapy within overlapping systems: A
natural matrix for diagnosis and therapeutic change. Psychiatric Annals,
18, 296--​308. Birk, L., & Brinkley-​Birk, A. (1974). Psychoanalysis and
behavior therapy. American Journal of Psychiatry, 131, 499--​510. Bohart,
A. (1982). Similarities between cognitive and humanistic approaches to
psychotherapy. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 6, 24--​249. Boring, E. G.
(1950). A history of experimental psychology (Rev. ed.). New York:
Appleton-​ Century-​Crofts. Boswell, J. F., Kraus, D. R., Miller, S. D., &
Lambert, M. J. (2015). Implementing routine outcome monitoring in
clinical practice: Benefits, challenges, and solutions. Psychotherapy
Research, 25, 6--​19. doi:10.1080/​ 10503307.2013.817696 Brady, J. P.
(1968). Psychotherapy by combined behavioral and dynamic approaches.
Compre­ hensive Psychiatry, 9, 536--​543. Brady, J. P., Davison, G. C.,
Dewald, P. A., Egan, G., Fadiman, J., Frank, J. D., . . . Strupp, H. H.
(1980). Some views on effective principles of psychotherapy. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 4, 271--​306. Brazier, D. (1993). Beyond Carl
Rogers. London: Constable and Company. Brooks-​Harris, J. E. (2008).
Integrative multitheoretical psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Burton, A. (Ed.). (1976). What makes behavior change possible? New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Carere-​ Comes, T. (1999). Beyond psychotherapy:
Dialectical therapy. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 9, 365--​396.

Caro, I. (1998). Integration of cognitive psychotherapies: Vive la
difference! Right now. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 12, 67--​76.
Cashdan, S. (1988). Object relations theory: Using the relationship. New
York: Norton. Castonguay, L. G. (1993). "Common factors" and
"nonspecific variables": Clarification of the two concepts and
recommendations for research. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 3,
267--​286. Castonguay, L. G. (2011). Psychotherapy, psychopathology,
research and practice: Pathways of connections and integration.
Psychotherapy Research, 21, 125--​140. doi:10.1080/​10503307.2011.563250
Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Practice oriented research. In M. J. Lambert
(Ed.), Bergin and Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and behavior
change (6th ed., pp. 85--​134). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Hayes, A. M., & Kerr, S. (1989,
June). An exploratory analysis of process and outcome variables in the
Sheffield Psychotherapy Project. Presented at the 20th annual meeting of
the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Toronto. Castonguay, L. G., &
Hill, C. E. (2007). Insight in psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. doi:10.1037/​ 11532-​000 Castonguay, L. G., &
Hill, C. E. (2017). How and why are some therapists better than others?
Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. doi:10.1037/​0000034-​000 Christoph-​ Lemke, C. (1999). The
contributions of transactional analysis to integrative psychotherapy.
Transactional Analysis Journal, 29, 198--​214. Cohen, L. H., & Pope, B.
(1980). Concurrent use of insight and desensitization therapy.
Psychiatry, 23, 146--​154. Constantino, M. J., Boswell, J. F., Bernecker,
S. L., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Context-​responsive psychotherapy
integration as a framework for a unified clinical science: Conceptual
and empirical considerations. Journal of Unified Psychotherapy and
Clinical Science, 2, 1--​20. Cullari, S. (1999). Does every good
behaviorist deserve favor? A reply to Neil Jacobson. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 9, 243--​249. Davison, G. C. (1995). A failure
of early behavior therapy (circa 1966): Or why I learned to stop
worrying and to embrace psychotherapy

History of Psychotherapy Integration integration. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 5, 107--​112. Diamond, R. E., Havens, R. A., &
Jones, A. C. (1978). A conceptual framework for the practice of
prescriptive eclecticism in psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 33,
239--​248. Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and
psychotherapy. New York: McGraw-​Hill. Driscoll, R. (1984). Pragmatic
psychotherapy. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. Driscoll, R. (1987).
Ordinary language as a common language for psychotherapy. Journal of
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6, 184--​194. Dryden, W. (1980).
"Eclectic" approaches in individual counselling: Some pertinent issues.
The Counsellor, 3, 24--​30. Dryden, W. (1982). Rational-​emotive therapy
and eclecticism. The Counsellor, 3, 15--​22. Dryden, W. (Ed.). (1992).
Integrative and eclectic therapy: A handbook. Buckingham, UK: Open
University Press. Dryden, W. (Ed.). (1995). Rational emotive behaviour
therapy: A reader. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Dryden, W., & Norcross, J.
C. (Eds.). (1990). Eclecticism and integration in counselling and
psychotherapy. Loughton, UK: Gale Centre Publications. Duhl, B., & Duhl,
F. (1981). Integrative family therapy. In A. Gurman & D. Kniskern
(Eds.), The handbook of family therapy (pp. 483--​513). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Duncan, B. L. (1992). Strategic therapy, eclecticism, and
the therapeutic relationship. Journal of Marital & Family Therapy, 18,
17--​24. Duncan, B. L., Parks, M., & Rusk, G. S. (1990). Eclectic
strategic practice: A process constructive perspective. Journal of
Marital & Family Therapy, 16, 165--​178. Eagle, G. T. (1998). An
integrative model for brief term intervention in the treatment of
psychological trauma. International Journal of Psychotherapy, 3,
135--​146. Egan, G. (1975). The skilled helper. Monterey, CA:
Brooks/​Cole. Feather, B. W., & Rhoads, J. M. (1972a). Psycho­ dynamic
behavior therapy: I. Theory and rationale. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 26, 496--​502. Feather, B. W., & Rhoads, J. M. (1972b).
Psycho­ dynamic behavior therapy: II. Clinical aspects. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 26, 503--​511. Feldman, L. B. (1979). Marital
conflict and marital intimacy: An integrative

55

psychodynamic-​behavioral-​systemic model. Family Process, 18, 69--​78.
Feldman, L. B. (1989). Integrating individual and family therapy.
Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 8, 41--​52. Feldman,
L. B., & Pinsof, W. M. (1982). Problem maintenance in family systems: An
integrative model. Journal of Marriage and Family Therapy, 8, 295--​308.
Fenichel, O. (1941). Problems of psychoanalytic technique. Albany, NY:
Psychoanalytic Quarterly. Fensterheim, H., & Glazer, H. I. (Eds.).
(1983). Behavioral psychotherapy: Basic principles and case studies in
an integrative clinical model. New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Fensterheim, H.,
& Raw, S. D. (1996). Empirically validated treatments, psychotherapy
integration, and the politics of psychotherapy. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 6, 207--​215. Fernández-​ Alvarez, H., Gómez, B., & García,
F. (2015). Bridging the gap between research and practice in a clinical
and training network: Aigle's Program. Psychotherapy Research, 25,
84--​94. doi:10.1080/​10503307.2013.856047 Ferster, C. B. (1974). The
difference between behavioral and conventional psychology. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 159, 153--​157. Figured, K. J., & Norcross,
J. C. (1996). Defining the future of SEPI: A survey of the membership.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 6, 385--​407. Fischer, J. (1978).
Effective casework practice: An eclectic approach. New York:
McGraw-​Hill. Frank, J. D. (1961). Persuasion and healing. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. Frank, J. D. (1979). The present status
of outcome research. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 47,
310--​316. Frank, J. D., & Frank, J. B. (1991). Persuasion and healing: A
comparative study of psychotherapy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
Press. Freedheim, D. K., & Frendenberger, H. J. (1992). History of
psychotherapy: A century of change. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Freedheim, D. K., Freudenberger, H. J.,
Kessler, J. W., Messer, S. B., Peterson, D. R., Strupp, H. H., &
Wachtel, P. L. (Eds.). (1992). History of psychotherapy: A century of
change. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. French, T.
M. (1933). Interrelations between psychoanalysis and the experimental
work of

56

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

Pavlov. American Journal of Psychiatry, 89, 1165--​1203. Friedman, P.
(1980a). An integrative approach to the creation and alleviation of
disease within the family. Family Therapy, 3, 179--​195. Friedman, P.
(1980b). Integrative psychotherapy. In R. Herink (Ed.), Psychotherapy
handbook (pp. 308--​313). New York: New American Library. Friedman, P.
(1981). Integrative family therapy. Family Therapy, 8, 171--​178.
Garfield, S. L. (1980). Psychotherapy: An eclectic approach. New York:
Wiley. Garfield, S. L., & Kurtz, R. (1976). Clinical psychologists in
the 1970s. American Psychologist, 31, 1--​9. Garfield, S. L., & Kurtz, R.
(1977). A study of eclectic views. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 45, 78--​83. Gaston, L. (1995). Common factors exist in
reality but not in our theories. Clinical Psychology: Science &
Practice, 2, 83--​86. Gevins, A. (1983). Shadows of thought: Toward a
dynamic network model of neurocognitive functioning. Paper presented at
the meeting of the Society of Biological Psychiatry, New York. Gilbert,
M., & Shmukler, D. (1996). Brief therapy with couples: An integrative
approach. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Giusti, E., Montanari, C., &
Montanarella, G. (1995). Manuale di psicoterapia integrate. Milano:
FrancoAngeli. Glass, C. R., & Arnkoff, D. B. (1988). Common and specific
factors in client descriptions of an explanations for change. Journal of
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 427--​440. Glass, C. R.,
Arnkoff, D. B., & Rodriquez, B. F. (1998). An overview of directions in
psychotherapy integration research. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 8, 187--​209. Gold, J. (1996). Key concepts in psychotherapy
integration. New York: Plenum. Goldfried, M. R. (1979). Anxiety
reduction through cognitive-​ behavioral intervention. In P. C. Kendall &
S. D. Hollon (Eds.), Cognitive-​ behavioral interventions: Theory,
research, and procedures (pp. 373--​385). New York: Academic. Goldfried,
M. R. (1980). Toward the delineation of therapeutic change principles.
American Psychologist, 35, 991--​999. Goldfried, M. R. (Ed.). (1982).
Converging themes in psychotherapy: Trends in psychodynamic, humanistic,
and behavioral practice. New York, NY: Springer Publishing Company.

Goldfried, M. R. (1987). A common language for the psychotherapies:
Commentary. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6,
200--​204. Goldfried, M. R. (1991). Research issues in psychotherapy
integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 5--​25. Goldfried,
M. R. (1993). Commentary on how the field of psychopathology can
facilitate psychotherapy integration. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 3, 353--​360. Goldfried, M. R. (1995). From
cognitive-​behavior therapy to psychotherapy integration: An evolving
view. New York: Springer. Goldfried, M. R. (1998). A comment on
psychotherapy integration in the treatment of children. Journal of
Clinical Child Psychology, 27, 49--​53. Goldfried, M. R. (1999). A
participant-​ observer's perspective on psychotherapy integration.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 9, 235--​242. Goldfried, M. R., &
Castonguay, L. G. (1992). The future of psychotherapy integration.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 29, 4--​10.
https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​ 0033-​3204.29.1.4 Goldfried, M. R., &
Castonguay, L. G. (1993). Behavior therapy: Redefining strengths and
limitations. Behavior Therapy, 24, 505--​526. Goldfried, M. R., &
Davison, G. C. (1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt,
Rinehart, & Winston. Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1994). Clinical
behavior therapy (Exp. ed.). New York: Wiley. Goldfried, M. R., & Hayes,
A. M. (1989). Can contributions from other orientations complement
behavior therapy? The Behavior Therapist, 12, 57--​60. Goldfried, M. R.,
& Newman, C. F. (1986, August). A look at what therapists actually do.
Symposium presented at the annual convention of the American
Psychological Association, Washington, DC. Goldfried, M. R., Newman, M.
G., Castonguay, L. G., Fuertes, J. N., Magnavita, J. J., Sobell, L., &
Wolf, A. W. (2014). On the dissemination of clinical experiences in
using empirically supported treatments. Behavior Therapy, 45, 3--​ 6.
doi:10.1016/​j.beth.2013.09.007 Goldfried, M. R., Newman, C. F., & Hayes,
A. M. (1989). The coding system of therapeutic focus. Unpublished
manuscript, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY.

History of Psychotherapy Integration Goldfried, M. R., & Padawer, W.
(1982). Current status and future directions in psychotherapy. In M. R.
Goldfried (Ed.), Converging themes in psychotherapy (pp. 3--​49). New
York: Springer. Goldfried, M. R., & Safran, J. D. (1986). Future
directions in psychotherapy integration. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Handbook of eclectic psychotherapy (pp. 463--​ 483). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Goldfried, M. R., & Wachtel, P. L. (1983). Results of the
questionnaire. Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration
Newsletter, 1, 1--​3. Goldfried, M. R., & Wolfe, B. E. (1996).
Psychotherapy practice and research: Repairing a strained relationship.
American Psychologist, 51, 1007--​1016. Goldstein, A. J., & Chambless, D.
L. (1978). A re-​ analysis of agoraphobia. Behavior Therapy, 9, 47--​59.
Grebstein, L. C. (1986). An eclectic family therapy. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Handbook of eclectic psychotherapy (pp. 282--​ 319). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Greenberg, L. S. (1995). The self is flexibly various and
requires an integrative approach. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration,
5, 323--​329. Greenberg, L. S., & Safran, J. D. (1984). Integrating
affect and cognitions: A perspective on the process of therapeutic
change. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 8, 559--​578. Greenberg, L. S., &
Safran, J. D. (1987). Emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Guilford.
Greening, T. C. (1978). Commentary. Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
18, 1--​4. Grencavage, L. M., & Norcross, J. C. (1990). Where are the
commonalities among the therapeutic common factors? Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 21, 372--​378. Grinker, R. R. (1976).
Discussion of Strupp's, "Some critical comments on the future of
psychoanalytic therapy." Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 40, 247--​254.
Guidano, V. F. (1987). Complexity of the self: A developmental approach
to psychotherapy and theory. New York: Guilford. Guidano, V. F., &
Liotti, G. (1983). Cognitive processes and emotional disorders: A
structural approach to psychotherapy. New York: Guilford. Gurman, A. S.
(1978). Contemporary marital therapies. In T. Paolino & B. McCrady
(Eds.), Marriage and marital therapy (pp. 445--​566). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Gurman, A. S. (1981). Integrative marital therapy: Toward
the development of an interpersonal

57

approach. In S. Budman (Ed.), Forms of brief therapy (pp. 415--​462). New
York: Guilford. Halgin, R. P. (1985). Teaching integration of
psychotherapy models to beginning therapists. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, 22, 555--​563. https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​
h0085540 Halgin, R. P. (Ed.). (1988). Special section: Issues in the
supervision of integrative psychotherapy. Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 152--​180. Hart, J. (1983). Modern eclectic
therapy: A functional orientation to counselling and psychotherapy. New
York: Plenum. Hatcher, C. (1978). Intrapersonal and interpersonal
models: Blending gestalt and family therapies. Journal of Marriage and
Family Counseling, 4, 63--​68. Heard, H. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2005).
Integrative therapy for borderline personality disorder. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(2nd ed., pp. 299--​ 320). New York: Oxford University Press. Herzberg,
A. (1945). Active psychotherapy. New York: Grune & Stratton. Hollanders,
H., & McLeod, J. (1999). Theoretical orientation and reported practice:
A survey of eclecticism among counsellors in Britain. British Journal of
Guidance & Counselling, 27, 405--​414. Horowitz, M. J. (1991). States,
schemas, and control: General theories for psychotherapy integration.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 85--​102. Houts, P. S., &
Serber, M. (1972). After the turn on, what? Learning perspectives on
humanistic groups. Champaign, IL: Research Press. Hunt, H. F. (1976).
Recurrent dilemmas in behavior therapy. In G. Serban (Ed.),
Psychopathology of human adaptation (pp. 307--​ 317). New York: Plenum.
Hutterer, R. (1993). Eclecticism: An identity crisis for person-​ centred
therapists. In D. Brazier (Ed.), Beyond Carl Rogers (pp. 274--​ 284).
London, England: Constable and Company. Jacobson, N. S. (1994). Behavior
therapy and psychotherapy integration. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 4, 105--​119. Jensen, J. P., Bergin, A. E., & Greaves, D. W.
(1990). The meaning of eclecticism: New survery and analysis of
components. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 21,
124--​130. Jones, E. E., & Pulos, S. M. (1993). Comparing the process in
psychodynamic and

58

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

cognitive-​behavioral therapies. Journal of Consulting & Clinical
Psychology, 61, 306--​316. Kaplan, H. S. (1974). The new sex therapy. New
York: Brunner/​Mazel. Knobloch, R., & Knobloch, J. (1979). Integrated
psychotherapy. New York: Aronson. Kubie, L. S. (1934). Relation of the
conditioned reflex to psychoanalytic technic. Archives of Neurology and
Psychiatry, 32, 1137--​1142. Lambley, P. (1974). Differential effects of
psychotherapy and behavioural techniques in a case of acute obsessive
compulsive disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 181--​183.
Lambley, P. (1976). The use of assertive training and psycho dynamic
insight in the treatment of migraine headaches: A case study. Journal of
Nervous and Mental Disease, 163, 61--​64. Landsman, T. (1974, August).
Not an adversity but a welcome diversity. Paper presented at the meeting
of the American Psychological Association, New Orleans. Larson, D.
(1980). Therapeutic schools, styles, and schoolism: A national survey.
Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 20, 3--​20. Lazarus, A. A. (1967). In
support of technical eclecticism. Psychological Reports, 21, 415--​416.
Lazarus, A. A. (1971). Behavior therapy and beyond. New York:
McGraw-​Hill. Lazarus, A. A. (1976). Multimodal behavior therapy. New
York: Springer. Lazarus, A. A. (1977). Has behavior therapy outlived its
usefulness? American Psychologist, 32, 550--​554. Lazarus, A. A. (1981).
The practice of multimodal therapy. New York: McGraw-​Hill. Lazarus, A.
A. (1989). The practice of multimodal therapy (rev. ed.). Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. Lazarus, A. A. (1990). Why I am an
eclectic (not an integrationist). In W. Dryden & J. C. Norcross (Eds.),
Eclecticism and integration in counselling and psychotherapy
(pp. 34--​50). Loughton, UK: Gale Centre Publications. Lazarus, A. A.,
Beutler, L. E., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). The future of technical
eclecticism. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 29,
11--​20. Lazarus, A. A., & Messer, S. B. (1991). Does chaos prevail? An
exchange on technical eclecticism and assimilative integration. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 143--​158. Lebow, J. L. (1984). On the
value of integrating approaches to family therapy. Journal of Marital
and Family Therapy, 10, 127--​138.

Lecompte, C., & Castonguay, L. G. (Eds.). (1987). Rapprochement et
integration en psychotherapie. Montreal: Gaetan Morin Editeur. Lemmens,
F., deRidder, D., & vanLieshout, P. (1994). The integration of
psychotherapy: Goal or utopia? Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy,
24, 245--​257. Levay, A. N., Weissberg, J. H., & Blaustein, A. B. (1976).
Concurrent sex therapy and psychoanalytic psychotherapy by separate
therapists: Effectiveness and implications. Psychiatry, 39, 355--​363.
Leventhal, A. M. (1968). Use of a behavioral approach within a
traditional psychotherapeutic context: A case study. Journal of Abnormal
Psychology, 73, 178--​182. Lewis, O. (1997). Integrated psychodynamic
psychotherapy with children. Child & Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of
North America, 6, 53--​68. Lietaer, G., Rombauts, J., & VanBalen, R.
(Eds.). (1990). Client-​ centered and experiential psychotherapy in the
nineties. Leuven, Belgium: Leuven University Press. Linehan, M. M.
(1987). Dialectical behavioral therapy: A cognitive-​ behavioral approach
to parasuicide. Journal of Personality Disorders, 1, 328--​333.
Linsenhoff, A., Bastine, R., & Kommer, D. (1980). Schulenubergreifende
Perspektiven in der Psy-​chotherapie. Integrative Psychotherapie, 4,
302--​322. London, P. (1964). The modes and morals of psychotherapy. New
York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. London, P. (1972). The end of ideology
in behavior modification. American Psychologist, 27, 913--​920. London,
P., & Palmer, M. (1988). The integrative trend in psychotherapy in
historical context. Psychiatric Annals, 18, 273--​279. Magnavita, J. J.
(2008). Toward unification of clinical science: The next wave in the
evolution of psychotherapy? Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 18,
264--​291. doi:10.1037/​a0013490 Magnavita, J. J. (2014). Unified
psychotherapy project. Retrieved from https://​www.
unifiedpsychotherapyproject.org Mahoney, M. J. (1979). Cognitive and
non-​cognitive views in behavior modification. In P. O. Sjoden & S. Bates
(Eds.), Trends in behavior therapy (pp. 39--​54). New York: Plenum.
Mahoney, M. J. (1980). Psychotherapy and the structure of personal
revolutions. In M.

History of Psychotherapy Integration Mahoney (Ed.), Psychotherapy
process (pp. 157--​180). New York: Plenum. Mahoney, M. J. (1984).
Integrating cognition, affect, and action: A comment. Cognitive Therapy
and Research, 8, 585--​589. Mahoney, M. J. (1985). Open exchange and
epistemic progress. American Psychologist, 40, 29--​39. Mahoney, M. J.
(1991). Human change processes: The scientific foundations of
psychotherapy. New York: Basic Books. Mahoney, M. J. (1993a). The
postmodern self in psychotherapy. Journal of Cognitive Psychotherapy, 7,
241--​250. https://​doi.org/​ 10.1891/​0889-​8391.7.4.241 Mahoney, M. J.
(1993b). Introduction to special section: Theoretical developments in
the cognitive psychotherapies. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 61, 187--​193. https://​ doi.org/​10.1037/​0022-​006X.61.2.187
Mahrer, A. R. (1989). The integration of psychotherapies: A guide for
practicing therapists. New York, NY: Human Sciences Press. Marks, I. M.,
& Gelder, M. G. (1966). Common ground between behavior therapy and
psychodynamic methods. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 39,
11--​23. Marmor, J. (1964). Psychoanalytic therapy and theories of
learning. In J. Masserman (Ed.), Science and psychoanalysis: Development
and research (Vol. 7, pp. 265--​279). New York, NY: Grune & Stratton.
Marmor, J. (1969). Neurosis and the psycho­therapeutic process:
Similarities and differences in the behavioral and psychodynamic
conceptions. International Journal of Psychiatry, 7, 514--​519. Marmor,
J. (1971). Dynamic psychotherapy and behavior therapy: Are they
irreconcilable? Archives of General Psychiatry, 24, 22--​28. Marmor, J.,
& Woods, S. M. (Eds.). (1980). The interface between psychodynamic and
behavioral therapies. New York: Plenum. Martin, C. G. (1972).
Learning-​based client-​centered therapy. Monterey, CA: Brooks/​Cole.
McCullough, J. P. (1995). Manual for cognitive behavioral analytic
system of psychotherapy (CBASP). Richmond, VA: Virginia Common­ wealth
University. McCullough, J. P. (2000). Treatments for chronic depression:
Cognitive behavior analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP). New York:
Guilford. Messer, S. B. (1986). Behavioral and psychoanalytic
perspectives at therapeutic choice points. American Psychologist, 41,
1261--​1272.

59

Messer, S. B. (1987). Can the Tower of Babel be completed? A critique of
the common language proposal. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 6, 195--​199. Messer, S. B., Sass, L. A., & Woolfolk, R.
L. (Eds.). (1988). Hermeneutics and psychological theory. New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press. Messer, S. B., & Winokur, M. (1980). Some
limits to the integration of psychoanalytic and behavior therapy.
American Psychologist, 35, 818--​827. Meyer, R. (1982). Le corps assui:
de la psychanalyse a'la somatanalyse. Paris: Maloine S. A., Editeur.
Mikulas, W. L. (1978). Four noble truths of Buddhism related to behavior
therapy. Psychological Record, 28, 59--​67. Millon, T., Everly, G., &
Davis, R. D. (1993). How can knowledge of psychopathology facilitate
psychotherapy integration? A view from the personality disorders.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 3, 331--​352. Murray, N. E. (1976).
A dynamic synthesis of analytic and behavioral approaches to symptoms.
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 30, 561--​569. National Institute of
Mental Health. (n.d.). Research domain criteria. Retrieved from
https://​www. nimh.nih.gov/​research-​priorities/​rdoc/​index. shtml Newman,
C. F. (1989). Cognitive therapy, counter-​ transference, and the
borderline patient. Unpublished manuscript, Center for Cognitive
Therapy, Philadelphia, PA. Nielsen, A. C. (1980). Gestalt and
psychoanalytic therapies: Structural analysis and rapprochement.
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 34, 534--​544. Norcross, J. C. (Ed.).
(1986). Handbook of eclectic psychotherapy. New York: Brunner/​Mazel.
Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (1987). Casebook of eclectic psychotherapy.
Philadelphia, PA: Brunner/​ Mazel. Norcross, J. C. (1988). Supervision of
integrative psychotherapy. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 71, 157--​166. Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (1993). Research
directions for psychotherapy integration: A roundtable. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 3, 91--​131. Norcross, J. C. (1997). Emerging
breakthroughs in psychotherapy integration: Three predictions and one
fantasy. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 34,
86--​90. Norcross, J. C. (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work:
Evidence-​based responsiveness (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/​ acprof:oso/​9780199737208.001.0001

60

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J. F., DiClemente, C. C.,
Halgin, R. P., Frances, A., . . . Suedfeld, P. (1986). Training
integrative/​ eclectic psychotherapists. International Journal of
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 5, 71--​94. Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R.
(Eds.). (1992). Handbook of psychotherapy integration. New York: Basic
Books. Norcross, J. C., & Grencavage, L. M. (1989). Eclecticism and
integration in counselling and psychotherapy: Major themes and
obstacles. British Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 17, 227--​247.
Norcross, J. C., & Lambert, M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy
relationships that work (3rd ed.). New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. Norcross, J. C., & Newman, C. F. (1992). Psychotherapy
integration: Setting the context. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried
(Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 3--​ 45). New York:
Basic Books. Norcross, J. C., Nolan, B. M. Kosman, D. C., & Fernández-​
Alvarez, H. (2017). Redefining the future of SEPI: Member
characteristics, integrative practices, and organizational
satisfactions. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27, 3--​12.
Norcross, J. C., & Thomas, B. L. (1988). What's stopping us now?
Obstacles to psychotherapy integration. Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 74--​80. O'Leary, K. D., & Turkewitz, H.
(1978). Marital therapy from a behavioral perspective. In T. J. Paolino
& B. S. McCrady (Eds.), Marriage and marital therapy: Psychoanalytic,
behavioral, and systems theory perspectives (pp. 240--​297). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Omer, H., & London, P. (1988). Metamorphosis in
psychotherapy: The end of the system's era. Psychotherapy, 25, 171--​180.
Orlinksy, D. E., & Howard, K. I. (1987). A generic model of
psychotherapy. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6,
6--​16. Palmer, J. O. (1980). A primer of eclectic psychotherapy.
Monterey, CA: Brooks/​Cole. Papajohn, J. C. (1982). Intensive behavior
therapy: The behavioral treatment of complex emotional disorders. New
York: Pergamon. Patterson, C. H. (1967). Divergence and convergence in
psychotherapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 21, 4--​17. Patterson,
C. H., & Watkins, C. E. (1996). Theories of psychotherapy (5th ed.).
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Longman.

Patterson, T. (1997). Theoretical unity and eclecticism: Pathways to
coherence in family therapy. American Journal of Family Therapy, 25,
97--​109. Perez, J. E. (1999). Integration of cognitive-​ behavioral and
interpersonal therapies for Latinos: An argument for technical
eclecticism. Journal of Contemporary Psychotherapy, 29, 169--​183. Pinel,
E. C., Bernecker, S. L., & Rampy, N. M. (2015). I-​sharing on the couch:
On the clinical implications of shared subjective experience. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 25, 59--​70. doi:10.1037/​a0038895 Pinsof, W.
M. (1983). Integrative problem-​centered therapy: Toward the synthesis of
family and individual psychotherapies. Journal of Marital and Family
Therapy, 9, 19--​35. Powell, D. H. (1988). Spontaneous insights and the
process of behavior therapy: Cases in support of integrative
psychotherapy. Psychiatric Annals, 18, 288--​294. Prochaska, J. O.
(1979). Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis. Homewood,
IL: Dorsey. Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984). The
transtheoretical approach: Crossing the traditional boundaries of
therapy. Homewood, IL: Dow Jones-​Irwin. Raimy, V. (1975).
Misunderstandings of the self. San Francisco: Jossey-​Bass. Ramirez, M.
III. (1991). Psychotherapy and counseling with minorities: A cognitive
approach to individual and cultural differences. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Raue, P. J., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (1993). The working
alliance: A comparison of two therapies. Psychotherapy Research, 3,
197--​207. Resnick, R. (1995). Gestalt therapy: Principles, prisms and
perspectives. British Gestalt Journal, 4, 3--​13. Rhoads, J. M. (1988).
Combinations and synthesis of psychotherapies. Annals of Psychiatry, 18,
280--​287. Rigazio-​Digilio, S. A., Goncalves, O. F., & Ivey, A. E.
(1996). From cultural to existential diversity: The impossibility of
psychotherapy integration within a traditional framework. Applied &
Preventive Psychology, 5, 235--​247. Robertson, M. (1979). Some
observations from an eclectic therapist. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, and Practice, 16, 18--​21.

History of Psychotherapy Integration

61

Robertson, M. H. (1995). Psychotherapy education (2nd ed., pp. 461--​
495). New York: Oxford and training: An integrative perspective.
University Press. Madison, CT: International Universities Press.
Schwartz, B. D. (1981). An eclectic group therapy Rogers, C. R. (1963).
Psychotherapy today or where course for graduate students in
professional do we go from here? American Journal of psychology.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Psychotherapy, 17, 5--​15. and Practice,
18, 417--​423. Rosenberg, J. (1978). Two is better than one: Use of
Schwartz, R. M. (1993). The idea of balance behavioral techniques within
a structural family and integrative psychotherapy. Journal of therapy
model. Journal of Marriage and Family Psychotherapy Integration, 3,
159--​181. Counseling, 4, 31--​40. Sechrest, L., & Smith, B. (1994).
Psychotherapy is the Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some implicit common
practice of psychology. Journal of Psychotherapy factors in diverse
methods in psychotherapy. Integration, 4, 1--​29. "At last the Dodo said,
'Everybody has won Segraves, R. T. (1982). Marital therapy: A and all
must have prizes'." American Journal of combined
psychodynamic-​behavioral approach. Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412--​415. New
York: Plenum. Ryle, A. (1978). A common language for the Segraves, R.
T., & Smith, R. C. (1976). Concurrent psychotherapies? British Journal
of Psychiatry, psychotherapy and behavior therapy: Treatment 132,
585--​594. of psychoneurotic outpatients. Archives of Ryle, A. (1980).
Some measures of goal attainment General Psychiatry, 33, 756--​763. in
focussed integrated active psychotherapy: A Shapiro, D. H., Jr. (1978).
Precision nirvana. study of fifteen cases. British Journal of Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-​Hall. Psychiatry, 37, 475--​486. Shirk, S. R.
(1999). Integrated child Ryle, A. (1982). Psychotherapy: A cognitive
integration psychotherapy: Treatment ingredients in search of theory and
practice. London: Academic Press. of a recipe. In S. W. Russ & T. H.
Ollendick Ryle, A. (1984). How can we compare different (Eds.), Handbook
of psychotherapies with psychotherapies? Why are they all effective?
children and families (pp. 369--​384). Dordrecht, British Journal of
Medical Psychology, 57, The Netherlands: Kluwer. 261--​264.
Shoham-​Salomon, V. (1991). Studying therapeutic Ryle, A. (1987).
Cognitive psychology as a common modules precedes the integration of
models. language for psychotherapy. Journal of Integrative Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 35--​41. and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6,
168--​172. Silverman, L. H. (1974). Some psychoanalytic Ryle, A. (1990).
Cognitive-​analytic therapy: Active considerations of non-​ psychoanalytic
participation in change. Chichester, UK: Wiley. therapies: On the
possibility of integrating Safran, J. D. (1984). Assessing the
cognitive-​ treatment approaches and related issues. interpersonal cycle.
Cognitive Therapy and Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice,
Research, 8, 333--​347. 11, 298--​305. Safran, J. D., Greenberg, L. S., &
Rice, L. (1988). Simek-​ Downing, L. (Ed.). (1989). International
Integrating psychotherapy research and psychotherapy: Theories,
research, and cross-​ practice: Modeling the change process. cultural
implications. New York: Praeger. Psychotherapy, 25, 1--​17. Sloane, R. B.
(1969). The converging paths of Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990).
Interpersonal behavior therapy and psychotherapy. American process in
cognitive therapy. Northvale, Journal of Psychiatry, 125, 877--​885. NJ:
Jason Aronson, Inc. Sloane, R. B., Staples, F. R., Cristol, A. H.,
Yorkston, Sarason, I. G. (1979). Three lacunae of cognitive N. J., &
Whipple, K. (1975). Psychotherapy therapy. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 3, versus behavior therapy. Cambridge, 223--​235. MA: Harvard
University Press. Schacht, T. E. (1991). Can psychotherapy education
Smith, D. A. (1999).The end of theoretical advance psychotherapy
integration? A view from orientations? Applied & Preventive Psychology,
the cognitive psychology of expertise. Journal of 8, 269--​280.
Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 305--​319. Sollod, R. (1975). Behavioral
and psychodynamic Schottenbauer, M. A., Glass, C. R., & Arnkoff, D.
dimensions of the new sex therapy. Journal of B. (2005). Outcome
research on psychotherapy Sex and Marital Therapy, 1, 335--​340.
integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried Society for the
Exploration of Psychotherapy (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
integration Integration. (n.d.). Basic research findings for

62

Conceptual and Historical Perspectives

the practicing clinician. Retrieved from http://​
www.sepiweb.org/​page/​basic\_​research Steinfeld, G. J. (1980). Target
systems: An integrative approach to individual and family therapy.
Jonesboro, TN: Pilgrimage. Stiles, W. B., Shapiro, D. A., & Elliott, R.
(1986). Are all psychotherapies equivalent? American Psychologist, 41,
165--​180. Stricker, G. (1996). Empirically validated treatment,
psychotherapy manuals, and psychotherapy integration. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 6, 217--​226. Stricker, G. (1997). Are science
and practice commensurable? American Psychologist, 52, 442--​448.
Stricker, G., & Gold, J. R. (1993). Comprehensive handbook of
psychotherapy integration. New York: Plenum. Strong, S. R. (1987).
Interpersonal theory as a common language for psychotherapy. Journal of
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6, 173--​183. Strupp, H. H.
(1973). On the basic ingredients of psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 41, 1--​8. Strupp, H. H. (1976). Some critical
comments on the future of psychoanalytic therapy. Bulletin of the
Menninger Clinic, 40, 238--​254. Strupp, H. H. (1983). Are psychoanalytic
therapists beginning to practice cognitive behavior therapy or is
behavior therapy turning psychoanalytic? British Journal of Cognitive
Therapy, 1, 17--​27. Textor, M. R. (1983). Integrative psychotherapie.
Munchen: Schobert. Thoresen, C. E. (1973). Behavioral humanism. In C. E.
Thoresen (Ed.), Behavior modification in education (pp. 98--​122).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Thorne, F. C. (1950). Principles
of personality counseling. Brandon, VT: Journal of Clinical Psychology.
Torrey, E. F. (1972). What western psychotherapists can learn from witch
doctors. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 42, 69--​72. Trijsburg, R.
W., Colijn, S., Collumbien, E. C. A., & Lietaer, G. (Eds.). (1998).
Dutch handbook of integrative psychotherapy. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
Elsevier. Truax, C. B., & Mitchell, K. M. (1971). Research on certain
therapist interpersonal skills in relation to process and outcome. In A.
E. Bergin & S. L. Garfield (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy and
behavior change: An empirical analysis (pp. 299--​344). New York: Wiley.

Wachtel, E. F., & Wachtel, P. L. (1986). Family dynamics in individual
psychotherapy. New York: Guilford. Wachtel, P. L. (1975). Behavior
therapy and the facilitation of psychoanalytic exploration.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, 12, 68--​72. Wachtel, P.
L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy: Toward an integration.
New York: Basic Books. Wachtel, P. L. (Ed.). (1982). Resistance: Psycho­
dynamic and behavioral approaches. New York: Plenum. Wachtel, P. L.
(1987). Action and insight. New York: Guilford. Wachtel, P. L. (1991).
From eclecticism to synthesis: Toward a seamless psychotherapeutic
integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 43--​54. Wachtel,
P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, and the relational
world. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Wandersman,
A., Poppen, P. J., & Ricks, D. F. (Eds.). (1976). Humanism and
behaviorism: Dialogue and growth. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon. Watson, G.
(1940). Areas of agreement in psychotherapy. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 10, 698--​709. Weinberger, J. (1995). Common factors
aren't so common: The common factors dilemma. Clinical Psychology:
Science & Practice, 2, 45--​69. Weitzman, B. (1967). Behavior therapy and
psychotherapy. Psychological Review, 74, 300--​317. Westen, D. (1988).
Transference and information processing. Clinical Psychology Review, 8,
161--​179. Westra, H. A., Aviram, A., & Doell, F. K. (2011). Extending
motivational interviewing to the treatment of major mental health
problems: Current directions and evidence. The Canadian Journal of
Psychiatry /​La Revue Canadienne de Psychiatrie, 56, 643--​650.
https://​doi.org/​10.1177/​070674371105601102 Westra, H. A., Constantino,
M. J., & Antony, M. M. (2016). Integrating motivational interviewing
with cognitive-​behavioral therapy for severe generalized anxiety
disorder: An allegiance-​ controlled randomized clinical trial. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84, 768--​782.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​ ccp0000098

History of Psychotherapy Integration Whitehouse, F. A. (1967). The
concept of therapy: A review of some essentials. Rehabilitation
Literature, 28, 238--​347. Wiser, S., & Goldfried, M. R. (1993).
Comparative study of emotional experiencing in
psycho­dynamic-​interpersonal and cognitive-​ behavioral therapies. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61, 892--​895. Wittman, L. (1981).
Verhaltenstherapie und Psycho­ dynamik. Therapeutisches Handeln jenseits
der Schulengrenzen. Weinheim: Beltz. Wolf, E. (1966). Learning theory
and psychoanalysis. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 39, 1--​10.
Wolfe, B. E. (1989). Phobias, panic, and psychotherapy integration.
Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 8, 264--​276.

63

Wolfe, B. E. (1995). Self pathology and psychotherapy integration.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 5, 293--​312. Wolfe, B. E. (2005).
Integrative psychotherapy for the anxiety disorders. In J. C. Norcross &
M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 263--​ 280). New York: Oxford University Press. Wolfe, B. E., &
Goldfried, M. R. (1988). Research on psychotherapy integration:
Recommendations and conclusions from an NIMH workshop. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56, 448--​451. Woodworth, R. S.
(1948). Contemporary schools of psychology. New York: Ronald. Woody, R.
H. (1971). Psychobehavioral counseling and therapy: Integrating
behavioral and insight techniques. New York: Appleton-​Century-​Crofts.

PART II

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

A. Common Factors/​Processes

3 Integration of Common Factors and Specific Ingredients BRUCE E.
WAMPOLD AND PÅL G. ULVENES

The history of psychotherapy is characterized by arguments between those
who are convinced that various treatments are superior to others and
those who claim that factors common to all psychotherapies are
responsible for the benefits produced by psychotherapy (Wampold & Imel,
2015). However, as we discuss in this chapter, this dichotomy is false.
Stefan Hofmann and David Barlow (2014), two vocal advocates of specific
treatments for particular disorders (e.g., Barlow, 2004; Hofmann et al.,
2012), had this to say about common factors: "We do not agree and never
have that so called 'common factors' are unimportant, nor do other
clinical scientists" (Hofmann & Barlow, 2014, p. 511). On the other
hand, common factor proponents, at least since Jerome Frank's work in
the 1960s (Frank, 1961), have stressed the importance of particular
therapeutic actions to address the

client's distress: "Jerome Frank discussed the importance of providing
an explanation for the patient's distress and concomitant specific
therapeutic actions to overcome the distress" (Yulish et al., 2017,
p. 329). Our point is that specific ingredients and common factors are
not mutually exclusive but work together to make psychotherapy
effective. Focusing on the debate between specific ingredients and
common factors ignores their integration, which results in treatment
outcomes superior to approaches that emphasize either the therapeutic
actions of a particular treatment or the common factors. In this
chapter, we describe and illustrate a psychotherapy that integrates
common factors and specific ingredients. Our overall message is that it
is impossible to conceptualize psychotherapy by emphasizing either
common

69

70

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

factors or specific ingredients to the exclusion of the other. However,
to make psychotherapy optimally effective, the manner in which the
common factors and specific ingredients are integrated is critical. THE
INTEGRATIVE APPROACH To understand the contextual model (Wampold &
Budge, 2012; Wampold & Imel, 2015; Wampold et al., 2006), which
integrates common factors and specific ingredients, it is important to
consider the historical context. Although the antecedents of
psychotherapy existed in the United States and Europe prior to Freud's
development of psychoanalysis (Caplan, 1998; Makari, 2008),
psychoanalysis was the first unified theory of psychotherapy. From the
inception of psychoanalysis, there were heated arguments about the
theory and the correct way to practice it. Indeed, Alfred Adler and Carl
Jung were expelled from Freud's inner circle due to disagreements about
theory and practice (Makari, 2008). This might be said to be the
beginning of the idea that some forms of treatments were superior to
others---​implicit in that idea was that treatments have specific and
unique therapeutic actions and that these actions are of paramount
importance for the effectiveness of the treatment. The idea that some
therapies are superior to others due to the potency of their specific
therapeutic actions has continued over the years. As said eloquently by
Norcross and Newman (1992): Rivalry among theoretical orientation has a
long and undistinguished history in psychotherapy dating back to Freud.
In the infancy of the field, therapy systems, like battling siblings,
competed for attention and affection in a "dogma eat dogma" environment.
. . . Mutual antipathy and exchange of puerile insults between adherents
of rival orientations were much the order of the day. (1992, p. 3)

Interestingly, the notion of relationship components and other factors
that are often labeled as common factors was recognized by

advocates of the specific treatments. Indeed, the idea of the alliance,
which is probably the most widely discussed and researched common
factor, emanated from psychoanalytic theory (Horvath, 2017). When making
a distinction between generic psychotherapy and psychological
treatments, Barlow (2004) noted that psychological treatments contained
common factors such as "the therapeutic alliance, the induction of
positive expectancy of change, and remoralization," much in the way that
generic psychotherapy would, but importantly also contain "specific
psychological procedures targeted at the psychopathology at hand"
(p. 873). That is, according to this view, what makes treatments work
are the specific procedures that remediate a psychological deficit and
thus render the patient healthier, even if common factors are necessary
for their delivery. There are now more than 400 purportedly different
therapies (Dattilio & Norcross, 2006), which would seem to indicate that
treatment developers believe that the specific therapeutic actions of
their newly developed treatment have an effect not obtainable with
existing treatments---​or so they lead us to believe. With the possible
exception of motivational interviewing (Moyers et al., 2016; Moyers,
Miller, & Hendrickson, 2005) and, of course, integrative therapies that
emphasize common factors, treatments emphasize what makes them different
from other treatments (Goldfried, 1980). The warrants for claims of
superiority have increasingly relied on outcomes of treatments produced
in clinical trials as estimated by meta-​ analyses (Tolin et al., 2015;
Wampold, 2013; Wampold & Imel, 2015). The initial meta-​ analysis of
psychotherapy outcomes found that there were few differences among
treatments, particularly after confounds were controlled (Smith & Glass,
1977; Smith, Glass, & Miller, 1980). Not surprisingly, this was a
conclusion that distressed advocates of behavioral treatments who
contended that their treatments were more effective because they relied
on "scientific" ingredients (e.g., Eysenck, 1978, 1984, 1995; Wilson,
1982; Wilson & Rachman, 1983). Disputes about the conclusions from

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

meta-​analyses continue (Baardseth et al., 2013; Tolin, 2010, 2014, 2015;
Wampold, Flückiger, et al., 2017) and illustrate that claims of
superiority of treatments and of the importance of specific therapeutic
ingredients have saturated the field of psychotherapy since the
beginning. The false dichotomy continues unabated. There is a
countervailing strand to the specific ingredient perspective in the
development of psychotherapy. In 1936, Saul Rosenzweig observed in a
brief article that advocates claimed that their treatments were
beneficial and that the specific ingredients were responsible for these
benefits---​and they provided an explanation for this: The proud
proponent, having achieved success in the cases he mentions, implies,
even when he does not say it, that his ideology is thus proved true, all
others false. . . . \[However\] it is soon realized that besides the
intentionally utilized methods and their consciously held theoretical
foundations, there are inevitably certain unrecognized factors in any
therapeutic situation---​factors that may be even more important than
those being purposefully employed. (Rosenzweig, 1936, p. 412)

Referring to the race in Alice in Wonderland in which participants
started when they wanted and ended when they wanted, Rosenzweig used the
metaphor "At last the Dodo bird said, 'Everybody has won and all must
have prizes' " as the subtitle to his article. This refers to both the
competition among the psychotherapies and the generally equivalent
outcomes among them. The equivalence of the benefits of psychotherapy
has even been called the Dodo Bird effect. Rosenzweig's "unrecognized"
factors have become known as common factors, as they are aspects of
therapy that are common to all, or at least most, psychotherapies and
include such aspects of therapy as hope, expectation, therapeutic
relationship, treatment ritual, and corrective experiences. Since
Rosenzweig introduced the notion of common factors, many researchers and
theoreticians have discussed them, developed taxonomies, and proposed
theories about how

71

they work (e.g., Castonguay, 1993; Frank & Frank, 1991; Garfield, 1992;
Grencavage & Norcross, 1990; Orlinsky & Howard, 1986; Tracey et al.,
2003; Wampold & Imel, 2015). Jerome Frank's model has been arguably the
most grounded in a theory of change (Wampold & Imel, 2015). His (and the
last one co-​authored with Julia Frank) editions of Persuasion and
Healing (Frank, 1961, 1973, Frank & Frank, 1991) provided a model of how
change occurs in various healing practices. The model presented here is
in many ways an extension of Frank's model. CHANGE PROCESSES AND
THERAPEUTIC RELATIONSHIP The contextual model (Wampold & Imel, 2015) is
a meta-​model of how psychotherapy works. Central to the model are three
pathways to change: (1) the real relationship, (2) expectation through
explanation and treatment, and (3) specific ingredients. Its basic
premise is that humans are evolved to heal in a social context
(Humphrey, 2002). For example, there is evidence that the facial
expression of pain, which is culturally and time invariant, evolved to
signal the need for social support to assist the person with pain
(Steinkopf, 2016). There are social healing practices in all societies,
with designated healers and healing rituals, and these have existed
since the earliest Homo sapiens (Frank & Frank, 1991; Shapiro & Shapiro,
1997; Wilson, 1978). In fact, eusocial insects heal through social means
(e.g., ants; Konrad et al., 2012). Most psychotherapy theories delineate
how a therapy works, emphasizing particular therapeutic actions or
change processes. The contextual model recognizes the importance of
these therapeutic actions, but integrates them with the relationship
between therapist and the client. Healing properties of the relationship
can provide a foundation or vehicle for delivering the specific
ingredients. Providing an explanation and a means to overcome one's
difficulties elicit healing responses, most likely through the creation
of positive expectation

72

Integrative Psychotherapy Models Real relationship, belonginess, social
connection

Therapist Trust, Understanding, Expertise Patient

Better Quality of Life Creation of expectation through explanation and
some form of treatment Tasks/Goals

Therapeutic Actions

Healthy Actions

Symptom Reduction

FIGURE 3.1 The Contextual Model.

and hopefulness. And, finally, enacting specific therapeutic actions has
benefits for the client. The multiple pathways to change can be active
simultaneously during the course of therapy, as shown in Figure 3.1.
Some theories will emphasize one pathway more than others, but the
contextual model suggests that the benefits of psychotherapy are
optimized when all three pathways are activated and utilized. The client
comes to therapy with distress---​ he or she is having difficulties in
life and likely has tried many strategies to overcome his or her
problem, all of which have failed to produce the desired changes. In
Jerome Frank's term, the client feels demoralized (Frank & Frank, 1991).
Of course, the client is more than a human with symptoms---​the client
has a personality, a racial/​ethnic identity, a social network (or lack
of), economic resources (or lack of), an occupation/​vocation/​work
history and situation, a history, and current life events (e.g., recent
death of a family member). The therapist also comes to the initial
meeting with a personality, a racial/​ethnic identity, a history, and
current life events, as well as professional training and a theoretical
orientation. It is a meeting of strangers imbedded in a professional
context. The patient is seeking immediate answers to some questions: Can
this therapist understand me and my problems? Can I trust the therapist?
Does the therapist have the capacity and expertise to help me? Bordin
(1979), who developed the pantheoretical concept of the therapeutic
alliance, noted that an initial bond was necessary before beginning
therapeutic work: "Some basic level of trust surely marks all varieties
of therapeutic relationships, but when attention is directed toward the
more protected recesses of

inner experience, deeper bonds of trust and attachment are required and
developed" (p. 254). The formation of the initial bond is a combination
of top-​down and bottom-​up processing. Clients presenting to
psychotherapy have some notion of what will be involved. They may have
received therapy previously, read about therapy, received information
from friends and family, or assimilated cultural conceptualizations of
therapy. Hopefully, this top-​ down processing involves the belief that
therapy will prove effective. It appears that patients experience
significant benefit from the time they make the initial appointment to
the time they present for the initial meeting with the therapist (Frank
& Frank, 1991), as they are remoralized because they believe their
involvement in the impending psychotherapy will be helpful. In addition,
there is bottom-​up processing of information from the therapy
experience. Having viewed another person's face, humans make quick
judgments about the trustworthiness of another person (Willis & Todorov,
2006). But the therapist (or the face of the therapist) is not the only
sources of information processed. The psychotherapy context itself is
critical---​the warmth and efficiency of the clinic staff, the
attractiveness and comfort of the waiting room, the therapy room itself,
including diplomas and pictures hung on the wall, will create strong
feelings about the psychotherapy experience. There is emerging evidence
that the clinic at which therapy is conducted has an influence on
outcome (Falkenström, Grant, & Holmqvist, 2018). It is clear that the
initial interaction and patient engagement early in therapy is critical
to the success of therapy, if for no other reason than the fact that
most patients

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

who drop out of therapy prematurely do so after the first session or two
(Connell, Grant, & Mullin, 2006; Simon & Ludman, 2010; Swift &
Greenberg, 2012).

73

an individual at as great or greater risk for mortality than smoking,
obesity, environmental pollutants, and physical inactivity (for general
populations or those at risk of cardiac events; Holt-​Lunstad et al.,
2017; Luo et al., 2012). Indeed, holding the hand of a loved one or even
The Real Relationship having a beloved person in the room increases The
client and the therapist have distinct roles tolerance of pain, with
expected concomiin treatment---​the client has a problem, com- tant
neural processes (Benedetti, 2011; Coan, plaint, or disorder that he or
she wants resolved, Schaefer, & Davidson, 2006), suggesting that and the
therapist is the healer, providing some- individuals in higher quality
relations benefit thing of value to the client based on his or her from
greater regulatory effects on neural systraining and experience. Despite
these roles, tems involved in negative emotions (Butler & psychotherapy
involves an intimate interper- Randall, 2013). sonal relationship
between two human beings. The impact of empathy on healing in medThis
relationship can be described psychody- icine has been discussed
extensively (e.g., namically as the transference-​free genuine rela-
Decety & Fotopoulou, 2015). This effect has tionship based on realistic
perceptions (Gelso, been shown in research on placebos, where 2009),
where genuineness is defined by Gelso the evidence indicates that the
placebo effect and Carter (1994) as "the ability and willingness for a
number of conditions is augmented when to be what one truly is in the
relationship---​to the placebos are administered by a warm and be
authentic, open and honest" (p. 297) and re- caring clinician who is
perceived as competent alistic perceptions as "those perceptions that
are (Fuentes et al., 2014; Howe, Goyer, & Crum, uncontaminated by
transference distortions and 2017; Kaptchuk et al., 2008; Kelley et al.,
2009). other defenses . . . \[the therapist and patient\] see An
empathic relationship is healing in iteach other in an accurate,
realistic way" (p. 297). self and augments the effectiveness of other In
therapy, the real relationship involves a ther- aspects of psychotherapy
(Elliott et al., 2018). apist who is warm, caring, and empathic with
Treatments without any therapeutic actions an understanding that this
relationship will con- other than meeting with a warm, caring, and tinue
regardless of the material discussed (albeit empathic therapist are
remarkably effective with exceptions; e.g., for clients reporting they
(Honyashiki et al., 2014; Smits & Hofmann, are a danger to themselves or
others). 2009). Fortunately, practitioners need not rely The real
relationship is therapeutic in and only on the real relationship for all
clients, but of itself. According to the literature, the real re- it
serves as the foundation for other therapeutic lationship is thought to
be fundamental to hu- processes and actions. manistic approaches,
important for dynamic Some clients will benefit more from the real
therapies, but generally not emphasized by most relationship than
others. Clients with problembehavioral and cognitive therapies. However,
atic attachments styles, poor social support, there is a compelling
clinical and empirical impoverished social networks, chaotic
interpercase to be made that the real relationship is crit- sonal
relations, and features of borderline perical to the benefits of all
types of psychotherapy sonality disorder will benefit more from the real
(Gelso, Kivlighan, & Markin, 2018). relationship than patients with
relatively supHumans evolved as social animals, and at- portive
interpersonal relationships. However, tachment is fundamental to the
survival of it may be that an intense and emotional interhumans, as
discussed by many prominent personal relationship could be detrimental,
at theorists (Cacioppo & Cacioppo, 2012; Holt-​ least initially. Clients
with paranoid features or Lunstad, Robles, & Sbarra, 2017; Lieberman,
autism spectrum disorders, for example, might 2013; Wilson, 2012).
Indeed, there is compel- find the intensity of such a relationship
stressful ling evidence that perceived loneliness places and avoid
psychotherapy as a result.

74

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Creation of Expectation Through Explanation and Treatment Patients may
come to therapy with an explanation for their distress, but typically
the explanation does not directly lead to solutions. These maladaptive
explanations, sometimes called "folk" psychology, are beliefs about the
cause of distress and solutions for overcoming difficulties. These
beliefs are culturally influenced and are often acquired from family,
friends, and influential others, as well as from the larger society
(e.g., in advertisements for psychotropic medications; Hutto, 2004;
Stich & Ravenscroft, 1994; Thomas, 2001). These explanations are not
labeled as "maladaptive" because they are unscientific---​although surely
many are---​but because they fail to lead the patient to find solutions
to what is distressing (Wampold & Imel, 2015; Wampold et al., 2006). In
psychotherapy, the clinician provides the client with an adaptive
explanation for his or her distress and a means for overcoming
difficulties. That is, the client comes to believe that participating in
and successfully completing the therapeutic tasks will be helpful in
coping with his or her problems, which then further creates the
expectation that the patient has "control" over his or her problems.
These expectations and beliefs are central to theories of how
individuals change and behave, including theories involving mastery
(Frank & Frank, 1991), self-​efficacy (Bandura, 1999), and response
expectancies (Kirsch, 1985, 1999). It is well known, scientifically as
well as clinically, that outcome expectations have a large effect on
what is experienced. Compelling evidence for the power of expectations
is found most profoundly in the placebo literature (see Benedetti, 2014;
Kirsch, 1985; Price, Finniss, & Benedetti, 2008). A few perspicuous
results will be convincing of the power of expectations. Taking a
placebo analgesic with the expectation that the substance or procedure
will reduce pain reduces the experience of pain (Benedetti, 2014; Price
et al., 2008, for a comprehensive review). Furthermore, taking the
placebo results in the release of endogenous opioids into the brain,
indicating that the placebo effect is not simply a subjective response

but is mediated by physiological processes. Moreover, in an
"open-​hidden" paradigm, surreptitiously administering a postsurgical
patient a dose of morphine (the hidden condition; e.g., by an
intravenous infusion from a machine out of the awareness of the patient)
is less effective than when the patient is aware that the drug is being
administered (open condition; e.g., a clinician indicates to the patient
that the drug is being delivered) (Benedetti et al., 2003). What is
clear from hundreds of other studies is that the patient's expectation
for pain relief results in pain relief and that the expectations are
created by what is said to the patient---​that is, in a verbal
interaction with a healer. Demonstrable placebo effects are not limited
to pain. Parkinson patients benefit from placebos both in terms of
symptoms (viz., motoric activity) but also in levels of dopamine in the
brain (Benedetti, 2014). In another interesting study, female hotel room
attendants were told that their everyday work was good exercise.
Compared to hotel workers who were not provided any information, the
informed workers reported that they got more exercise and they had
better health indicators (lower weight, lower blood pressure, and less
body fat), even though they did not do more exercise (Crum & Langer,
2007). More than 90% of the effect of antidepressants is probably due to
the placebo effect (Kirsch, 2009; Kirsch et al., 2008). Positive
expectations about the effectiveness of chamomile extract for
generalized anxiety created symptom relief after receiving the extract
(Keefe et al., 2017). Expectations in psychotherapy have a strong
influence on the benefits experienced. For example, many studies show
that expectations about therapy are determinants of the final outcome in
the treatment of anxiety (Borkovec & Costello, 1993; Brown et al., 2014;
Chambless, Tran, & Glass, 1997; Kirsch et al., 1983; Newman & Fisher,
2010; Rutherford et al., 2015; Westra, Dozois, & Marcus, 2007).
Meta-​analyses of psychotherapy studies examining the relation of
expectations and outcome find medium-​sized effects (Constantino et al.,
2018), and reviews suggest that it is important for therapists to
deliberately create

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

positive expectations for change (Constantino, Ametrano, & Greenberg,
2012; Yulish et al., 2017). As well, psychotherapy clients who attribute
their therapeutic gains to their own efforts rather than to a medication
they had taken (which was actually a placebo) were significantly less
likely to relapse (Liberman, 1978; Powers et al., 2008). Simply creating
expectations through providing the patient an explanation for the
distress and describing the treatment are not sufficient. The client
must actually enact the therapeutic procedure---​explaining that a pill
will decrease pain must be accompanied by taking the pill. The
explanation and procedure/​ritual work together; the client must believe
that therapeutic progress is a result of his or her own efforts,
providing a sense of control over the person's distress. A critical
aspect of explanation and therapeutic actions is acceptance of the
explanation and agreement about the tasks of therapy. This aspect is
embodied in the tripartite concept of the therapeutic alliance: the bond
between the patient and the therapist, agreement about the goals of
therapy, and agreement about the tasks of therapy (Bordin, 1979; Hatcher
& Barends, 2006; Horvath, 2006). More than 300 studies have investigated
the correlation of alliance with outcome across all forms of
psychotherapy and found meta-​ analytically that there is a strong
association between the alliance, measured early in psychotherapy, and
the final outcome (Flückiger et al., 2012, 2018; Horvath et al., 2011).
The alliance capitalizes on the collaborative effort undertaken in the
therapeutic relationship, and, as already indicated, the therapist and
patient work together toward mutually agreed upon goals using means that
the patient agrees are relevant for the problem at hand. The Specific
Ingredients The power of therapeutic procedures is not limited to their
created expectations. The first two pathways in the contextual model set
the stage for the client to collaborate with the therapist to do
something that is good for the client.

75

Different treatments will utilize different therapeutic actions.
Cognitive-​behavioral therapists work with clients to reduce
dysfunctional thinking and behavior, interpersonal therapists work to
improve the quality of relationships, and dynamic therapists encourage
the expression of avoided emotions. For most disorders, different
treatment actions have proved effective (Wampold & Imel, 2015). Of
course, every approach to psychotherapy has a different explanatory
system for disorders, as Laska, Gurman, and Wampold (2014) describe in
reference to posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD): Each \[treatment\]
posits a specific mechanism of change based on a given scientific
theory. For example, prolonged exposure (PE) for PTSD (Foa, Hembree, &
Rothbaum, 2007) is conceptually derived from emotional processing theory
(Foa & Kozak, 1986), and the specific ingredients of PE (viz., imaginal
and in vivo exposure) (a) activate the "fear network," (b) whereby
clients habituate to their fears, and thus, (c) extinguish the fear
response. On the other hand, interpersonal therapy (IPT) for PTSD
(Markowitz, Milrod, Bleiberg, & Marshall, 2009) is derived from
interpersonal and attachment theory (Bowlby, 1973; Sullivan, 1953) and
"focuses on current social and interpersonal functioning rather than
exposure" (Bleiberg & Markowitz, 2005, p. 181). (p. 468)

Several features of the specific ingredients probably account for their
contribution to successful psychotherapy. The first is that there is
evidence that the particular ingredient used is not important, as long
as the ingredient is credible to the patient (Constantino et al., 2018;
Devilly & Borkovec, 2000). There is little evidence that any one
treatment is superior to another (Wampold & Imel, 2015); even when there
are differences, they are small, are limited to targeted symptoms,
disappear at follow-​up, and are probably due to methodological aspects
rather than to the ingredients themselves (Wampold, Flückiger, et al.,
2017). The second point is that when the specific ingredients are
removed from treatments (in dismantling designs), treatments without the

76

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

removed ingredient generally prove as effec- levels of carbon dioxide
(Pco2)and respiration tive as the entire treatment (Ahn & Wampold, rates
(Kim, Wollburg, & Roth, 2012). The ef2001; Bell, Marcus, & Goodlad,
2013). A third fect of breathing exercises for anxiety seems to point is
that adherence (or fidelity) to a treat- be due to the therapeutic
relationship, expecment protocol is not consistently related to out-
tancy, and credibility (Kim, Roth, & Wollburg, come (Boswell et al.,
2013; Webb, DeRubeis, & 2015), the latter two derived from having
credBarber, 2010) whereas flexibility seems to be re- ible tasks that
make sense to the client and that lated to better outcomes (Owen &
Hilsenroth, create positive expectations. Finally, psychoan2014; Wampold
& Imel, 2015). alytic treatments for panic are effective (Busch, Some
would take the evidence about partic- Milrod, & Sandberg, 2009; Milrod
et al., 2007). ular theoretical ingredients to infer that having A final
point is that there is evidence to specific ideas about what actions
maintain and support focusing on the client's problems and what actions
can change a condition is not nec- working toward their solution. In
clinical trials, essary or that a therapist can do anything and control
treatments without any specific therait will be effective. This is
wrong. For therapy peutic actions (i.e., the therapist is proscribed to
be optimally effective, the patient must work from actions that would be
classified as "spetoward goals that are meaningful to him or cific" to a
treatment) perform remarkably well her based on a credible explanation
and con- (Honyashiki et al., 2014; Smits & Hofmann, vincing means to
achieve those goals. Jerome 2009), capitalizing on the first pathway of
Frank (1961, 1973; Frank & Frank, 1991) made the contextual model.
Interestingly, several it clear that a therapeutic "ritual" was one of
the treatments were believed to be inactive controls, most important---​
if not essential---​ common but, when given structure, therapeutic
actions factors. The client's dedicated work toward a that the therapist
and client believed were efgoal and attribution that such work is
beneficial fective and that involved psychoeducation is a vital
component of successful therapy (i.e., were found to be as effective as
the first-​line the third pathway of the contextual model). treatments.
For example, interpersonal therapy The results of clinical trials show
that a par- for depression and present-​centered therapy for ticular
ingredient may not be critical---​what is PTSD were designed as
nonspecific controls important is the client's work toward his or her
but now are designated as psychological treatgoal (Yulish et al., 2017).
ment with research evidence (see Wampold From our viewpoint, the
scientific validity of & Imel, 2015). Thus, focusing on the client's the
explanation of distress and the therapeutic problem, providing an
explanation for the actions is not what is important; rather, it is the
problem, and instituting specific therapeutic client's acceptance and
engagement in these actions (the second two pathways of the
contexaspects that is needed. That is, the explanations tual model) seem
to render the treatments more must be credible to the patient.
effective, particularly for targeted symptoms This point can be
understood by examining (Yulish et al., 2017). the literature on panic
disorder. Cognitive-​ The contextual model is not a common behavior
therapy (CBT) for panic contain factor therapy as such, but rather an
explanavarious actions derived from a theoretical un- tion of why
specific interventions may be effecderstanding of panic disorder (Barlow
et al., tive. Thus, CBT, psychodynamic approaches, 1989; Clark et al.,
1994), yet the theoretical emotion-​focused treatments, and so forth are
models proposed for panic disorder have not consistent with the
contextual model. Rather been empirically verified, and it is ques- than
saying "I am a Contextual therapist," tionable whether they are
verifiable (Roth, practitioners might say "I am a \[fill in the Wilhelm,
& Petit, 2005). Furthermore, oppo- blank . . . CBT, dynamic,
emotion-​focused\] site breathing techniques (viz., hypoventilation
therapist who delivers the treatment in a conand hyperventilization)
have the same effect on textual model manner." Or, even more to the
panic symptoms as they do on control of blood point, "I choose a
treatment that I am confident

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

can provide a convincing explanation and prescribe therapeutic actions
that are logically coherent with my explanation in a convincing way
(i.e., that will be accepted by the client)." The contextual model is
integrative in that the actions endemic to a particular treatment are
put into relationship context. In this way, the common factors give
potency to the specific ingredients. ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION There
are several ways to think about assessment and case formulation in the
contextual model. The first involves the assessment of the client in the
usual sense that this term is used (e.g., by doing diagnostic
assessments according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders \[DSM-​5\] or the International Classification of Disease
\[ICD-​ 10\] codes). Different approaches to psychotherapy place
different emphasis on client assessment. The same can be said for case
formulations---​ a CBT case formulation will probably differ from a
psychodynamic formulation. The contextual model is agnostic with regard
to these assessments and case formulations as concerns their usefulness
in planning and delivering treatment. From the contextual model point of
view, what is important is the client's experience of the assessment,
although information from the assessment itself might be useful. The
client should experience the assessment as the genuine interest of the
therapist to know more about the client---​the client should, as a result
of the assessment, feel better understood. As well, the client should
believe that this knowledge will help the therapist develop a treatment
that will be more effective and congruent with the client's presenting
problems. On the other hand, if the assessment is experienced as
impersonal, routine, or otherwise unhelpful, the relationship with the
therapist may be harmed and psychotherapy may not be optimally
effective. The formulation that the therapist develops might well be
useful for developing an effective intervention for the client. But
critical to the

77

success of therapy is the acceptance of the explanation for distress and
the treatment actions. No matter how cogent the formulation, what is
important from a contextual perspective is how it is communicated to the
client and whether it makes sense and is accepted. In the contextual
model, ongoing assessment of the relationship components of
psychotherapy is important. There are assessment devices for most of the
common factors, such as the alliance, expectations, treatment
credibility, and positive regard/​affirmation (Norcross & Lambert, 2018).
Several routine outcome monitoring systems have incorporated
relationship variables into their assessments, so that therapist have
information about client progress (outcome) as well as about the
relationship factors that might account for client progress (Chow et
al., 2015; Duncan & Reese, 2015; Lambert et al., 2005). APPLICABILITY
AND STRUCTURE The contextual model is a meta-​model in that it applies to
all types of treatments with all types of clients. Some treatments focus
on one aspects of the contextual model. For example, a long-​term
humanistic treatment would probably emphasize the real relationship,
whereas a short-​term CBT for a particular disorder would rely on the
specific ingredients and treatment procedures. It is our contention that
both those treatments, despite their obvious differences, would benefit
from emphasizing all pathways of the contextual model. The same applies
to every other treatment. The humanistic therapist should give thought
to the structure of the treatment, how the client connects what is done
in therapy to achieving his or her goals, and how various actions in
therapy as well as between sessions promote psychological growth and
distress reduction. On the other hand, the CBT therapist should
understand that the real relationship, feeling understood and cared for,
and expectations that are created through explanation are important
determinants of outcome in psychotherapy. In the integrative tradition,
adherence to the contextual model

78

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

would suggest more structure and focus for traditionally unstructured
treatments and more focus on relationship and expectations in more
structured treatments. METHODS AND TECHNIQUES As discussed earlier, the
contextual model integrates common factors and specific ingredients, but
it is not a treatment protocol that guides treatment in the way that a
manual for a particular treatment would. Nevertheless, attention to the
contextual model can be used to assess and improve the quality of just
about any treatment. The therapist should monitor the quality of each
pathway by asking the following questions: What is the quality of the
real relationship? Does the client feel understood and cared for? ◆ Is
there a sufficient bond to do the difficult work of therapy? ◆ Does the
therapist understand the folk psychology or explanatory model of the
client? ◆ Does treatment privilege or take into account cultural
practices, life context, and other factors? ◆ Was a cogent and
convincing explanation for the client's distress provided (i.e.,
psychoeducation), and was it accepted by the client? ◆ Has the therapist
persuasively presented a cogent treatment plan consistent with the
explanation for distress? Was the plan accepted by the client? ◆ Are the
therapist and client working collaboratively on the treatment plan
toward consensual goals? ◆ Is the client participating in the
therapeutic actions? ◆ Is therapy progressing? That is, is there less
distress, progress toward goals, improved relationships, greater well-​
being? If not, make sure there is sufficient attention paid to other
components of the contextual model. ◆ ◆

DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS By its nature, the contextual model is
transcultural because it applies to most healing practices and to
clients of various ethnicities, genders, sexual orientations, religions,
and other cultural identities. As noted earlier, endemic to the therapy
process is that the folk psychology of the client needs to be assessed
and explanations and treatment design must be congruent with the
patient's understanding of the problem, but the therapy process must
also have an adaptive component so that there will be opportunities to
change. A client who believes that his or her failure is due to poor
genes from his or her parents, which conferred low intelligence, must
come to have an alternative explanation that involves something that can
be changed. Care must be taken in this process. Many manualized
therapies have psychoeducation components, a feature that is consistent
with the contextual model. However, "canned" psychoeducation is often
composed of Western rational and scientific-​ sounding components and
consequently will not be congruent with the cultural values of many
groups. A meta-​ analysis of culturally adapted, evidence-​based
treatments found that those treatments that adapted the explanation
given to various racial, ethnic, language, and cultural groups had
better outcomes (Benish, Quintana, & Wampold, 2011; Duncan & Reese,
2015). A component of the contextual model is an assessment of whether
therapy is progressing and the patient improving. If not, one of the
things the therapist should consider is whether cultural factors are
part of the reason for lack of progress.

CASE EXAMPLES Case Example 1: Abby: A Case of Sudden Deterioration Abby
is a 22-​year-​old white American who grew up on a farm where both of her
parents struggled with opioid addiction, and she had a history of
physical abuse from both parents. Abby attempted

Integration of Common and Specific Factors to "leave her bad family"
behind by attending college. She felt disoriented at college (a large
land-​grant institution), which she attributed to her being different
from other undergraduates who seemingly grew up in functional families.
She met the criteria for major depressive disorder. She had been seeing
a CBT therapist and had been making adequate progress. But, in the fifth
session, she presented in a rather disheveled manner, her affect was
flat, and she did not appear engaged (e.g., had difficulty making eye
contact). The therapist, who noticed the change in demeanor and
presentation, summarized the progress in therapy and asked Abby about
the assigned homework. She responded as follows: Abby: I did not feel
like doing it. So, I didn't do it. According to the contextual model,
there is no "right" way to proceed but the therapist should consider
each of the model's pathways. Suppose that the therapist hypothesized
that something, either external or internal, has led to this sudden
worsening. The therapist could decide to accept this situation:
Therapist (in empathic manner): Abby, you seem really sad and
discouraged today. You look like someone piled a sack of bricks on your
back and asked you to walk up the hill to class. Alternatively, the
therapist might be thinking that the bond between them was sufficient
when they were working successfully, but now whatever has happened is
too difficult to talk about with this therapist. Therapist: I sense that
something has happened with you but you find it difficult to talk with
me about it. The therapist might have assessed that the agreement about
the tasks related to changing dysfunctional thoughts was not agreeable
to Abby but that she went along with it, thinking that it might help
anyway. Therapist: I am thinking that you don't find the work on
dysfunctional thinking all that helpful. I think we should talk about
whether these exercises are useful to you so that I could clarify why
they are helpful or we might change them or do something different.

79

Then again, the therapist might have concluded that there was a strong
enough bond to do the work and sufficient agreement on tasks to proceed.
The therapist might not have wanted to reinforce the depressive mood and
recognized the ups and downs of depressive disorder: Therapist: It is
not unusual for those with depression to experience ups and downs. We
were making good progress, so I am wondering whether there was anything
about this particular assignment that turned you off? It would be
helpful to complete it, so are you agreeable to giving it another go? On
the other hand, the therapist might have felt that Abby was feeling
profoundly alone, had little or no social connection, felt alienated
both from family and those at the university, and what she really wanted
and needed was someone to understand her. Therapist: Abby, I get the
sense that your loneliness is overwhelming sometimes---​there is no one
in your life right now who supports you, cares for you, and wants to see
you succeed. Doing these exercises might seem like putting a Band-​Aid on
a deep wound to your soul. We certainly can come back to them another
time, when you feel like they would be helpful. Therapists have a
variety of options to determine which tack to take with any client. Some
are determined by the theoretical orientation, but what the contextual
model makes clear is that the therapist has to consider the multiple
ways that clients make use of therapy. Case Example 2: Tshua: A Hmong
Gentleman Without a Soul Tshua is a 69-​year-​old male Hmong American who
was referred by his physician for depression after a heart transplant.
Many of Tshua's family members were killed during the secret war in
Laos, and the remainder have passed away since then. His therapist was a
young Hmong woman training to be a psychologist. Tshua discussed with
the therapist that, in his experience of Hmong culture, his heart was
where his soul was and that through the transplant he had lost his soul.
The therapist, trained in the importance of the alliance, worked

80

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

diligently to establish goals of therapy, but Tshua was not inclined to
be goal-​directed. Tshua: You know, Kiab \[the name of the therapist\], I
am lonely. I come here to talk to you. I am too old to have goals, there
is nothing I want to change. Please let me just come and talk about
life. The psychologist trainee was frustrated because she wanted this
therapy to be successful, to document that she delivered treatment in an
optimal way. She was required to document in the client's chart his
goals of therapy, the treatment plan, and clinical progress. On the
other hand, culturally, the trainee was expected to honor her elders,
which would be contradictory to pushing her client to agree on
measurable treatment goals if he did not want to do so. She consulted
her supervisor, who encouraged her to emphasize the real relationship
(the first pathway of the contextual model). In the next session, the
therapist told the client the following. Therapist: Tshua, I want you to
get what you want from coming to counseling. Your stories are terribly
sad, but I learn much about you and our people from your wisdom.
Sometime in the future, we can come back to having goals to work on if
we want, but for now, please tell me more about your life. Tshua: \[with
tears in his eyes\] Thank you. Some might say that the trainee was not
doing psychotherapy, but, according to the contextual model, she was
certainly providing psychotherapy through the first pathway of the
model. However, the psychotherapy could also be understood to encompass
all three pathways of the Contextual model, and, as such, there are
reasons to be hopeful for the progression of Tshua's therapy. Through
the assessment, it is clear that the patient was depressed, and clearly
loneliness was central to his distress. At this stage in therapy, the
goal may be to help Tshua feel understood and less lonely. The means for
achieving this was to meet with the therapist weekly and share
experiences and stories that he does not have anyone else to share with.
Through this understanding it may be possible for Tshua to expect that
his loneliness and depression can disappear. Working toward achieving
this goal, new goals might appear, such as Tshua finding ways to connect
with other people in addition to his therapist.

OUTCOME RESEARCH The research supporting the contextual model was
reviewed extensively by Wampold and Imel (2015) as mentioned earlier,
and the relationship components of the contextual model were
investigated and supported by multiple meta-​ analyses in Psychotherapy
Relationships That Work (Norcross & Lambert, 2018). Here, the major
conclusions are summarized. All treatments intended to be therapeutic
and which contain elements of the contextual model are approximately
equally effective, in general and for specific disorders. ◆
Psychotherapies composed of only the first pathway (i.e., without an
explanation for distress or specific therapeutic actions) are effective.
◆ However, treatments without a focus on the patient's distress, without
explanations for distress, and without actions focused on the patient's
problems are less effective than treatments than contain these
ingredients. ◆ Expectations created in an interpersonal relationship
have a strong association with outcomes, as shown in placebo and
psychotherapy studies. ◆ The alliance, including the bond, agreement on
therapy goals, and consensus on the tasks of therapy, is robustly
related to psychotherapy outcome. ◆ Warmth, empathy, positive regard,
and genuineness (real relationship) are associated with outcome in
psychotherapy. ◆ Tailoring psychotherapy to the patient's culture and
preferences reliably increases the effectiveness of psychotherapy
(Norcross & Wampold, 2018). ◆

FUTURE DIRECTIONS The contextual model was constructed based on research
and theory across the social sciences, including anthropology, social
psychology, neuroscience, placebo studies, and evolutionary psychology,
as well as psychotherapy research. The continued development and
refinement of

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

the model requires additions to all the pathways of the model as
research accumulates. For example, the model currently and rightfully
considers patient expectations but does not capitalize on recent
research showing that client preferences exert at least as strong, and
probably stronger, an effect on therapy outcome (Swift, Callahan, &
Vollmer, 2011; Swift et al., 2018). In addition to cultural adaptation,
contextual therapists can also profit from tailoring therapy to a
client's stage of change, reactance level, and coping style (Norcross &
Wampold, 2018). Work needs to be done on the utility of applying the
contextual model to train and guide therapists. That is to say, the
model is based on robust behavioral evidence, but whether it proves
useful to psychotherapists is untested. The contextual model suggests
that relationship skills are critical to the success of psychotherapy.
There is evidence that more effective therapists have a sophisticated
set of interpersonal skills that are demonstrated in challenging
interpersonal environments (Anderson et al., 2009; Schöttke et al.,
2017; Wampold, Baldwin, Holtforth, & Imel, 2017). A vital question is
whether such skills can be taught and practiced and whether increasing
competence in these skills will improve a therapist's outcomes. There is
a burgeoning movement in psychotherapy that claims that deliberate
practice of these interpersonal skills in the psychotherapy context will
improve outcomes (Rousmaniere et al., 2017), but there is only
preliminary evidence that therapist deliberate practice will improve
therapist's outcomes (Chow et al., 2015; Goldberg et al., 2016) and more
research on this idea is needed. There is another complexity involved
here. It may well be that many of the relationship factors work
differently in different therapies (Hoffart et al., 2012; Ulvenes et
al., 2012; Webb et al., 2011). Thus, using the contextual model to guide
therapy may depend on the type of therapy being delivered. Three major
ways have been suggested to improve the quality of psychotherapy: (1)
dissemination of evidence-​based treatments, (2) use of routine outcome
monitoring and feedback

81

to therapists (and patients), and (3) improving the outcomes of
individual therapists by deliberate practice of clinical skills.
Although not fully examined, option (3), which is based on the
contextual model, offers an innovative alternative or addition to other
attempts to improve mental health services. References Ahn, H., &
Wampold, B. E. (2001). A meta-​ analysis of component studies: Where is
the evidence for the specificity of psychotherapy? Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 48(3), 251--​257. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​
0022-​0167.48.3.251. Anderson, T., Ogles, B. M., Patterson, C. L.,
Lambert, M. J., & Vermeersch, D. A. (2009). Therapist effects:
Facilitative interpersonal skills as a predictor of therapist success.
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65(7), 755--​768. doi:10.1002/​jclp.20583
Baardseth, T. P., Goldberg, S. B., Pace, B. T., Wislocki, A. P., Frost,
N. D., Siddiqui, J. R., . . . Wampold, B. E. (2013). Cognitive-​
behavioral therapy versus other therapies: Redux. Clinical Psychology
Review, 33(3), 395--​405. doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2013.01.004 Bandura, A.
(1999). Self-​efficacy: Toward a unifying theory of behavioral change. In
R. F. Baumeister (Ed.), The self in social psychology. (pp. 285--​ 298).
New York: Psychology Press. Barlow, D. H. (2004). Psychological
treatments. American Psychologist, 59, 869--​878. Barlow, D. H., Craske,
M. G., Cerny, J. A., & Klosko, J. S. (1989). Behavioral treatment of
panic disorder. Behavior Therapy, 20, 261--​282. Bell, E. C., Marcus, D.
K., & Goodlad, J. K. (2013). Are the parts as good as the whole? A meta-​
analysis of component treatment studies. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 81(4), 722--​736. doi:10.1037/​a0033004 Benedetti, F.
(2011). The patient's brain: The neuroscience behind the doctor-​ patient
relationship. New York: Oxford University Press. Benedetti, F. (2014).
Placebo effects: Understanding the mechanisms in health and disease (2nd
ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Benedetti, F., Maggi, G.,
Lopiano, L., Lanotte, M., Rainero, I., Vighetti, S., & Pollo, A. (2003).
Open versus hidden medical treatments: The patient's knowledge about
therapy affects the

82

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

therapy outcome. Prevention & Treatment, 6, research. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, Article 1. 3, 267--​286. Benish, S. G.,
Quintana, S., & Wampold, B. E. Chambless, D. L., Tran, G. Q., & Glass,
C. R. (1997). (2011). Culturally adapted psychotherapy and Predictors of
response to cognitive-​behavioral the legitimacy of myth: A direct-​
comparison group therapy for social phobia. Journal of meta-​analysis.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, Anxiety Disorders, 11(3), 221--​ 240.
doi:http://​ 58(3), 279--​289. doi:10.1037/​a0023626
dx.doi.org/​10.1016/​S0887-​6185(97)00008-​X Bordin, E. S. (1979). The
generalizability of the Chow, D. L., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J. A., Kane,
R. T., psychoanalytic concept of the working alliance. Thornton, J. A.,
& Andrews, W. P. (2015). The Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice,
role of deliberate practice in the development of 16(3), 252--​260.
doi:10.1037/​h0085885 highly effective psychotherapists. Psychotherapy,
Borkovec, T. D., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy of 52(3), 337--​345.
doi:10.1037/​pst0000015 applied relaxation and cognitive-​ behavioral
Clark, D. M., Salkovskis, P. M., Hackmann, A., therapy in the treatment
of generalized anxiety Middleton, H., Anastasiades, P., & Gelder,
disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical M. (1994). A comparison of
cognitive therapy, Psychology, 61(4), 611--​619. doi:http://​dx.doi.
applied relaxation, and imipramine in the org/​10.1037/​0022-​006X.61.4.611
treatment of panic disorder. British Journal of Boswell, J. F.,
Gallagher, M. W., Sauer-​ Zavala, Psychiatry, 164, 759--​769. S. E.,
Bullis, J., Gorman, J. M., Shear, Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., &
Davidson, R. J. M. K., . . . Barlow, D. H. (2013). Patient (2006).
Lending a hand: Social regulation of characteristics and variability in
adherence and the neural response to threat. Psychological competence in
cognitive-​ behavioral therapy Science, 17(12), 1032--​1039.
doi:http://​dx.doi. for panic disorder. Journal of Consulting
org/​10.1111/​j.1467-​9280.2006.01832.x and Clinical Psychology, 81(3),
443--​454. Connell, J., Grant, S., & Mullin, T. (2006). Client
doi:10.1037/​a0031437 initiated termination of therapy at NHS Brown, L.
A., Wiley, J. F., Wolitzky-​ Taylor, K., primary care counselling
services. Counselling Roy-​ Byrne, P., Sherbourne, C., Stein, M. &
Psychotherapy Research, 6(1), 60--​67. B., . . . Craske, M. G. (2014).
Changes in self-​ doi:10.1080/​14733140600581507 efficacy and outcome
expectancy as predictors Constantino, M. J., Ametrano, R. M., &
Greenberg, of anxiety outcomes from the CALM study. R. P. (2012).
Clinician interventions and Depression and Anxiety, 31(8), 678--​689.
participant characteristics that foster adaptive
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1002/​da.22256 patient expectations for
psychotherapy and Busch, F. N., Milrod, B. L., & Sandberg, L. S.
psychotherapeutic change. Psychotherapy, 49(4), (2009). A study
demonstrating efficacy of 557--​569.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​a0029440 a psychoanalytic psychotherapy
for panic Constantino, M. J., Arnkoff, D. B., Glass, C. R., disorder:
Implications for psychoanalytic Ametrano, R. M., & Smith, J. Z. (2011).
research, theory, and practice. Journal of the Expectations. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, American Psychoanalytic Association, 57(1), 67(2),
184--​192. doi:10.1002/​jclp.20754 131--​148.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1177/​ Constantino, M. J., Coyne, A. E.,
Boswell, J. F., Iles, 0003065108329677 B. R., & Vîslă, A. (2018). A
meta-​analysis of the Butler, E. A., & Randall, A. K. (2013). Emotional
association between patients' early perception coregulation in close
relationships. Emotion of treatment credibility and their posttreatment
Review, 5(2), 202--​210. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​ outcomes. Psychotherapy,
55(4), 486--​495. 10.1177/​1754073912451630
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000168 Cacioppo, S., & Cacioppo, J. T.
(2012). Decoding the Constantino, M. J., Vîslă, A., Coyne, A. E., &
invisible forces of social connections. Frontiers Boswell, J. F. (2018).
A meta-​analysis of the in Integrative Neuroscience, 6. doi:10.3389/​
association between patients' early treatment fnint.2012.00051 outcome
expectation and their posttreatment Caplan, E. (1998). Mind games:
American culture and outcomes. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 473--​485. the birth
of psychotherapy. Berkeley: University
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000169 of California Press. Crum, A.
J., & Langer, E. J. (2007). Mind-​ set Castonguay, L. G. (1993). "Common
factors" matters: Exercise and the placebo effect. and "nonspecific
variables": Clarification of Psychological Science, 18(2), 165--​171. the
two concepts and recommendations for
doi:10.1111/​j.1467-​9280.2007.01867.x

Integration of Common and Specific Factors

83

Dattilio, F. M., & Norcross, J. C. (2006). Frank, J. D., & Frank, J. B.
(1991). Persuasion and Psychotherapy integration end the emergence
healing: A comparative study of psychotherapy of instinctual
territoriality. Archives of Psychiatry (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins and Psychotherapy, 8(1), 5--​16. University Press. Decety, J., &
Fotopoulou, A. (2015). Why Fuentes, J., Armijo-​Olivo, S., Funabashi, M.,
Miciak, empathy has a beneficial impact on others M., Dick, B., Warren,
S., . . . Gross, D. P. (2014). in medicine: Unifying theories. Frontiers
Enhanced therapeutic alliance modulates pain in Behavioral Neuroscience,
8. doi:10.3389/​ intensity and muscle pain sensitivity in patients
fnbeh.2014.00457 with chronic low back pain: An experimental Devilly, G.
J., & Borkovec, T. D. (2000). Psychometric controlled study. Physical
Therapy, 94(4), 477--​ properties of the credibility/​ expectancy 489.
doi:10.2522/​ptj.20130118 questionnaire. Journal of Behavior Therapy and
Garfield, S. L. (1992). Eclectic psychotherapy: A Experimental
Psychiatry, 31(2), 73--​86. doi:http://​ common factors approach. In J. C.
Norcross dx.doi.org/​10.1016/​S0005-​7916(00)00012-​4 & M. R. Goldfried
(Eds.), Handbook of Duncan, B. L., & Reese, R. J. (2015). The Partners
psychotherapy integration (pp. 169--​ 201). for Change Outcome Management
System New York: Basic Books. (PCOMS): Revisiting the client's frame of
Gelso, C. J. (2009). The real relationship in a reference.
Psychotherapy, 52(4), 391--​401. postmodern world: Theoretical and
empirical doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000026. explorations.
Psychotherapy Research, 19(3), Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson, J.
C., & 253--​264. doi:10.1080/​10503300802389242 Murphy, D. (2018).
Therapist empathy and Gelso, C. J., & Carter, J. A. (1994). Components
client outcome: An updated meta-​ analysis. of the psychotherapy
relationship: Their Psychotherapy, 55(4), 399--​ 410. doi:http://​
interaction and unfolding during treatment.
dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000175 Journal of Counseling Psychology, 41(3),
296--​ Eysenck, H. J. (1978). An exercise in meta-​silliness. 306.
doi:10.1037/​0022-​0167.41.3.296 American Psychologist, 33, 517. Gelso, C.
J., Kivlighan, D. M., Jr., & Markin, R. Eysenck, H. J. (1984).
Meta-​analysis: An abuse of D. (2018). The real relationship and its role
research integration. The Journal of Special in psychotherapy outcome: A
meta-​ analysis. Education, 18, 41--​59. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 434--​ 444.
doi:http://​ Eysenck, H. J. (1995). Meta-​ analysis squared---​
dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000183. does it make sense? American
Psychologist, 50, Goldberg, S. B., Babins-​Wagner, R., Rousmaniere,
110--​111. T., Berzins, S., Hoyt, W. T., Whipple, J. Falkenström, F.,
Grant, J., & Holmqvist, R. (2018). L., . . . Wampold, B. E. (2016).
Creating a Review of organizational effects on the outcome climate for
therapist improvement: A case of mental health treatments. Psychotherapy
study of an agency focused on outcomes and Research, 28(1), 76--​ 90.
doi:10.1080/​ deliberate practice. Psychotherapy, 53(3), 367--​
10503307.2016.1158883 375. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000060
Flückiger, C., Del Re, A. C., Wampold, B. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (1980).
Toward the delineation Horvath, A. O. (2018). The alliance in adult of
therapeutic change principles. American psychotherapy: A meta-​ analytic
synthesis. Psychologist, 35, 991--​999. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 316--​ 340.
doi:http://​ Grencavage, L. M., & Norcross, J. C. (1990).
dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000172 Where are the commonalities among the
Flückiger, C., Del Re, A. C., Wampold, B. E., therapeutic common
factors? Professional Symonds, D., & Horvath, A. O. (2012). How
Psychology: Research and Practice, 21, 372--​378. central is the alliance
in psychotherapy? Hatcher, R. L., & Barends, A. W. (2006). How a A
multilevel longitudinal meta-​ analysis. return to theory could help
alliance research. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 59(1), 10--​17.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, doi:10.1037/​a0025749
Training, 43(3), 292--​299. Frank, J. D. (1961). Persuasion and healing:
A Hoffart, A., Borge, F.-​ M., Sexton, H., Clark, D. comparative study of
psychotherapy. M., & Wampold, B. E. (2012). Psychotherapy Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press. for social phobia: How do alliance and
Frank, J. D. (1973). Persuasion and healing: A cognitive process
interact to produce outcome? comparative study of psychotherapy
(Rev. Ed. Psychotherapy Research, 22(1), 82--​94. ed.). Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press. doi:10.1080/​10503307.2011.626806

84

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Hofmann, S. G., Asnaani, A., Vonk, I. J. J., Sawyer, A. Keefe, J. R.,
Amsterdam, J., Li, Q. S., Soeller, I., T., & Fang, A. (2012). The
efficacy of cognitive DeRubeis, R., & Mao, J. J. (2017). Specific
behavioral therapy: A review of meta-​analyses. expectancies are
associated with symptomatic Cognitive Therapy and Research, 36(5),
outcomes and side effect burden in a trial of 427--​440. chamomile
extract for generalized anxiety Hofmann, S. G., & Barlow, D. H. (2014).
Evidence-​ disorder. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 84, based
psychological interventions and 90--​97.
doi:10.1016/​j.jpsychires.2016.09.029 common factors approach: The
beginnings of a Kelley, J. M., Lembo, A. J., Ablon, J. S., Villanueva,
rapproachement? Psychotherapy, 51, 510--​513. J. J., Conboy, L. A., Levy,
R., . . . Kaptchuk, T. Holt-​ Lunstad, J., Robles, T. F., & Sbarra, D. A.
J. (2009). Patient and practitioner influences on (2017). Advancing
social connection as a public the placebo effect in irritable bowel
syndrome. health priority in the United States. American Psychosomatic
Medicine, 71(7), 789--​797. Psychologist, 72(6), 517--​530.
doi:http://​dx.doi. doi:10.1097/​PSY.0b013e3181acee12
org/​10.1037/​amp0000103 Kim, S., Roth, W. T., & Wollburg, E. (2015).
Effects Honyashiki, M., Furukawa, T. A., Noma, H., Tanaka, of
therapeutic relationship, expectancy, and S., Chen, P., Ichikawa, K., .
. . Caldwell, D. M. credibility in breathing therapies for anxiety.
(2014). Specificity of CBT for depression: A Bulletin of the Menninger
Clinic, 79(2), 116--​ contribution from multiple treatments meta-​ 130.
doi:10.1521/​bumc.2015.79.2.116 analyses. Cognitive Therapy and Research,
Kim, S., Wollburg, E., & Roth, W. T. (2012). 38(3), 249--​260. Opposing
breathing therapies for panic Horvath, A. O. (2006). The alliance in
disorder: Randomized controlled trial of context: Accomplishments,
challenges, and lowering vs raising end-​tidal Pco2. Journal of future
directions. Psychotherapy: Theory, Clinical Psychiatry, 73(7), 931--​939.
Research, Practice, Training, 43(3), 258--​263. Kirsch, I. (1985).
Response expectancy as a doi:10.1037/​0033-​3204.43.3.258 determinant of
experience and behavior. Horvath, A. O. (2017). Research on the American
Psychologist, 40, 1189--​1202. alliance: Knowledge in search of a Kirsch,
I. (1999). How expectancies shape experience. theory. Psychotherapy
Research. Advance Washington, DC: American Psychological online
publication. doi:10.1080/​ Association. 10503307.2017.1373204 Kirsch, I.
(2009). Antidepressants and the placebo Horvath, A. O., Re, A. C. D.,
Flückiger, C., & response. Epidemiology and Psychiatric Symonds, D.
(2011). Alliance in individual Sciences, 18(4), 318--​322. psychotherapy.
In J. C. Norcross & J. C. Kirsch, I., Deacon, B. J., Huedo-​ Medina, T.
B., Norcross (Eds.), Psychotherapy relationships Scoboria, A., Moore, T.
J., & Johnson, B. T. that work: Evidence-​ based responsiveness (2008).
Initial severity and antidepressant (2nd ed.). (pp. 25--​ 69). New York:
Oxford benefits: A meta-​ analysis of data submitted University Press. to
the food and drug administration. Plos Howe, L. C., Goyer, J. P., &
Crum, A. J. (2017). Medicine, 5(2), 260--​268. doi:10.1371/​journal.
Harnessing the placebo effect: Exploring the pmed.0050045 influence of
physician characteristics on placebo Kirsch, I., Tennen, H., Wickless,
C., Saccone, A. response. Health Psychology, 36(11), 1074--​ J., & Cody,
S. (1983). The role of expectancy 1082.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​hea0000499 in fear reduction. Behavior
Therapy, 14(4), Humphrey, N. (2002). The mind made flesh: Essays
520--​533. from the frontiers of psychology and evolution. Konrad, M.,
Vyleta, M. L., Theis, F. J., Stock, New York: Oxford University Press.
M., Tragust, S., Klatt, M., . . . Cremer, S. Hutto, D. D. (2004). The
limits of spectatorial folk (2012). Social transfer of pathogenic fungus
psychology. Mind & Language, 19, 548--​573. promotes active immunisation
in ant colonies. Kaptchuk, T. J., Kelley, J. M., Conboy, L. A., Davis,
PLoS Biology, 10(4). doi:10.1371/​journal. R. B., Kerr, C. E., Jacobson,
E. E., . . . Lembo, pbio.1001300 A. J. (2008). Components of placebo
Lambert, M. J., Harmon, C., Slade, K., Whipple, J. effect: Randomised
controlled trial in patients L., & Hawkins, E. J. (2005). Providing
feedback with irritable bowel syndrome. BMJ: British to psychotherapists
on their patients' progress: Medical Journal, 336(7651), 999--​1003.
Clinical results and practice suggestions.
doi:10.1136/​bmj.39524.439618.25 Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61(2),
165--​174.

Integration of Common and Specific Factors Laska, K. M., Gurman, A. S.,
& Wampold, B. E. (2014). Expanding the lens of evidence-​based practice
in psychotherapy: A common factors perspective. Psychotherapy, 51(4),
467--​481. doi:10.1037/​a0034332 Liberman, B. L. (1978). The role of
mastery in psychotherapy: Maintenance of improvement and prescriptive
change. In J. D. Frank, R. Hoehn-​ Saric, S. D. Imber, B. L. Liberman, &
A. R. Stone (Eds.), Effective ingredients of successful psychotherapy
(pp. 35--​ 72). Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. Lieberman, M.
D. (2013). Social: Why our brains are wired to connect. New York: Crown
Publishing Group. Luo, Y., Hawkley, L. C., Waite, L. J., & Cacioppo, J.
T. (2012). Loneliness, health, and mortality in old age: A national
longitudinal study. Social Science & Medicine, 74(6), 907--​914.
doi:http://​ dx.doi.org/​10.1016/​j.socscimed.2011.11.028 Makari, G.
(2008). Revolution in mind: The creation of psychoanalysis. New York:
HarperCollins. Milrod, B., Leon, A. C., Busch, F., Rudden, M.,
Schwalberg, M., Clarkin, J., . . . Shear, M. K. (2007). A randomized
controlled clinical trial of psychoanalytic psychotherapy for panic
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 265--​272. Moyers, T. B.,
Houck, J., Rice, S. L., Longabaugh, R., & Miller, W. R. (2016).
Therapist empathy, combined behavioral intervention, and alcohol
outcomes in the COMBINE research project. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 84(3), 221--​229. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​
ccp0000074 Moyers, T. B., Miller, W. R., & Hendrickson, S. M. L. (2005).
How does motivational interviewing work? Therapist interpersonal skill
predicts client involvement within motivational interviewing sessions.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73(4), 590--​598.
doi:10.1037/​0022-​006x.73.4.590 Newman, M. G., & Fisher, A. J. (2010).
Expectancy/​ credibility change as a mediator of cognitive behavioral
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder: Mechanism of action or proxy
for symptom change? International Journal of Cognitive Therapy, 3(3),
245--​ 261. doi:http://​ dx.doi.org/​10.1521/​ijct.2010.3.3.245 Norcross, J.
C., & Lambert, M. J. (2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work II.
Psychotherapy, 48(1), 4--​8. doi:10.1037/​a0022180 Norcross, J. C., &
Lambert, M. J. (2018). Psychotherapy relationships that work III.

85

Psychotherapy, 55(4), 303--​ 315. doi:http://​
dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000193 Norcross, J. C., & Newman, C. F. (1992).
Psychotherapy integration: Setting the context. In J. C. Norcross & M.
R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 3--​ 45).
New York: Basic Books. Norcross J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (2018). A new
therapy for each patient: Evidence-​ based relationships and
responsiveness. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 74,
1089--​1906. Orlinsky, D. E., & Howard, K. I. (1986). Process and outcome
in psychotherapy. In S. L. Garfield & A. E. Bergin (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy and behavior change (3rd ed., pp. 311--​381). New York:
Wiley. Owen, J., & Hilsenroth, M. J. (2014). Treatment adherence: The
importance of therapist flexibility in relation to therapy outcomes.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 61(2), 280--​288. Powers, M. B., Smits,
J. A. J., Whitley, D., Bystritsky, A., & Telch, M. J. (2008). The effect
of attributional processes concerning medication taking on return of
fear. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 76(3), 478--​490.
Price, D. P., Finniss, D. G., & Benedetti, F. (2008). A comprehensive
review of the placebo effect: Recent advances and current thought.
Annual Review of Psychology, 59, 565--​590. Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some
implicit common factors in diverse methods of psychotherapy: "At last
the Dodo said, 'Everybody has won and all must have prizes'." American
Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412--​415. Roth, W. T., Wilhelm, F. H., &
Petit, D. (2005). Are current theories of panic falsifiable?
Psychological Bulletin, 131, 171--​192. Rousmaniere, T., Goodyear, R. K.,
Miller, S. D., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2017). The cycle of excellence:
Using deliberate practice to improve supervision and training. Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley. Rutherford, B. R., Bailey, V. S., Schneier, F. R., Pott, E.,
Brown, P. J., & Roose, S. P. (2015). Influence of study design on
treatment response in anxiety disorder clinical trials. Depression and
Anxiety, 32(12), 944--​957. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1002/​ da.22433
Schöttke, H., Flückiger, C., Goldberg, S. B., Eversmann, J., & Lange, J.
(2017). Predicting psychotherapy outcome based on therapist
interpersonal skills: A five-​ year longitudinal study of a therapist
assessment protocol. Psychotherapy Research, 6, 642--​652.

86

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Shapiro, A. K., & Shapiro, E. S. (1997). The powerful disorders."
Clinical Psychology: Science and placebo: From ancient priest to modern
medicine. Practice, 22, 315--​316. doi:10.1111/​cpsp.12109 Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press. Tolin, D. F., McKay, D ., Forman, E. M.,
Klonsky, Simon, G. E., & Ludman, E. J. (2010). Predictors of E. D., &
Thombs, B. D. (2015). Empirically early dropout from psychotherapy for
depression supported treatment: Recommendations for a in community
practice. Psychiatric Services, new model. Clinical Psychology: Science
and 61(7), 684--​689. doi:10.1176/​appi.ps.61.7.684 Practice, 22(4),
317--​338. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​ Smith, M. L., & Glass, G. V. (1977).
Meta-​analysis 10.1111/​cpsp.12122 of psychotherapy outcome studies.
American Tracey, T. J. G., Lichtenberg, J. W., Goodyear, R.
Psychologist, 32, 752--​ 760. doi:10.1037/​ K., Claiborn, C. D., &
Wampold, B. E. (2003). 0003-​066X.32.9.752 Concept mapping of therapeutic
common Smith, M. L., Glass, G. V., & Miller, T. I. (1980). factors.
Psychotherapy Research, 13(4), 401--​ The benefits of psychotherapy.
Baltimore: The 413. doi:10.1093/​ptr/​kpg041 Johns Hopkins University
Press. Ulvenes, P. G., Berggraf, L., Hoffart, A., Stiles, T. C., Smits,
J. A. J., & Hofmann, S. G. (2009). A Svartberg, M., McCullough, L., &
Wampold, meta-​ analytic review of the effects of B. E. (2012). Different
processes for different psychotherapy control conditions for anxiety
therapies: Therapist actions, therapeutic bond, disorders. Psychological
Medicine, 39(2), and outcome. Psychotherapy, 49(3), 291--​302. 229--​239.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1017/​ doi:10.1037/​a0027895 S0033291708003498
Wampold, B. E. (2013). The good, the bad, and the Steinkopf, L. (2016).
An evolutionary perspective on ugly: A 50-​ year perspective on the
outcome pain communication. Evolutionary Psychology, problem.
Psychotherapy, 50(1), 16--​24. 14(2), 7. doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1177/​
doi:10.1037/​a0030570 1474704916653964 Wampold, B. E., Baldwin, S. A.,
Holtforth, M. g., & Stich, S., & Ravenscroft, I. (1994). What is folk
Imel, Z. E. (2017). What characterizes effective psychology? Cognition,
50, 447--​468. therapists? In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill Swift, J. K.,
Callahan, J. L., Cooper, M., & Parkin, S. (Eds.), How and why are some
therapists better R. (2018). The impact of accommodating client than
others?: Understanding therapist effects preference in psychotherapy: A
meta-​analysis. (pp. 37--​ 53). Washington, DC: American Journal of
Clinical Psychology. doi:http://​dx.doi. Psychological Association.
org/​10.1002/​jclp.22680 Wampold, B. E., & Budge, S. L. (2012). The 2011
Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L., & Vollmer, B. M. (2011). Leona Tyler
Award Address: The relationship---​ Preferences. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, and its relationship to the common and specific 67(2),
155--​165. doi:10.1002/​jclp.20759 factors of psychotherapy. The
Counseling Swift, J. K., & Greenberg, R. P. (2012). Premature
Psychologist, 40(4), 601--​ 623. doi:10.1177/​ discontinuation in adult
psychotherapy: A meta-​ 0011000011432709 analysis. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Wampold, B. E., Flückiger, C., Del Re, A. C., Yulish,
Psychology, 80(4), 547--​ 559. doi:10.1037/​ N. E., Frost, N. D., Pace, B.
T., . . . Hilsenroth, a0028226 M. J. (2017). In pursuit of truth: A
critical Thomas, R. M. (2001). Folk psychologies across examination of
meta-​ analyses of cognitive cultures. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. behavior
therapy. Psychotherapy Research, Tolin, D. F. (2010). Is
cognitive--​behavioral therapy 27(1), 14--​32.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1080/​ more effective than other therapies? A
meta-​ 10503307.2016.1249433 analytic review. Clinical Psychology Review,
Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. E. (2015). The great 30(6), 710--​720.
doi:10.1016/​j.cpr.2010.05.003 psychotherapy debate: The research
evidence Tolin, D. F. (2014). Beating a dead dodo for what works in
psychotherapy (2nd ed.). bird: Looking at signal vs. noise in cognitive-​
New York: Routledge. behavioral therapy for anxiety disorders. Wampold,
B. E., Imel, Z. E., Bhati, K. S., & Johnson Clinical Psychology: Science
and Practice, Jennings, M. D. (2006). Insight as a common 21(4),
351--​362. doi:10.1111/​cpsp.12080 factor. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E.
Hill Tolin, D. F. (2015). Corrigendum to "Beating a (Eds.), Insight in
psychotherapy (pp. 119--​139). dead dodo bird: Looking at signal
vs. noise Washington, DC: American Psychological in cognitive-​
behavioral therapy for anxiety Association.

Integration of Common and Specific Factors Webb, C. A., DeRubeis, R. J.,
Amsterdam, J. D., Shelton, R. C., Hollon, S. D., & Dimidjian, S. (2011).
Two aspects of the therapeutic alliance: Differential relations with
depressive symptom change. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 79(3), 279--​283. doi:10.1037/​a0023252 Webb, C. A., DeRubeis,
R. J., & Barber, J. P. (2010). Therapist adherence/​competence and
treatment outcome: A meta-​ analytic review. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 78(2), 200--​211. doi:10.1037/​a0018912 Westra, H.
A., Dozois, D. J. A., & Marcus, M. (2007). Expectancy, homework
compliance, and initial change in cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for
anxiety. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 75(3), 363--​373.
doi:http://​dx.doi. org/​10.1037/​0022-​006X.75.3.363 Willis, J., & Todorov,
A. (2006). First Impressions: Making up your mind after a 100-​ ms
exposure to a face. Psychological

87

Science, 17(7), 592--​ 598. doi:10.1111/​ j.1467-​9280.2006.01750.x Wilson,
E. O. (1978). On human nature. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Wilson, E. O. (2012). The social conquest of earth. New York: Liveright
Publishing. Wilson, G. T. (1982). How useful is meta-​analysis in
evaluating the effects of different psychological therapies? Behavioural
Psychotherapy, 10, 221--​231. Wilson, G. T., & Rachman, S. J. (1983).
Meta-​ analysis and the evaluation of psychotherapy outcome: Limitations
and liabilities. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51,
54--​64. Yulish, N. E., Goldberg, S. B., Frost, N. D., Abbas, M.,
Oleen-​Junk, N. A., Kring, M., . . . Wampold, B. E. (2017). The
importance of problem-​ focused treatments: A meta-​analysis of anxiety
treatments. Psychotherapy, 54(4), 321--​338.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000144

4 A Principle-​B ased Approach to Psychotherapy Integration CATHERINE F.
EUBANKS AND MARVIN R. GOLDFRIED

A principle-​based approach to psychotherapy grew out of a desire to
enhance clinicians' abilities to help their clients by integrating ideas
from different schools of thought. This approach facilitates such
integration by focusing on principles of change shared across
orientations. In addition to lowering the barriers between theoretical
schools, this approach also facilitates the integration of research and
practice by privileging change principles that have empirical support.
In doing so, it provides a transtheoretical framework that encourages
therapists to enact these evidence-​based principles in a flexible,
responsive, and hopefully more effective way. Keeping the principles in
mind is much more feasible and practical than trying to integrate across
hundreds of potential techniques.

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH Early in his career, the second author
(Goldfried) found that, although his preferred theoretical orientation
of behavior therapy seemed to be an effective means of helping many
patients, focusing solely on overt behavior and learning models limited
his conceptualization of clients' difficulties and his ability to
successfully intervene. Along with other behavior therapists, he became
one of the early advocates of enhancing behavior therapy by integrating
cognitive processes. He also began to draw on psychodynamic and
experiential ideas that complemented cognitive-​behavioral therapy (CBT)
(Goldfried, 2015). The rationale behind this rapprochement was that if
one set aside the jargon employed by various

88

Principle-Based Integration

approaches, it might be possible to identify a set of change principles
that were shared by the major theoretical orientations. In 1980, the
second author proposed that a useful way to identify these commonalities
would be to focus on an intermediate level of abstraction (Goldfried,
1980). With theoretical frameworks or orientations at the highest level
of abstraction and specific techniques at the lowest level of
abstraction, at the intermediate level are change principles. By
focusing on this intermediate level and describing these principles in
clear language that eschews jargon, the goal was to step outside of the
contentious competition between orientations and recognize how seemingly
disparate techniques actually serve similar clinical functions. In a
1980 article and in subsequent writings (e.g., Goldfried, 2012),
Goldfried delineated five principles that he argued are common across
orientations:

89

Extinction of avoidance behavior is achieved by repeated exposure to
subjectively threatening stimuli under conditions designed to ensure
that neither the avoidance responses nor the anticipated adverse
consequences occur. (Bandura, 1969, p. 414)

Referred to as "directive behavior" within an experiential/​humanistic
approach, the goal is to provide the client with the opportunity for
relevant practice in behaviors he may be avoiding. Through his own
discoveries in trying out these behaviors, he will uncover aspects of
himself which in their turn will generate further self-​ discovery.
(Polster & Polster, 1973, p. 252)

Each of these instances, stated in a somewhat different language and
perhaps implemented technically in different ways, may be seen as
reflecting the principle of "encouraging correc1. Fostering the
patient's hope, positive tive experiences." These five common principles
of change expectations, and motivation are not presumed to be
exhaustive: additional 2. Facilitating the therapeutic alliance 3.
Increasing the patient's awareness and principles can be identified,
particularly as new treatment approaches are developed, as existing
insight approaches evolve, and as the research litera4. Encouraging
corrective experiences ture identifies additional predictors of positive
5. Emphasizing ongoing reality testing treatment outcome. In this
chapter, we feaThis set of principles is based on the clin- ture and
illustrate only these five principles, ical, theoretical, and research
literature of recognizing that others would probably expand major
orientations, especially the cognitive-​ and revise our list. behavioral,
psychodynamic, and experiential/​ humanistic traditions. For example,
compare how the general approach to the reduction of ASSESSMENT AND
FORMULATION fearful behavior is described from these three It is
important to recognize that principles of orientations. change, by
definition, involve general strategic From a psychoanalytic point of
view: approaches to intervention. They say nothing when a person is
afraid but experiences a situa- about the specific techniques that are
used tion in which what was feared occurs without to achieve these
objectives and also nothing any harm resulting, he will not immediately
trust about what aspects of the client's functioning the outcome of his
new experience; however, the are to be the focus of the intervention.
For exsecond time he will have a little less fear, the third ample, with
regards to the strategies just indicated, what should the client become
aware time still less. (Fenichel, 1941, p. 83) of? What is the nature of
the experiences that Couched in heavy jargon, from a cognitive-​ can be
corrective? What is the target of the ongoing reality testing? These are
the issues that behavioral viewpoint:

90

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

are the focus of clinical assessment and case formulation. Based on a
coding system for the process of change that proves common to more than
one therapy approach, the second author developed a transtheoretical
approach to clinical assessment and case formulation (Goldfried, 1995).
The acronym STAIRCaSE refers to those variables involved in a person's
interaction with the environment that can be the focus of intervention.
They are: Situation, Thought, Affect, Intention, Consequence, and
Self-​Evaluation. Situation: Refers to something external to the
individual, be it an event, circumstance, or interaction with another
person. ◆ Thought: May be of various sorts, such as an interpretation of
the external situation, an expectation, or an attribution of the motive
behind another person's action. ◆ Affect: Refers to an emotional
reaction that could be conditioned to the situation or one mediated by a
thought. ◆ Intention: Refers to what the person wants and/​or needs in
this particular situation. ◆ Response: Represents an action that is
observable, which may be something a person does or avoids doing. ◆
Consequence: Refers to what results from the action or avoidance, be it
consequences to the individual or the impact it makes on someone else. ◆
Self-​evaluation: How the individual judges how well he or she responded
to the situation.

Because this assessment and case formulation approach is
transtheoretical in nature, the specific clinical methods of assessment
and intervention, by definition, are not specified. Our principle-​based
integration directs clinicians to what information to acquire, not how
to acquire it. The particular assessment methods (e.g., interview,
observation, psychological testing) should be determined by the specific
details of the case, clinical judgment, and the existing empirical
evidence. Gathering Assessment Information Relevant to Current Life
Situation. In assessing unassertiveness, the therapist looks for
difficulty in refusing requests from others, people-​pleasing and trying
to be "nice," and reluctance in taking the initiative in requesting what
the client wants or needs. These can occur generally or only within
specific classes of stations, such as work, school, friends, family, or
intimate relationships. Client may be more attuned to "shoulds" than
"wants." Observing markers in session. Passivity, being apologetic,
reassurance-​seeking; putting oneself down; worrying about what one said
or did in the past and/​or what one will say or do in the future.
Obtaining client history. Past history of criticism, abuse, trauma,
neglect, difficulty in forming relationships, strict rules and role
constraints (e.g., religion, culture). Selecting possible targets.
Anxiety, depression, interpersonal conflict, outbursts of anger
following period of passivity, lack of confidence/​ self-​efficacy,
excessive concern about impact on others, external locus of control,
uncertainty and hesitancy.

The following is an example of how STAIRCaSE is used in the assessment
and case formulation of unassertive behavior and how this information
guides the principles of change. "Unassertiveness" here is broadly
defined as the client having difficulty in verbalizing or acting on what
she or he wants, feels, or thinks. This unassertiveness may be the
result of fear and/​or lack of ability. In essence, this is what we
frequently see clinically, where a patient's problematic behavior is
more a function of anxiety or inability than what she or he wants and
needs.

Case Formulation Situations: Request by another person; client needing
something from another person. Intention: What client would like to say
about what he or she needs or wants, thinks, or feels. Thought: Thought
that one can't say what one wants; explicitly or implicitly expects
negative reaction from other. Affect: Anxiety at thought of saying what
one needs or wants, thinks, or feels, often as the result of feared
consequences.

◆

Principle-Based Integration

Response: Behaviorally avoids saying what one needs or wants, thinks, or
feels. Consequence: Inconvenienced; doesn't get what one wants; others
may view client negatively. Self-​Evaluation: Negative thoughts and
feelings about self; feelings of inefficacy; regret about not
self-​asserting. Providing client with rationale for intervention. The
goal here is to help clients gain a preliminary understanding of why
they are having the problem (concurrently and historically), what needs
to be done therapeutically to make changes, and how they can work with
the therapist to bring this about. 1. Present formulation to client,
together with any relevant history leading to current vulnerability, in-​
session markers, and therapy targets. 2. Use case formulation described
earlier to clarify the STAIRCaSE links that need to be broken: (e.g.,
"You are afraid \[affect\] to say what you really want to say
\[intention\] because you think \[thought\] that it will be taken badly
by the other person. The problem is that by remaining silent
\[response\], you end up not only failing to get what you want
\[consequence\], but the other person may see you in a negative way
\[consequence\]. And you also then feel lousy about yourself."
\[self-​evaluation\]). 3. Clarify links that need to be made in therapy:
S---​I---​R---​C---​SE \[e.g., "When you are in a situation where you want
or don't want something, the goal is be able to focus on your intention
rather than your fearful thoughts and emotions, to notice the
consequences of what you say or do for yourself and the impact it makes
on others and see if you can give yourself credit for what you've done."
Clinical assessment and case formulation naturally lead to goal
specification. There are three associated principles of change for
clinically pursuing the goal of facilitating assertive behavior.

91

Increasing awareness: The goal here is to help clients become more aware
in their day-​to-​day interactions of the connections between the external
situation; their thoughts, feelings, intentions/​needs, actions; the
consequences of their actions for themselves and others; and how they
evaluate the way they dealt with the situation. An ultimate goal is to
help them develop a more efficacious view or expectation of their
ability to deal with future situations. Although the therapist can point
these out, the eventual goal is to have clients make use of their
executive functioning to step back and observe these connections
themselves in life situations. Corrective experience: The goal here is
to create behavior change by speaking up and saying what they want,
think, and feel in specific situations. This new behavior will also have
an impact on thoughts, feelings, intentions, consequences, and how they
evaluate the way they responded in this life situation. There is a
certain amount of risk-​t aking involved (and the client should be
informed of this explicitly) where the goal---​based on their increased
awareness---​is for them to behave in a new way that is more effective
(e.g., having positive consequences) and satisfying (e.g., positive
self-​evaluation). Ongoing reality testing: The goal here is to
facilitate a synergy between increased awareness and corrective
experiences. Once they have a corrective experience by acting in a more
self-​assertive way, clients become more aware of new links between the
external situation, their thinking, feelings, and intentions. Thus, they
focus more on what they want to say rather than on being inhibited by
excessive concerns about the reactions of others. They also recognize
that what they have done differently results in better consequences and
makes them feel

92

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

more positive about what they have done. This increase in awareness
resulting from a corrective experience may then be used to encourage
more corrective experiences, resulting in an ongoing synergistic process
between cognition and behavior.

APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE This principle-​based approach is a framework
that addresses the general therapy change process and that therefore can
be applied to multiple clinical situations and populations. In fact, we
would argue that these principles are relevant for all patients,
settings, and modalities and can be applied in either short-​or long-​term
treatments. The five principles provide general guidelines for what
needs to be accomplished in therapy. Drawing on these organizing
principles, the therapist can then identify subgoals for each principle
and select specific methods or techniques that will enable him or her to
achieve those subgoals over the course of treatment. Future research may
identify certain principles that therapists should emphasize more with
specific patient populations or clinical settings. At this point, we see
no reason that these principles cannot be utilized with patients
undergoing couples or family therapy or who are also receiving
psychotropic medication. With patients on medication, clinicians will
need to be mindful of how they interpret their corrective experiences:
if patients attribute all of their success experiences to medication,
they may miss an opportunity to develop a more positive and empowered
self-​evaluation. PROCESSES OF CHANGE AND REPRESENTATIVE TECHNIQUES In
this section, we describe each of the five principles of change in
greater detail, together with representative research on and methods
using each. As noted earlier, the principle-​ based approach does not
prescribe a specific set of

methods and techniques; any technique can be utilized as long as it
supports one or more of the principles of change, is within the
therapist's skill set, and is responsive to the client's needs and
preferences. Fostering Hope, Positive Expectations, and Motivation
Psychotherapy often proves more effective when patients have hope that
their lives can improve, positive expectations that therapy can
facilitate this improvement, and motivation to do the work of therapy.
The idea that therapists need to take steps to foster this sense of
hopefulness and motivation in patients has long been an important
principle of many therapeutic approaches. For example, Frank (1961)
proposed that patients seek therapy because they are demoralized, and
the restoration of their hope and positive expectations is an important
part of treatment. Research on patients' expectations about the benefits
of therapy shows a small but significant relation with positive outcome
in treatment. This research also shows that unmet patient expectations
are related to premature dropout from therapy (Constantino, Vîslă,
Coyne, & Boswell, 2018). The importance of patient motivation to change
is underscored by the transtheoretical model, which conceptualizes
change as prog­ ress­ing through the five stages of precontemp­ lation,
contemplation, preparation, action, and maintenance. Research on these
stages of change has found that patients in the precontemplative stage,
who lack awareness of their problems or motivation to change their
behavior, are far less likely to make progress in therapy than patients
who are more motivated and thinking more actively about making changes
(Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8, this volume; Krebs, Norcross,
Nicholson, & Prochaska, 2018). In order to have hopeful, positive
expectations about treatment and the motivation to engage in it, it is
important that patients know what the treatment entails. Role induction
is the process of orienting patients to treatment by giving them a
general idea of what will happen

Principle-Based Integration

in therapy and the roles of each participant (Orne & Wender, 1968).
Several studies have found that the use of role induction is associated
with less dropout and better therapy outcome (Strassle, Borckardt,
Handler, & Nash, 2011; Swift & Greenberg, 2015). Useful role induction
strategies include helping clients understand the general behaviors of
an ideal client and the general behaviors the client can expect from the
therapist, providing a credible treatment rationale, and also supplying
logistical information about the length and frequency of sessions and
how payment is handled. Therapists seeking to increase client motivation
can look to the techniques of motivational interviewing (MI; Miller &
Rollnick, 2013), a client-​centered approach that addresses ambivalence
about change. In MI, when a patient resists making changes, the
therapist does not directly challenge or confront this resistance, but
rather seeks to "roll with resistance" by viewing it as valuable
information to understand rather than as an obstacle to progress. Using
person-​ centered techniques, but with some leading as well as following,
the therapist helps the patient to recognize the consequences of
changing and not changing. Outcome research on MI has demonstrated
efficacy and effectiveness across a range of outcomes, particularly
alcohol and drug use (Hettema, Steele, & Miller, 2005; Lundahl & Burke,
2009; Lundahl et al., 2013), and a recent meta-​analysis found that
therapist skills consistent with MI were correlated with more change
talk from clients (Magill et al., 2017). Finally, in order to help their
patients have hope, therapists themselves need to maintain their own
hope. Given research that mental health workers report relatively high
levels of burnout (e.g., Morse, Salyers, Rollins, Monroe-​ DeVita, &
Pfahler, 2012; Paris & Hoge, 2010), it is important that therapists
practice good self-​ care (Wise & Barnett, 2016). Facilitating the
Therapeutic Alliance The alliance is one of the most robust predictors
of outcome in therapy (Flückiger, Del Re, Wampold, & Horvath, 2018).
Many theorists

93

and researchers draw on Bordin's (1979) conceptualization of the working
alliance as agreement between patient and therapist on the goals of
therapy, collaboration on the tasks of therapy, and the presence of a
positive emotional bond. Although therapeutic approaches may differ
regarding the extent to which the alliance is regarded as a mechanism of
change (e.g., Safran & Muran, 2000) or as a precondition of change
(e.g., Beck, 2011), there is widespread agreement that a "good-​enough"
alliance is essential for effective therapy. In addition, when problems
or ruptures in the alliance arise, if these are not addressed and
resolved, patients may quit therapy or fail to achieve good outcomes
(e.g., Samstag, Batchelder, Muran, Safran, & Winston, 1998). Conversely,
successful resolution of ruptures is moderately related to improved
outcome (Eubanks, Muran, & Safran, 2018). One way to build a strong
alliance is to help the patient actually move closer to achieving his or
her treatment goals: in other words, effective therapy facilitates a
good alliance. In addition, therapists can facilitate agreement and
collaboration on goals and tasks by negotiating the goals of treatment
with the patient and by giving patients some agency with respect to the
tasks. An example of this would be collaborating with the patient to
decide on a homework assignment rather than simply telling the patient
what the therapist wants the patient to do. Therapists can work to build
a strong bond by being empathic and respectful and validating the
patient's experience. The empathic style of the client-​centered
tradition is well-​suited to building a strong bond (Elliott, Bohart,
Watson, & Murphy, 2018). Focusing on the alliance is clearly a crucial
task early in treatment so that the patient is willing to engage in the
work of therapy. Research on alliance ruptures points to the importance
of monitoring the alliance throughout treatment and intervening when a
rupture emerges (Eubanks et al., 2018). Useful alliance rupture repair
strategies include both direct strategies in which the therapist draws
attention to the rupture, such as inviting the patient to express his or
her thoughts and feelings about

94

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

an impasse, and indirect strategies, in which the therapist resolves the
rupture without explicitly acknowledging it---​such as changing a
homework task that a patient finds too challenging. Rupture resolution
strategies can be immediate as well, such as providing a rationale for a
task that the patient did not understand so that the dyad can quickly
resolve the rupture and resume the therapeutic task. Rupture repair
strategies can also be more expressive or exploratory and aim to shift
the focus of treatment to exploring the rupture and the patient's needs
or concerns that underlie it. This form of resolution may entail
exploring not only the patient's experience of the rupture, but also
disclosure of the therapist's experience and nondefensive acknowledgment
of how the therapist has contributed to the rupture. Increasing Patient
Awareness and Insight Patients often begin psychotherapy in a state of
unconscious incompetence---​unaware of exactly how they are contributing
to their difficulties. An important step in therapy is to help the
client move to a stage of greater awareness or insight that can be
described as conscious incompetence. As illustrated earlier, a clear
case formulation helps therapists identify the thoughts, feelings,
intentions, and/​or behaviors of which the client needs to become more
aware. For example, a client who is unaware of her anger at others may
also be unaware of how she inadvertently expresses her anger through
indirect slights and pained facial expressions. She then may also be
unaware of how her behavior aggravates others and leads them to withdraw
from her. A task for the therapist would be to help this client
recognize her feelings of anger, how she manifests her anger, and how
these manifestations impact those around her. The therapist could draw
upon STAIRCaSE to help the client increase her awareness of the links
between specific challenging encounters with her employer \[situation\],
her belief that she is being treated unfairly but "must not cause a
scene" \[thought\], her feelings of anger and frustration

\[affect\], and her attempts to "say something nice" while clenching her
jaw \[response\]. As the client becomes more aware of these factors and
the links between them and how they are interfering with her ability to
achieve her career goals \[intention\], she will start to recognize
opportunities for positive change. All of the major therapeutic
approaches embrace techniques for enhancing patient awareness.
Increasing patient insight has always been a central aim of
psychodynamic approaches and, certainly, interpretations, when accurate
and well-​ timed, can facilitate greater awareness in patients of the
relational patterns that contribute to their difficulties. Reflections,
observations, and feedback have long been employed in insight-​oriented
therapies for this purpose. The CBT technique of having patients
complete thought records can help patients to become more aware of
connections among thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Two-​ chair
exercises, a hallmark of experiential approaches, can help patients to
become more aware of implicit feelings and unmet needs (Elliott, Watson,
Goldman, & Greenberg, 2004). Encouraging Corrective Experiences In 1946,
Alexander and French proposed that a client's experience of interacting
with a therapist in a way that differed from the client's experiences
with significant figures in the client's early life could, in itself,
produce therapeutic change. This concept has been extended to include
experiences outside of the therapeutic relationship: a corrective
experience is any experience in which the patient takes a risk and
engages in a new behavior that leads to a shift in cognitions and
emotions (Goldfried, 2012). Corrective experiences can be concept­
ualized as a form of learning---​ the patient engages in a new way of
behaving that is more effective. For example, exposure in fear reduction
is one type of corrective experience. When patients begin to engage in
new, more adaptive behaviors, they move into the stage of conscious
competence: they are choosing to act more effectively and competently
through deliberate and conscious efforts.

Principle-Based Integration

95

As Alexander and French observed, the ther- aggression, a therapist
might meet the patient's apeutic relationship can also provide a correc-
aggression with active engagement and healthy tive experience. A patient
who is accustomed self-​assertion. to being criticized or abandoned by
significant Indeed, the therapeutic relationship can others can have a
corrective experience when provide a corrective experience for the
patient a therapist is supportive, empathic, validating, even when the
therapist is not intentionally and willing to address and work through
alli- trying to do so. For example, once when the ance ruptures
(Eubanks, 2019). A corrective ex- first author was giving a client a
handout in sesperience is the heart of change---​it is the most sion, she
mentioned that she had come across essential of the change principles.
the handout during the past week and thought Therapists can encourage
corrective the client would find it useful. The client's face
experiences both between and within sessions. lit up and she said, "You
were thinking about Between sessions, therapists and patients can me!"
What the therapist had intended to be collaborate on identifying
possible between-​ a psychoeducational intervention had a relasession
situations in which clients can attempt tional significance that took
the therapist by to have corrective experiences, such as facing
surprise. situations that they may have been avoiding. The very process
of exploring such experiences Emphasizing Ongoing Reality Testing in
session can also lead clients to consider doing things differently.
Questions the thera- The ultimate goal of therapy is to help patients
pist raises in the process of exploring a patient's move to the stage of
unconscious competence, experience (e.g., "Have you ever told her how in
which adaptive behaviors become so well-​ that makes you feel?") may,
even without the learned that they no longer require deliberate
eftherapist's awareness or intent, plant a seed that fort. To reach this
stage, patients need to engage subtly encourages the patient to try a
new be- in repeated corrective experiences. Patients may havior. This
indirect approach may be particu- also need the therapist's help to
process these larly well-​suited to high-​reactance patients who new
experiences: they may fail to detect, acdo not respond well to being
told what to do cept, or recall their success experiences because
(Beutler, Edwards, & Someah, 2018). these experiences are inconsistent
with their Corrective experiences within the session long-​standing views
of themselves. Clients can can be facilitated through in-​session tasks,
such see how their present functioning differs from as patients
reporting more open and expres- their past, less effective functioning
and align sive reactions about their experiences, or by their
expectations of situations, the emotions role-​plays in which the patient
tries out a new they anticipate experiencing, the consequences behavior.
An empty chair exercise can provide they deem most likely, and their
subsequent an opportunity for a patient to have the experi- self-​
evaluations (Goldfried & Robins, 1982). ence of a new interpersonal
interaction with a The client's reality has changed, and the client
significant other, even someone who has died, recalibrates his or her
expectations \[thought\] as a means of processing unfinished business.
and self-​view \[self-​evaluation\] to be in line with Therapists can
facilitate corrective experiences this new reality. This process of
ongoing reality by using their case formulation to help them testing
represents the consolidation of change. identify what kind of relational
experience As patients make positive changes, therapists would be most
beneficial for a particular pa- can help patients process their
corrective tient (Eubanks, 2019). For example, if a hostile experiences
by using the STAIRCaSE acronym patient is accustomed to encountering
hos- to help patients recognize how each component tility from others,
the therapist might provide of their functioning is changing. When
altering a different experience by being validating and one's negative
self-​ schema proves difficult, nondefensive. If a hostile patient is
accustomed therapists can offer affirmation by celebrating to others
fleeing from or cowering before his their patients' successes.
Therapists can also

96

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

encourage patients to find or strengthen positive interpersonal
relationships that will be a source of support when therapy ends.
Finally, therapists can encourage patients to develop healthy habits
such as mindfulness, engagement in the arts, or regular exercise. Such
heathy behaviors will likely increase their sense of mastery and
pleasure and will help them cope with future stressors. THERAPY
RELATIONSHIP In our principle-​based approach, the therapy relationship
can contribute to the change process both indirectly and directly. A
good therapy relationship will enable the therapist and client to
collaborate on tasks of treatment that are helpful to the client. As
noted earlier, facilitation of the alliance, which is an important
aspect of the therapy relationship, is a key principle in our approach.
A "good-​enough" alliance, in which the patient is willing to collaborate
with the therapist, is a necessary precondition for the work of therapy.
The "real relationship" component of the patient--​ therapist
relationship, characterized by a genuine and realistic perception of the
other (Gelso, 2014), can also foster a sense of connection and trust
that increases patients' willingness to engage in the tasks of therapy.
Within the context of therapy research, the therapy relationship in this
instance is said to "moderate" the change process, which may be
occurring outside the session. At the same time, the experience of being
in a relationship with a supportive, empathic, and reliable therapist
who encourages the patient's growth can also challenge the patient's
negative beliefs about relationships and provide a new interpersonal
experience of what is possible in an adaptive relationship with another
person. Patients who are fearful of being vulnerable with others due to
a history of being rejected and neglected by their parents may have the
experience of opening up to a therapist who is respectful and attentive.
Through this relationship, the patient learns that it is possible to be
vulnerable with another person and thus gains a new appreciation of his
or her own worth. In this second instance, the relationship can be
considered a mediator of change.

In our principle-​ based approach, therapists should strive to be attuned
to both possibilities: particularly in early sessions, they should focus
on developing a good-​enough relationship with the client in order to lay
the foundation for collaboration. As treatment progresses, they should
be mindful of the patient's past and current relationships with
significant figures, and they should think actively about what kind of
relational experience with the therapist would facilitate a corrective
emotional experience for the patient. Therapists may find it challenging
at times to provide the positive relational experience the client needs
as the patient may "pull for" negative responses similar to those the
patient has received in past relationships. By closely attending to
their own internal experience of the patient---​ including ways in which
they contribute to alliance ruptures by pushing against or pulling away
from the client---​ therapists can identify opportunities to "pause" the
therapeutic tasks they are engaging in and turn to actively exploring
the therapy relationship. This kind of exploration is necessary if
problems in the therapeutic relationship are hindering collaboration
between patient and therapist. DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS A strength of a
principle-​based approach to integration is its flexibility with respect
to specific techniques when working with patients from diverse cultures,
backgrounds, and identities. As we have indicated earlier, in viewing
therapy from within the perspective of principles of change, therapists
can choose from an array of techniques in support of one of the
principles. The therapist's choice of techniques is informed by the
research literature on multicultural competence but should also be
tailored to the specific needs and preferences of the individual client
because accommodating patient preferences typically enhances treatment
outcome and decreases premature termination (Swift, Callahan, Cooper, &
Parkin, 2018). There is strong research evidence that therapies adapted
for religious clients and for patients of color offer additional
benefits

Principle-Based Integration

compared to nonadapted secular therapies (Captari, Hook, Hoyt, Davis,
McElroy-​Heltzel, & Worthington, 2018; Soto, Smith, Griner, Domenech
Rodríguez, & Bernal, 2018). For example, a therapist can tailor
treatment for a religious client by encouraging the client to draw on
his or her faith tradition, such as encouraging the client to attend
religious services, including the client's favorite verses of Scripture,
or by incorporating prayer. By closely attending to subtle shifts in the
alliance, the therapist can quickly detect therapy ruptures that can
arise from differences between patients and therapists with respect to
aspects of their identities such as gender, race, religion, sexual
orientation, and class (Muran, 2007). Microaggressions, or direct and
indirect disrespectful, insulting, dismissive communications about
another individual's cultural group, can be understood as a type of
alliance rupture (Hook, Davis, Owen, & DeBlaere, 2017), and there may be
value in drawing on alliance rupture resolution strategies to address
microaggressions (Gaztambide, 2012; Spengler, Miller, & Spengler, 2016).
A principle-​based approach to integration proceeds from an assumption
that certain principles of change are universal. However, it is
certainly possible that this assumption is wrong---​certain principles
may not be relevant for all patients, or there may be important
principles missing from our list. It is important that we approach our
work with cultural humility, appreciating how much we do not know about
the lived experiences of our clients and how much we may be blinded by
our implicit cultural assumptions (Hook et al., 2017). As more
principle-​based research is conducted with diverse samples of patients
and therapists, we expect and indeed hope that additional principles
will be identified so that therapists have a rich array of clinical
strategies to draw upon when tailoring treatment to a particular
patient.

97

heterosexual male in his mid-​40s who worked as an attorney at a
prestigious law firm. He presented with anxiety that he linked to work
stressors, his distant relationship with his wife, and his frustrations
with his teenage daughter who was performing poorly in her academics.
Greg met diagnostic criteria for generalized anxiety disorder. The
psychologist was a white, heterosexual female in her early 40s. At the
first session, the therapist asked the patient to complete the Outcome
Questionnaire (OQ; Lambert, 2015), which indicated that he was
experiencing a moderate level of distress. Fostering Hope, Positive
Expectations, and Motivation In the first session, the therapist
inquired about Greg's expectations for treatment. Greg's answer included
the unrealistic hope about what the therapist could do---​"I am hoping
that you have something in your therapist bag of tricks that will put
all my demons to rest once and for all. I want a life with no setbacks."
He also expressed resignation about his own helplessness---​"I think it's
something in how I'm wired; I just can't stop thinking this way and
feeling this way." The therapist tried to encourage more balanced
expectations by orienting Greg to the treatment. She explained that this
treatment would be a collaborative effort, with both parties
contributing to the work; that it was possible for him to feel better,
but it would take some time; and that therapy might not entail
exorcising all of his demons but rather helping him develop skills to
cope with his demons more effectively. The therapist inquired about
Greg's past experience in therapy to gain a better understanding of what
he did and did not find helpful. She also observed that Greg brought
several strengths to therapy: his awareness that things were not going
well in his life, his motivation to seek treatment, and his willingness
to share his difficulties fairly readily with the therapist. By drawing
attention to these strengths, the therapist not only fostered Greg's
positive expectations, but also bolstered her own personal sense of
hope.

CASE EXAMPLE To illustrate our principle-​ based approach, we present a
case example based on clients in our clinical practices. The patient,
Greg, was a white,

Facilitating the Therapeutic Alliance In the first session, the
therapist introduced the concept of the therapeutic alliance to Greg by

98

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

using Bordin's (1979) tripartite conceptualization of the alliance as
(1) agreement between the patient and the therapist on the goals of
treatment, (2) collaboration between the patient and the therapist on
the tasks of treatment, and (3) the existence of a positive affective
bond between the patient and the therapist. She encouraged Greg to let
her know if at any point he disagreed with the direction in which they
were going. She also shared that she might at times draw his attention
to their interaction as a better understanding of how they were relating
to each other could help them better understand his interactions with
others; in this way, she provided a rationale for any future efforts to
attend to and explore alliance ruptures. Throughout the first few
sessions, the therapist paid close attention to the development of her
alliance with Greg. As she and Greg spoke about his goals for therapy,
she directly noted that she and Greg had different perspectives on the
best ways to achieve some of Greg's goals. Greg wanted to include
winning more legal cases as a treatment goal because he believed that
this would mean that he would make more money and that his difficulties
with anxiety would be relieved if he were wealthier. The therapist was
concerned that there were many external variables outside Greg's control
that contributed to whether he won or lost a case and that making more
money would not resolve Greg's difficulties with anxiety. She thought
that focusing on the ways in which Greg's own behavior, thoughts,
feelings, intentions, and self-​ evaluation were contributing to his
anxiety was a better way to proceed. Greg's tendency to tie his personal
worth to his net worth was part of his problem, and she did not want to
reinforce this. Knowing that agreement on treatment goals is a key
component of the alliance, the therapist spoke explicitly with Greg
about their differing views and engaged in a collaborative discussion
about whether they could find a treatment goal with which they were both
comfortable. Greg agreed that they could start with focusing on how his
thoughts, feelings, intentions, behaviors, and self-​evaluation
contributed to his anxiety. He said that he still hoped that this would
help him be more effective at work and make more money. The therapist
agreed to help Greg reflect on his behaviors at work and to identify
whether his anxiety was interfering with his ability to do his job

effectively, but she also said that increasing his income would not
solve his problems. Greg felt that this was fair, and said "OK, we can
agree to disagree on that." In addition to negotiating an agreement on
goals, the therapist worked to collaborate with Greg on tasks and to
develop a bond. Greg made several references to his former therapist who
was "very perceptive and insightful" based on his "years of experience
with hundreds of patients." Greg drew contrasts with the current
therapist's relative lack of experience: he noted that since she was an
academic, her private practice was probably small and that there were
things she would know more about "once you've seen more patients." The
therapist felt that Greg was challenging her at times by rejecting some
of her interpretations and homework suggestions in a slightly
confrontational way. She drew Greg's attention to this dynamic, trying
to be nondefensive and curious about their interaction: "I feel like you
are testing me." Greg laughed and said, "Oh, there you go, talking about
our relationship, just like you said you would," in a teasing manner.
When the therapist tried to further explore Greg's potential concerns
about her ability, he made more jokes and kept the conversation light.
The therapist believed that while Greg was determining if she passed
muster, he was simultaneously eager for her approval. As Greg seemed
uncomfortable exploring this aspect of their interaction directly at
this point, the therapist decided to back off for the time being. The
therapist reflected to herself on how the therapeutic relationship could
provide a corrective experience for Greg. Greg was raised by parents who
pressured him to succeed, and he now lived with frequent criticism from
his wife, hostile competition from his work colleagues, and numerous
demands from his 16-​year-​old daughter. The therapist hypothesized that
experiencing validation, support, and acceptance in the therapy
relationship could be a healing experience for Greg. She tried to keep
this as a guiding principle in her interactions with Greg. For example,
in one session, Greg was relating an argument he had with his daughter.
He acknowledged losing his temper with his daughter and "yelling and
doing everything wrong." The therapist stopped him and asked, "What do
you

Principle-Based Integration think I think about all of this?" Greg
responded, "I hope you are figuring out what parenting techniques I
should be using to communicate better with her, set limits better, be
more patient---​ all these things that I keep messing up." The therapist
replied, "I do think there are some things that could be helpful, which
I'll share with you, but that's not what I was thinking just now. I was
thinking, 'this is really hard.' " Greg looked surprised for a moment,
then put his face in his hands, and, for the first time in the
treatment, he began to cry. The therapist sat with him for several
minutes and listened as Greg slowly began to speak about his sadness and
pain as a failing parent. This moment felt like a turning point in the
therapeutic relationship.

99

formulation of Greg's case and shared this with him. Greg agreed with
the therapist's formulation and reported that he found this diagram
helpful. The diagram laid out the vicious cycle Greg was stuck in: a
sense of inadequacy leading to anxiety that he found difficult to
tolerate, leading to efforts to escape the anxious feelings through
avoidant thoughts and behaviors, which then contributed to difficulties
in his life that fueled his personal sense of inadequacy. Greg reported
that he knew many of the pieces of this cycle but had never really
connected them. This case formulation increased his awareness of what
was operating and became a useful way to track Greg's progress and to
explain the rationale for various interventions by linking them to the
stage in the cycle they were meant to address.

Increasing Patient Awareness and Insight Based on his prior therapy,
Greg could speak fluently about many of his difficulties. However, his
insights remained intellectualized---​sounding almost like he was talking
about someone else when he spoke of his tendency to worry and his
history of self-​defeating behaviors. The therapist suspected that Greg
needed to become more self-​ aware in an experiential fashion that linked
his thoughts with his emotions. The therapist employed the two-​chair
technique to facilitate this link. During a session in which Greg was
being highly self-​critical, the therapist pulled up a chair and
facilitated a dialogue between Greg and his critical voice by having
Greg go back and forth between the two chairs. This dialogue helped to
increase Greg's awareness of the origins of his inner critic: as he
later observed, pointing at the critic chair, "That's my father." Greg
also shared that highlighting his inner critic increased his sense of
self-​compassion: "I really felt something---​ it really activated
something emotional for me. I wanted to give myself a hug." Greg had
long known at an intellectual level that he was self-​critical; now he
seemed to have a deeper, affective understanding of it and an
appreciation for how much his self-​ criticism was hurting him.
Throughout treatment, the therapist periodically reviewed Greg's
progress by readministering the OQ and discussing how Greg felt that he
was changing. She also prepared a diagram of her

Encouraging Corrective Experiences In addition to facilitating
corrective experiences within the alliance, as described earlier, the
therapist encouraged Greg to pursue corrective experiences outside of
session. The therapist introduced Greg to mindfulness exercises and
encouraged Greg to practice these daily to help him be more aware of the
present moment and less consumed by his anxious thoughts. Greg found
that his mindfulness practice helped him have new kinds of interpersonal
interactions. For example, he reported that he was waiting for his wife
to get ready for an event they were attending together, and he was
getting frustrated that she was taking too long. Usually, this kind of
occurrence would be the beginning of an argument that would overshadow
the entire evening. However, Greg realized that he could practice
mindfulness while he waited for his wife. As he paid attention to his
breathing and felt himself grow calmer, he realized that he had skills
that he could utilize to manage the anxiety and anger he usually felt
when he was helpless to control a situation. He---​ and his wife---​were
both surprised at how much they enjoyed their evening together and how
much this positive experience subsequently impacted their entire
weekend. As Greg relayed this experience to the therapist, she
enthusiastically highlighted what an important experience this was and
how the accumulation of many of these experiences could help not only
Greg's symptoms

100

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

of anxiety, but also could positively impact his marriage. Emphasizing
Ongoing Reality Testing Greg began to report more corrective experiences
outside session in managing his anxiety, and the therapist processed
these experiences with him. At times, Greg needed encouragement to
recognize his gains: for example, after he proactively addressed a
difficult task at work by appropriately asking for help from a
colleague, he tried to minimize what he had done: "I was lucky; he was
in a good mood that day." The therapist noted that Greg's proactive and
skillful handling of the situation had contributed to the positive
outcome and highlighted the contrast between this success experience and
his previous, negative interactions with this particular colleague.
Drawing on the STAIRCaSE concept, she pointed out how his different
response was leading to a new consequence, and she encouraged Greg to
incorporate this feedback into his self-​evaluation. She also linked this
to the case formulation, observing that by tolerating uncomfortable
feelings, such as the discomfort of acknowledging his limitations to his
colleague and taking proactive steps rather than avoiding the task, he
broke his old cycle. The therapist also drew links between this
situation and Greg's behavior in therapy. She noting how Greg's
willingness to be open and vulnerable with the therapist had not made
him look foolish or weak, but rather had helped her to understand him,
had strengthened their bond, and had facilitated their work together.
Moreover, it provided him with a corrective experience whereby he could
show vulnerability without being criticized. After approximately 40
individual sessions, Greg's scores on the OQ moved into the normal
range. Greg reported that he was feeling anxious less often and felt
better equipped to tolerate and manage his anxious feelings when they
did arise. He also reported that his relationship with his wife was
greatly improved. He felt that he and his wife were working together
better as parents, and this was leading to improvements in their
relationship with their daughter. The therapist introduced the idea of
termination. Greg was initially reluctant to terminate,

but as the therapist continued to highlight his progress, Greg agreed to
a gradual tapering off of therapy sessions. He terminated with definite
improvement and with the understanding that he could return for booster
sessions should the need arise.

OUTCOME RESEARCH In presenting this principle-​based approach to
integration, the goal was not to create yet another brand of therapy to
compete in horse races with other treatments, but rather to provide a
conceptual framework for how to think about integrating empirically
supported principles into clinical practice. There are no formal or
controlled clinical trials on the effectiveness of this integrative
approach. Because flexibility---​ the ability to use a variety of
techniques to enact a particular principle---​is integral to this
approach, it would prove challenging to study principle-​based
integration via traditional means such as randomized controlled trials.
At the same time, there is some outcome research to support most of the
principles. Castonguay and Hill have brought together researchers to
collect supporting research on increasing clients' awareness (Castonguay
& Hill, 2007) and on corrective experiences (Castonguay & Hill, 2012). A
task force sponsored jointly by the Society for Clinical Psychology
(Division 12 of the American Psychological Association) and the North
American Chapter of the Society for Psychotherapy Research identified
research-​ supported principles for the treatment of four categories of
psychological disorders: dysphoric disorders, anxiety disorders,
personality disorders, and substance abuse disorders (Castonguay &
Beutler, 2006). Principles common across at least two disorders
included, for example, providing structure and a clear focus throughout
therapy and helping clients to accept, tolerate, and, at times, fully
experience their emotions. Several of the principles in the approach we
have described have also been identified

Principle-Based Integration

by an interdivisional American Psychological Association (APA) Task
Force to be elements of the therapy relationship that are probably or
demonstrably effective. The most recent compendium featured
meta-​analyses of the literature to demonstrate the relationship between
several of these principles and patient outcomes (Norcross & Lambert,
2019): specifically, client expectations, the alliance, collaboration,
facilitating positive expectations, and alliance rupture repair.

101

integration places on therapists: it requires that therapists think
flexibly and creatively to move outside the box of one orientation, to
gain familiarity with a variety of techniques, to look beyond
superficial differences between seemingly disparate techniques to
recognize common underlying functions, to stay abreast of the research
literature, and to tolerate a degree of uncertainty because there is no
clear script for the next therapy session other than focusing on
principles of change and being responsive to the patient's needs
(Stiles, Honos-​Webb, & Surko, 1998). It also provides researchers with
FUTURE DIRECTIONS robust phenomena on which to focus their research
efforts---​as opposed to clinical trials One promising direction is to
use principle-​ involving complex interventions designed to based
integration as a way of training therapists treat heterogeneous
disorders as defined in the and to compare the clinical outcomes of
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental therapists trained in this
approach to those Disorders (DSM-​ 5; American Psychiatric of therapists
trained in other approaches. Association, 2013). Beginning trainees can
quickly grasp the five Perhaps most important, this approach principles
and use them to organize their requires therapists to be open to
recognizing thinking so that they are not overwhelmed by the their
limits and receptive to continually vast array of possible therapeutic
interventions. learning new ways to help their patients. An It is far
easier to keep in mind a handful of op- important future direction is to
identify how erating principles than to identify which of best to
inculcate such openness, flexibility, hundreds of techniques might be
relevant in and skill at integrating research findings into any given
case. As they progress through their clinical practice in therapist
trainees. For extraining, trainees can learn possible techniques ample,
should trainees develop competence in nested within each principle and
thereby grad- employing these principles within one orientaually
accumulate a larger repertoire of methods tion first, in order to gain a
secure foundation, for facilitating each principle. Early controlled or
would early exposure to how different theostudies of principle-​based
training in system- retical orientations implement these principles atic
treatment selection (Consoli & Beutler, help maximize trainees' openness
and agility? Chapter 7, this volume) and transtheoretical Does the best
training approach depend on therapy (Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8,
the trainee and his or her level of anxiety or this volume) have
demonstrated its viability on other therapist characteristics? Another
imand promising results. The context respon- portant future direction
for our principle-​based sive integration model (Constantino, Boswell,
approach is to determine whether additional Bernecker, & Castonguay,
2013) is an ex- principles should be added to the five discussed ample
of a practical and useful way to structure in this chapter. A related
future direction is the principle-​based training with clinical markers
need for more research on applying the princiand related strategies.
Thus, if a marker occurs, ples to work with specific populations, as it
may such as a rupture in the alliance, one should be that certain
principles are more critical for consider using certain rupture repair
strategies. specific types of patients or clinical situations. In the
future, as the field becomes more aware An exciting potential future
direction is the posof the importance of the therapist in treatment
sibility that we may one day know enough about (e.g., Castonguay & Hill,
2017), we will address the interactions among some patient characterthe
burden that a principle-​based approach to istics, clinical principles,
and the effectiveness

102

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

of particular techniques to develop empirical algorithms to tailor
treatment to the patient. One example is the Personalized Advantage
Index that DeRubeis and colleagues have developed for determining
whether a patient is a better match for cognitive therapy or medication
for depression (DeRubeis et al., 2014). Another, broader example is the
list of effective treatment adaptations to patients' transdiagnostic
characteristics from the intradivisional APA task force on
evidence-​based relationship and responsiveness (Norcross & Wampold,
2019). Extensive meta-​analyses have determined that several patient
characteristics serve as markers for doing something particular: when
the patient presents with this feature, then the research indicates this
method typically proves most effective. Those six client characteristics
are reactance level, stages of change, patient preferences, culture
(race/​ ethnicity), religion/​ spirituality, and coping style. Not
coincidentally, our principle-​ informed integration already addresses
many of them. As indicated in Chapter 1 of this Handbook, there have
been four major approaches to psychotherapy integration: common factors,
assimilative integration, technical eclecticism, and theoretical
integration. A principle-​ based approach encompasses aspects of all of
these approaches. It is clearly aligned with a common factors approach
in that it identifies principles/​change processes that are common across
different therapeutic approaches. As the five principles described
earlier are present in all the major orientations, the principle-​based
approach is also conducive to assimilative integration: therapists can
conceptualize a case using the five principles from within their primary
orientation and then integrate techniques from other orientations into
that primary approach in service of those principles as needed. Similar
to the technical eclectic approach, a principle-​based approach also
gives therapists the freedom to select different techniques from
different orientations without remaining tied to one school. Consistent
with theoretical integration, it does have an integrating, overarching
conceptualization of what is necessary for change that guides the
selection of various

approaches. Thus, a principle-​based approach is not only a way to
integrate different approaches to therapy, but it also has the potential
to facilitate movement toward greater future consensus in the field of
psychotherapy integration.

References Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946). Psycho­ analytic
therapy; principles and application. Oxford: Ronald Press. American
Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical manual of
mental disorders (5th ed.). Arlington, VA: American Psychiatric
Publishing. Bandura, A. (1969). Principles of behavior modification. New
York: Holt, Rinehart, & Winston. Beck, J. S. (2011). Cognitive behavior
therapy: Basics and beyond (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Beutler, L.
E., Edwards, C., & Someah, K. (2018). Adapting psychotherapy to patient
reactance level: A meta-​analytic review. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
74(11), 1952--​1963. http://​dx.doi. org /​10.1002/​jclp.22682 Bordin, E.
(1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 16,
252--​260. Captari, L. E., Hook, J. N., Hoyt, W., Davis, D. E., McElroy-​
Heltzel, S. E., & Worthington, E. L., Jr. (2018). Integrating clients'
religion and spirituality within psychotherapy: A comprehensive
meta-​analysis. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 74(11), 1938--​1951.
http://​ dx.doi.org /​10.1002/​jclp.22681 Castonguay, L. G., Beutler, L. E.
(2006). Common and unique principles of therapeutic change: What do we
know and what do we need to know? In L. G. Castonguay & L. E. Beutler
(Eds.), Principles of therapeutic change that work (pp. 353--​ 369). New
York: Oxford University Press. Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (2007).
Insight in psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (2012). Transformation in
psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across cognitive behavioral,
humanistic, and psychodynamic approaches. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Principle-Based Integration Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E.(2017). How
and why are some therapists better than others? Understanding therapist
effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1037/​0000034-​009 Constantino, M. J., Boswell, J.
F., Bernecker, S. L., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Context-​responsive
psychotherapy integration as a framework for a unified clinical science:
Conceptual and empirical considerations. Journal of Unified
Psychotherapy and Clinical Science, 2, 1--​20. Constantino, M. J., Vîslă,
A., Coyne, A. E., & Boswell, J. F. (2018). A meta-​analysis of the
association between patients' early treatment outcome expectation and
their posttreatment outcomes. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 473--​485.
http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1037/​pst0000169 DeRubeis R. J., Cohen Z. D.,
Forand N. R., Fournier J. C., Gelfand L. A., & Lorenzo-​ Luaces, L.
(2014). The Personalized Advantage Index: Translating research on
prediction into individualized treatment recommendations. A
demonstration. PLoS ONE, 9, e83875. Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., Watson,
J. C., & Murphy, D. (2018). Therapist empathy and client outcome: An
updated meta-​ analysis. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 399--​410. http://​dx.doi.
org /​10.1037/​pst0000175 Elliott, R., Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., &
Greenberg, L. S. (2004). Learning emotion-​ focused therapy: The process-​
experiential approach to change. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. http://​dx.doi.org /​ 10.1037/​10725-​004 Eubanks, C. F.
(2019). Alliance-​ focused case formulations. In U. Kramer (Ed.), Case
formulation for personality disorders: Tailoring psychotherapy to the
individual client. (pp. 337--​ 354).Cambridge, MA: Elsevier. Eubanks, C.
F., Muran, J. C., & Safran, J. D. (2018). Alliance rupture repair: A
meta-​ analysis. Psychotherapy, 55(4), 508--​519. http://​dx.doi. org
/​10.1037/​pst0000185 Fenichel, O. (1941). Problems of psychoanalytic
technique. Albany, NY: Psychoanalytic Quarterly. Flückiger, C., Del Re,
A. C., Wampold, B. E., & Horvath, A. O. (2018). The alliance in adult
psychotherapy: A meta-​ analytic synthesis. Psychotherapy, 55(4),
316--​340. http://​dx.doi. org /​10.1037/​pst0000172 Frank, J. D. (1961).
Persuasion and healing: A comparative study of psychotherapy. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.

103

Gaztambide, D. J. (2012). Addressing cultural impasses with rupture
resolution strategies: A proposal and recommendations. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 43, 183--​189.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​a0026911 Gelso, C. (2014). A tripartite model
of the therapeutic relationship: Theory, research, and practice.
Psychotherapy Research, 24, 117--​ 131. http://​
dx.doi.org/​10.1080/​10503307.2013.845920 Goldfried, M. R. (1980). Toward
the delineation of therapeutic change principles. American Psychologist,
35, 991--​999. Goldfried, M. R. (1995). Toward a common language for case
formulation. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 5(3), 221--​244.
http://​dx.doi.org. /​ 10.1037/​h0101272 Goldfried, M. R. (2012). The
corrective experience: A core principle for therapeutic change. In L. G.
Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Transformation in psychotherapy.
(pp. 13--​ 29). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1037/​13747-​002 Goldfried, M. R. (2015). A
professional journey through life. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 71,
1083--​1092. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1002/​ jclp.22218 Goldfried, M. R., &
Robins, C. (1982). On the facilitation of self-​ efficacy. Cognitive
Therapy and Research, 6, 361--​379. http://​dx.doi.org /​
10.1007/​BF01184004 Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W. R. (2005).
Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 1,
91--​111. http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1146/​annurev.clinpsy.1.102803.143833
Hook, J. N., Davis, D., Owen, J., & DeBlaere, C. (2017). Cultural
humility: Engaging diverse identities in therapy (pp. 91--​112).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​0000037-​005 Krebs, P., Norcross, J. C.,
Nicholson, J. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2018). Stages of change and
psychotherapy outcomes: A review and meta-​analysis. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 74(11), 1964--​1979. http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1002/​ jclp.22683
Lambert, M. J. (2015). Progress feedback and the OQ-​ system: The past
and the future. Psychotherapy, 52, 381--​390. http://​dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/​pst0000027 Lundahl, B., & Burke, B. L. (2009). The effectiveness
and applicability of motivational interviewing: A practice-​friendly
review of four meta-​analyses. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 65,
1232--​1245. http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1002/​jclp.20638

104

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Lundahl, B., Moleni, T., Burke, B. L., Butters, R., Tollefson, D.,
Butler, C., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational interviewing in medical
care settings: A systematic review and meta-​ analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Patient Education and Counseling, 93, 157--​168.
http://​ dx.doi.org /​10.1016/​j.pec.2013.07.012 Magill, M., Colby, S. M.,
Orchowski, L., Murphy, J. G., Hoadley, A., Brazil, L. A., & Barnett, N.
P. (2017). How does brief motivational intervention change heavy
drinking and harm among underage young adult drinkers? Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85, 447--​ 458. http://​dx.doi.org
/​10.1037/​ccp0000200 Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2013). Motivational
interviewing: Helping people change (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford.
Morse, G., Salyers, M. P., Rollins, A. L., Monroe-​ DeVita, M., &
Pfahler, C. (2012). Burnout in mental health services: A review of the
problem and its remediation. Administration and Policy in Mental Health
and Mental Health Services Research, 39, 341--​352.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1007/​ s10488-​011-​0352-​1 Muran, J.C. (Ed.). (2007).
Dialogues on difference: Diversity studies on the therapeutic
relationship. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Norcross, J.C., & Lambert, M.J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy
relationships that work (3rd ed., Vol. 1). New York, NY: Oxford
University Press. Norcross, J.C., & Wampold, B.E. (Eds.). (2019).
Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd ed., Vol. 2). New York, NY:
Oxford University Press. Orne, M. T., & Wender, P. H. (1968).
Anticipatory socialization for psychotherapy: Method and rationale. The
American Journal of Psychiatry, 124, 1202--​1212. http://​dx.doi.org
/​10.1176/​ ajp.124.9.1202 Paris, M., Jr., & Hoge, M. A. (2010). Burnout
in the mental health workforce: A review. The Journal of Behavioral
Health Services & Research, 37, 519--​528. http://​dx.doi.org/​
10.1007/​s11414-​009-​9202-​2 Polster, E., & Polster, M. (1973). Gestalt
therapy integrated. New York: Brunner/​Mazel.

Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). Negotiating the therapeutic
alliance: A relational treatment guide. New York: Guilford. Samstag, L.
W., Batchelder, S. T., Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., & Winston, A.
(1998). Early identification of treatment failures in short-​term
psychotherapy: An assessment of therapeutic alliance and interpersonal
behavior. Journal of Psychotherapy Practice & Research, 7, 126--​143.
Soto, A., Smith, T. B., Griner, D., Domenech Rodríguez, M., & Bernal, G.
(2018). Cultural adaptations and therapist multicultural competence: Two
meta-​ analytic reviews. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 74(11), 1907--​
1923. http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1002/​jclp.22679 Spengler, E. S., Miller, D.
J., & Spengler, P. M. (2016). Microaggressions: Clinical errors with
sexual minority clients. Clinical Errors, 53, 360--​366.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​pst0000073 Stiles, W. B., Honos-​Webb, L., &
Surko, M. (1998). Responsiveness in psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 5, 439--​458. Strassle, C. G., Borckardt, J. J.,
Handler, L., & Nash, M. (2011). Video-​t ape role induction for
psychotherapy: Moving forward. Psychotherapy, 48, 170--​178.
http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1037/​ a0022702 Swift, J. K., Callahan, J. L.,
Cooper, M., & Parkin, S. R. (2018). The impact of accommodating client
preference in psychotherapy: A meta-​analysis. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 74(11), 1924--​ 1937. http://​dx.doi.org /​10.1002/​jclp.22680
Swift, J. K., & Greenberg, R. P. (2015). Premature termination in
psychotherapy: Strategies for engaging clients and improving outcomes.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​14469-​004 Wise, E. H., & Barnett, J. E.
(2016). Self-​ care for psychologists. In J. C. Norcross, G. R.
VandenBos, D. K. Freedheim & L. F. Campbell (Eds.), APA handbook of
clinical psychology: Education and profession (Vol. 5, pp. 209--​ 222).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. http://​ dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/​14774-​014

5 Feedback Informed Treatment CYNTHIA L. MAESCHALCK, DAVID S. PRESCOTT,
AND SCOTT D. MILLER

A recent newspaper headline, "Human Rights Complaint: Atheist Nurse
Fights AA Edict" led into an article describing a nurse's claim that his
employer violated his human rights by forcing him to attend Alcoholics
Anonymous (AA) meetings. Three years previously, the nurse had been
admitted into a hospital after he experienced a psychotic break brought
on by withdrawal from a combination of alcohol, medications, and street
drugs. Following the recommendations of the nurse's doctor, his employer
and union developed a plan that, prior to returning to work, he would
complete a residential treatment program, attend AA meetings, and submit
to random drug tests. The nurse took issue with the plan but eventually
submitted and completed the 5-​week, 12 step--​based residential treatment
program they chose for him. While there, he tried to explain that he was
an atheist but found that "If \[he\] questioned the 12-​step philosophy
or tried to

discuss scientific explanations and treatments for addiction, \[he\] was
labelled as 'in denial' . . . \[and\] told to admit that he was
powerless, and must submit to a higher power . . . \[and\] encouraged to
pray" (Van Manan, 2016, p. 3). The nurse told the reporter that the
experience "was unhelpful and humiliating." After completing the
treatment program, he refused to continue attending the mandated three
AA meetings per week and was consequently fired. Ultimately, he filed a
human rights complaint based on the doctor, union, and employer's
disregard for his feedback regarding his religious views and treatment
preferences. The result had serious, if not tragic, consequences. The
nurse lost his job and potentially his career. The doctor, employer, and
union were now facing legal action for human rights violations.
Furthermore, the likelihood of the nurse reaching out for help in the
future was questionable. Clearly, AA has helped

105

106

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

millions of individuals struggling with alcoholism. The treatment plan
might have made sense and been a good fit for someone else. However,
forcing people into any treatment approach could lead to similar
results. This story highlights the importance of integrating client
feedback into care, a core principle of the integrative approach known
as feedback informed treatment (FIT). Had those charged with the nurse's
treatment been open and willing to act on his feedback, the outcomes may
have been very different.

of total expenditures in the healthcare system (Miller, 2011). Adding to
the problem, there is evidence that clinicians are not accurately
identifying clients at risk for premature termination or negative
outcomes. Clinicians are frequently overly optimistic about their
clients' treatment satisfaction and progress. In a 2005 study,
researchers looked at how well clinicians predicted treatment outcomes.
The results are sobering. Clinicians were accurate in their prediction
of client negative outcome in less than 5% of the cases (Hannan et al.,
2005). The researchers conclude that "therapists tend to over predict
THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH improvement and fail to recognize clients who
worsen in therapy" (Hannan et al., 2005, A substantial body of evidence
demonstrates p. 161). Comparing clinicians' and clients' that
psychotherapy is effective in reducing dis- views of how therapy is
progressing frequently tress and improving well-​being. Consistently,
reveals quite different perceptions (Schuckard the average effect size
for psychotherapy is ro- et al., 2017). These concerns beg the quesbust,
coming in reliably between 0.8 and 1.2 tion: How can psychotherapists
improve at standard deviations above the mean of no treat- identifying
clients at risk of dropping out or ment or control conditions (Lambert &
Ogles, treatment failure and engage more clients in 2004; Smith, Glass,
& Miller, 1980; Wampold, achieving successful outcomes? 2001). The
effectiveness of psychotherapy In the past two decades, numerous studies
equals or exceeds many medical treatments have documented the benefits
of routine out(such as coronary bypass surgery for heart come
measurement (ROM). Gathering and problems and chemotherapy for breast
cancer) utilizing ongoing client feedback about the alliwith the added
benefits of being cost effective ance and progress in treatment has been
shown and avoiding the negative side effects of many to improve the
effectiveness of therapy. In a medical treatments (Schuckard, Miller, &
meta-​analysis of 15 randomized clinical trials Hubble, 2017; Wampold,
2007). (RCTs), Lambert and colleagues (2018) found Beyond these
generally positive results, that providing therapists with ongoing
feedback a more complicated picture emerges. Amid and clinical support
tools reduced deterioration progressing cases, mental health
professionals rates in at-​risk patients from an average of 30%
experience client no-​ shows, dropouts, and to 12%; feedback improves by
half the likelithose who remain stuck in despair despite the hood of
at-​risk patients experiencing positive best efforts to help them. Yes,
psychotherapy is outcomes. effective, but it is impossible to ignore the
facts. Consistent with these findings, that same Dropout rates average
about 25% for adults meta-​analysis (Lambert et al., 2018) of nine and
35% for adolescents and children (Swift & additional RCTs (2,272
clients) using a difGreenberg, 2012; Weisz et al., 2005). With 5--​
ferent measure (PCOMS) found that feed10% of adult clients and 12--​20%
of child and back produced an average effect size of .40 youth clients
actually getting worse in therapy, on client outcomes. To illustrate, in
a study of the picture begins to look quite different, if not 6,424
clients, Miller and his colleagues progrim (Lambert, 2010; Warren et
al., 2010). vided therapists with ongoing, real-​time feedThe financial
implications for healthcare sys- back regarding the client's experience
of the tems for clients who are not successfully helped alliance and
progress (Miller et al., 2006). The are enormous, eating up an estimated
60--​70% results included higher retention rates and a

Feedback Informed Treatment

doubling of the effect size of services offered (baseline ES = .37
vs. final phase ES = .79). Providing mental health professionals with
ongoing consumer feedback regarding the working relationship and
progress in treatment markedly increased success rates and the cost-​
effectiveness of services. Availability, frequency, and immediacy of
feedback have also been shown to be instrumental in improving the
outcome of therapy. For example, immediate feedback had a larger impact
on outcomes than feedback that was delayed by 2 weeks (Slade et al.,
2008). Sharing outcome data with clients and actively engaging them in
discussion about their progress has been shown to contribute to improved
outcomes. (Hawkins et al., 2004; Schuckard et al., 2017). Moving from
research to practice, FIT has evolved to embrace not only the use of ROM
and client feedback to inform treatment, but also to look beyond
individual client outcomes toward improving the effectiveness of
individual therapists. FIT is an evidence-​ based approach that
translates the best available research about what works in therapy into
a practical system by which clinicians measure their outcomes, enhance
their chances of achieving positive treatment effects, and improve
performance across their career. In keeping with the American
Psychological Association (APA) Task Force on Evidence-​Based Practice,
FIT promotes "the integration of the best available research with
clinical expertise in the context of patient characteristics, culture,
and preferences" (APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-​ Based
Practice, 2006, p. 273). Furthermore, FIT provides a practical method
for "monitoring of patient progress (and of changes in the patient's
circumstances---​e.g., job loss, major illness) that may suggest the need
to adjust the treatment . . . (e.g., problems in the therapeutic
relationship or in the implementation of the goals of the treatment)"
(APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-​ Based Practice, 2006,
pp. 276--​277). Beyond these, FIT encourages a growth mindset,
encouraging clinicians to pursue ongoing improvement of their
performance.

107

Guiding Principles Research indicates that the therapeutic alliance is a
strong predictor of outcome (Del Re et al., 2012; Miller et al., 2005).
The therapeutic or working alliance involves the relational bond between
therapist and client and---​ t aking client preferences into account---​
agreement on the goals of therapy, as well as the means and methods to
be used to achieve those goals (Bordin, 1979). Research on the power of
the therapeutic alliance has been well established in more than 1,100
research findings (Horvath et al., 2011) and steadfastly emerges as one
of the strongest predictors of eventual patient success---​or failure.
The client's rating of the alliance has a higher correlation with
outcome than therapists' ratings (Horvath et al., 2011). Research
consistently indicates that therapists are relatively poor judges of the
client's view of the alliance. On top of this, therapists and clients
tend to perceive the therapeutic relationship differently---​ clients may
not see the therapist's behaviors in the same light as they were
intended. For the most part, clients and therapists tend to attribute
change to different factors (Horvath et al., 2011). Monitoring the
client's view of the alliance helps clinicians identify divergent
perspectives that may have a negative impact on the alliance and
heighten the risk of dropout or null or negative outcomes. In addition
to the therapeutic alliance, early change is a strong predictor of
client engagement and, in turn, of therapeutic outcome. Numerous large
research studies suggest that, on average, the bulk of change in
successful therapy occurs earlier rather than later (Owen, Adelson,
Budge, et al., 2015; Stulz et al., 2007). With as many as 30% of people
remaining in treatment while experiencing no measurable benefit and a
90% chance of failure if there is no change between the second and
eighth visits (Lambert, 2013), obtaining real-​ time feedback from
clients regarding their experience of change is especially
important---​not only early in treatment but throughout the treatment
process. Maintaining engagement and ensuring that change continues is
key to successful therapy outcomes.

108

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

FIT involves the use of reliable and valid methods to monitor and track
client progress and identify clients at risk of unsuccessful treatment.
Feedback provides insight into clients' subjective experience of the
therapy alliance and the impact that treatment is having on their
functioning. This feedback guides service delivery to best meet each
client's needs. Thus, FIT involves routine collection of client feedback
through alliance and outcome measures administered at each session and
engaging clients in discussions about their progress. This information
is used to inform and refine practice decisions. Furthermore, FIT
encourages clinicians to use aggregate outcome data to establish their
personal baseline of effectiveness, then develop strategies to improve
their effectiveness and monitor the impact that these strategies have on
their outcomes. FIT is a transtheoretical approach that can be applied
by psychotherapists no matter which theoretical orientation they
endorse. In 2011, Miller and colleagues established four core
competencies for FIT, laying out knowledge and skills associated with
outstanding clinical performance and the components essential to FIT
practice (Miller et al., 2011; Prescott, 2017). The following is a
summary of the FIT core competencies. Competency 1, Research
Foundations, includes:

◆

familiarity with the research on the therapeutic alliance ◆ familiarity
with research on behavioral healthcare outcomes ◆ familiarity with the
general research on expert performance and its application to clinical
practice ◆ familiarity with the properties of valid, reliable, and
feasible alliance and outcome measures

FIT does not designate specific outcome and alliance measures to gather
client feedback other than the requirement that they be valid and
reliable measures. While there are numerous options to measure alliance
and outcomes, longer formats have proved cumbersome, taking too much
time to administer and making them impractical for regular use. Indeed,
utilization rates suffer when measures take more than 5 minutes to
administer (Brown, Dreis, & Nace, 1999). Moreover, several feedback
instruments and ROMs are proprietary and costly, putting them out of
reach for some clinicians and clinics. The Outcome Rating Scale (ORS;
Miller & Duncan, 2000) and the Session Rating Scale (SRS; Johnson,
Miller, & Duncan, 2000) are brief measures that have proven feasible

◆

Competency 2, Implementation, includes: integration of consumer-​reported
outcome and alliance data into clinical work ◆ collaboration and
transparency in interactions with consumers about collecting feedback ◆

using the resulting information to inform and tailor service delivery ◆
ensuring that the course and outcome of behavioral healthcare services
are informed by consumer preferences Competency 3, Measurement and
Reporting, includes: measuring the therapeutic alliance and the outcome
of clinical services on an ongoing basis with consumers ◆ providing
details in reporting outcomes sufficient to assess the accuracy and
generalizability of the results ◆

Competency 4, Continuous Professional Improvement, includes clinicians:
determining their baseline level of performance ◆ comparing their level
of performance to the best available norms, standards, or benchmarks ◆
developing and executing a plan for improving their performance ◆
seeking performance excellence by deliberate practice ◆

ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION

Feedback Informed Treatment

109

for regular use and are commonly used by degree of agreement between the
therapist and therapists implementing FIT. Designed to client on goals,
agreement on methods, and minimize content and complexity, each of the
agreement on overall approach to therapy. measures consists of four
visual analog scales. Versions of the ORS and SRS are available The
client marks the scale nearest to which- for use with adults,
adolescents, and children, ever "pole" best describes his or her
experience. thus making the measures versatile with diverse Visual
analog scales tend to have good face client populations. A group session
rating scale validity. (GSRS) measures the client's alliance with the
The ORS developed out of the third author's group facilitator and other
group members. long-​standing use of the Outcome Questionnaire Oral
versions of ORS and SRS are available 45 (OQ-​45; Lambert et al., 2003).
Miller was for use over the phone and with clients who teaching a
workshop on routine outcome meas- have literacy or visual problems or
who prefer urement in Israel and mentioned the time that not to complete
paper or electronic versions of the measure took to administer as well
as how the measures. To date, the measures have been its literacy level
created difficulty for many of translated into 19 different languages
and used his clients. A psychologist in attendance, Haim in many
countries across the globe. Omer, suggested bypassing the language-​ The
adult versions of the ORS and SRS dependent items and using a visual
analog are designed for administration to clients scale to capture the
major domains assessed by with a grade six reading level or higher and
the longer tool. Miller had experience with the are normed for people 13
years and older. Line Bisection Test (Schenkenberg, Bradford, The Child
Outcome Rating Scale (CORS) & Ajax, 1980) during his neuropsychology in-
and Child Session Rating Scale (CSRS) are ternship and developed scaling
questions at the designed for use with children aged 6--​12 with Brief
Family Therapy Center (Berg & Miller, about a grade two or higher
reading level. 1992; Miller & Berg, 1995). This prompted Due to the
simplified language on the meashim to suggest a measure with four lines,
each ures, they can also be used with adolescents 10 centimeters in
length, representing the four or with adults who have literacy or
language domains of client functioning assessed by the challenges.
Versions of the measures are availOQ-​45 (Miller, 2010). A similar
process led to able for use with very young children who lack the
creation of the SRS (Miller, 2010). literacy skills (usually under 6
years old). These Miller's mentor and supervisor, Johnson are called the
Young Child Outcome Rating (1995), had developed a 10-​item, Likert-​type
Scale (YCORS) and the Young Child Session scale for assessing the
quality of therapeutic Rating Scale (YCSRS). They use three "feeling
interactions (including alliance). Miller had face" pictures
representing a happy or smiley used the scale but wanted a simpler,
briefer face, a neutral face, and a frowning or unhappy version to fit
with the demands of an inner-​city face that young children choose to
represent clinic. The measure was shortened and con- their experience. A
fourth blank feeling face verted into a visual analogue scale that
captures provides an option to draw their feeling if the the major
elements of a good therapeutic al- other three faces do not adequately
capture their liance as originally defined by Bordin (1979; experience.
Since these measures do not have Miller, Duncan, & Hubble, 2004). any
numeric assignment, they do not provide a The ORS and SRS provide a
broad snap- numerical measure of change. However, they shot of client
functioning and view of the alli- engage young children in providing
feedback. ance. The ORS measures change in three areas Adding to the
utility of the FIT measures, of client functioning: individual (or
sympto- computerized systems are available for adminmatic) functioning,
interpersonal relationships, istration and for tracking client scores.
These and social role performance (including work systems save time by
allowing clients to comand quality of life). The SRS measures four plete
the measures electronically. If clients interrelated domains of the
therapeutic alli- prefer paper or oral versions, therapists can ance:
the quality of the relational bond, the input scores following
administration of the

110

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

measures. The computer systems automatically score the measures and plot
the scores on a graph that provides a comparison of the client's score
to a normative sample of 427,744 administrations of the ORS, in 95,478
unique episodes of care, provided by 2,354 different clinicians (Miller,
2011). This provides immediate feedback on the client's progress
compared to change trajectories formulated from the normative sample,
indicating whether the client's progress is similar to clients whose
therapy outcome was successful, uncertain, or unsuccessful. Access to
the trajectories has the added benefit of making it possible to assess
under-​and overreporting of change, thereby facilitating a discussion
with clients in real time. Finally, computerized systems calculate
aggregate outcome data for both individual therapists and agencies,
allowing a comparison of effectiveness to agency and national norms.
Unlike many therapy models, FIT discourages theoretical interpretations.
Instead, it puts the focus on client progress (based on outcome and
alliance scores). Treatment efforts prioritize goals according to client
preferences, and treatment decisions derive from feedback generated from
monitoring the client's progress and his or her view of the alliance via
ongoing administration of measures and client discussions regarding
scores. Clinical cutoffs for the ORS and SRS provide essential
assessment information to therapists. The clinical cutoff of outcome
measures defines the boundary between a normal and clinical range of
distress and provides a reference point for evaluating the severity of
distress in a particular client or client sample. The clinical cutoff of
the ORS is 25 for clients18 years and older. Scores below 25 indicate
lower satisfaction in areas such as personal relationships and
acquaintanceships, while those over 25 imply a level of distress that is
not significant enough to seek out psychotherapy. Adolescents and
children tend to score the ORS higher, so the cutoff for these clients
is higher (adolescents 13--​18 years old = 28; children 6--​12 years old
=32). A quarter to a third of clients who present for treatment have
normal scores typical of those not seeking psychotherapy---​ falling
above the clinical cutoff for the ORS. This is

usually because they are mandated for treatment or because they are
seeking assistance for a focal problem with limited impact on their
well-​ being. Initial scores that indicate a low level of distress (i.e.,
above the clinical cutoff) may give cause for concern because normative
studies show that when clients' initial scores are high, with therapy
they tend to decrease over time. However, when clients present with
initial scores on the ORS in the "normal" range, therapists should
explore their reason for seeking therapy. For example: "From your score
on the ORS it looks like things are going pretty well. I am curious
about why you decided to come to see me now?" Typically, clients will
score high on alliance measures, and the SRS is no exception. It asks
clients to rate the session in terms of how understood and respected the
client felt, how well the therapist's approach addressed their needs,
and to what extent the client and therapist agreed on the goals of
treatment. Only about 24% of clients score lower than 36/​40 on any
version of the SRS. Thus, the clinical cutoff for all versions of the
SRS is 36; scores below this cutoff clearly warrant discussions about
how to ensure the best possible alliance. FIT therapists watch for any
change in alliance scores. A drop of even 1 point during the course of
therapy can indicate a problem with the alliance that could lead to the
client dropping out or continued services being ineffective (Miller &
Duncan, 2004). APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE As a transtheoretical
approach, FIT can apply to almost all treatment settings (outpatient,
inpatient, crisis), therapy formats (individual, couple, family or
group), and patient ages (adults, adolescents, children, young children)
regardless of presenting concerns or referral source (voluntary,
mandated). In some situations, FIT may seem inappropriate or of
uncertain relevance. For example, clients with cognitive impairments may
have difficulty assessing changes in their well-​being over time. In
these cases, although trends in scores on the measures may be more open
to interpretation,

Feedback Informed Treatment

111

the usefulness of the measures as tools for clin- that encourages
clients to provide honest ical dialog remains. Some argue that FIT may
and useful feedback. In FIT this is known as also not be appropriate for
planned single-​ creating a "culture of feedback." Specifically, contact
situations since clients would not be re- clients are told that
providing feedback is critturning for a second appointment and a second
ical to success, enabling the clinician to tailor session score is
needed to measure change. services to meet their needs. Typical
scripting However, obtaining an initial ORS score can and suggestions
for processing feedback are nonetheless provide a snapshot when
assessing illustrated in the case example at the end of clients, and it
is generally useful to obtain feed- this chapter as well as the FIT
Treatment and back regarding a client's experience. Training manuals
(Bertolino & Miller, 2013). Typically, the frequency of sessions and
Surveys regularly indicate that more than length of treatment depend on
client progress. 90% of adult psychotherapy patients report When
positive change occurs rapidly, more fre- having lied to their
therapists (Blanchard & quent and intense treatment maximizes gains.
Farber, 2015). According to this research, one of When positive change
slows or diminishes, ses- the most common lies is that the client likes
or sions are less frequent and intensity of treatment benefits from his
or her therapist's interventions decreases with a focus on consolidating
change more than he or she actually does. Naturally, and transitioning
out of therapy. Psychotherapy fears and the desire to be viewed
positively can goes on as long as meaningful change is evi- make people
reluctant to provide negative feeddent and the client wants to continue.
back. Evidence indicates that creating an environment where clients feel
able to share such feelings is a skill that can be learned. Studies
PROCESSES OF CHANGE using the ORS and SRS indicate, for example, that
the most effective practitioners receive Therapists' attitudes toward
soliciting and more negative feedback (e.g., low SRS scores) using
patient feedback vary and may influence than their more average
counterparts (Miller, change. Therapists who value feedback achieve
Duncan, & Hubble, 2007; Owen, Miller, better outcomes (Miller, 2014).
From a FIT Seidel, & Chow, 2016). perspective, change is measured by
outcome Clinical experience reveals that many data and client feedback.
therapists experience discomfort in obtaining Clinicians can use any
theoretical approach patient feedback. Reasons range from fears to
achieve patient change, but if the data indi- about receiving negative
feedback to concerns cate that the approach is not working, the onus
that low outcome or alliance scores could is on the therapists not the
client, to adjust the threaten their job security and fears that
approach. Lack of change within the first few administering measures
could dampen the sessions (typically by the third session) merits
therapeutic alliance. Managing such worries, evaluating the frequency
and intensity of treat- consulting the research to differentiate worry
ment. Therapists should explore the alliance from reality, and being
transparent with clients more carefully and adjust their approach as can
prove essential. needed. If, despite adjustments, lack of significant
change continues, it may be time to consider referral to a different
therapist or changing METHODS AND TECHNIQUES the treatment approach.
Clients are diverse; no single treatment works for all clients. From a
FIT perspective, outTHERAPY RELATIONSHIP come takes precedence over
technique. The choice of therapy approach depends on the FIT involves
not only the administration of out- probable effect the approach will
have on the come and alliance measures, but also the cre- client's
outcomes. When feedback scores ination of a transparent and open
environment dicate a lack of progress and/​or problems with

112

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

the alliance, therapists can adjust their treatment plan (e.g., type,
frequency or intensity of treatment). One of the biggest technical
errors in implementing FIT happens when therapists use feedback measures
in a perfunctory fashion (e.g., administering the measures but failing
to discuss scores with clients or not using the feedback to guide
therapy). Charts of client progress should be shared with the client and
act as a springboard for discussion around the alliance and progress in
therapy. Based on clients' input, therapists can align better with
clients' preferences and adjust their approach accordingly. At their
initial contact, therapists can introduce clients to FIT by presenting
the measures with a rationale for clients to complete them, emphasizing
the importance of detailed and honest feedback in the outcome of their
therapy. Once clients understand its purpose, therapists should
administer the ORS as early as possible and at each session thereafter
unless there is a specific reason not to, such as frequency of sessions.
In order to avoid measurement fatigue, clients should not be expected to
complete the measure any more frequently than once per week.
Administering the ORS as early as possible---​at first contact---​is
useful because it provides a baseline of client functioning. We
recommend that the SRS be administered near the end of each session,
leaving enough time to discuss the client's scores with them in case
concerns are present that require attention. Since the alliance is
associated with and predicts treatment outcome, therapists should
promptly address any indication of an alliance problem or rupture.
Taking swift action may prevent the premature termination or
deterioration of treatment. Some change patterns warrant special
consideration and action. When a client's initial score indicates
functioning in the normal rage of distress, therapists should proceed
with caution. In the case of a voluntary client seeking help with a
specific concern, depth-​oriented techniques may not be useful, and
problem-​ solving techniques focused on the presenting concern may be
more appropriate. When

dealing with involuntary clients, consider asking them to complete the
ORS based on how the person who referred them would score the measure.
This provides an opportunity to compare the clients' self-​perception to
that of the referrer and also opens up discussion on what kind of change
the referrer would need to see in order to resolve the referrer's
concerns. Although having clients remain in psychotherapy longer may
consolidate behavior change (and prevent relapses), treatment starts to
have a diminishing return when essential goals are met and clients
continue treatment in absence of further change (scores plateau). When
clients have made positive changes and their scores plateau, therapists
can talk with them about spreading out sessions and begin planning for
termination. When treatment frequency and intensity are not decreased
during maintenance sessions, client scores can begin to fluctuate
dramatically. This pattern in scores can indicate everyday ups and downs
rather than meaningful changes over time. Sometimes, ORS scores will
drop dramatically after positive change has occurred---​ a phenomenon
known as "ditching." Often this is due to an event external to therapy
(an "extratherapeutic" variable). When this happens, we advise
clinicians to review each domain of the ORS carefully to determine if
there are any external variables affecting the scores and to monitor
change to ensure quick recovery of gains. DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS Race,
ethnicity, nationality, gender, age, sexual orientation, gender
identity, religion, physical ability, socioeconomic status, and body
size are all examples of human diversity that have led to people and
groups being marginalized. Failing to consider the impact of such
marginalization can result in power imbalances that contribute to
clients' distrust and feeling unsafe to disclose feedback regarding
their psychotherapy. The essence of FIT is providing feedback to
clinicians so they can tailor services to the individual client. The
process includes specific

Feedback Informed Treatment

guidelines for creating a "culture of feedback" that maximizes
opportunities for attending to diverse client backgrounds, experiences,
and ways for making sense of the world (Bertolino & Miller, 2013). The
SRS in particular is designed to alert therapists to differences in
understanding, goal consensus, and preferences related to identity so
they may be discussed and addressed directly. Although FIT has proved
versatile, as evidenced by its use in many countries and cultures,
providing direct feedback to health professionals may not be the norm
and, in some cases, may conflict with deeply held values. Even the
outcome being measured may present challenges. For example, the idea of
"personal well-​ being," included on many outcomes measures, may not be
relevant in cultures where well-​being is experienced in the context of
relationships (Bertolino & Miller, 2013; Koo, Dion, & Rice, 2016).
Making room for the client's perspective in this case would mean
choosing a method and measure for seeking feedback in which well-​being
refers to the feeling of the group close to the client. In another
example, older adults in the United States have frequently been
conditioned not to critique or evaluate a professional's activities.
Still other patients will resist providing alliance and outcome measures
at every session. Cultural adaptations in the use of feedback should
follow the same fundamental FIT principles of therapist flexibility and
client preferences. To help in this regard, Miller and colleagues have
produced a comprehensive and detailed series of FIT manuals. Manual 5 is
specifically designed to guide therapists in applying FIT across diverse
settings, cultures, and clients (Bertolino & Miller, 2013). With ORS and
SRS measures available in multiple languages, there are several FIT
implementation projects under way where FIT is being applied in diverse
settings and populations. Unlike other measures, to date, comparisons of
clients from different countries and cultures have not shown differences
in either the psychometric properties of the measures or the predictive
trajectories (Koo et al.,

113

2016; Miller, Bargmann, & Wampold, in preparation; Schuckard et al.,
2017).

CASE EXAMPLE Thirty-​year-​old Natalie and her partner, Andrea, had been
seeing a couple's therapist. Andrea was addicted to alcohol and street
drugs, and she completed a residential treatment program. She was now
engaged in outpatient treatment to continue working on her recovery.
Andrea and her therapist invited Natalie to attend couple sessions,
during which Andrea had expressed that Natalie's ongoing marijuana use
was putting her at risk for relapse. Indeed, the couple had experienced
an escalation of conflict with Natalie defending her right to
recreational marijuana use, saying she was not responsible for Andrea's
problem and therefore should not have to change her behavior because
Andrea decided to pursue abstinence from all substances. Ultimately, the
relationship deteriorated, and Andrea moved out. Andrea's therapist
recommended that Natalie seek help from another therapist to deal with
the aftermath of the breakup. Natalie presented for individual therapy
as angry and depressed. She felt heartbroken and betrayed by a bitter
ending to a loving relationship. According to Natalie, as a result of
her addiction, Andrea had accumulated massive debt. She was unemployed
and now on a disability pension, and she was unable to pay anything
toward the debt. Natalie found herself saddled with the debt, a huge
financial burden. She was working full-​ time yet struggling to make ends
meet. Preoccupied with worry about debt, not sleeping, and becoming
socially isolated, Natalie was angry, perceiving herself as having been
dumped and left to clean up Andrea's financial mess. The following is a
reconstruction of Natalie's psychotherapy based on the recollection of
her therapist (first author). At the initial session, Natalie's
therapist introduces her to FIT. Therapist: I want to be certain that
the work we do together has the best chance for success. To help me with
this, I'd like to ask if you would complete two very brief measures each
time we meet.

114

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Usually, if change is going to happen, it should happen sooner rather
than later. These measures will help us see if the work we are doing
together is working for you. If things aren't getting better, then we'll
talk about what we can do to get things moving in the right direction.
The first measure is one that I'd like you to fill in at the beginning
of each session and will tell us if change is happening. The second one
is the one I'd like you to complete at the end of each session. It will
ask you questions about how you think the session went and whether I am
in sync with what you are wanting. It's kind of like when your doctor
gives you medicine to reduce high blood pressure and then monitors it
regularly to make sure the medicine is working. Would you be willing to
do this with me? Natalie: Sure. Sounds like a good idea. Therapist:
Great. Now, we have a couple of options. If you like, you could complete
the measures on my tablet here, or, if you prefer, I have paper versions
that you could use. Do you have a preference? Natalie: Well, may as well
go green. I'll use the tablet. Therapist: Okay. So here is the first
measure. I am going to ask you to complete this one at the beginning of
each session. It's the one that helps us to see if change is happening.
When you complete this, it's not based on how you are doing at this
moment, it's based on how things have been going over the past week or
since the last session we've had together. Things can fluctuate day to
day, but what we need to know is how things are going over time. So, you
see it asks: "Looking back over the last week, including today, help us
understand how you have been feeling by rating how well you have been
doing in the following areas of your life, where marks to the left
represent low levels and marks to the right indicate high levels." Now,
to mark each of the scales, all you do is just move the cursor where you
want to and then click on the line. Make sense? Natalie: Yeah, I think
so. (Takes the tablet and completes the measure then hands it back to
therapist.) Therapist: Great, thanks. Okay, let's take a look (holding
the tablet so that they both see it). You

see, each of these scales has a value of 10. So, if you marked it way
over to the left here, the score would be zero and if you score it way
over to the right, the score would be 10. What the computer does is it
takes each of the scores and adds them up to get a score out of 40. Then
it plots your score on this graph (shows the client the graph). Then the
computer compares your scores to a huge sample of people who started
therapy with a similar score to you. First, we look to see if your score
falls above or below this line (points to the line on the graph that
represents the clinical cut off, in this case for the ORS the score is
25). When someone's score falls above the line usually it means things
are going pretty well for them. If their score is below the line, it
means there may be some things that aren't going so well, in which case
therapy might help. It looks like you had a score of 19 indicating that
there may be some things that you aren't feeling too good about. Is that
right? Figure 5.1 below represents Natalie's initial score on the ORS
once it was entered into MyOutcomes, a computerized system used in the
administration of the ORS and SRS. The chart displays the ORS score
relative to the clinical cutoff for the ORS (represented by the solid
black line). The shaded areas on the chart provide a guide to indicate
where subsequent scores would fall if the client's progress were similar
to clients whose treatment was successful (light gray zone), uncertain
(white zone), or unsuccessful (dark gray zone). Natalie: Yes, that's
right. Therapist: As you can see, there are shaded areas on the chart, a
light gray one, a white area, and a dark gray area. As I mentioned, I'm
going to ask you to complete this measure at each session to see if and
how things are changing. So, as we progress, we'll track your scores. If
your score lands in the light gray area it means you are responding to
therapy similar to people who ended therapy successfully. If your scores
are in the white area, it means you are responding like people whose
outcome of therapy was uncertain. And if your scores are in the dark
gray area, well, it means that your scores are similar to those where
the outcome wasn't successful. Does that make sense? Natalie: Yes, I
think so.

115

Feedback Informed Treatment Episode: 1 Last Session #: 1 Client Status
Report (CSR) 2016-6-6 40

20

0

1

2

3 ORS Cutoff Off Track

4 ORS On Track

5 SRS Cutoff Off Track Line

6 SRS

7

8

At Risk

On Track Line

FIGURE 5.1 Expected treatment response based on initial Outcome Rating
Scale (ORS) score. Therapist: So if we think of this as a kind of
traffic light, if you are in the light gray zone, then everything is on
track to keep going as we are. On the other hand, if the scores are in
the white zone, we should proceed with caution and pay careful attention
and consider if we should change things up. If the scores are in the
dark gray area, then we should take pause and talk about what changes I
should make to help you get back on track. When therapy is successful,
usually change takes place sooner rather than later, so if we are not
seeing progress soon then we'll want to talk when we notice that.
Natalie: Okay, that makes sense. Had the client opted to complete the
paper version, the therapist would use a metric ruler to score the
measure, putting the 0 on the far left pole and then taking the
measurement to the nearest centimeter where the client marked on each of
the scales. The score is either plotted on a paper graph or is entered
manually into one of the computer tracking systems designed for managing
ORS and SRS data. The limitation with paper graphs is that it does not
provide comparison of client scores to the normative sample. In
addition,

it does not allow for easy calculation of aggregate therapist outcome
data. Therapist: Now, I noticed that you marked a couple of the scales
on the measure lower than the others. I see you have marked the
"Interpersonally" and the "Individually" scales lower than the other two
scales. Would you like to start by telling me about that? Why are these
two lower? What's been going on? Natalie and her psychotherapist
proceeded to discuss the meaning of the scores, and the treatment
unfolded based on their conversation. The therapist eventually chose a
treatment plan indicated by the clients' preferences, problems, and
personality. At the end of the session, the therapist introduced the SRS
and left enough time to discuss Natalie's answers. Therapist: If you'll
recall, when we started today I mentioned that I would be asking you to
complete another brief measure at the end of the session. Here it is
(showed Natalie the measure on the tablet). As you can see, it is
similar to the last measure, only this time, it's asking you for
feedback

116

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

about how you thought the session went. If you felt heard and respected
by me, if we worked on or talked about what you wanted to today, if my
approach was a good fit for you or not, and finally how the session was
for you overall. You fill it in the same as before, by clicking on the
line. Before you do this, though, it is important for you to know that I
need you to be honest with me when you do this. If there is something,
even the smallest thing, that I missed, it is important that your score
reflects that. I am not perfect, no one is, so don't be afraid to mark
the scales honestly. I won't be offended, and it will help us to stay on
track. How I learn what works best for you is when you let me know what
felt right and what didn't. Okay? Natalie: Okay, sure (therapist handed
her the tablet and she filled it in). Therapist: Thanks Natalie. Now
let's take a look at your scores. Whether the alliance scores are high
or low, it is important to seek additional information. Asking task
questions can generate actionable feedback. Therapist: Okay, I see all
of the scores were pretty high. It looks like the session was good for
you. Natalie: Yes, thanks, it was good. Therapist: That's good to hear.
Now, if there was one thing that might have made the session even
better, what would that be? Natalie: (Thought for a minute). Well, maybe
if we could spend a bit more time talking about my debt. I really need
some concrete ideas about how I can get a handle on them. Therapist:
Okay, great. How about next time we make sure to check in about that. I
have some ideas and resources that may be of interest to you. Natalie:
Sounds good. Thank you. When I can see you next? The therapy continued,
with the therapist asking Natalie at each session to complete the
measures. However, ORS scores indicated little progress, even though
alliance scores remained high (refer to Figure 5.2). The therapist
talked to Natalie about this pattern. Therapist: Natalie, I notice that
since we started to work together, your scores have not changed much. As
you can see, they are about the same

as when you began to see me. If you recall, when we first met I
explained that usually, if therapy is working, we'll notice change
sooner, rather than later. Based on your scores it looks like not much
is changing. Natalie: I hate this measure. Therapist: Wow, I feel
surprised. You never mentioned this to me before. Natalie: Well, it's
not really the measures. It's just that when I fill them in and see my
scores, I realize I need to change some things in my life if I am going
to feel better. I've been thinking about it, and since we did that work
on budgeting I am realizing that a lot of my money is going to buying
pot. That's not helping with the debt problem, and I think it's probably
not helping with my sleep problems either. But pot is like one of the
only things that gives me a bit of relief and helps me relax and focus
on something other than Andrea and the mess I've been left with.
Therapist: So where do we go from here then? Natalie: Well, I think it
would help if I cut down a bit on the pot. Natalie and her therapist
started in a new direction, monitoring her progress as they went. They
agreed to shift the focus of psychotherapy to strategies aimed at
reducing and eventually eliminating her use of marijuana. Natalie
attended weekly one-​to-​one sessions as well as Narcotics Anonymous
meetings. When she first stopped using marijuana, her scores on the ORS
increased. However, after a couple of weeks, her score decreased,
indicating that she was having more trouble coping. Despite this, SRS
scores remained high. Figure 5.2 shows the drop in Natalie's ORS scores
into the dark gray zone indicating that she was at risk for an
unsuccessful treatment outcome. Once again, her therapist discussed the
declining ORS scores with Natalie. Natalie said she was having trouble
coping without marijuana and needed help with that. Her therapist
referred her to a relapse prevention program consisting of weekly group
sessions focused on helping clients develop coping strategies, such as
stress and anger management. Biweekly one-​ to-​ one sessions continued
while she attended the group program. During this time, her ORS

117

Feedback Informed Treatment Episode: 1 Last Session #: 13

Client Status Report (CSR)

2016-6-6 2016-6-20 2016-7-5 2016-7-25 2016-8-25 2016-10-11 2016-12-28
2016-6-13 2016-6-27 2016-7-11 2016-8-9 2016-9-8 2016-11-15 40

20

0

1

2

3

4 ORS Cutoff Off Track

5

6 ORS On Track

7

8

SRS Cutoff Off Track Line

9

10

SRS

11

12

13

At Risk

On Track Line

FIGURE 5.2 Client progress based on Outcome Rating Scale (ORS) scores
over the course of treatment. scores increased, indicating decreasing
distress. SRS scores remained high, suggesting no issues with the
alliance. After her ORS scores moved into the light gray zone and
plateaued (indicating she was on track for successful treatment
outcome), her therapist adjusted the frequency of sessions to once a
month, and the focus shifted to maintaining gains and eventual
termination. Natalie's treatment took place over the course of 6 months
(13 sessions). At last contact, Natalie reported improved mood, sleep,
and ability to cope without marijuana. Although still in debt, she was
making headway paying it down. She had also decided to proceed with a
divorce from Andrea and had started dating. Natalie said she felt ready
to end psychotherapy and expressed her appreciation and gratitude to her
therapist. In this case, continuous monitoring of Natalie's feedback
about her progress and adjusting the approach when Natalie was not
progressing resulted in the eventual successful outcome to her
psychotherapy. Figure 5.2 shows the pattern of Natalie's progress from
start of psychotherapy to termination.

OUTCOME RESEARCH In 2012, FIT was formally recognized as an evidence-​
based practice and listed on the Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration's National Registry of Evidence-​ Based Programs
and Practices (https:/​www. samhsa.gov/​nrepp). Since that time, the
number of RCTs on FIT, whether using the ORS/​SRS or another combination
of measures, has been accelerating with clinically, culturally, and
economically diverse clients. The effectiveness of FIT has been
impressive: routine outcome monitoring and feedback reliably increases
the rate of clinically significant change, consistently decreases
dropout and deterioration rates, and significantly reduces the cost of
mental healthcare (Lambert et al., 2018). In non--​feedback groups, the
costs increased (Schuckard et al., 2017). Questions remain, however. Is
it simply the use of measures to assess outcome and alliance that helps
improve treatment outcomes, or is it the process of engaging people in
their care that produces the most improvement?

118

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Research suggests that focusing too closely on the measures themselves
proves risky and distracts focus away from outcome (Miller, Duncan, &
Hubble, 2004). A dismantling by study found that using both alliance and
outcome measures did not translate into any significant increase in
feedback effects when compared to using only an alliance or an outcome
measure to solicit feedback (Mikeal et al., 2016). This study suggests
that the process of asking clients about their experience of therapy may
prove more important than which measures are used to collect feedback.
This finding speaks to the importance of creating a culture that engages
the client in collaboration, dialogue, and the process of change itself.
Therapy without both outcome and alliance feedback presents limitations.
For example, opting to administer only alliance measures hinders the
ability to track client progress along with valuable aggregate data,
including session-​ to-​ session change. Using outcome measurement alone
may limit insight into fluctuations in the strength of the alliance,
which hold predictive value in terms of engagement and retention. FUTURE
DIRECTIONS FIT has potential in three principal directions: increased
dissemination and implementation, more investigation into the boundary
conditions of when FIT does and does not work well, and employment of
therapist deliberate practice in conjunction with client feedback. Given
the clinical and research evidence of its benefits and the fact that
psychotherapists can adopt FIT with virtually any theoretical
orientation, it is no wonder that many psychotherapists are implementing
formal feedback systems to monitor their clients' progress and view of
the alliance. However, FIT is a relatively new approach and, at this
point, not all mental health professionals are using ROM in their
practices. Some are not familiar with FIT, others are hesitant to
implement FIT into their practice. For example, Babins-​ Wagner (2017)
found that after research was presented on the value

of outcome and alliance measurement, only 60% of therapists in an agency
opted to administer the measures. When asked, therapists offer many
reasons for opting not to use the measures (Babins-​ Wagner, 2017).
Objections such as "it will take too much time," "it will conflict with
my style," or "my clients won't like it" prevent therapists from
implementing FIT. Even when therapists administer such measures, Lutz
found in Germany that about 60% of the time when the feedback suggests a
client is deteriorating, therapists do not discuss this with clients.
Furthermore, therapists attempt to assist clients with other treatment
resources about 27% of the time and only adjust therapeutic
interventions 30% of the time, varying the intensity or dose of services
9% of the time and consulting with others (e.g., supervision or
education) 7% of the time (Lutz, 2014; Miller, 2014). Even though some
mental health professionals are reluctant to implement formal
measurement processes, 92% of people in healthcare say they like the use
of outcome measures (Lutz, 2014). It seems that therapists' attitudes
are more likely than clients' to create barriers to implementation. Such
findings suggest a need to overcome therapist reluctance to implement
FIT as intended. The goal of dissemination and implementation is to
share the value and methods of FIT and then ensure that it is conducted
appropriately. Despite early encouraging evidence that ROM and client
feedback improve outcomes, recent studies show more modest results
(Lambert et al., 2019). Chow (2017) notes that "ROM and feedback studies
are not immune to the decline effect . . . earlier studies have
demonstrated therapeutic benefits of using feedback measures, but more
recent studies have shown contrary results" (Chow, 2017, p. 325).
Several recent studies show predictable evidence of this decline effect.
This ubiquitous effect may be attributable to a confluence of the
enthusiasm and allegiance of its developers and early proponents, the
regression toward the mean in scientific studies, probable publication
bias, and the paucity of treatment fidelity in later studies. In other
words, future researchers will examine the boundary conditions of the

Feedback Informed Treatment

efficacy of FIT more closely, including when, how, and with whom it
works. Convinced that feedback alone is not sufficient to generate
substantial, sustainable gains in treatment outcomes, Miller and
colleagues (2013) have begun to look more closely at a growing body of
evidence suggesting that therapist factors influence outcomes.
"Available evidence documents that the therapist is one of the most
robust predictors of outcome among factors studied. Indeed, the variance
of outcomes attributable to therapists (5%--​ 9%) is larger than the
variability among treatments (0%--​1%), the alliance (5%), and the
superiority of an empirically supported treatment to a placebo treatment
(0%--​4%)" (Miller et al., 2013, p. 90). They looked to studies of
research on experts and expertise in a number of fields such as sports,
music, and medicine. Here, they found a large body of research outside
of psychotherapy that provided a clearer direction that could drive
better outcomes. They concluded that the common avenue to superior
performance consists of three steps: (1) determining a baseline level of
effectiveness; (2) obtaining systematic, ongoing feedback; and (3)
engaging in deliberate practice. Deliberate practice involves
individualized training activities especially designed to improve
specific aspects of an individual's performance through repetition and
successive refinement. To receive maximum benefit from feedback,
individuals have to monitor their training with active concentration on
a regular basis (Ericsson & Lehmann, 1996). FIT strives to enhance
outcomes at two levels. First, it informs the work client by client.
Second, aggregate outcome data informs therapists about their level of
effectiveness (relative effect size) compared to national norms. By
establishing a baseline for their performance and by analyzing outcome
and alliance data, therapists can identify areas for professional
development. Engaging in deliberate practice includes creating and
executing a plan for improving one's performance. Early research
indicates that therapists with superior outcomes are characterized by
professional self-​ doubt,

119

focusing more on their mistakes and what they can do to change than on
their successes (Chow, 2017). In fact, highly effective therapists
spend, on average, two to three times more hours per week engaged in
deliberate practice activities than do other therapists (Chow, 2017).
The ideal path to developing expertise in psychotherapy is still hazy.
In going forward, deliberate practice merits greater attention.

References APA Presidential Task Force on Evidence-​ Based Practice.
(2006). Evidence-​ based practice in psychology. American Psychologist,
61, 271--​285. Babins-​Wagner, R. (2017). FIT in agency and clinical
settings. In D. S. Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, & S. D. Miller (Eds.),
Feedback informed treatment in clinical practice: Reaching for
excellence (pp. 167--​ 185). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Berg, I. K., & Miller, S. D. (1992). Working with the
problem drinker: A solution-​oriented approach. New York: Norton.
Bertolino, B., & Miller, S. D. (Eds.). (2013). The ICCE feedback
informed treatment manuals (6 Volumes). Chicago: ICCE. Blanchard, M., &
Farber, B. (2015). Lying in psychotherapy: Why and what clients don't
tell their therapist about therapy and their relationship. Counselling
Psychology Quarterly, 29, 1--​23. 10.1080/​09515070.2015.1085365 Bordin,
E. S. (1979). The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the
working alliance. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, 16,
252--​260. Brown, J., Dreis, S., & Nace, D. K. (1999). What really makes
a difference in psychotherapy outcome? Why does managed care want to
know? In M. A. Hubble, B. L. Duncan, & S. D. Miller (Eds.), The heart
and soul of change: What works in therapy (pp. 389--​406). Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association Press. Chow, D. (2017). The
practice and the practical: Pushing your clinical performance to the
next level. In D. Prescott, C. Maeschalck, & S. D. Miller (Eds.),
Feedback informed treatment in clinical practice: Reaching for
excellence (pp. 323--​ 355). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

120

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Del Re A. C., Flückiger C., Horvath A. O., Symonds D., & Wampold B. E.
(2012). Therapist effects in the therapeutic alliance-​outcome
relationship: a restricted-​maximum likelihood meta-​analysis. Clinical
Psychology, 32(7), 642--​649. Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. (1996).
Expert and exceptional performance: Evidence of maximal adaptation to
task constraints. Annual Review of Psychology, 47(1), 273--​305. Hannan,
C., Lambert, M. J., Harmon, C., Nielsen, S. L., Smart, D. W., Shimokawa,
K., & Sutton, S. W. (2005). A lab test and algorithms for identifying
clients at risk for treatment failure. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
61, 155--​163. Hawkins, E. J., Lambert, M. J., Vermeersch, D. A., Slade,
K. L., & Tuttle, K. C. (2004). The therapeutic effects of providing
patient progress information to therapist and patients. Psychotherapy
Research, 14, 308--​327. Horvath, A. O., Del Re, A. C., Flückiger, C., &
Symonds, D. (2011). Alliance in individual psychotherapy. Psychotherapy,
48(1), 9--​16. Johnson, L. D. (1995). Psychotherapy in the age of
accountability. New York: Norton. Johnson, L. D., Miller, S. D., &
Duncan, B. L. (2000). The Session Rating Scale 3.0. Chicago: Authors.
Koo, M., Dion, D., & Rice, A. (2016). FIT and cultural competency.
Unpublished manuscript. Lambert, M. (2010). Prevention of treatment
failure: The use of measuring, monitoring, and feedback in clinical
practice. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Lambert,
M. (2013). Outcome in psychotherapy: The past and important advances.
Psychotherapy (Chicago, Ill.), 50, 42--​51. Lambert, M. J., Hansen, N.
B., Umpress, V., Lunnen, K., Okiishi, J., & Burlingame, G. M. (2003).
Administration and scoring manual for the OQ-​ 45.2. Stevenson, MD:
American Professional Credentialing Services. Lambert, M. J., & Ogles,
B. M. (2004). The efficacy and effectiveness of psychotherapy. In M. J.
Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and
behavior change (5th ed., pp. 139--​193). New York: Wiley. Lambert, M. J,
Whipple, J. L., & Kleinstäuber, M. (2019). Collecting and delivering
client feedback. In J. C. Norcross & M. J. Lambert (Eds.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Lutz, W. (2014, December). Why, when and how do patients change?
Identifying and predicting outcome in therapy. Retrieved

from http://​kpplutz.uni-​trier.de; https://​www.
slideshare.net/​scottdmiller/​lecture-​wolfgang-​ lutz-​calgary2014-​send
Mikeal, C., Gillaspy, J. A., Scoles, M. T., & Murphy, J. J. (2016). A
dismantling study of the partners for change outcome management system.
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 63, 704--​709. Miller, S. D. (2010).
Finding feasible measures for practice-​based evidence \[Blog post\].
Retrieved from http://​www.scottdmiller.com/​?qtaxonomy/​ term/​70 Miller,
S. D. (2011). Cutting edge feedback \[Blog post\]. Retrieved from
http://​www.scottdmiller. com/​page/​40/​ Miller, S. D. (2014). Dinner with
Paul McCartney \[Blog post\]. Retrieved from http://​www.
scottdmiller.com/​feedback-​informed-​treatment-​ fit/​1327/​ Miller, S. D.,
Bargmann, M. T., & Wampold, B. Feedback informed treatment: Developing
predictive trajectories of change from a naturalistic international data
set. Manuscript submitted for publication. Miller, S. D., & Berg, I. K.
(1995). The miracle method: A radically new approach to problem
drinking. New York: W. W. Norton. Miller, S. D., & Duncan, B. L. (2000).
The Outcome Rating Scale. Chicago: Authors. Miller, S. D., & Duncan, B.
L. (2004). The Outcome and Session Rating Scales: Administration and
scoring manual. Chicago: ISTC. Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., Brown, J.,
Sorrell, R., & Chalk, M. B. (2006). Using formal client feedback to
improve retention and outcomes. Journal of Brief Therapy, 5(1), 5--​22.
Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., & Hubble, M. A. (2004). Beyond
integration: The triumph of outcome over process. Psychotherapy in
Australia, 10, 2--​19. Miller, S. D., Duncan, B. L., & Hubble, M. A.
(2007). Supershrinks. Psychotherapy Networker, 31(6), 26--​35, 56.
Miller, S. D., Hubble, M. A., Chow, D. L., & Seidel, J. A. (2013). The
outcome of psychotherapy: Yesterday, today, and tomorrow. Psychotherapy,
50, 88--​97. Miller, S. D., Maeschalck, C., Axsen, R., & Seidel, J.
(2011). The international center for clinical excellence core
competencies. Retrieved from http://​ c enterforclinicalexcellence.com/​ w
p-​ content/​ plugins/​buddypress-​group-​documents/​
documents/​1281032711-​Core Competencies. pdf

Feedback Informed Treatment Miller, S. D., Mee-​Lee, D., Plum, B., &
Hubble, M. A. (2005). Making treatment count: Client-​ directed,
outcome-​informed clinical work with problem drinkers. Psychotherapy in
Australia, 11(4), 42--​56. Owen, J., Adelson, J., Budge, S., Wampold, B.
E., Kopta, M., Minami, T., & Miller, S. D. (2015). Trajectories of
change in short-​ term psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 71,
817--​827. Owen, J., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J., & Chow, D. (2016). The
working alliance in treatment of military adolescents. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84, 200--​210. Prescott, D. S.
(2017). Core competencies in feedback-​ informed treatment. In D. S.
Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, & S. D. Miller (Eds.), Feedback informed
treatment in clinical practice: Reaching for excellence (pp. 37--​52).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Schenkenberg, T.,
Bradford, D. C., & Ajax, E. T. (1980). Line bisection and unilateral
visual neglect in patients with neurologic impairment. Neurology, 30(5),
509. Schuckard, E., Miller, S. D., & Hubble, M. A. (2017). Feedback
informed treatment: Historical and empirical implications. In D. S.
Prescott, C. L. Maeschalck, & S. D. Miller (Eds.), Feedback-​ informed
treatment in clinical practice: Reaching for excellence (pp. 13--​ 35).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Slade, K., Lambert,
M. J., Harmon, S. C., Smart, D. W., & Bailey, R. (2008). Improving
psychotherapy outcome: The use of immediate electronic feedback and
revised clinical support

121

tools. Clinical Psychology & Psychotherapy, 15, 287--​303. Smith, M. L.,
Glass, G. V., & Miller, T. I. (1980). The benefits of psychotherapy.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-​Hall. Stulz, M., Lutz, W., Leach, C.,
Lucock, M., & Barkham, M. (2007). Shapes of early change in
psychotherapy under routine outpatient conditions. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 75, 864--​74. Swift, J. K., & Greenberg, R. P.
(2012). Premature discontinuation in adult psychotherapy: A meta-​
analysis. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 80(4),
547--​559. http://​doi.org/​ 10.1037/​a0028226 Van Manen, M. (2016, October
16). Human rights complaint: Atheist nurse fights AA edict. The
Province. Vancouver, British Columbia. pp. 1, 3. Wampold, B. E. (2001).
The great psychotherapy debate: Models, methods, and findings. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Wampold, B. E. (2007). Psychotherapy: The
humanistic (and effective) treatment. American Psychologist, 62,
857--​873. Warren, J. S., Nelson, P. L., Mondragon, S. A., Baldwin, S.
A., & Burlingame, G. A. (2010). Youth psychotherapy change trajectories
and outcomes in usual care: Community mental health versus managed care
settings. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78(2),
144--​155. Weisz, J. R., Sandler, I. N., Durlak, J. A., & Anton, B. S.
(2005). Promoting and protecting youth mental health through evidence-​
based prevention and treatment. American Psychologist, 60(6), 628--​648.

B. Technical Eclecticism

6 Multimodal Therapy CLIFFORD N. LAZARUS AND ARNOLD A. LAZARUS

subscribing to the theories that spawned them. He argued that to combine
different theories At the time when rival factions were dominating in
the hope of creating more robust methods the field of psychotherapy,
Arnold A. Lazarus would only furnish a mélange of incompat(AAL) was
prompted to write a brief note, "In ible notions, whereas technical
eclecticism Support of Technical Eclecticism" (Lazarus, (not theoretical
integration) would permit one 1967). Specific schools of thought were
actively to import and apply a broad range of potent competing for
dominance and prominence---​ strategies. Subsequently, in addition to
develeach claiming its own superiority over all others. oping the
multimodal approach to assessment It seemed obvious that no one school
could and therapy (which will be explicated in this have all the answers
and that many approaches chapter), he wrote at length about the pros of
had something worthwhile to offer. AAL was technical eclecticism and the
cons of theoretstrongly influenced by London's (1964) obser- ical
integration (A. Lazarus, 1986, 1987, 1989, vation that techniques, not
theories, are actually 1992, 1995, 1996; Lazarus & Beutler, 1993; used
on people and that the "study of the effects Lazarus, Beutler, &
Norcross, 1992; Lazarus & of psychotherapy, therefore, is always the
study Lazarus, 1987). of the effectiveness of techniques" (p. 33)\*. In
1983, the Society for the Exploration of AAL recommended that we cull
effective Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI) was founded, techniques from
many orientations without held annual international conferences, THE
INTEGRATIVE APPROACH

- Author Note: Arnold Lazarus (1932--​2013) authored earlier incarnations
  of this chapter in previous editions of this Handbook but died before
  the third edition was initiated.

125

126

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

and launched the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration. It was AAL's view
that the much-​ needed emphasis on eclecticism and integration had served
a useful purpose but that it is now passé. The narrow and self-​limiting
consequences of adhering to one particular school of thought are now
self-​evident to most. It seems that the current emphases on evidence-​
based methods and the use of manuals in psychotherapy (Wilson, 1998,
2006) have much to commend them. As will now be underscored, the
multimodal approach provides a framework that facilitates systematic
treatment selection in a broad-​based, comprehensive, and yet highly
focused manner. It respects science and data-​driven findings, and it
endeavors to use evidence-​ based methods when possible. Nevertheless, it
recognizes that many issues still fall into the gray area in which
clinical artistry and judgment are necessary, and it tries to fill the
void by offering methods that have strong clinical support. In essence,
owing to its emphasis on technical eclecticism instead of theoretical
integration, multimodal therapy (MMT) aims to be a synergistic synthesis
rather than a syncretistic stew. History of Multimodal Therapy AAL's
undergraduate and graduate training exposed him to several schools of
psychotherapeutic thought---​ Freudian, Rogerian, Sullivanian, Adlerian,
and behavioral---​but, for several reasons, he became a strong advocate
for behavior therapy (Wolpe & Lazarus, 1966). Most of his conclusions
about the conduct of therapy were derived from careful outcome and
follow-​up inquiries. Twice a year, he made a point of studying his
treatment outcomes. He'd ask, in essence, "Which clients derived
benefit? Why did they apparently profit from therapy? Which clients did
not derive benefit? Why did this occur, and what could be done to
rectify matters?" Follow-​up investigations proved to be especially
pertinent. They led to the development of AAL's broad-​spectrum outlook
because, to his chagrin, he found that about one-​third of his clients
who had attained their therapeutic goals

after receiving traditional behavior therapy backslid or relapsed.
Further examination led to the obvious conclusion that the more people
learn in therapy, the less likely they are to relapse. There is a
clinical point of diminishing returns: So what are people best advised
to learn to have minimal emotional problems? Clearly there are essential
behaviors to be acquired---​acts and actions that are necessary for
coping with life's demands. The control and expression of one's emotions
are also imperative for adaptive living---​to correct inappropriate
affective responses that undermine success in many spheres. Untoward
sensations (e.g., the ravages of tension), intrusive images (e.g.,
pictures of personal failure and ridicule from others), and faulty
cognitions (e.g., toxic ideas, as well as important missing information)
also play a significant role in diminishing the quality of life. Each of
the foregoing areas must be addressed to remedy significant excesses and
deficits. Moreover, the quality of one's interpersonal relationships is
a key ingredient of happiness and success, and, without the requisite
social skills, one is likely to be shortchanged in life. Finally,
consideration that we are biological entities, governed by the myriad
physiological processes of our brains and bodies, is also vital in a
complete and comprehensive paradigm. The aforementioned considerations
led to the development of what AAL initially termed multimodal behavior
therapy (Lazarus, 1973, 1976) and what was soon changed to multimodal
therapy or MMT (A. Lazarus, 1981, 1986, 1997, 2000a, 2000b). Emphasis
was placed on the fact that, at base, we are biological organisms
(neurophysiological/​biochemical entities) who behave (act and react),
emote (experience affective responses), sense (respond to tactile,
olfactory, gustatory, visual, and auditory stimuli), imagine (conjure up
sights, sounds, and other events in our mind's eye), think (entertain
beliefs, opinions, values, and attitudes), and interact with one another
(enjoy, tolerate, or suffer various interpersonal relationships). Most
psychological problems are multifaceted, multidetermined, and
multilayered; comprehensive therapy calls for a

Multimodal Therapy

careful assessment of seven, reciprocally transactional dimensions or
"modalities" in which individuals operate: Behavior, Affect, Sensation,
Imagery, Cognition, Interpersonal relationships, and Biological
processes. Given that the most common biological intervention is the use
of psychotropic drugs, the first letters from the seven modalities can
be combined to produce the convenient acronym "BASIC I.D." although the
"D" modality actually represents the complete range of physiological and
biological factors beyond the use of substances, prescribed or
otherwise. In addition to its use as a template for conducting therapy,
the BASIC I.D. stands alone as a model of human personality and
phenomenology (Lazarus & Lazarus, 2015; C. Lazarus, 2017). The BASIC
I.D. or multimodal framework rests on a broad social and cognitive
learning theory because its tenets are open to verification or disproof
(Bandura, 1977, 1986). Instead of postulating putative complexes and
unconscious forces, social learning theory rests on testable
developmental factors (e.g., modeling, observational learning,
acquisition of expectancies, operant and respondent conditioning,
self-​regulatory mechanisms). While drawing on effective methods from any
discipline, the multimodal therapist does not embrace divergent theories
but remains consistently within social-​ cognitive learning theory. The
virtues of technical eclecticism (Lazarus, 1967, 1992; Lazarus et al.,
1992) over the dangers of theoretical integration is a cardinal
presumption of MMT. The major criticism of theoretical integration is
that it inevitably tries to blend incompatible notions and breeds
confusion. The polar opposite of the multimodal approach is any unimodal
therapy. Case in point is the Rogerian or person-​centered orientation,
which is conversational and virtually unimodal. Although, in general,
the relationship between therapist and client is highly significant and
sometimes sufficient, in most instances, the doctor--​patient
relationship is but the soil that enables the techniques to take root. A
good relationship, adequate rapport, and a constructive working alliance
are "usually necessary

127

but often insufficient" (Fay & Lazarus, 1993; Lazarus & Lazarus, 1991a).
ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION The elements of a thorough assessment involve
the following range of questions: B: What is this individual doing that
is getting in the way of his or her happiness of personal fulfillment
(self-​defeating actions, maladaptive behaviors)? What does the client
need to increase and decrease? What should he or she stop doing and
start doing? A: What emotions (affective reactions) are predominant? Are
we dealing with anger, anxiety, depression, or combinations thereof, and
to what extent (e.g., irritation vs. rage; sadness vs. melancholy)? What
appears to generate these negative affects---​ certain cognitions,
images, interpersonal conflicts? How does the person respond (behave)
when feeling a certain way? It is important to look for interactive
processes: What impact does various behaviors have on the person's
affect and vice versa? How does this influence each of the other
modalities? S: Are there specific sensory complaints (e.g., tension,
chronic pain, tremors)? What feelings, thoughts, and behaviors are
connected to these negative sensations? What positive sensations (e.g.,
visual, auditory, tactile, olfactory, and gustatory delights) does the
person report? This includes the individual as a sensual and sexual
being. When called for, the enhancement or cultivation of erotic
pleasure is a viable therapeutic goal. The importance of the specific
senses is often glossed over or even bypassed by many treatment
approaches. I: What fantasies and images are predominant? What is the
person's "self-​ image?" Are there specific success or failure images?
Are there negative or intrusive images (e.g., flashbacks to unhappy or
traumatic experiences)? And how are these images connected to ongoing
cognitions, behaviors, affective reactions, and the like? C: Can we
determine the individual's main values, beliefs, and opinions---​his or
her

128

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

cognitions? What are this person's predominant shoulds, oughts, and
musts? Are there any definite dysfunctional beliefs or irrational ideas?
Can we detect any untoward automatic thoughts that undermine his or her
functioning? I.: Interpersonally, who are the significant others in this
individual's life? What does he or she want, desire, expect, and receive
from them, and what does he or she, in turn, give to and do for them?
What relationships give him or her particular pleasures and pains? D.:
Is this person biologically healthy and health conscious? Does he or she
have any medical complaints or concerns? What relevant details pertain
to diet, weight, sleep, exercise, alcohol, and drug use? The foregoing
are some of the main domains that multimodal clinicians traverse while
assessing the client's BASIC I.D. A more comprehensive problem
identification sequence is derived from asking most clients to complete
a Multimodal Life History Inventory (MLHI; Lazarus & Lazarus, 1991b).
This 15-​page questionnaire facilitates treatment when conscientiously
completed by clients as a homework assignment, usually after the initial
session. Seriously disturbed clients will obviously not be expected to
comply, but most outpatients who are reasonably literate will find the
exercise useful for speeding up routine history taking and to readily
provide the therapist with a BASIC I.D. analysis. Such a BASIC I.D.
analysis is referred to as a Modality Profile: a list, or matrix, of
identified problems across the BASIC I.D. and the best therapeutic
interventions to address them. While several problems may be discovered
within an individual's BASIC I.D. because of the "the ripple effect," it
is not usually necessary to address them all in therapy (i.e., because
significant improvement with one or a few central problems often results
in positive, compensatory changes in other problems, even if they were
not directly focused on in treatment). A primary postulate of MMT is
that the most robust and durable outcomes are positively correlated with
the number of BASIC I.D. modalities addressed in treatment. Moreover,
given their structured and comprehensive nature, modality profiles allow
novice

therapists to achieve a level of thoroughness and effectiveness usually
associated with more experienced practitioners. What's more, by virtue
of their highly individualized nature, Modality Profiles transcend
standard diagnostic nomenclature because many people with the same
diagnosis (from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders \[DSM\] or International Classification of Disease \[ICD\]
codes) often have very different symptom constellations and, thus,
unique Modality Profiles with corresponding individualized treatment
plans (C. Lazarus, 1991). Despite all people having all seven modalities
of the BASIC I.D., no two people are alike in how they experience their
psychological life. Indeed, just as all musical compositions can be
reduced to seven notes in the musical scale, no two musical works are
exactly the same in spite of being based on the same fundamental notes.
In this way, the BASIC I.D. can be thought of as a person's unique
"basic identity" in addition to the fundamental dimensions of his or her
psychological makeup. In addition to Modality Profiles, there are three
other important assessment procedures employed in MMT: second-​ order
BASIC I.D. assessments, a method called bridging, and another called
tracking. Second-​Order BASIC I.D. Assessments If and when treatment
impasses arise, a more detailed inquiry into associated behaviors,
affective responses, sensory reactions, images, cognitions,
interpersonal factors, and possible biological considerations may shed
light on the situation. For example, a client was making almost no
progress with assertiveness training. He was asked to picture himself as
an assertive person and was then asked to recount how his behavior would
differ in general, what affective reactions he might anticipate, and so
forth, across the BASIC I.D. This brought a central cognitive schema to
light that had eluded all other avenues of inquiry: "I am not entitled
to be happy." Therapy was then aimed directly at addressing this
maladaptive cognition before assertiveness training was resumed.

Multimodal Therapy

Bridging Let's say a psychotherapist is interested in a client's
emotional responses to an event. "How did you feel when you first
discovered that your wife was seeing another man?" Instead of discussing
his feelings, the client responds with defensive and irrelevant
intellectualizations. "My wife was always looking for affirmation. It
stemmed from the fact that her parents were less than forthcoming with
praise or affection." It is often counterproductive to confront the
client and point out that he is evading the question and seems reluctant
to face his feelings. In situations of this kind, bridging is usually
effective. First, the therapist deliberately tunes in to the client's
preferred modality---​in this case, the cognitive domain. Thus, the
therapist explores the cognitive content: "So you see it as a
consequence of your wife's own lack of self-​confidence and her excessive
need for love and approval. Please tell me more." In this way, after
perhaps a 5-​to 10-​minute discourse, the therapist endeavors to branch
off into other directions that seem more productive. "Tell me, while we
have been discussing these matters, have you noticed any sensations
anywhere in your body?" This sudden switch from Cognition to Sensation
may begin to elicit more pertinent information (given the assumption
that, in this instance, Sensory inputs are probably less threatening
than Affective material). The client may refer to some sensations of
tension or bodily discomfort, at which point the therapist may ask him
to focus on them, often with an hypnotic overlay. "Will you please close
your eyes, and now feel that neck tension. (Pause.) Now relax deeply for
a few moments, breathe easily and gently, in and out, in and out, just
letting yourself feel calm and peaceful." The feelings of tension, their
associated images and cognitions may then be examined. One may then
venture to bridge into Affect. "Beneath the sensations, can you find any
strong feelings or emotions? Perhaps they are lurking in the
background." At this juncture, it is not unusual for clients to give
voice to their feelings. "I am in touch with anger and with sadness. I
feel betrayed." By starting where the client is and then bridging into a
different

129

modality, most clients are willing to traverse the more emotionally
charged areas they had been avoiding. Tracking the Firing Order A fairly
reliable pattern may be discerned in the way that many people generate
negative affect. Some dwell first on unpleasant sensations
(palpitations, shortness of breath, tremors), followed by aversive
images (pictures of disastrous events), to which they attach negative
cognitions (ideas about catastrophic illness), leading to maladaptive
behavior (withdrawal and avoidance). This S-​ I-​ C-​ B firing order
(Sensation, Imagery, Cognition, Behavior) may require a different
treatment strategy from that employed with, say, a C-​I-​S-​B sequence, an
I-​C-​ B-​S, or yet a different firing order. Clinical findings suggest
that it is often best to apply treatment techniques in accordance with a
client's specific chain reaction. A rapid way of determining someone's
firing order is to have him or her in an altered state of
consciousness---​ deeply relaxed with eyes closed---​ contemplating
untoward events and then describing their reactions. This tracking
procedure can also have an immediate positive effect. Thus, a 67-​ year-​
old woman who had responded well to a course of cognitive restructuring
for depression nevertheless complained that she was prone to what she
termed "panic attacks." As she explained it, "I am inclined to feel
somewhat nervous and jittery at times, but for no reason at all, this
often develops into a massive sense of anxiety. I have no idea where
this comes from." She was asked to identify the thoughts that preceded
and accompanied her next attack and to jot them down. Subsequently, she
outlined the following sequence: "I was waiting at home for my friend
Betty to come over. I really like her and was looking forward to her
visit. Suddenly, I noticed that my nervous feeling was coming on. I did
what you said and asked myself what I was thinking, and how I was
bringing it on. But I drew a blank. I then became aware that my heart
was beating rather fast and took my pulse---​it was over 90 beats per
minute. Then

130

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

I started feeling overheated, as if I had a temperature. But when I took
it, my thermometer showed that my temperature was below normal---​ 98.3
degrees. Then I noticed that my right knee was throbbing and felt
painful, so I started massaging it. Because I was scrutinizing and
following my thoughts as you had recommended, I immediately realized
that I was picturing myself in the rehab center right after my knee
replacement surgery and dwelling on how I had developed an infection
that almost killed me. Ever since then, I know I have been panicky
whenever I have a fever or whenever my knee hurts. So I told myself not
to be stupid because my temperature was in fact below normal, I had no
fever, and I was actually creating fear out of nothing, and this calmed
me down." This woman's firing order appeared to follow a Sensory
(becomes aware of nervous reaction, develops tachycardia, feels
overheated), Behavioral (measures her temperature), Sensory (pain in her
knee), Behavioral (massages her knee), Imagery (recalling her
life-​threatening postoperative infection), and then Cognition (turns to
rational, self-​calming thoughts) order. Many clients have reported that
using this "tracking" procedure tends to furnish them with a useful
self-​control device. Another client who reported having panic attacks
"for no apparent reason" put together the following string of events.
She had initially become aware that her heart was beating faster than
usual. This brought to mind an episode where she had passed out after
imbibing too much alcohol at a party. This memory or image still
occasioned a strong sense of shame. She started thinking that she was
going to pass out again, and, as she dwelled on her sensations, this
cognition only intensified and culminated in her feelings of panic.
Thus, she exhibited an S-​I-​C-​S-​C-​A pattern (Sensation, Imagery,
Cognition, Sensation, Cognition, Affect). Thereafter, she was asked to
take careful note whether any subsequent anxiety or panic attacks
followed a similar "firing order." She subsequently confirmed that her
two "trigger points" were usually Sensation and Imagery. This alerted
the therapist to focus on sensory training

techniques (e.g., diaphragmatic breathing, deep muscle relaxation)
followed immediately by Imagery training (e.g., the use of coping
imagery and the selection of mental pictures that evoked profound
feelings of serenity). A Structural Profile Inventory (SPI) has been
developed and tested (C. Lazarus, 1986). This 35-​item survey provides a
quantitative rating of the extent to which clients favor specific BASIC
I.D. areas. The instrument measures action-​oriented proclivities
(Behavior); the degree of emotionality (Affect); the value attached to
various sensory experiences (Sensation); the amount of time devoted to
fantasy, daydreaming, and "thinking in pictures" (Imagery); analytical
and problem-​solving propensities (Cognition); the importance attached to
interacting with other people (Interpersonal); and the extent to which
health-​conscious habits are observed (Drugs/​ Biology). The reliability
and validity of this instrument has been borne out by research (Herman,
1992; Landes, 1991). Herman (1991, 1994, 1998) showed that when clients
and therapists have wide differences on the SPI, therapeutic outcomes
tend to be adversely affected. In addition, preliminary research
demonstrated that it is possible to predict which forms of treatment
will be most effective and preferred on the basis of clients' scores on
the SPI (Herman, 2004). Beyond the SPI, owing to its emphasis on
technical eclecticism, MMT is open to any other validated psychometric
instrument (e.g., MMPI-​II, WAIS-​IV) provided its use is rational and
therapeutically indicated (e.g., demonstrating that a person who
denigrates him-​or herself for "stupidity" has at least average,
objectively measured intelligence). Students and colleagues frequently
inquire whether any particular BASIC I.D. areas are more significant,
more heavily weighted, than others. For thoroughness, all seven require
careful attention, but perhaps the biological and interpersonal
modalities are especially significant. The biological modality wields a
profound influence on all the other modalities. Unpleasant sensory
reactions can signal a host of medical illnesses; excessive emotional

Multimodal Therapy

reactions (anxiety, depression, and rage) may all have biological
determinants; faulty thinking and images of gloom, doom, and terror may
derive entirely from chemical imbalances; and untoward personal and
interpersonal behaviors may stem from many somatic reactions ranging
from toxins (e.g., drugs or alcohol) to intracranial lesions. Hence,
when any doubts arise about the probable involvement of biological
factors, it is imperative to have them fully investigated. A person who
has no untoward medical/​physical problems and enjoys warm, meaningful,
and loving relationships is apt to find life personally and
interpersonally fulfilling. Hence, the biological modality serves as the
base, and the interpersonal modality is perhaps the apex. The seven
modalities are by no means static or linear but, as previously noted,
exist in a state of reciprocal transaction. A question often raised is
whether a "spiritual" dimension should be added. In the interests of
parsimony, AAL pointed out that when someone refers to having had a
"spiritual" or a "transcendental" experience, typically their reactions
point to, and can be captured by, the interplay among powerful
cognitions, images, sensations, and affective responses. Another
question that is often asked is why a particular problem is assigned to
a specific modality when it could be as accurately applied to another.
For example, social avoidance is a behavior as well as an interpersonal
difficulty. Similarly, excessive drinking is a behavior, but it is also
a biological consideration. In essence, where an identified problem is
placed in a Modality Profile is not crucial. What is vital, however, is
that the problem is identified and that it receives the best therapeutic
intervention. Most people to enter therapy with explicit problems in two
or more modalities---​"I have headaches that my doctor tells me are due
to tension. I also worry too much, and I feel frustrated a lot of the
time. And I'm very angry with my brother." Initially, it is usually
advisable to engage the patient by focusing on the issues, modalities,
or areas of concern that he or she presents. To deflect the emphasis too
soon onto other matters that may seem more important is only inclined to
make the patient feel discounted. Once rapport has been established,

131

however, it is usually easy to shift to more significant problems. Thus,
any good clinician will first address and investigate the presenting
issues. "Please tell me more about the aches and pains you are
experiencing." "Do you feel tense in any specific areas of your body?"
"You mentioned worries and feelings of frustration. Can you please
elaborate on them for me?" "What are some of the specific clash points
between you and your brother?" Any competent therapist would flesh out
the details. A multimodal therapist goes further. She or he will
carefully note the specific modalities across the BASIC I.D. that are
being discussed and which ones are omitted or glossed over. The latter
(i.e., the areas that are overlooked or neglected) often yield important
data when specific elaborations are requested. And when examining a
particular issue, the BASIC I.D. will be rapidly but carefully
traversed. APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE One cannot point to specific
diagnostic categories for which MMT is especially suited. MMT offers
practitioners a broad-​based template, several unique assessment
procedures, and a technically eclectic armamentarium that permits the
selection of effective interventions from any sources whatsoever.
Clinicians of any persuasion are likely to report that
noncharacterological disorders are typically more responsive than
personality disturbances. Like any other approach, MMT can point to many
individual successes with patients diagnosed as schizophrenic or with
those who suffered from mood disorders, anxiety disorders, sexual
disorders, eating disorders, sleep disorders, substance use disorders,
and the various adjustment disorders. But there is no syndrome or
symptoms that stands out as being most strongly indicated for a
multimodal approach. Instead, MMT practitioners will endeavor to
mitigate any clinical problems that they encounter, drawing on the
scientific and clinical literature that shows the best way to manage
matters. But they will also traverse the BASIC I.D. spectrum in an
attempt to leave no stone

132

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

unturned. Moreover, they may refer out to an expert, a resource better
qualified to treat the entire problematic disorder or one (or a few)
specific foci of it. This is routinely done, for instance, when
psychotropic medication is indicated. And, while some clinicians prefer
to refer to a psychiatrist or psychopharmacologist for these needs,
others with the requisite training and expertise are happy to engage in
collaborative medical management with internists, primary care, or
family physicians. In other cases, a referral to an expert in
addictions, insomnia, or obsessive-​ compulsive disorder (OCD), for
example, can be made. In these cases, either a co-​therapy approach can
be employed or the client may choose to work exclusively with the
clinician to whom he or she was referred. In this way, in MMT, the act
of referral itself can be seen as a therapeutic intervention. To
reiterate, MMT is not a unitary or closed system. It is basically a
clinical approach that rests on a social and cognitive learning theory
foundation and uses technical eclectic and evidence-​based procedures in
an individualistic manner. The overriding question is, "Who and what is
best for this client?" Obviously, no one therapist can be well versed in
the entire gamut of methods and procedures or populations that exist.
Some clinicians are excellent with children, whereas others have a
talent for working with geriatric populations. Some practitioners have
specialized in specific disorders (e.g., OCD, eating disorders, sexual
dysfunctions, posttraumatic stress disorder, panic, depression,
substance abuse, or schizophrenia). Those who employ MMT will bring
their talents to bear on their areas of special proficiency and employ
the BASIC I.D. as per the foregoing discussions and, by so doing,
possibly enhance their clinical impact. If a problem or a specific
client falls outside their sphere of expertise, they will endeavor to
effect a referral to an appropriate resource. But, as will be further
explicated later, because all people have BASIC I.D.'s, there are no
problems or populations per se that are excluded. The main drawbacks and
exclusionary criteria are those that pertain to the limitations of
individual therapists.

PROCESSES OF CHANGE Ultimately, all psychological experience of human
phenomenology is based on brain activity. Hence, changes attributable to
psychotherapy are likely due to various alterations in neurophysiology.
Since the mind (or psychology) and body (or biology) are different sides
of the same coin, they influence each other in many reciprocal ways.
What's more, a primary goal of most psychotherapy is to help people feel
better. Yet the Holy Grail of direct affect modification remains
elusive. By virtue of its seven transactional modalities, however, MMT
has six points of entry into affect, and five into biology, each of
which is believed to influence psychological experience and thus allows
for numerous synergistic effects. Multimodal therapists view
psychotherapy as a mostly psychoeducative endeavor that aims to help
clients acquire specific skills they may be lacking. By enhancing
people's repertoires of techniques for behavioral management and
emotional regulation, it is believed that they will feel and function
better. For example, anxiety management, mood regulation, assertiveness
and relaxation training, and cognitive reframing are a few of the skills
typically emphasized in MMT. By providing clients with missing
information, correcting misinformation, encouraging specific behavioral
changes, and addressing various response deficits and excesses across
the BASIC I.D., it is believed that desirable emotional shifts will
result. In essence, corrective thinking and corrective action while
traversing the BASIC I.D. is thought to bring about corrective emotional
experiences by altering cortical and subcortical activity. On a global
scale, this translates into changes in the BASIC I.D. insofar as
behavioral patterns are more adaptive, the sensorium is positively
affected, imagery is improved, cognitive schemata and ideation are more
rational, social functioning is better, physiology improves, and
desirable shifts in emotional functioning result. Hence, unlike in
traditional psychotherapy, insight per se is not seen as necessary for
therapeutic change, provided, of course, some degree of self-​awareness
is present. Similarly, while

Multimodal Therapy

transferential processes are de-​emphasized, it is maintained that a good
therapeutic relationship and strong alliance can greatly enhance
positive outcomes. Indeed, MMT sees the relationship as the soil in
which the methods and techniques of psychotherapy take root. It is a
fundamental postulate of MMT that the more knowledge and skills a person
acquires within and across his or her BASIC I.D., the more robust and
durable progress and change will be. Therefore, the more versed a
therapist is with a variety of methods, strategies, and techniques, and
the more flexible and adaptable he or she is, the more thoroughly he or
she can therapeutically traverse a given client's BASIC I.D., thus
producing enhanced outcomes. THERAPY RELATIONSHIP The multimodal
orientation is not yet another system of psychotherapy to be added to
the hundreds already in existence. It is an approach that uses
techniques that are likely to prove helpful regardless of their point of
origin, and it contends that the larger the clinician's repertoire of
methods and procedures, the more likely treatment will prove to be
effective. In addition to techniques of choice, the multimodal clinician
is well aware that the relationship between client and therapist is
often the sine qua non of salubrious outcomes. Thus, emphasis is placed
on trying to be an authentic chameleon who also selects relationships of
choice (Lazarus, 1993). Decisions regarding different relationship
stances or styles include when and how to be directive, supportive,
reflective, cold, warm, tepid, gentle, tender, tough, earthy, chummy,
casual, informal, or formal. How does the clinician determine or arrive
at specific relationships of choice? By carefully observing the client's
reactions to various statements, tactics, and strategies. One begins
neutrally by offering the usual facilitative conditions---​ the therapist
listens attentively, expresses caring, exudes empathy, and notes the
client's reactions. If there are clear signs of progress, one offers
more of the same; if not,

133

the clinician may take a more active or directive position and note
whether this proves effective. Moreover, those who complete the MLHI
(Lazarus & Lazarus, 1991b) are asked to describe their "Expectations
Regarding Therapy" including their views of the personal qualities of
the ideal therapist. A client who describes the ideal therapist as "a
good listener" will probably respond to a treatment trajectory that
differs from a patient who wants "a good teacher and coach." Sometimes
the client's expectancies leap out at one. Once AAL used the word
"ephemeral" with a client who was a philosophy professor. She
immediately said, "Ephemeral? Did you say ephemeral? Or did you mean to
say abstruse, evanescent, transient, cursory, or illusive---​and do you
know the difference?" She made it very clear that she was uninterested
in advice or opinions but wanted a sounding board, an active listener.
This was one of the few cases in which a strictly person-​centered
approach seemed indicated. MMT practitioners endeavor to provide what
the client appears to desire, especially the relational ambiance from
which he or she is most likely to benefit. In essence, no matter how
knowledgeable and skillful a therapist might be, it is the therapeutic
relationship that allows the methods and techniques to take root.
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES As noted previously, MMT is a theoretically
consistent, technically eclectic approach to "broad-​spectrum"
cognitive-​behavior therapy (CBT) that rests on a foundation of social
cognitive learning theory. While the specific methods of MMT have
already been discussed (i.e., use of the MLHIs, Modality Profiles,
structural profiles, bridging, tracking, firing orders, and second-​order
BASIC I.D's), some elaboration of the process and techniques of MMT
might prove helpful. MMT endeavors to be flexible, thus tailoring
treatment to the unique needs of a given individual. Once specific
problems across the BASIC I.D. have been identified (which is
accomplished

134

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

by interviewing, discussion, and, when desirable, the use of the MLHI),
a Modality Profile is constructed noting the identified problems and the
interventions of choice for them. This, again, depends heavily on the
therapist's personal repertoire of knowledge, skill, and experience.
Since MMT evolved from CBT, most multimodal therapists are well-​
practiced with methods such as cognitive reframing/​ restructuring,
exposure-​ based methods, behavioral assignments, and assertiveness and
various types of relaxation training, as well as a range of
interpersonally focused approaches, such as marital and family therapy.
Basically, given its eclectic stance, any and all methods that are
thought to be helpful will be employed, but preference is always placed
on empirically supported ones first. The few methods that most
multimodal therapists would eschew are those based on analytic or
psychodynamic approaches that rely on purported transferential phenomena
or those involving as of yet unproved methods such as "energy" work and
past-​life regression. Moreover, MMT is versatile, and an experienced
therapist will routinely transition between degrees of active-​ directive
and supportive-​nondirective styles and interventions both within a given
client's therapy and among different individuals. Thus the therapist's
work will at times be quite active and intensive (e.g., during exposure,
role-​playing, participant modeling, hypnosis, etc.) while at other times
much less active (e.g., while supportively listening to someone in grief
who is sharing a narrative). On those occasions when noncompliance is
encountered, rather than positing factors such as "resistance,"
multimodal therapists conceptualize such "road blocks" in terms of
readiness on the part of the client or appropriate selection of
techniques on the part of the therapist. That is, perhaps the assignment
or therapeutic process did not make sense to the client, he or she did
not understand the assignment or task, or the therapist expected more
from the client than he or she was ready to deliver. A patient
requesting therapy may point to any of the seven modalities as his or
her entry point. Affect: "I suffer from anxiety and depression."
Behavior: "My checking and cleaning

routines are getting to me." Interpersonal: "My husband and I are not
getting along." Sensory: "I have these tension headaches and chest
pains." Imagery: "I can't get the picture of my mother's funeral out of
my mind, and I often have disturbing dreams." Cognitive: "I know I set
unrealistic goals for myself and expect too much from others, but I
can't seem to help it." Biological: "I need to remember to take my
medication, and I should start exercising and eating less junk." Yet,
given the emphasis placed on established treatments of choice for
specific disorders and the weight attached to using evidence-​ based
methods, in most instances, MMT typically draws on methods employed by
most cognitive-​ behavior therapists. The cognitive-​behavioral literature
has documented various treatments of choice for a wide range of
afflictions including maladaptive habits, fears and phobias, stress-​
related difficulties, sexual dysfunctions, depression, eating disorders,
OCDs, and traumatic stress disorders. We can also include substance use
disorders, somatization disorders, personality disorders,
psychophysiological disorders, and pain management. Hence,
cognitive-​behavioral therapies have by far produced the most empirically
supported or evidence-​based methods. Moreover CBT and its derivatives,
more than other approaches, have provided research-​based data for
matching particular methods to explicit problems. It is our view that
some of the current approaches that have garnered increasing interest
and some degree of empirical support (e.g., dialectical behavior therapy
\[DBT\], eye movement desensitization and reprocessing \[EMDR\],
acceptance and commitment therapy \[ACT\], mindfulness based stress
management \[MBSR\]) are essentially derivatives of CBT. By virtue of
its technically eclectic stance and BASIC I.D. formulation, MMT can
incorporate and subsume any other therapeutic approach. For example, if
a client's Modality Profile included intrusive images as an identified
problem, EMDR might be strategically employed (Lazarus & Lazarus, 2002).
MMT can, and routinely does, utilize methods like EMDR, ACT, MBSR, and
DBT.

Multimodal Therapy

DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS The matter of diversity considerations is often
raised with respect to MMT. While gaining an understanding of the varied
cultural aspects of clients from differing backgrounds is up to
individual therapists, since all people have a BASIC I.D., MMT is
practically universally applicable. How a multimodal therapist "sells"
and thus utilizes the MMT approach is entirely dependent on his or her
knowledge of, familiarity with, and sensitivity for both the unique
aspects of a specific individual as well as the diverse cultural factors
relevant to that person. Thus, some multimodal practitioners are very
knowledgeable and experienced with transgender populations, others with
members of particular racial or ethnic groups, while some are more
limited in their knowledge or breadth of cultural diversity. Since the
goodness of fit and therapeutic relationship prove important for
success, it is hoped that a multimodal therapist---​indeed any therapist
for that matter---​will refer to a more suitable colleague if certain
diversity or cultural obstacles are seen as impediments to therapy.

CASE EXAMPLE Kevin was referred for therapy by his primary care
physician whom Kevin consulted for vague physical complaints such as
back pain and generalized muscle tension. A 46, a single white male,
Kevin was an information technology professional at a nearby university.
He was raised in a middle-​class suburb, did well at school, graduated
from college, but tended to be rather anxious, obsessional, prone to
bouts of depression, and suffered from work-​ related stress. After an
initial session that consisted of establishing rapport, the usual
exploration of the client's situation, background information, and an
inquiry into antecedent events and their consequences, C. Lazarus asked
Kevin to complete an MLHI and bring it with him to the next session.
Clients who comply tend to facilitate their treatment trajectory because
this usually reflects motivation for change and thus serves as a good
predictor of a client's willingness to complete homework assignments.

135

After the second session, upon a perusal of his MLHI, coupled with some
in-​session discussion of it, the following therapeutic considerations
were explored and relevant information was obtained. B: What is Kevin
doing that is getting in the way of his happiness or personal
fulfillment (e.g., self-​ defeating actions, maladaptive behaviors)? What
does he need to increase and decrease? What should he stop doing and
start doing? A: What emotions (affective reactions) are predominant? Are
we dealing with anger, anxiety, depression, or combinations thereof, and
to what extent (e.g., irritation vs. rage; sadness vs. profound
melancholy)? What appears to generate these negative affective states---​
certain cognitions, images, interpersonal conflicts? And how does Kevin
respond (behave) when feeling a certain way? We discussed what impact
various behaviors had on his affect and vice versa and how this
influenced each of the other modalities. S: We discussed Kevin's
specific sensory complaints (e.g., tension, chronic lower back
discomfort, frequent headaches) as well as the feelings, thoughts, and
behaviors that were connected to these negative sensations. Kevin was
also asked to comment on positive sensations (e.g., visual, auditory,
tactile, olfactory, and gustatory pleasures). This included sensual and
sexual elements. I: Kevin described some of his main fantasies and
mental images. He described self-​images full of failure. C: We explored
Kevin's main values, beliefs, and opinions and looked into his
predominant cognitions: his shoulds, oughts, and musts. It was clear
that he was too hard on himself and embraced a perfectionistic viewpoint
that was bound to prove frustrating and disappointing. Moreover, he had
a lot of anxious ideation, including worry about his job security,
financial future, and interpersonal confrontation. I.: Interpersonally,
we discussed his relationships with significant others; he was fearful
of commitment, inclined to avoid confrontations, and often felt
short-​changed and resentful. D.: In addition to his minor aches and
pains, Kevin was about 20 pounds above his ideal weight, often skipped
lunch, drank 6 to 10 cups of coffee during the work week, and exercised
infrequently. Nevertheless, his drugs/​biology profile

136

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

showed him to be in generally good health, never smoked cigarettes, and
never used recreational drugs or drank alcohol to excess. The foregoing
assessment pointed immediately to four issues that called for
remediation (or attention?). (1) His images of failure had to be altered
to images of coping and succeeding. (2) His perfectionism needed to be
changed to a generalized anti-​perfectionistic philosophy of life, and
his anxiogenic cognitions required reduction. (3) His interpersonal
reticence called for an assertive modus vivendi wherein he would discuss
his feelings and not harbor resentments, and his avoidance of social
challenges called for gradual exposure. And, (4) he would benefit from a
shift toward more health-​conscious patterns of eating and physical
activity. To achieve these ends, the techniques selected were standard
methods---​ positive and coping imagery exercises, disputing irrational
cognitions, assertiveness training, exposure, and relaxation-​based,
sensory relabeling. To look at Kevin's therapy under a "higher
magnification," a review of his (simplified) Modality Profile is useful.
(Keep in mind that these are the broad brush strokes used to convey the
essential features of a Modality Profile.) Problems identified in

Therapeutic recommendations

Behavior: Avoids confrontation

Exposure

Works too many hours

Leave work at quitting time

Affect: Anxiety

MMT\*

Depression

MMT\*

Anger

MMT\*

Sensation Generalized muscle tension

Relaxation training

Back pain and headaches

Mindfulness techniques

Imagery Failing

Visualizing success

Getting fired

Coping imagery

Being criticized

Visualizing assertiveness

Cognition Various categorical imperatives

Rational disputation

Perfectionism

Deliberate, substandard performance

Anxious ideation (i.e., "what if's")

Calming self-​statements

Interpersonal: Lacks assertiveness

Assertiveness training

Avoids confrontation

Graded exposure

Fears commitment

Emotional risk-​taking

Drugs/​Biology Overweight and poor nutrition

Referral to nutritionist

Excessive coffee consumption

Gradual reduction

Sedentary

Increase physical activity

The astute reader will notice that no specific therapeutic
recommendations are noted for affective problems. Rather, "MMT" for
multimodal therapy is noted. This is because the current state of the
art and science of psychological therapy lacks the means and methods for
direct affect modification. There appears to be no way to access affect
directly and, hence, technically, no interventions exist that allow one
to work directly with it. Even direct brain stimulation that activates
or produces emotional phenomena is not direct affect modification but,
rather, enters the system at the level of biology---​the D. modality.
Similarly, psychotropic medication works to change or ameliorate
aversive affective states through the conduit of the biological
modality. Nevertheless, since all of the other six modalities of the
BASIC I.D. can be accessed and modified directly, and since all the
modalities are transactional and reciprocally influential, the MMT model
provides six potentially synergistic portals into affect, albeit
indirectly.

Multimodal Therapy Kevin took well to the multimodal model, saying "It
makes a lot of sense to me." He was highly motivated and felt
comfortable in the therapy owing to the great respect he had for his
referring physician. Hence, a solid therapeutic relationship was quickly
cultivated and paved the way for the process of therapy, which was
mostly an active-​directive undertaking. Given his comfort in the
therapeutic setting, Kevin was initially introduced to some relaxation
and visualization techniques as well as asked to monitor and record his
cognitions during negative affective states. Building on that, Kevin was
asked to keep a journal of his avoidance behavior while he was
introduced to the methods of identifying and challenging his irrational
thoughts. This segued to some mindfulness methods, imaginal exposure,
and then in vivo exposure. Concurrently, assertiveness training was
undertaken using some role-​playing and role-​reversal techniques. Kevin
was also referred to a nutritionist and encouraged to increase his
general physical activity. After six consecutive weekly sessions, Kevin
agreed to reduce the frequency of his visits to every 2 weeks. Following
four biweekly sessions, it was decided to meet on a monthly basis. After
three monthly meetings, regular therapy was terminated, and we agreed
that Kevin would follow-​up as needed. Six months after his last session,
Kevin was contacted and reported that he was continuing to enjoy the
gains he made in active treatment and that he had also started working
out at a local gym and had lost 20 pounds. This case has been presented
to demonstrate how MMT provided a template (the BASIC I.D.) that pointed
to four discrete but interrelated components that became the main
treatment foci. In a sense, the term "multimodal therapy" is a misnomer
because, while the assessment is multimodal, the treatment is largely
cognitive-​ behavioral and draws, whenever possible, on evidence-​ based
methods. The main claim is that by assessing clients across the BASIC
I.D., one is less apt to overlook subtle but important problems, and the
overall problem identification process is significantly expedited.

137

OUTCOME RESEARCH MMT is so broad, so flexible, and so personalistic that
tightly controlled outcome research is difficult to conduct.
Nevertheless, the Dutch psychologist Kwee (1984) organized a treatment
outcome study on 84 hospitalized patients suffering from OCDs and
extensive phobias, 90% of whom had received prior treatment without
success. More than 70% of these patients had suffered from their
disorders for more than 4 years. Multimodal treatment resulted in
substantial recoveries and durable 9-​month follow-​ ups. This was
subsequently replicated and amplified (Kwee & Kwee-​Taams, 1994). In
Scotland, Williams (1988), in a carefully controlled outcome study,
compared multimodal assessment and treatment with less integrative
approaches in helping children with learning disabilities. Clear results
emerged in support of the multimodal procedures compared to treatment as
usual. Although the multimodal approach per se has not become a
household term, recently, the vast literature on psychosocial treatment
has borrowed liberally from MMT, with authors referring to
multidimensional, multimethod, or multifactorial treatment procedures.
The recent surge in combining modular treatments, especially in the
personality disorders (e.g., Livesley, Dimaggio, & Clarkin, 2016), was
predated by MMT approach by almost 50 years. Identical, unimodal
treatment for all patients is now considered unwise at best, malpractice
at worst. Follow-​up studies that have been conducted since 1973 (see
Lazarus 1997, 2000a) have consistently suggested that durable outcomes
are in direct proportion to the number of modalities deliberately
traversed. To reiterate an important point made at the start of this
chapter, although there is obviously a point of diminishing returns, it
is a multimodal maxim that the more someone learns in therapy, the less
likely he or she is to relapse. In this connection, circa 1970, it
became apparent that lacunae or gaps in people's coping responses were
responsible for many relapses. This occurred even after they had been in
various (non-​multimodal) therapies, often for

138

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

years on end. Follow-​ups indicate that teaching people how to cope with
problems across the BASIC I.D. ensured far more compelling and durable
results (Lazarus, 2000a). MMT takes Paul's (1967, p.111) mandate
seriously: "What treatment, by whom, is most effective for this
individual with that specific problem and under which set of
circumstances?" There are serious limitations of group designs in
comparative therapy research, and a strong case can be made for the
idiographic analyses of individual cases (Davison & Lazarus, 1994). One
cannot study identical cases (because everyone is unique), but there are
often sufficient similarities and obvious dissimilarities to permit the
evaluation of treatment effects on the basis of various related and
unrelated features. Be that as it may, from a research perspective, the
major thrust in MMT is to attempt to unravel the complex interplay among
personal biases, professional allegiances, epistemological assumptions,
theoretical preferences, and familiarity with the use of certain bodies
of data. A sustained and widespread emphasis on the documentation of
clinical research, with special reference to objective ratings and a
thorough account of the course of a given patient's treatment---​ in
concrete and operational terms---​may yet transform psychotherapy into a
clinical science.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS Cost-​ effective MMT underscores the notion that
treatment should be custom-​ made for each client. The client's needs
come before the therapist's theoretical framework. Instead of placing
clients on a Procrustean bed and treating them alike, multimodal
therapists look for a broad but tailor-​made panoply of effective
techniques to bring to bear upon the problem. Flexibility is the major
impetus. Thus, as already indicated, if an assessment reveals the need
to listen attentively and reflect the client's feelings, a multimodal
therapist will do just that. If the situation calls for a directive
stance involving role-​playing and other active strategies, that is what
will be implemented.

In searching for the best match in terms of the therapeutic relationship
and the specific treatment trajectory, a multimodal practitioner is
quite willing to refer a client to someone else---​ a colleague who may
be a more effective resource. This stands in stark contrast to many
clinical schools of thought wherein the client will receive what the
therapist offers---​whether or not that is what is required. In terms of
future directions, beyond adding to research that further validates its
effectiveness, employing MMT in primary care and inpatient settings
could greatly reduce unnecessary medical healthcare costs as well as
enhance the outcomes of patients treated in levels of care that are
higher than community-​based outpatient settings. This too, of course, is
grist for the research mill.

References Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall. Bandura, A. (1986). Social foundations of thought and
action: A social cognitive theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Davison, G. C., & Lazarus, A. A. (1994). Clinical innovation and
evaluation: Integrating practice with inquiry. Clinical Psychology:
Science and Practice, 1, 157--​168. Fay, A., & Lazarus, A. A. (1993). On
necessity and sufficiency in psychotherapy. Psychotherapy in Private
Practice, 12, 33--​39. Herman, S. M. (1991). Client-​ therapist similarity
on the Multimodal Structural Profile Inventory as predictive of
psychotherapy outcome. Psychotherapy Bulletin, 26, 26--​27. Herman, S. M.
(1992). A demonstration of the validity of the Multimodal Structural
Profile Inventory through a correlation with the Vocational Preference
Inventory. Psychotherapy in Private Practice, 11, 71--​80. Herman, S. M.
(1994). The diagnostic utility of the Multimodal Structural Profile.
Psychotherapy in Private Practice, 13, 55--​62. Herman, S. M. (1998). The
relationship between therapist-​ client modality similarity and
psychotherapy outcome. Journal of Psycho­ therapy Practice and Research,
7, 56--​64. Herman, S. M. (2004). Predicting the differential
effectiveness of relaxation training with the

Multimodal Therapy Multimodal Structural Profile Inventory.
Psychological Services, 1, 48--​55. Kwee, M. G. T. (1984). Klinische
multimodale gedragstherapie. Lisse, Holland: Swets & Zeitlinger. Kwee,
M. G. T., & Kwee-​ Taams, M. K. (1994). Klinishegedragstherapie in
Nederland & vlaan-​ deren. Delft, Holland: Eubron. Landes, A. A. (1991).
Development of the Structural Profile Inventory. Psychotherapy in
Private Practice, 9, 123--​141. Lazarus, A. A. (1967). In support of
technical eclecticism. Psychological Reports, 21, 415--​416. Lazarus, A.
A. (1973). Multimodal behavior therapy: Treating the BASIC ID. Journal
of Nervous and Mental Disease, 156, 404--​411. Lazarus, A. A. (1976).
Multimodal behavior therapy. New York: Springer. Lazarus, A. A. (1981).
The practice of multimodal therapy. New York: McGraw-​Hill. Lazarus, A.
A. (1986). Multimodal therapy. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Handbook of
eclectic psychotherapy (pp. 65--​93). New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Lazarus,
A. A. (1987). The need for technical eclecticism: Science, depth,
breadth, and specificity. In J. K. Zeig (Ed.), The evolution of
psychotherapy (pp. 154--​ 172). New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Lazarus, A. A.
(1989). Why I am an eclectic (not an integrationist). British Journal of
Guidance & Counselling, 17, 248--​258. Lazarus, A. A. (1992). Multimodal
therapy: Technical eclecticism with minimal integration. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(pp. 231--​ 263). New York: Basic Books. Lazarus, A. A. (1993). Tailoring
the therapeutic relationship, or being an authentic chameleon.
Psychotherapy, 30, 404--​407. Lazarus, A. A. (1995). Different types of
eclecticism and integration: Let's be aware of the dangers. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 5, 27--​39. Lazarus, A. A. (1996). The utility
and futility of combining treatments in psychotherapy. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 3, 59--​68. Lazarus, A. A. (1997).
Brief but comprehensive psychotherapy: The multimodal way. New York:
Springer. Lazarus, A. A. (2000a). Multimodal therapy. In R. J. Corsini,
& D. Wedding (Eds.), Current psycho-​ therapies (6th ed. ). Itasca, IL:
Peacock.

139

Lazarus, A. A. (2000b). My professional journey: The development of
multimodal therapy. In J. J. Shay & J. Wheelis (Eds.), Odysseys in
psychotherapy (pp. 167--​186). New York: Irvington. Lazarus, A. A., &
Beutler, L. E. (1993). On technical eclecticism. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 71, 381--​385. Lazarus, A. A., Beutler, L. E., & Norcross,
J. C. (1992). The future of technical eclecticism. Psychotherapy, 29,
11--​20. Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1987). Commentary: Reactions
from a multimodal Perspective. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Casebook of
eclectic psychotherapy (pp.237--​239). New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Lazarus,
A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991a). Let us not forsake the individual nor
ignore the data: A response to Bozarth. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 69, 463--​465. Lazarus, A. A., & Lazarus, C. N. (1991b).
Multimodal life history inventory. Champaign, IL: Research Press.
Lazarus, C. N. (1986). Development and validation of the multimodal
structural profile inventory. Unpublished manuscript, Rutgers
University, New Brunswick, NJ. Lazarus, C. N. (1991). Conventional
diagnostic nomenclature versus multimodal assessment. Psychological
Reports, 68, 1363--​1367. Lazarus, C. N. (2017). Multimodal therapy. In
A. Wenzel (Ed.), The Sage encyclopedia of abnormal and clinical
psychology (Vol. 4, pp. 2163--2166). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Lazarus,
C. N., & Lazarus, A. A. (2002). EMDR: An elegantly concentrated
multimodal procedure? In F. Shapiro (Ed.), EMDR as an integrative
psycho­therapy approach, pp. 209--223. Washington DC: American
Psychological Association. Lazarus, C. N., & Lazarus, A. A. (2015).
Multimodal therapy. In E. Neukrug (Ed.), The Sage encyclopedia of theory
in counseling and psychotherapy (Vol. 2, pp. 667--682). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage. Livesley, W. J., Dimaggio, G., & Clarkin, J. F. (2016).
Integrated Treatment for Personality Disorder: A Modular Approach.
Guilford. London, P. (1964). The modes and morals of psycho­therapy. New
York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Paul, G. L. (1967). Strategy of outcome
research in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31,
109--​118.

140

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Williams, T. A. (1988). A multimodal approach to assessment and
intervention with children with learning disabilities. Unpublished
doctoral dissertation, Department of Psychology, University of Glasgow.
Wilson, G. T. (1998). Manual-​based treatment and clinical practice.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 5, 363--​375.

Wilson, G. T. (2006). Manual-​based treatment: Evolution and evaluation.
In T. A. Treat, R. R. Bootzin, & T. B. Baker (Eds.), Psychological
clinical science: Papers in honor of Richard M. McFall. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum. Wolpe, J., & Lazarus, A. A. (1966). Behavior therapy
techniques. Oxford: Pergamon.

7 Systematic Treatment Selection ANDRÉS J. CONSOLI AND LARRY E. BEUTLER

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH Contemporary research that compares manualized
psychotherapies has minimized the roles of the patient, the therapist,
the therapy relationship, the environment, and treatment fit that both
cut across theoretical approaches and that form effective treatments
(Wampold & Imel, 2015). The result is a considerable discordance between
what works from the perspective of the clinician and what variables
occupy the attention of the researcher. These collective limitations
underscore a need for integrative, evidence-​based therapies that
facilitate human change by eschewing the broad definitions of treatment
type and patient diagnosis in favor of matching narrower treatment
interventions to specific problems, patients, and populations.
Systematic treatment selection (STS) is an evidence-​based,
principle-​driven approach that arose from three converging observations
extracted from psychotherapy practice and research: (1) there has been
an exponential

growth in the number of psychotherapies touted as "empirically
supported" (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001); (2) there is strong evidence
that most treatment packages/​interventions produce equivalent effects,
suggesting that the effects of treatment are heavily influenced by
nonprocedural factors, such as the therapy relationship and treatment
fit (e.g., Castonguay, 2000; Luborsky et al., 2002; Wampold & Imel,
2015); and (3) there is a persistent disparity between what clinicians
consider to be important to effect change and what researchers seek to
confirm in clinical trials (Beutler, Williams, Wakefield, & Entwhistle,
1995). The foregoing suggests that the methods for evoking meaningful
change are broad ranging, interactive, and are not indelibly yoked to
specific theories or treatment models. STS, as it has evolved and
expanded during the past decades, has its roots jointly planted in
clinical practice and empirical research. From practitioners have come
an appreciation for the cross-​cutting nature (i.e., relevant to all

141

142

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

psychotherapy approaches) of the therapeutic relationship, an awareness
of the need for a pragmatic form of intentional eclecticism, and
skepticism regarding the value of traditional diagnoses for treatment
planning (Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, in press; Machado &
Beutler, 2017). From researchers have come an appreciation of the power
of controlled observations, the relative advantages of both efficacy and
effectiveness research, and the strangely contrasting views that exist
about the contributors to psychotherapy benefit. STS seeks to provide
the clinician with an intentional framework for identifying,
recognizing, and facilitating the optimal conditions for therapeutic
change. This effort began with a representative review of outcome
literature (Beutler, 1979) and proceeded to more comprehensive reviews
and the construction of a model of treatment decision-​making (Beutler,
1983; Beutler & Clarkin, 1990). STS has been subjected to prospective
empirical tests (Beutler et al., 2000; Beutler, Mohr, Grawe, Engle, &
MacDonald, 1991), which has led to a refinement of ways to apply
psychotherapy (e.g., Beutler & Harwood, 2000). STS is based on three
cardinal assumptions.

the use of a semi-​ structured intake battery of standardized
psychometric instruments. However, few clinicians employ standardized
assessment in their intake procedures. Often, and potentially to the
detriment of the patient, therapists rely solely on unstructured and
unstandardized clinical interviews to inform their judgments. This can
frequently prove to be unfortunate because therapists are often called
on to make life-​changing decisions, such as whether to hospitalize a
patient or refer for medication consultation, without an informative
historical context. Often, clinicians are unsure of what constructs to
measure and uncertain about what to do with the information they gather
from psychological tests (Harwood, Beutler, & Groth-​Marnat, 2011). Since
most tests of personality and cognitive functioning are keyed to help
establish the diagnosis and a list of problem areas, clinicians often
resort to using those that will help them identify a reliable diagnosis.
Although clinicians may establish a diagnosis that satisfies the
insurance carrier---​no mean feat in itself---​they still may be
uncomfortable because rendering a diagnosis has not helped them much in
tendering a meaningful and empirically grounded treatment plan (Beutler
& Malik, 2002). Diagnosis is usually a weak contributor to 1. All or
most psychotherapy approaches are beneficial for some individuals, but
none is finding a distinctive path for a given patient's improvement. It
may provide targets of needed effective for all. 2. Therapists can
implement multiple change, but it does not offer direct information
therapeutic strategies and techniques that about how to reach these
targets. Thus, even go beyond the theories that originated them if one
knows some identifying principles of if therapists follow empirically
derived treatment that might suit a given individual, principles that
determine when and how one has still to face the task of finding a test
or a test battery that will elucidate the relevant they should be used.
3. An inordinate focus exists on problem principles. To address the
questions of what to measure, etiology among psychotherapists, which has
proven to be less important to the process how to measure it, and how to
use it in treatment of change than a focus on improving the planning, we
utilize and recommend considerquality of clinical decision-​making used
by ation of two related instruments. If there is need (e.g., mandated,
adolescent, and psychotic psychotherapists. patients) and time to
provide a clinician-​based assessment, we use the Systematic Treatment
Selection-​ Clinician Rating Form (STS-​ CRF) ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION
that reliably assesses most of the well-​validated Reliable and valid
assessment of treatment-​ patient characteristics associated with
planning relevant patient characteristics benefits from for change
(Fisher, Beutler, & Williams, 1999).

Systematic Treatment Selection

In most cases, we prefer and use a patient self-​ report instrument that
is a derivation and expansion of the STS-​CRF. The STS/​innerlife (www.
innerlife.com; Beutler, Williams, & Norcross, 2009) includes reliable
measurement of most patient-​ based predictors of change identified in
the research literature (Beutler et al., 2000; Norcross, 2011). The
roles of these patient qualities have been translated into a list of
evidence-​ based principles of effective psychotherapy from which is
generated a set of narrative and graphic reports that are easily
understood and translated into a practice plan by clinicians. The
STS/​innerlife is a cloud-​based measure of patient and environmental
characteristics that has proved to contribute to change and from which
we developed a method of tracking symptom changes over time. The measure
consists of 22 reliable and culturally sensitive symptom scales, six of
which are global indicators of distress and dysfunction (depression,
anxiety, chemical abuse, somatic symptoms, thought disorder, and risk of
self-​harm). In addition, independently validated questions which address
the client's cultural stress, coping styles, resistance traits,
preferences, readiness for change, and many others are included. The
STS/​innerlife is listed as a reliable and valid psychological test by
Division 12 of the American Psychological Association, and STS (the
therapy developed from this assessment) is recognized as an
evidence-​based treatment by Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration (SAMHSA) (M. Bejarano, personal communication, 2016).
Innerlife produces both a narrative report for patients and one for the
clinician that suggests treatment approaches and prognoses. It has been
used successfully to facilitate therapist compliance with empirically
established principles (Harwood et al., 2011) and to improve the
efficacy of acquiring psychotherapy skills in supervision (Holt et al.,
2015; Stein, 2015). The STS practitioner adheres closely to the clinical
maxim, "the outcomes of the assessments guide the interventions." Case
formulations are based on the results of the assessments and expressed
as treatment fit. This responsiveness is a finely tuned aspect of case
formulation and treatment planning and hinges on identifying key patient
characteristics and

143

then selecting and implementing a fitting treatment. The eight
principles that are core to the current practice of STS and that are
detailed in the next section focus on maximizing the blending of
interventions and patient qualities (Beutler et al., 2000; Holt et al.,
2015). APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE STS consists of clinically and
empirically informed principles that guide practitioners in their
decision-​making process of how best to treat patients. The principles
apply to the use of multiple person therapy (e.g., couples, family,
group), different settings and levels of care, psychoactive medication,
and to factors that reduce patient risk. Furthermore, the principles
identify the conditions that take place within the treatment
relationship to maximize the fit between patient and therapist. These
principles were identified empirically through repeated surveys of
literature (Beutler et al., 2000; Castonguay & Beutler, 2006). Among 39
empirically grounded principles (Castonguay et al., in press; Holt et
al., 2015), eight core principles were selected because of their
empirical strength and their practical fit with the usual developmental
sequence of establishing a therapeutic relationship and selecting an
intervention strategy. The principles are introduced here as they
describe clinical situations and patients for which STS is most
relevant. Functional Impairment 1. For all patients with moderate to
severe impairment, the therapist should identify social service or
medical care needs and arrange for attention to these needs. Those with
low social support systems, in particular, need assistance from the
therapist to develop social support and support services.
Psychotherapeutic Relationship 2. Psychotherapy is likely to be
beneficial if a strong working alliance is established and maintained
during the course of treatment.

144

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

3.  The qualities of a good working alliance are likely to be
    facilitated if the therapist relates to clients in an empathic way
    and adopts an attitude of caring, warmth, and acceptance, as well as
    one of congruence or genuineness.
4.  Therapists are likely to resolve alliance strains and ruptures when
    addressing them in an empathic and flexible way. Resistance
5.  In dealing with clients exhibiting resistance, the therapist's use
    of directive treatments should be planned to inversely correspond
    with the patient's manifest level of resistant traits and states.
    Coping Styles
6.  Clients whose personalities are characterized by relatively high
    "externalizing" styles (e.g., impulsivity, social gregariousness,
    emotional lability, and external blame for problems) benefit more
    from direct behavioral change and symptom reduction efforts,
    including building new skills and managing impulses, than they do
    from procedures that are designed to facilitate insight and
    self-​awareness.
7.  Clients whose personalities are characterized by relatively high
    "internalizing" styles (e.g., low levels of impulsivity,
    indecisiveness, self-​ inspection, and overcontrol) tend to benefit
    more from procedures that foster self-​ understanding, insight,
    interpersonal attachments, and self-​esteem than they do from
    procedures that aim at directly altering symptoms and building new
    social skills. Readiness
8.  Clients who are in more advanced stages of readiness for change
    (preparation, action, maintenance) are more likely to improve in
    psychotherapy than those at lower stages of readiness
    (precontemplation, contemplation). The structure of treatment is
    predicated on these eight principles. To expand on them, we will
    review the clinical implications for each of these principles. For
    example, the first principle asserts that the more severe the
    patient's

impairment, the more intensive the planned treatment must be to effect
change. Functional impairment is often inversely related to the degree
of social support available to the patient from family and reference
groups. Low levels of social support are indicative of the need to
provide assistance in developing attachments and social outlets
(Longabaugh et al., 1993). In such cases, referral of the patient to
group and family therapy may be useful to consider. Impairment is a
complex construct and is comprised of the interrelation among variables
like the severity of the symptoms, extant levels of social isolation,
and problem chronicity (Holt et al., 2015). For example, a patient who
has high levels of anxiety, depression, and daily impairment of
function, and who lacks social support is considered to be highly
impaired. The salience of this determination is increased if the patient
has had the condition or its recurrence over a long period of time,
making them a poor candidate for psychotherapy. The trajectory of
severity for such a patient is likely to worsen. But by improving the
patient's access to systems that provide social support and by working
to relieve symptoms that have reduced the patient's functioning, this
negative trajectory can be at least partially ameliorated. As a
therapist shifts the focus of treatment from one stage (e.g.,
precontemplation) to foster the next (contemplation), patients are most
likely to benefit if that shift includes enhanced social support.
Principles 2--​4 are used to initiate, maintain, and repair the
therapeutic relationship. They are discussed in detail in a later
section titled "Therapy Relationship." Suffice to say here that, in STS,
as in most psychotherapies, the therapeutic relationship consists of a
collaboration between patient and therapists that is built on trust and
reflects personal interest in the patient by the therapist. At the same
time, these principles suggest a progression of relationship qualities
over the course of treatment and a need for the therapist to be skilled
both in fostering a helping relationship and in healing strains and
ruptures. Principle 5 addresses ways in which one may most effectively
structure treatment to deal with patient resistance. Resistance is
considered to have both state and trait qualities, but in STS

Systematic Treatment Selection

the focus is on trait-​ like qualities that jeopardize one's long-​term
change prospects. The effects of resistance as a moderator of outcomes
are of central importance. Patients with high propensities to resist the
efforts of others to change them are less likely to benefit from
directive treatments and goal-​ driven therapists. These patients are
more responsive to therapy methods that emphasize patient self-​direction
and that de-​ emphasize therapist control and guidance (Beutler et al.,
2000). The effective therapist in this instance is more evocative than
directive, more empathic than assertive, and more gentle than
challenging. The exception to this rule is in the use of paradoxical
procedures, which can prove quite effective among highly resistant
patients in whom fear of the loss of freedom and control dominate
(Beutler & Harwood, 2000). By way of contrast, patients who are low on
resistance are more likely to find comfort in therapists who assume
directive and guiding functions. These patients generally experience
good results and retain these effects when treated by a structured and
directive therapist using targeted goals, homework, and instruction.
Principles 6 and 7 address the role of patient coping styles in
treatment implementation. The fact that the effects of internalization
and externalization as coping patterns are expressed in two principles
is a reminder that they are separate but related dimensions; they do not
exist on a continuum and are weakly but positively correlated with one
another. Thus, there is often great variation among the ways in which
they are expressed. Treatments must account not only for which of the
two patterns are dominant but also for the overall levels of their
expression. Being low on both coping scales reflects low levels of
energy and social engagement. High levels on both scales suggest the
degree of ambivalence and instability with which one approaches and
handles change. In most instances, a patient tends to prefer either an
externalizing or internalizing stance when facing new situations or
impending threat. That stance is one that either is blaming and openly
defensive or one that is self-​punitive and inhibited. Internalizing
styles of adjustment are typically best addressed by insight-​and

145

emotion-​focused treatments. Conversely, those with externalizing coping
styles are guided to procedures that emphasize the development of
problem-​solving strategies and direct behavioral change. Principle 8
comes into play throughout treatment and again when one anticipates
transferring or terminating a patient. The higher one's stage of
readiness, the easier the shift will be, and this adaptation process can
be enhanced by inclusion of social support and, progressively, by a
focus on emotional expression through a progression of decision-​making
and taking action. The therapist notes the patient's level of readiness
and guides the patient toward experiences that will enhance the movement
from contemplation to action and maintenance of change. We address
processes and stages of change in more detail next. PROCESSES OF CHANGE
Beyond the impact of the therapeutic relationship (covered more
extensively in the next section), there are several mechanisms that are
used to facilitate change processes in STS. To begin with, there are
important therapist characteristics that contribute to change, including
but not limited to trust, acceptance, acknowledgment, collaboration,
support, respect, awareness of self and others as cultural beings,
cultural competence, and humility. These characteristics are likely to
be represented in the behaviors of most effective therapists, perhaps
many of whom have chosen this "impossible profession" because of
consistent praise that they received to indicate their skills precisely
in expressing these interpersonal abilities. Therapists' psychological
well-​ being and personality play important roles to the extent that they
are likely to significantly mediate their capacity to resonate
empathically with their patients' struggles and accomplishments.
Furthermore, therapists' personal styles and match or mismatch with
those of each of their patients are also likely to influence
significantly the outcome of psychotherapy (Beutler, Moleiro, & Talebi,
2002; Fernández-​Álvarez, 2001). Although the well-​being of therapists
plays an important role in the quality of service

146

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

provision (i.e., be well to serve well), so does may respond to this
level by assuming the roles patients' character traits. These two
domains of of emotional managers who seek to facilitate experience
(clinician experience and patient change by activating an optimal level
of emotraits) tend to interact to jointly move the pro- tional arousal.
Therapists are called on to use cess along and enhance outcomes of
psycho- therapeutic strategies that will modulate emotherapy. Moreover,
high problem complexity, tional arousal, such as structure and support
marked chronicity, significant functional im- when emotional level is
too high; and conpairment, maladaptive coping styles, high reac-
frontation, experiential, and open-​ ended/​ untance levels, and extreme
distress all are likely structured procedures when emotional level is to
have a negative impact on treatment and per- too low. haps make
difficult the actualization of a caring To optimally benefit from
treatment, patients relationship (Beutler & Consoli, 1993). must be
ready to make changes. A powerful heuSTS emphasizes the importance and
gener- ristic that therapists may want to systematically ality of
exposure as a process that brings about consider in honoring patient
differences in readhuman change while curtailing the potentially iness
is that of stages of change (DiClemente & harmful influence of
avoidance. Treatment suc- Prochaska, Chapter 8, this volume; Norcross,
cess is likely to be brought about if patients can Krebs, & Prochaska,
2011; Prochaska & be persuaded to expose themselves to objects or
DiClemente, 1983): precontemplation, contargets of behavioral and
emotional avoidance. templation, preparation, action, maintenance, STS
operationalizes the adage, "different and termination. Precontemplation
is a stage in folks benefit from different strokes." It identifies which
one is not engaging in active change and procedural emphases that may
contribute to typically is not considering change. In contrast,
individualized change among patients. At a ge- the movement a patient
makes to enter the neral level, patient variability is based on the
contemplation stage is indexed by the initiaidentification of
externalizing contrasted with tion of thoughts about change and the need
for internalizing coping styles. For the former, the making a change.
The preparation stage follows relative balance of interventions ought to
favor contemplation and signals a stage of readiness the use of
skill-​building and symptom reduction that may include making some
tentative efforts procedures, whereas for the latter, the balance to
change. The patient's behaviors indicate that should tip toward
insight-​and relationship-​ change is wanted and motivates the patient to
focused procedures. take the next step in the change process. In
Concomitantly, the principles empha- this action stage, one begins to
take the task of size that therapeutic change is most likely changing
seriously by actively engaging in the to occur when therapeutic
procedures do process and trying to change. In this stage, if one not
evoke patient resistance. In other words, is successful, the acts of
"trying" are replaced STS emphasizes the importance of tailoring by a
commitment to change. At the end of the treatments to address the level
of resistance process of making a change, one enters the that is
present. When patient resistance is high, maintenance stage. Maintenance
is a stage of treatments most likely to facilitate change are living
with and refining the changes made and those that are the least
directive or those that are coping with the environmental changes they,
paradoxical in nature, such as prescribing the themselves, evoke. Put
simply, therapists may continuation of symptomatic behavior. consider
the question of what the patient is a Another contributor to the nature
of the customer for based on what stage of change they relationship is
seen in the way that STS urges are at and then tailor interventions that
would the therapist to underscore the importance move the patient along
in the corresponding of a personalized strategy for moderating stages of
change. a patient's emotional distress. Therapeutic STS emphasizes the
importance of suschange is maximized when the distress expe- tained
emotional arousal until problematic rienced by patients is moderate, and
therapists responses diminish. Finally, positive change

Systematic Treatment Selection

is more likely to occur when the initial foci of treatment is to build
new skills and to alter disruptive symptoms. THERAPY RELATIONSHIP The
therapeutic relationship occupies an important role in STS, accounting
for three of the eight core principles detailed previously. The
therapeutic relationship, or working alliance, has been described as
"the quintessential integrative variable" (Wolfe & Goldfried, 1988,
p. 449). Much of what will happen in therapy as well as outside of
therapy will be influenced by the persuasive qualities of not only the
therapeutic relationship but also of those relationships that are most
significant in the patient's life. The therapeutic relationship is
critically involved at the beginning of therapy, but it is also a
cardinal process in maintaining the therapeutic work and healing the
wound when the relationship is strained or ruptured. STS considers the
roles of patient's preparation and the process of role induction
together with the therapist's preparation. In this interplay, the
therapist is encouraged to observe role activation as a variable that is
most relevant to the initial development and facilitation of the
therapeutic relationship. Therapists formally prepare patients and
themselves for therapy; present and actualize therapy as a process
characterized by alliance, mutuality, and collaboration; and,
ultimately, seek to engage patients in change and stabilizing
activities. A patient's preparation serves the purpose of not only
putting the patient at ease but of also setting the stage for change.
Congruent with the adage that an informed consumer makes for a better
one, the likelihood of positive psychotherapy outcomes is significantly
increased when patients are properly informed of how to make best use of
the services offered to them. It is of particular importance to evaluate
issues related to expectations that patients bring to treatment,
including personal and cultural values, beliefs and attitudes toward the
presenting complaint and its etiology, and attitude toward

147

help-​seeking, treatment, and possible stigma associated with
psychological difficulties. Time needs to be spent redressing any
misperceptions or unrealistic prospects while educating patients on the
roles and activities to be expected of them. Furthermore, patient
preparation at the beginning of treatment and again when strains or
ruptures are being addressed involves explaining confidentiality and its
limitations, the purposes and potential length and outcomes of therapy,
billing procedures, and informed consent to treatment. Therapists'
preparation involves education, training, and supervised experience. It
also involves the development of what Laing described as a "harmless,
inviting, cultivated" state (in Tougas & Shandel, 1989), refined not
only through personal therapy but also through lifelong exercises that
expand the therapist's acceptance (Beutler, Consoli, & Williams, 1995),
cultural competence, and humility (Consoli et al., 2017). This caring
relationship is likely to engender a safe and respectful environment
that could be described as "a secure base" (Bowlby, 1988). Such base is
not an end in itself but a sine qua non foundation that will permit
meaningful exploration and important risk-​ t aking by the patient, the
therapist, and their relationship. In partial agreement with Rogers
(1957), we view these therapists and potentially therapeutic
relationship characteristics as necessary although not, in and of
themselves, sufficient conditions for change. Incipient ruptures in the
therapeutic alliance, flagged by signs of hostility, negativism,
criticism, intolerance, or anger, are to be redressed through reparative
healing. Reparation may require an active consultation with a supervisor
or colleague because, many times, patient hostility may inadvertently
drag therapists into negative complementary sequences expressed through
hopelessness, belittling, and criticism, which may prove quite difficult
to overcome. Coldness, distancing, counterhostility, and rejection
toward patients are the markers of serious potential disruptions to a
fruitful therapeutic alliance. Unaddressed, these feelings are likely to
evolve into strains and then possibly ruptures in the alliance (Safran,

148

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Muran, & Shaker, 2014; Wolf, Goldfried, & Muran, 2013). Ultimately,
establishing a warm and caring therapeutic relationship is crucial. As
Norcross put it, in a wordplay based in a spinoff of Bill Clinton's
unofficial presidential campaign slogan, "It is the economy, stupid!,"
in psychotherapy, "It is the relationship, stupid!" (Norcross, 2011,
p. 347). Yet, with all its healing properties, the therapeutic
relationship is not an end to itself. As we see it, the therapeutic
relationship ought to evolve from therapists' actions reflecting
acceptance and affirmation to those processes that complement the
relationship qualities with a chain of interactions that expand the
repertoire of emotions experienced by patients and their associated
meanings (Wachtel, 1997). In the context of this secure base, patients
are appropriately encouraged to take the necessary risks to face avoided
material, emotions, and circumstances. We now turn to the methods and
techniques involved in such risk-​t aking activities. METHODS AND
TECHNIQUES STS methods and techniques are those acts of the therapist
that come in response to one or more patient behaviors that, in turn,
arise from the characteristic traits that are used in treatment
planning. These therapist acts and the patient behaviors from which they
arise should exist in a pattern that operationalizes one or more
principles of change. In this section, we discuss the most frequently
used methods and techniques when addressing patient dimensions such as
functional impairment, resistance level, coping style, and readiness for
change. We will not discuss principles 2, 3, and 4 on the therapeutic
relationship again, as they were addressed in the prior section.

provide the needed levels of social support that will sustain change.
Functional impairment ranges from behaviors that reflect minimal
disturbance of life patterns or acute disturbance in one area of life to
those in which behavior is impaired in all areas of function. The
antidote to the negative influence of the patient's impairment level is
treatment intensity. The greater the impairment, the more intense the
treatment needs to be. The diagnosis of a personality disorder, for
example, typically indicates the presence of an enduring and
cross-​situational disturbance in interpersonal functioning that can be
predictive of one's long-​term response to change efforts. If the
destructive influence of this disorder can be moderated by intensifying
and varying the interventions, positive change is more likely. Treatment
intensity, as used in this context, most often includes the use of
adjunctive interventions like group therapy, family therapy, couple
therapy, employment training, self-​ help groups, substance abuse
treatment, and psychoactive medication. With few exceptions, adding
treatments works through a process of increasing the patient's
involvement with treatment resources and pushes change forward. While it
probably is true that some of the adjunctive treatments (e.g., mood
elevators, antimanic medication, drug abuse titration) have some direct
and specific effects, at least part of the action of intensifying
treatment is to call on the patient to get involved and committed to the
process of change (Beutler et al., 2000). Patients with complex and
chronic problems require longer term and more intensive treatments, with
a therapeutic focus kept on interpersonal domains. Use of psychoactive
medication is recommended in cases of patients with very high levels of
problem complexity and chronicity (Beutler et al., 2000). Principle 5:
Resistance

Principle 1: Functional Impairment Functional impairment may be seen in
the spread or overlap of dysfunctional behavior across environments, the
frequency of reoccurrence, and the degree to which the patient has
access to people and institutions that can

Resistance is a concept that has widely been applied to explain all
types of patient behavior, both therapeutic and social. A narrower
concept, reactance, has been applied by social psychologists and
cognitive theorists to explain both trait-​and state-​ like behavior

Systematic Treatment Selection

within the context of social persuasion theories (Brehm & Brehm, 1981;
Goldfried & Davison, 1976). Reactance can be viewed as an extreme case
of resistance. It is the tendency to respond oppositionally to external
demands. Reactance, in contrast to lesser forms of resistance, has clear
trait-​like (as well as state-​like) properties---​ an attribute whose
likely expression varies from person to person and one that is related
to an individual's acquired sensitivity to perceived interpersonal
threats to one's autonomy. Reactance can be indexed by a given
individual's ability to comply with externally imposed demands. A
patient's intolerance for external demands indicates the level of
therapist directiveness that likely will be needed and accepted by the
patient without eliciting oppositional resistance. Those who are easily
threatened by a perceived loss of autonomy respond more positively both
to low levels of therapy directives and to the use of paradoxical
interventions (e.g., prescribing the symptom, symptom exaggeration)
compared to those who have high tolerance for such threats (Ollendick &
Murphy, 1977). Mismatching the use of highly directive procedures with
patients who are prone to reactance frequently results in worsening of
symptoms (e.g., Forsyth & Forsyth, 1982). Highly resistant patients do
best in the context of methods that are evocative and self-​directed and
that generate in the patient a sense of autonomy and self-​reliance. If
such straightforward, first-​order change strategies are not sufficient
to catalyze the necessary or desired changes, then therapists are
encouraged to use paradoxical or second-​order change strategies. Low
patient resistance is expressed by a tendency to avoid confrontation and
to be obedient to authority. Patients who are low in resistance tend to
benefit more from guidance, assignments, and interpretations. Therapists
may resort to structured homework, including self-​monitoring and direct
suggestions that redress presenting complaints. Principles 6 and 7:
Coping Styles A coping style is defined as "the typical and usual way an
individual interacts with others

149

and responds to a threatened loss of safety and wellbeing" (Beutler &
Harwood, 2000, p. 74). Coping styles reflect the patient's efforts to
adjust to anticipated or past change and related discomfort. Although
coping styles are trait-​ like characteristics, they are not in
themselves pathological. All individuals resort to coping strategies in
order to navigate the usual changes that occur in one's life while
seeking constancy and freedom from pain. Coping styles, among patients,
therefore can turn into a problem when the individual becomes either
unstable or inflexible in the use of certain coping strategies. The
degree to which this kind of rigidity is expressed adds further to the
problems that stimulate coping and the negative effects of the coping
style itself. Although we have come to identify coping styles
categorically as either dominantly "internalizing" or "externalizing,"
each can have different levels of adaptability and functioning.
Internalization is a more complex expression of coping than is
externalization, thus warranting the independence of these constructs.
Internalizing coping styles include self-​criticism, feelings of guilt
and fear, inhibition of impulses, somatic symptoms, introversion, and
agitated or low activity levels. An internalizing patient is most often
described as being self-​blaming, timid, and engaging in self-​devaluation
accompanied by compartmentalization of affect and idealization of
others. Clinical signs that can indicate internalization include a
greater tendency toward suppressed negative affect and avoidance of
expressing outward anger. Internalizers attribute faults and mishaps to
their lack of skills or abilities and then try to compensate by engaging
in ritualistic behavior that is initiated with the intention of undoing
the faulty behavior. They are prone to be intropunitive and to restrict
their emotional response to the point of being constrained and stilted
in emotional expression. This style parallels some of the traits
associated with diagnostic groupings of avoidant and
obsessive-​compulsive personality disorders. When one determines that an
internalizing coping style is present and insight-​ oriented treatment is
indicated, the next major task is to define a focal theme to guide and
organize the

150

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

relevant interventions. The formulation of the issue is best done by
using a theoretical orientation with which the therapist is most
familiar. Within cognitive therapy (CT) and cognitive-​ behavior therapy
(CBT), a theme that focuses on schematic cognitions would fit, and
within the psychodynamic tradition, either an object relations theme or
a social dynamic theme works well. Externalizers, in sharp contrast to
internalizers, attribute responsibility for their distress and
discomfort to external objects or to others. Externalization includes
such behaviors as acting out, blaming others for one's own mistakes,
projection, social gregariousness, extraversion, and direct avoidance.
Externalizers tend to behave in a manner easily characterized as
aggressive; they tend to actively avoid blame or responsibility and to
exhibit denial. They also tend to avoid taking responsibility for
change, leaving their future well-​being in the hands of others or fate.
Externalizers tend to respond best to symptom-​oriented procedures and
those treatments that provide structure, feedback, and enhance
behavioral coping skills. Principle 8: Readiness for Change The
readiness principle not only applies to the point of entry into
psychotherapy, but at the point of exit when follow-​up and continuing
work is needed. A patient who remains in the precontemplation stage will
find it difficult to commit to further treatment. Listening and
understanding the patient's investment in avoiding change may reveal
some avenues to pursue, and negotiating a level of intervention to which
the patient can make a commitment is often the goal at this point. When
patients achieve higher levels of readiness, the recommendations for
further treatment become more varied and the treatments suggested become
more flexible. As the patient enters the action phase and has made a
commitment to change, then the specificity of any needed referral and
follow-​up becomes of greater importance again. Until the patient has
experienced the benefits of change, their follow-​through and autonomy in
seeking out other treatment sources will be weak.

Therapists can vary their degree of directiveness and focus to fit the
patient's coping style and resistance levels at every stage of change.
Of course, treatment methods do not exist independently of the
practitioners who use them, and patients are more than diagnoses and
character traits. It is as important to know the patient who has a given
clinical problem as it is to know the disorder the patient is
experiencing. Therefore, the effectiveness of treatment is predicated on
therapist skills to adapt treatment to the most salient patient
dimensions beyond diagnosis. Though methods are important, even more
important is the systematic selection of those interventions that are
most likely to make a difference for a given patient. DIVERSITY
CONSIDERATIONS Psychotherapy is a culturally sanctioned approach within
the healing arts. Moreover, psychotherapy as a professional culture has
its own aspirational values expressed in general principles such as
nonmaleficence, beneficence, fidelity, and the like (www.apa.org/​ethics
/​code/​ ethics-​code-​2017.pdf), as well as practices such as
confidentiality. These values and practices may be familiar to,
congruent with, and expected by some patients while possibly awkward and
incongruent to others. Clinicians employing a culturally grounded
psychotherapy such as STS work toward mutual understandings with their
patients. The concept of fitting treatment to one's cultural behaviors
and beliefs is absorbed within the larger goals of fitting treatment to
specific qualities and characteristics. Culture specific attitudes and
beliefs are simply another way of characterizing some of the
compatibilities of treatment that therapists must address. They do so by
maintaining a respectful and listening attitude toward their patients,
one in which they actively join with them in discerning the influence
that historical, sociocultural, and contextual dimensions have on
presenting complaints, patients' strengths and difficulties, and ways to
redress their difficulties while furthering their strengths.

Systematic Treatment Selection

The Cultural Assessment of Risk for Suicide and the Minority Stress
Scale (Chu et al., 2013) are included within the STS/​innerlife to
broaden the nature of factors that are the object of a treatment fitting
process. These are specific scales to assess minority suicidality and
stress among ethnically diverse populations. This assessment is
activated at the discretion of the clinician or when some key questions
are scored in the direction of minority stress. Research is in the
process of identifying indicators for different treatments within these
stressed minority communities. Early results indicate that coping styles
and stages of change are identifiable across many different cultures,
but their expression may differ as a function of one's culture. For
example, internalization is the modal coping style in some countries,
and some behaviors that appear to be "externalizing" in one country may
in fact be strongly infused with internalizing guilt and blame. We
believe these embedded measures will prove useful in identifying risk
among minority groups and in helping therapists struggling with issues
related to cultural competence and humility. STS emphasizes the person
of the therapist as the most fundamental tool in psychotherapy. The
development of the therapist is fostered through awareness of our own
privileges, such as our education and profession, while considering the
influence of intersecting cultural dimensions in ourselves and our
patients (e.g., race, ethnicity, culture, (dis)abilities, sexuality, and
gender, among others). An STS approach is mindful of the impact that
xenophobia, discrimination, racism, ethnocentrism, ableism, and other
human shortcomings are likely to have on the therapist's ability to be
of service as well as the impact they may have on patients' presenting
complaints and experiences. Due to the implicit nature of many of our
biases, STS therapists welcome supervision and consultation concerning
diversity matters while engaging in the lifelong endeavor of fostering
cultural competence and humility. STS honors diversity by appreciating
the power differential in the therapeutic relationship and in the
variety of interventions utilized to establish and maintain the
therapeutic contract (e.g., informed consent, confidentiality,

151

mandated reporting, involuntary hospitalization). Specifically, in STS,
diversity is recognized through honoring the adage "one size does not
fit all." STS practitioners personalize treatment to the unique patients
and systematically select interventions tailored to the client's
singular context.

CASE EXAMPLE HG is a 45-​year-​old, white married male who voluntarily
participated in a research study on the treatment of comorbid stimulant
abuse and depression. He was seen in a psychology training clinic by a
master-​level drug counselor certified by the state of California. The
patient completed the initial 20 planned sessions and a 6-​ month
extension. The patient reported that he had been a poly-​ drug abuser off
and on for several decades. His preferred drug was heroin, but he also
abused cocaine, methamphetamines, and alcohol, as well as various
"downers." He had been through rehabilitation several times and on one
occasion had remained drug-​free for 5 years. At the time he was
referred, he was using heroin and cocaine on a weekly basis, as well as
engaging in daily marijuana use. HG was recently unemployed and was
trying to support himself and his family (one child) as a telephone
solicitor. His work had been negatively affected by frequent
absenteeism; finally, he had been terminated because of drug use at
work. His wife vowed support for him, but no longer trusted that he
could take care of the family or that he would stay chemical-​free as he
promised. In the initial assessment, the patient presented a chaotic
family history in which both parents were alcoholics and frequent drug
users. The patient began drug use at age 13 under the tutelage of his
older brother who supplied him with marijuana and heroin for the next 4
years until he was arrested for the first time for possession. Asked
about his own explanations for his difficulties HG responded, "You are
what you see." Assessment with the STS-​CRF computer-​based system
(Harwood & Williams, 2003) revealed the patient to have chronic
problems, to have both a

152

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

polysubstance abuse disorder and major depression, and to have a
probable personality disorder. Characteristics ascribed to him by the
intake clinician included moodiness, impulsivity, limited foresight and
insight, impatience, anger, resentment of authorities, and irritability.
These qualities were judged to be present across situations, suggesting
their trait-​like qualities. Thus, problem complexity and chronicity were
both high. Likewise, functional impairment was high, with impaired work,
social, and intimate functioning. At the same time, but somewhat
surprisingly, HG felt social support was moderate, with the patient
placing much reliance on the support of his wife and one other friend.
Though the patient was depressed, there were no indicators of current
suicidality. These findings supported intensive outpatient care. A
program of daily contact via electronic means and three times per week
treatment sessions, occasionally supplemented by collateral treatment
with his wife, was initiated. Weekly blood tests for drugs complemented
this work. Collectively, the patient's status on chronicity, complexity,
impairment, and social support suggested that treatment should be
intense. Inpatient care was considered but rejected because of insurance
coverage. An externalized coping style led to the targeting of symptom
change and interpersonal skill development, especially in the area of
impulse control. The patient's reactance level required that strong
assertions and control on the part of the therapist and the patient's
family be avoided. The initial treatment focus was on achieving
symptomatic change in drug use. The initial treatment plan called for
little emphasis to be placed on insight, given HG's impulsive and
externalizing coping style. Thus, daily monitoring, assisted by the
patient's wife, provided the degree of oversight needed to help him
transition off of drugs. His preferences for outpatient care and
self-​monitored drug withdrawal were accepted in order to fit the
treatment to the patient's resistance. However, a contingency plan of
involuntary hospitalization was presented in the event that these
initial self-​care efforts proved unsuccessful. This was presented
paradoxically, as a fallback position that would be employed if the
patient demonstrated that he could not control

his impulses. We anticipated that this paradoxical presentation might
strengthen his resolve to be self-​controlling. A working relationship
was slow to develop. The patient, initially, was distrustful and
guarded, saying little without being prompted. His attendance was spotty
at first, but the patient gradually became more open and, by the eighth
session, had come to seek advice and showed other indicators of active
participation. The therapist, accordingly, initiated treatment with
reflections, open but nonthreatening questions, and statements of
support. As the patient became more invested and his attendance
improved, the therapist began to introduce some homework assignments.
The sessions remained supportive and nonconfrontative, however, and the
patient accepted the weekly blood tests without resistance. Honoring
HG's views on what brought about his difficulties, we encouraged the
development of social contacts and role models as ways of improving
social support and facilitating commitment to a healthier life style. HG
selected Al-​ Anon from among a list of potential social referrals and
support groups provided by the therapist, again trying to work with,
rather than against, the patient's resistance tendencies. Thus, homework
assignments encouraged monitoring of abstinence, urges, effective
cognitive and behavioral coping strategies, increased social activities
(HG chose to join a hiking club for families), job-​seeking behaviors,
and support-​seeking from his wife and a friend. Telephone contact was
initiated as a way of maintaining low-​demand contact during the early
phase when he missed sessions. These calls were made to inquire about
and then to encourage attendance. Eventually, they were instrumental in
implementing a program that required him to call the therapist or his
closest friend each morning. This program was instituted to ensure his
ongoing compliance and continued throughout his treatment. With the
overall program, drug use began to decline under the initial suggestion
that he monitor urges and avoid change, then monitor urges and delay
use, and then monitor urges and reduce use. As the patient's resistance
would allow, self-​monitoring skills and symptom maintenance homework
instructions (e.g., "Don't try to quit

Systematic Treatment Selection your drug use, just keep it at the same
level for a while") were the focus of training and homework assignments
until about session 13. At that point, he was challenged to reduce his
drug use, "but not too rapidly." Drug withdrawal was complete by the
eighteenth session, and he remained substance-​ free through the duration
of the treatment and a 6-​ month, planned follow-​up period. HG terminated
successfully with two clean urine tests and was referred to a therapist
in the community for follow-​ up as needed.

OUTCOME RESEARCH A psychotherapy like STS, which is built on principles
of change rather than on circumscribed theories, offers certain
advantages to those who seek to implement outcome research. First, since
principles are independent, they can be separately validated as well as
validated as part of a large treatment package. Second, psychotherapies
frequently comply with some of the STS principles without specifically
intending to do so. Hence, it usually is possible to identify which
principles were employed in a given treatment plan and to determine if
their usage may have been related to positive outcomes. What is perhaps
the most unique contribution of STS is that it has sought empirical
support on how it works and when to intervene and then expressed the
findings in the form of principles of change that inform therapists'
actions regardless of theoretical leanings. Six randomized controlled
trials (RCT), at least three quasi-​experimental studies, and multiple
meta-​analyses provide empirical support for STS. We will review one RCT
to illustrate the methods and some of the typical findings. The first
RCT to test some of the core STS principles employed a sample of
moderately depressed patients (Beutler, Engle et al., 1991) and
concentrated on testing the principles of resistance and coping styles.
In this case, three therapies to be compared with one another were
selected because they systematically differed in the implicit principles
on which they

153

relied. CT, as a directive approach focused on symptom change, was
expected to perform best among patients who were low on resistance and
who were characterized by externalizing coping styles. Self-​directed
therapy was a low direction, insight-​ oriented approach and was expected
to perform best with patients who were highly resistant. Finally,
focused expressive psychotherapy was selected as a moderately directive
approach that focused on current experience and emotional awareness. It
was expected to do best among those with internalizing coping styles. A
test of the outcomes associated with the three treatments was
undertaken. Not surprisingly, few main effect differences emerged for
the three treatments; the "Dodo bird verdict" of equivalent outcomes was
supported. The next step in the analysis assessed the interaction
effects resulting in an effect size (d) of .75 associated with coping
style × insight/​ symptom focus and one of .88 (d) associated with
compliance with directiveness × resistance. A follow-​up (Beutler et al.,
1993) was undertaken at 12 months post discharge. The match between
patient trait-​ resistance and therapist directiveness then generated a
strong effect size (d) of 1.40, and the match between coping style ×
insight/​symptom focus earned a 1.64 (d), indicating that the match
enhanced maintenance effects. Subsequently, a cross-​ cultural
replication (Switzerland) was undertaken comparing two therapies, one
based on behavioral principles (high directiveness and symptom focused)
and one on client-​ centered therapy (low directiveness and insight
focused; Beutler, Mohr et al., 1991). Main effect differences modestly
favored the behavior therapy, but a within-​ groups comparison showed
that resistance and coping style matching significantly added to
treatment gains. Similar results were found across other studies with
different populations, including patients with co-​ occurring depression
and stimulant abuse (Beutler et al., 2003), substance dependence
(Beutler et al., 1993; Karno, Beutler, & Harwood, 2002), alcohol
dependence/​abuse (Karno & Longabaugh, 2004, 2005a, 2005b), and mixed
diagnostic samples (e.g., Beutler et al., 2012; Watzke et al., 2010).

154

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Our most recent study (Holt et al., 2015) demonstrated that training in
STS produced greater improvement among patients receiving care from
therapists supervised through STS compared to those who received
supervision as usual (SAU). The SAU group of graduate student therapists
achieved good results among their patients but were outperformed by
students who received STS-​assisted supervision (SAS). The effect sizes,
which were expressed as percentages of a standard deviation (d) drawn
from pre-​post differences were (d) = 0.72 (SAU) and 1.37 (SAS) and
revealed a d = .65 increase over students receiving SAU supervision.
More than 80% of the patients in the SAS group returned to "normal"
functioning by the end of treatment. In addition to individual studies,
of which we have reviewed only a few, the core principles have been
subjected to several meta-​analyses. Here, and for the purpose of
illustration, we will briefly report only on a meta-​analysis that has
addressed the principles of patient reactance levels. A meta-​analysis of
15 studies that reviewed the impact of treatment when a good fit (i.e.,
an inverse relationship between patient resistance and therapist
directiveness) occurred compared to when a poor fit was present (i.e., a
positive relationship occurred between patient resistance levels and
therapist directiveness) reported a mean d across studies of .81, a
strong effect in support of the match (Edwards, Beutler, & Someah, in
press). The significance of this study as well as others for which these
served as illustrations (e.g., Beutler, Edwards, Kimpara, & Miller, in
press; Edwards et al., in press) is threefold. First, they have
consistently found positive effects of STS, suggesting that the efficacy
of STS among mixed patient groups is comparable to that obtained among
diagnostically pure groups of depressed and chemically dependent
patients. Second, the meta-​analyses support the matching principles
identified earlier in this chapter. And third, emerging studies on
supervision using the STS principles have provided a clinically
convincing demonstration that the STS skills and principles can be
learned in supervision to the benefit of the client, outperforming
supervision

as usual. That, we reiterate, is the mandate and the goal of STS:
enhanced patient outcomes. The cumulative research on STS, as we have
noted, has included both inpatients and outpatients, alcoholics, co-​
occurring conditions, depressed and anxious outpatients, and European
and South American samples in addition to many from North America.
Moreover, the research has failed to reveal a specific effect of patient
diagnosis on treatment outcome when the effects of FI and other STS
factors are controlled (Beutler et al., 2012). We think these results
are promising for the generalization of STS principles. We conclude that
STS treatment matching does enhance the effects of psychotherapy. Even
compliance with a single principle produces substantial increases in the
proportion of change variance contributed by treatment. Moreover, the
higher effect sizes observed when STS is applied as a multiprinciple
package provides indirect evidence that the components are additive in
their effects.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS The most pressing needs in STS are the validation of
its therapeutic efficacy and the delineation of the principles of
therapeutic change. The past two decades have seen a substantial
increase in the number of research studies on therapy-​ patient-​
practitioner matching. Yet much needs to be done in extracting---​from
the many clinically relevant variables that have been touted as matching
dimensions---​ those that do serve as indicators and contraindicators.
Our own research has moved from correlational demonstrations of the
efficacy of matching dimensions to prospective studies that focus on
causality and guidelines for the practicing clinician. Prospective
research continues to be needed, however, to determine how well the
relations that have been observed between coping style and treatment
focus, and between reactance level and therapist's directiveness,
translate from major depression and anxiety symptoms

Systematic Treatment Selection

to other diagnostic groups. Likewise, systematic research is needed to
determine if the treatment procedures currently available are
sufficiently broad and flexible to encompass most patient patterns.
Finally, more research is needed on training effective psychotherapists.
Our recent studies (Holt et al., 2015; Stein, 2015) provide encouraging
support for the conclusion that trainees' effectiveness (and patient
outcomes) can be improved by using STS-​assisted supervision over the
usual supervision methods. However, both studies were performed at the
same training clinic and led by the primary developer of STS.
Replication in multiple sites is sorely needed. Beyond these research
questions, we believe that the future will see a continuation of
interest among psychotherapists in integrative, principle-​ driven,
evidence-​ based methods of responsively fitting psychotherapy to the
individual patient. The methods for assisting clinicians directly in
developing effective treatment plans will become more widely available,
such as that offered in electronic assessments. Ultimately, if any
integrative psychotherapies prove more beneficial than the approaches
they integrate, they must stand the empirical as well as the clinical
test. The matching concepts must be useful to the clinician, verifiable
to the scientist, acceptable to a diversity of practitioners, and
relevant to a pluralistic society.

References Beutler, L. E. (1979). Toward specific psychological
therapies for specific conditions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 47, 882--​897. Beutler, L. E. (1983). Eclectic psychotherapy:
A systematic approach. New York: Pergamon. Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin, J.
F. (1990). Systematic treatment selection: Toward targeted therapeutic
interventions. New York: Brunner/​Mazel. Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J. F.,
& Bongar, B. (Eds.). (2000). Guidelines for the systematic treatment of
the depressed patient. New York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L.
E., & Consoli, A. J. (1993). Matching therapist's style to clients'
characteristics. Psychotherapy, 30, 417--​422.

155

Beutler, L. E., Consoli, A. J., & Williams, R. E. (1995). Integrative
and eclectic psychotherapies in practice. In B. Bongar & L. Beutler
(Eds.), Comprehensive textbook of psychotherapy: Theory & practice
(pp. 274--​ 292). New York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L. E.,
Edwards, C., Kimpara, S., & Miller, K. (in press). Coping styles. In J.
N. Norcross & B. E. Wampold (Eds.), Psychotherapy relationships that
work: Vol. 2. Evidence-​based transdiagnostic responsiveness (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L. E., Engle, D., Mohr, D.,
Daldrup, R. J., Bergan, J., Meredith, K., & Merry, W. (1991). Predictors
of differential response to cognitive, experiential and self-​directed
psychotherapeutic procedures. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 59, 333--​340. Beutler, L. E., Forrester, B.,
Gallagher-​Thompson, D., Thompson, L., & Tomlins, J. B. (2012). Common,
specific, and treatment fit variables in psychotherapy outcome. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 22(3), 255--​281. Beutler, L. E., &
Harwood, M. T. (2000). Prescriptive psychotherapy: A practical guide to
systematic treatment selection. New York: Oxford University Press.
Beutler, L. E., & Malik, M. L. (Eds.). (2002). Rethinking the DSM.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Beutler, L. E.,
Mohr, D. C., Grawe, K., Engle, D., & MacDonald, R. (1991). Looking for
differential treatment effects: Cross-​ cultural predictors of
differential psychotherapy efficacy. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 1, 121--​141. Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., Malik, M.,
Harwood, T. M., Romanelli, R., Gallagher-​ Thompson, D., & Thompson, L.
(2003). A comparison of the Dodo, EST, and ATI indicators among comorbid
stimulant dependent, depressed patients. Clinical Psychology &
Psychotherapy, 10, 69--​85. Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., & Talebi, H.
(2002). How practitioners can systematically use empirical evidence in
treatment selection. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58, 1199--​1212.
Beutler, L. E., Patterson, K. M., Jacob, T., Shoham, V., Yost, E., &
Rohrbaugh, M. (1993). Matching treatment to alcoholism subtypes.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 30(3), 463--​472.
Beutler, L. E., Williams, O. B., & Norcross, J. C. (2009). Systematic
Treatment Selection---​STS/​ Innerlife \[proprietary software\]. Retrieved
from www.innerlife.com.

156

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Beutler, L. E., Williams, R. E., Wakefield, P. J., & Entwhistle, S. R.
(1995). Bridging scientist and practitioner perspectives in clinical
psychology. American Psychologist, 50, 984--​994. Bowlby, J. (1988). A
secure base: Clinical applications of attachment theory. London:
Routledge. Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981). Psychological reactance:
A theory of freedom and control. New York: Academic Press. Castonguay,
L. G. (2000). Controlling is not enough: The importance of measuring the
process and specific effectiveness of psychotherapy treatment and
control conditions. Ethics and Behavior, 12, 31--​42. Castonguay, L. G.,
& Beutler, L. E. (2006). Principles of therapeutic change: A task force
on participants, relationships, and techniques factors. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 62(6), 631--​638. Castonguay, L., Constantino, M.
J., & Beutler, L. E. (Eds.). (in press). Principles of psychotherapeutic
change that work: How psychotherapists implement research in practice.
New York: Oxford University Press. Chambless, D. L., & Ollendick, T. H.
(2001). Empirically supported psychological interven­ tions:
Controversies and evidence. Annual Review of Psychology, 52, 685--​716.
Chu, J., Floyd, R., Diep, H., Pardo, S., Goldblum, P., & Bongar, B.
(2013). A tool for the culturally competent assessment of suicide: The
Cultural Assessment of Risk for Suicide (CARS) measure. Psychological
Assessment, 25(2), 424--​434. Consoli, A. J., Fernández-​Álvarez, H., &
Corbella, S. (2017). The training and development of psychotherapists: A
life-​ span perspective. In A. J. Consoli, L. E. Beutler, & B. Bongar
(Eds.), Comprehensive textbook of psychotherapy: Theory and practice
(2nd ed., pp. 462--​479). New York: Oxford University Press. Edwards, C.,
Beutler, L. E., & Someah, K. (in press). Reactance/​resistance. In J. N.
Norcross & B. E. Wampold (Eds.), Psychotherapy relationships that work:
Volume 2. Evidence-​ based transdiagnostic responsiveness (3rd ed.). New
York: Oxford University Press. Fernández-​Álvarez, H. (2001). Formación
de terapeutas: Entrenamiento en habilidades terapéuticas \[Training of
psychotherapists: Training in psychotherapeutic skills\]. In H. Mesones
Arroyo (Ed.), La formación del psicoterapeuta \[The training of the
psychotherapist\] (pp. 75--​ 90). Buenos Aires, Argentina: Anaké.

Fisher, D., Beutler, L. E., & Williams, O. B. (1999). Making assessment
relevant to treatment planning: The STS clinician rating form. Journal
of Clinical Psychology, 55, 825--​842. Forsyth, N. L., & Forsyth, D. R.
(1982). Internality, controllability, and the effectiveness of
attributional interpretations in counseling. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 29,140--​150. Goldfried, M. R., & Davison, G. C. (1976).
Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. Harwood,
T. M., Beutler, L. E., & Groth-​Marnat, G. (2011). Integrative assessment
of adult personality (3rd ed.). New York: Guilford. Harwood, T. M.,
Beutler, L. E., Williams, O. B., & Stegman, S. (2011). Identifying
treatment relevant assessment: Systematic Treatment Selection. In T. M.
Harwood, L. E. Beutler, & G. Groth-​Marnat (Eds.), Integrative assessment
of adult personality (3rd ed., pp. 61--​ 79). New York: Guilford.
Harwood, T. M., & Williams, O. B. (2003). Identifying treatment relevant
assessment: The STS. In L. E. Beutler & G. Groth-​Marnat (Eds.),
Integrative assessment of adult personality (2nd ed., pp. 65--​81). New
York: Guilford. Holt, H., Beutler, L. E., Kimpara, S., Macias, S., Haug,
N. A., Shiloff, N., . . . Stein, M. (2015). Evidence-​based supervision:
Tracking outcome and teaching principles of change in clinical
supervision to bring science to integrative practice. Psychotherapy, 52,
185--​189. Karno, M. P., Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2002).
Interactions between psychotherapy procedures and patient attributes
that predict alcohol treatment effectiveness: A preliminary report.
Addictive Behaviors, 27, 779--​797. Karno, M. P., & Longabaugh, R.
(2004). What do we know? Process analysis and the search for a better
understanding of project MATCH'S anger-​by-​treatment matching effect.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 65(4), 501--​512. Karno, M. P., &
Longabaugh, R. (2005a). An examination of how therapist directiveness
interacts with patient anger and reactance to predict alcohol use.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 66(6), 825--​832. Karno, M. P., &
Longabaugh, R. (2005b). Less directiveness by therapists improves
drinking outcomes of reactant clients in alcoholism treatment. Journal
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 73(2), 262--​267. Longabaugh, R.,
Beattie, M., Noel, N., Stout, R., & Malloy, P. (1993). The effect of
social

Systematic Treatment Selection investment on treatment outcome. Journal
of Studies on Alcohol, 54, 465--​478. Luborsky, L., Rosenthal, R.,
Diguer, L., Andrusyna, T. P., Berman, J. S., Levitt, J. T., . . .
Krause, E. D. (2002). The Dodo bird verdict is alive and well mostly.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 2--​12. Machado, P. P. P.,
& Beutler, L. E. (2017). Research methods and randomized clinical trials
in psychotherapy. In A. J. Consoli, L. E. Beutler, & B. Bongar (Eds.),
Comprehensive textbook of psychotherapy: Theory and practice (2nd ed.,
pp. 445--​461). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C. (Ed.).
(2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​ based
responsiveness (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross,
J. C., Krebs, P. M., & Prochaska, J. O. (2011). Stages of change. In J.
C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​
based responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 279--​ 300). New York: Oxford
University Press. Ollendick, T. H., & Murphy, M. J. (1977). Differential
effectiveness of muscular and cognitive relaxation as a function of
locus of control. Journal of Behavioral Therapy & Experimental
Psychiatry, 8, 223--​228. Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1983).
Stages and processes of self-​ change in smoking: Toward an integrative
model of change. Journal of Consulting & Clinical Psychology, 5,
390--​395. Rogers, C. R. (1957). The necessary and sufficient conditions
of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21,
95--​103.

157

Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Shaker, A. (2014). Research on
therapeutic impasses and ruptures in the therapeutic alliance.
Contemporary Psychoanalysis. 50, 211--​232. Stein, M. (2015). The impact
of a common factors, principle-​ based supervisory approach on treatment
outcomes at a psychology training clinic (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from ProQuest. (Order No. AAI10187625) Tougas, K., & Shandel,
T. (1989). Did you used to be R. D. Laing? Vancouver, Canada: Third Mind
Productions. Wachtel, P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy,
and the relational world. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. E. (2015). The great
psychotherapy debate: Research evidence for what works in psychotherapy
(2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. Watzke, B., Rüddel, H., Jürgensen, R.,
Koch, U., Kriston, L., Grothgar, B., & Schulz, H. (2010). Effectiveness
of systematic treatment selection for psychodynamic and
cognitive--​behavioural therapy: Randomised controlled trial in routine
mental healthcare. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 197(2), 96--​105.
Wolf, A. W., Goldfried, M. R., & Muran, J. (2013). Transforming negative
reactions to clients: From frustration to compassion. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. Wolfe, B. E., & Goldfried, M. R.
(1988). Research on psychotherapy integration: Recommendations and
conclusions from an NIMH workshop. Journal of Consulting & Clinical
Psychology, 56, 448--​451.

C. Theoretical Integration

8 The Transtheoretical Approach JAMES O. PROCHASKA AND CARLO C.
DICLEMENTE

Impetus for the transtheoretical approach came from several sources.
First and foremost was a discontent with the state of affairs in
psychotherapy theory, research, and practice. The narrowness and
frequent dogmatism of the proponents of many therapies and the
consistent research findings of few differences in outcome between
therapy systems encouraged a search for alternatives. Therapy systems
focused more on theories of psychopathology and single mechanisms of
change than on an exploration of the more extensive process of
intentional behavior change. Positive regard, authenticity, living in
the here and now, confrontation of beliefs, social interest,
conditioning, and contingencies are valuable rules for human functioning
but are not sufficient to explain psychotherapy change. In 1977,
Prochaska, with the help of his graduate students, embarked on a journey

through the major systems of therapy to seek the commonalities across
the boundaries of the most popular theories of psychotherapy. Systems of
Psychotherapy: A Transtheoretical Analysis (Prochaska, 1979; Prochaska &
Norcross, 2018) represents the culmination of this journey. The map used
for the journey indicated that active ingredients identified by theories
of psychotherapy can be summarized by 10 processes of change. Although
the framework used in this analysis appeared to have face validity, it
remained a conceptual integration with no empirical basis. Since that
initial work, we and many collaborators applied and studied the
transtheoretical model, created assessment instruments, expanded its
scope, and explored its limitations. This research supported our model
of change and encouraged us to continue the development of The
Transtheoretical

161

162

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Approach: Crossing the Traditional Boundaries of Therapy (Prochaska &
DiClemente, 1984). As our applications expanded beyond office-​ based
psychotherapy of psychopathology in individuals to a proactive treatment
of health problems in entire populations, we have expanded the model.
Changing for Good (Prochaska, Norcross, & DiClemente, 1994) and Changing
to Thrive (Prochaska & Prochaska, 2016) are apt titles for helping
individuals and populations progress across the stages of change.
Hundreds of outcome studies using the transtheoretical model have now
been conducted around the world on dozens of health and behavioral
problems. A final impetus for our work was the zeitgeist among
psychotherapy practitioners and theorists. We heard the pleas for a more
integrated and comprehensive approach to psychotherapy that would take
into account the differences in the experiences of therapists and
clients. Moreover, in our thinking, an integrative approach should
account for how individuals change on their own (unaided by
psychotherapy) as well as how individuals change with the assistance of
psychotherapy.

simplistic, or clinically irrelevant integration will never be adopted.
3. Bring some order to the chaotic diversity and divisiveness in
psychotherapy but not by merely throwing a collection of techniques into
a toolbox to hide the chaos. 4. Offer a researchable alternative to
single-​ system and comparative research designs. Explanation without
experimentation will not silence critics of integration or
psychotherapy. 5. Generate a systematic approach: a structure or set of
principles that are comprehensive enough to include crucial dimensions
of the work of psychotherapy and behavior change and, at the same time,
provide a perspective that promotes collaboration, creativity, and
choice. The transtheoretical approach attempts to meet these goals by
means of four critical dimensions: the processes of change, the stages
of change, the pros and cons of change, and the levels of change. In the
following sections, we review these four dimensions and their important
interconnections. Processes of Change

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH The proliferation of psychotherapy systems
reflects the complex, interactive nature of psychotherapy. The daily
dilemma facing the clinician is what to do, when to do it, with whom, in
what way, with which problem. Both in the research literature and in
clinical experience, it has become clear that no one system of therapy
addresses adequately all these questions. From our perspective, an
integrative perspective will accomplish the following goals: 1. Preserve
the valuable insights of major systems of psychotherapy. Trying to
reduce all therapy systems to their least common denominator removes
their richness. 2. Provide practical answers to pressing questions faced
by clinicians. However elegant a theory might be, an impractical,

An analysis of the 24 most popular theories of psychotherapy (Prochaska,
1979) yielded the first of the four dimensions of the transtheoretical
approach: the processes of change. Transtheoretical therapy began with
the assumption that integration across a diversity of therapy systems
most likely would occur at an intermediate level of analysis, somewhere
between overarching theory and specific techniques. Coincidentally,
Goldfried (1980, 1982), in his well-​known call for a rapprochement,
independently suggested that principles of change were the appropriate
starting point for integration. The processes of change, then, may best
be understood as a middle level of abstraction between the global
theoretical assumptions of a system of psychotherapy and its specific
techniques. A process of change represents the activities initiated or
experienced by an

Transtheoretical Approach

individual in modifying thinking, behavior, or emotion related to a
particular problem. Although there are many coping activities, there
appear to be a finite set of processes that represent change principles.
In a similar manner, techniques of therapy can be analyzed to see which
change process they would draw on or promote. Thus, therapist feedback
would provide new information and challenge current thinking about the
problem. These therapist activities would enable the individual to
engage in more accurate information processing. From a transtheoretical
perspective, these activities activate the process of change known as
"consciousness raising" in the client. Subsequent research has driven
modifications of our original formulations. That research has
consistently yielded 10 distinct processes of change: consciousness
raising, self-​ liberation, social liberation, counterconditioning,
stimulus control, self-​ reevaluation, environmental reevaluation,
contingency management, helping relationships, and dramatic
relief/​emotional arousal. Our studies indicate that people in the
natural environment generally use these 10 processes of change to modify
problem behaviors (DiClemente & Prochaska, 1982). Most major systems of
therapy, however, theoretically employ only two or three processes
(Prochaska & Norcross, 2018). One of the assumptions of the
transtheoretical approach is that therapists should be at least as
cognitively complex as their clients. They should think in terms of a
more comprehensive set of processes and apply techniques to engage each
process when appropriate. Stages of Change A second dimension of the
transtheoretical approach is the stages of change, which reflect the
temporal and intentional aspects of change. Intentional change is not an
all-​or-​none phenomenon but a gradual movement through specific stages.
Lack of awareness of the stages led some theories of therapy to assume
that clients arriving at therapy present in the same stage of change and
are ready for the same change processes.

163

Studies of various outpatient populations (e.g., Carbonari & DiClemente,
2000; DiClemente & Hughes, 1990; McConnaughy, DiClemente, et al., 1989;
McConnaughy et al., 1983) have found a variety of profiles on a Stages
of Change measure. Clearly, all individuals who come to therapy are not
at the same place in terms of their stage of change. We have identified
five stages of change: precontemplation, contemplation, preparation,
action, and maintenance. A stage of change represents both a period of
time and a set of tasks needed for movement to the next stage. Although
the time spent in each stage may vary, the tasks to be accomplished to
achieve successful movement to the next stage are assumed to be
invariant. In the move from precontemplation to contemplation, an
individual must become concerned and aware of the problem, make some
acknowledgment of or take ownership of the problem, confront defenses
and habitual aspects that make it difficult to control, and see some of
the negative aspects of the problem or positive aspects of change in
order to move to the next stage of seriously contemplating change. One
of the most helpful findings to emerge from our research is that
specific processes of change are emphasized during particular stages of
change. The integration of stages and processes of change has been well
supported across problem areas. In fact, a meta-​ analysis of 47 cross-​
sectional studies (Rosen, 2000) examining the relation between the
stages and processes found moderate to large effect sizes: .70 for
variation in cognitive-​affective processes by stage and .80 for
variation in behavioral processes by stage. This integration serves as
an important guide for therapists. Once a client's stage of change is
clear, the therapist likely knows which processes to activate to
optimally help the client complete critical tasks and progress to the
next stage of change. Rather than try to engage change processes in a
haphazard or trial-​and-​error approach, integrative therapists can use
change processes more systematically. Table 8.1 summarizes the
integration that emerged in our research explorations of the

164

Integrative Psychotherapy Models TABLE 8.1 Processes of change
emphasized at particular stages of change Precontemplation

Contemplation

Preparation

Action

Maintenance

Consciousness raising Emotional arousal Environmental reevaluation
Self-​reevaluation Self-​liberation Contingency management
Counterconditioning Stimulus control

stages and processes of change (DiClemente, 2018; Prochaska &
DiClemente, 1983). During precontemplation, individuals use change
processes significantly less than people in any other stage. Individuals
in precontemplation process less information about their problems, spend
less time and energy reevaluating themselves, experience fewer emotional
reactions to the negative aspects of their problems, are less open with
significant others about their problems, and do little to shift their
attention or their environment in the direction of overcoming their
problems. In therapy, these are clients who are labeled "resistant."
What can help people move from precontemplation to contemplation? Table
8.1 suggests several change processes that prove most helpful. First,
consciousness raising interventions, such as observations, feedback, and
interpretations, can help clients become more aware of the causes,
consequences, and cures of their problems. To move to the contemplation
stage, clients have to become more aware of the negative consequences of
their behavior. Often, we must help clients become more aware of their
defenses before they can become more conscious of what they are
defending against. Second, the process of dramatic relief or emotional
arousal provides clients with helpful affective experiences (e.g.,
psychodrama, gestalt empty chair), which offer emotional experiences
related to problem behaviors. Life events, such as illness or death of a
friend or lover, can also move individuals in precontemplation
emotionally. As clients become increasingly more aware of themselves and
the nature of their problems,

they are freer to reevaluate themselves both affectively and
cognitively. The self-​reevaluation process includes an assessment of
which values clients will try to actualize. The more central problems
are to their core values, the more their reevaluation will involve their
sense of self. Contemplators also use environmental reevaluation to
reevaluate the effects that their behaviors have on their environments,
especially the people they care about most. Addicted individuals, for
example, may ask, "How do I think and feel about living in an
environment that places me and my family in increasing risk of disease,
death, poverty, and/​or imprisonment?" Movement through the contemplation
stage involves increased use of cognitive, affective, and evaluative
processes of change leading to a decision to change. To better prepare
individuals for action, changes are required in how people think and
feel about their problem behaviors and how they value their problematic
lifestyles. Preparation indicates a readiness to change in the near
future and realization of valuable lessons from past change attempts and
failures. They are on the verge of taking action and need to set goals
and priorities accordingly. Patients in preparation often develop an
implementation intention and action plan for how they will proceed. In
addition, they build firm commitments to follow through on the action
option they choose. In fact, they are often already engaged in processes
that would increase self-​ regulation and initiate behavior change
(DiClemente et al., 1991). People typically begin by taking some small
steps toward action.

Transtheoretical Approach

During the action stage, clients act from a sense of self-​liberation.
They need to believe that they have the autonomy and to take
responsibility to change their lives in key ways. Yet they also accept
that coercive forces are as much a part of life as is autonomy. Self-​
liberation is based in part on a sense of self-​ efficacy (Bandura, 1977,
1982), the belief that one's own efforts play a crucial role in
succeeding in the face of difficult situations. Self-​ liberation,
however, requires more than an affective and cognitive foundation.
Clients must also be effective using behavioral processes, such as
counterconditioning and stimulus control, to cope with those external
circumstances that can coerce them into relapsing. If necessary,
therapists can provide training in behavioral processes to increase the
probability that clients will be successful when they do implement plans
and take action. Successful maintenance builds on each of the change
processes that has come before and involves a candid assessment of the
conditions under which a person is likely to be encouraged or coerced
into relapsing. Clients assess the alternatives they have for coping
with such coercive forces without resorting to self-​defeating defenses
and pathological responses. Perhaps most important is the sense that one
is becoming more of the kind of person one wants to be. Continuing to
apply counterconditioning, stimulus control, and reinforcement
management is most effective when it is based on the conviction that
maintaining change maintains a self that is highly valued by oneself and
at least one significant other. The amount of progress patients
typically make in treatment is a function of their pretreatment stage of
change. A meta-​analysis of 76 psychotherapy studies (encompassing 21,424
patient) found that stages robustly predict (d = .41) distal outcomes
(Krebs, Norcross, & Prochaska, 2018). Several longitudinal studies
illustrate this meta-​analytic finding. In an intervention study with
smokers with heart disease, Ockene and her colleagues (1992) found that
22% of smokers in precontemplation prior to treatment were not smoking
at a 6-​month follow-​ up. However, of those in contemplation, 44% were
abstinent and approximately

165

80% of those in preparation or in action were not smoking at 6 months.
With a household sample of Mexican American smokers in Texas (Gottlieb
et al., 1990), at a 12-​to 18-​month follow-​up, smokers originally in
contemplation progressed to the action and/​or maintenance stages four
times as frequently as smokers originally in the precontemplation stage.
The amount of progress head-​injury adults made in rehabilitation also
was directly related to their stage of change prior to treatment (Lam et
al., 1988). Pros and Cons of Changing A third dimension of the
transtheoretical model is the pros and cons of changing, which represent
the decisional and motivational aspects of change. Janis and Mann's
(1977) model of decision-​making inspired our original work on the pros
and cons of change. They identified four types of "pros" or benefits of
decisions and a similar set of "cons" or costs: instrumental benefits/​
costs to self, instrumental benefits/​ costs to others,
approval/​disapproval from self, and approval/​disapproval from others.
Questionnaires assessing the pros and cons included items to represent
each of these eight categories. Principle components analyses
consistently demonstrated that decision-​ making could be reduced to two
core constructs: pros and cons of changing (Velicer et al., 1985). When
weighing important life changes, people do not differentiate benefits to
self from those for others or instrumental benefits from affective or
evaluative. They do clearly differentiate the pros from the cons. Most
importantly, there are clear and consistent associations between the
stages of change and the pros and cons of changing across all types of
problems. A meta-​analysis was performed on the relation of the pros and
cons and stages of change across 43 behaviors in more than 60,000 people
from nine nations (Hall & Rossi, 2003). The problem behaviors included
depression, stress, anorexia, alcohol abuse, heroin addiction, cocaine
abuse, obesity, smoking, partner abuse, and more. Figure 8.1
demonstrates how clear integration can be even in the face of so many
differences.

166

Integrative Psychotherapy Models Stage Transitions 56 54 52 50 48 46 44
PC

Cont

Prep

Action

Pros

Maint

Cons

FIGURE 8.1 Integration of pros and cons by stages of change across 43
behaviors.

Across 43 behaviors, the cons of changing outweigh the pros by .7
standard deviations (SD) for people in precontemplation. The opposite is
true for people in maintenance where the pros of changing are .7 SD
higher than the cons. The pros of changing are clearly higher in
contemplation than in precontemplation. In contemplation, the pros and
cons are about equal, reflecting the profound ambivalence that
characterizes the contemplation stage. The pros and cons cross over for
people in the preparation stage who are more convinced that the huge
efforts needed during the action stage are likely to be worth it. The
further along people are in the stages, the more convinced they are that
the struggles to change are worthwhile. It might be helpful here to
briefly apply these change dynamics to people's decisions to participate
in treatment. We need to keep in mind that the weighing of the pros and
cons of changing is not fully conscious or rational. The clear patterns
in Figure 8.1 only emerge if standardized scores rather than raw scores
are used. If raw scores were used, then the pros of changing would
outweigh the cons at each stage. Imagine clients in the precontemplation
stage who are prescribed psychotherapy or medication for depression.
Their cons of treatment would clearly outweigh the pros. So, if they
started treatment, they would likely be among the 40% who would
discontinue treatment quickly and prematurely. That is exactly what we
found in predicting more than 90% of premature termination from
psychotherapy: those

in precontemplation were highly likely to discontinue. Those in the
action stage were likely to finish therapy quickly but appropriately, as
judged by their therapists (Brogan et al., 1999). A growing number of
studies indicate that by matching processes of change to stage of
change, patients in precontemplation can complete a treatment program at
the same high rates as those in preparation (e.g., Prochaska et al.,
1993; Prochaska, Velicer, Fava, Rossi, & Tsoh, 2001; Prochaska, Velicer,
Fava, Ruggiero, et al., 2001). Levels of Change At this point in our
analysis, we appear to be discussing how to approach a single, well-​
defined problem. However, as clinicians know, reality is not so
accommodating. Although we can isolate certain symptoms and syndromes,
these occur in the context of complex, interrelated levels of human
functioning. In changing any one behavior there is the life context
surrounding that change. The fourth dimension of the transtheoretical
approach addresses this issue. The levels of change represent an
organization of five distinct and interrelated levels of psychological
problems that can be addressed in psychotherapy: ◆ ◆ ◆

Symptom/​situational problems Maladaptive cognitions Current
interpersonal conflicts

Transtheoretical Approach

problem level. Integrating the levels with the stages and processes of
change provides a model for intervening hierarchically and
sysHistorically, systems of psychotherapy have tematically across a
broad range of therapeutic attributed psychological problems primarily
to content. Table 8.2 presents an overview of the one or two levels and
focused their interventions integration of levels, stages, and processes
of on these levels. Behavior therapists have focused change. on the
symptom and situational determinants, Three basic strategies can be
employed for cognitive therapists on maladaptive cognitions, intervening
across multiple levels of change. family therapists on the
family/​systems level, The first is a shifting levels strategy. Therapy
and psychoanalytic therapists on intrapersonal would typically focus
first on the client's conflicts. It is crucial that both therapists and
symptoms and the situations supporting those clients agree as to which
level they attribute symptoms. If processes could be applied effecthe
problem and at which level or levels they tively at this level and the
client could progress are willing to target as they work to change the
through each stage of change, treatment could problem (Begin, 1988). be
completed without shifting to a more comIn the transtheoretical
approach, we con- plex level of analysis. If this focus proved
ineffecsider intervening initially at the symptom/​sit- tive or
incomplete, therapy should shift to other uational level because change
tends to occur levels in sequence to achieve desired change. more
quickly at this level and symptom/​situa- Table 8.2 illustrates the
strategy of shifting from tional problems are often primary reasons for
a higher to a deeper level by the arrows moving entering therapy. The
further down the levels first across one level and then down to the we
focus, the further removed from awareness next level. are the
determinants of the problem and the The second strategy is the key level
strategy. more historically remote and more interrelated If clinical
assessment points to one key level of the problem is with the sense of
self. Thus, causality and the client can effectively be enwe often
predict that the "deeper" the level gaged at that level, the therapist
could work that needs to be changed, the longer and almost exclusively
at that level. The key level more complex therapy is likely to be and
the may also represent the problem area where the greater the resistance
of the client (Prochaska client has the most motivation or is in the
most & DiClemente, 1984). active stage of change. These levels, it
should be emphasized, The third alternative is the maximum impact are
not independent: change at any one level strategy. With many complex
cases, it is evident is likely to produce change at other levels. that
multiple levels are involved as a cause, an Symptoms often involve
intrapersonal conflicts, effect, or a maintainer of the client's
problems. and maladaptive cognitions often reflect family/​ Interventions
in these cases need to address system beliefs or rules. In the
transtheoretical multiple levels of change in order to establish
approach, the complete therapist is prepared to a maximum impact for
change in a synergistic intervene at any of the five levels of change,
al- rather than a sequential manner. though the preference is to begin
at the highest, Each system of psychotherapy has distincmost
contemporary level that clinical assess- tive strengths within the
transtheoretical model. ment and judgment can justify. Table 8.3
illustrates where leading systems of therapy fit best within the
integrative framework of the transtheoretical approach. Depending on
Integrating Levels, Stages, and Processes the patient's level and stage
of change, different In summary, the transtheoretical approach therapy
systems will play a more or less promisees therapeutic integration as
the differential nent role. Behavior therapy, for example, has
deapplication of the processes of change at spe- veloped specific
interventions at the symptom/​ cific stages of change according to
identified situational level for clients who are ready for ◆ ◆

Family/​Systems conflicts Intrapersonal conflicts

167

168

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

TABLE 8.2 Interaction of levels, stages, and processes of change Stages
Levels Symptom/​ Situational

Precontemplation

Contemplation

Preparation

Action

Maintenance

Consciousness raising Emotional arousal Self-​reevaluation
Self-​liberation Contingency management Counterconditioning Stimulus
control

Maladaptive cognitions Interpersonal conflicts Family systems conflicts
Intrapersonal conflicts

action. At the maladaptive cognition level, however, Ellis's
rational-​emotive therapy and Beck's cognitive therapy are most prominent
for clients in the contemplation and action stages. We have not excluded
any therapy systems from the transtheoretical approach. Our approach is
an open framework that allows for integration of new and innovative
interventions, as well as the inclusion of existing therapy systems that
either research findings or clinical experience suggest are most helpful
for clients in particular stages at particular levels of change
(DiClemente, 2018).

ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION Accurate assessments of the clients' stage,
level, and processes of change are crucial to the transtheoretical
approach. Therapy should prove most effective if patient and therapist
are matched and working at the same stage and level of change. The
joining of the patient and therapist is centered around the structure
and process of intentional change. The therapist's role is one of
maximizing self-​change efforts by facilitating neglected processes, de-​
emphasizing overused processes, correcting

TABLE 8.3 Integration of psychotherapy systems within the
transtheoretical framework Stages Levels

Precontemplation

Symptom/​situational

Motivational interviewing

Maladaptive cognitions therapy

Adlerian therapy

Interpersonal therapy conflicts

Sullivanian therapy

Contemplation

Preparation

Action

Solution-​focused

Maintenance

Behavior therapy Exposure therapy Rational emotive

Third-​wave Therapies Cognitive therapy

Family/​ systems Strategic therapy conflicts Intrapersonal conflicts
Psychoanalytic therapies

Interpersonal Transactional analysis Bowenian therapy

Existential therapy

Structural therapy Gestalt therapy Dialectic behavior therapy

Transtheoretical Approach

inappropriately applied processes, teaching new processes, and
redirecting change efforts to the appropriate stages and levels of
change. Clinical assessment of the stages, levels, and processes
requires a specific focus within the clinical interview. Knowledge of
both the attitudes and intentions toward a change, as well as the
actions taken about it, are needed for accurately assessing the stages
of change. It is important to know that an individual stopped drinking 1
week ago when his partner left him. However, equally important is
knowing whether this is the first step in taking significant action
toward intentional change of his drinking or an attempt to change his
partner's behavior. Another method of assessing the current stage of
change is to evaluate how adequately an individual accomplished the
tasks of any prior stage of change. If someone has contemplated changing
only casually or briefly, for example, then that person often would not
have made a decision strong enough to support the commitment and plan
needed to take action. Assessment of the levels of change requires a
clinical interview that addresses each of the levels. In a case of
vaginismus, we must know the symptomatic expression and situational
determinants of the sexual dysfunction but should also explore explicit
and implicit thoughts, the couple's interpersonal functioning, family
system involvement, and any possible intrapersonal conflicts regarding
identity, self-​esteem, and so on. In this assessment, it is important to
establish at which level or levels the patient perceives the problem, as
well as the levels that the clinician assesses are integrally involved
in the problem. For one couple it could be related to a religious or
moral belief, for another an issue of interpersonal control or anger,
and for another a physiological anxiety symptom. Evaluating the
processes of change being employed by the patient can be a rather
extensive task. Therapists should explore what the patient is currently
doing about the problem, how often these activities are occurring, and
what has been done in the past in attempts to overcome the problem. An
obsessive patient may be relying heavily on consciousness-​raising

169

as the most important process while neglecting more action-​oriented
processes. In our research, we developed assessment instruments to
evaluate the stages, levels, and processes of change. The University of
Rhode Island Change Assessment Scale (URICA), or Stages of Change
Questionnaire, is a 32-​ item questionnaire with four scores:
precontemplation, contemplation, action, and maintenance (DiClemente &
Hughes, 1990). Several forms of a questionnaire to assess the processes
of change have also been developed (www.uri.edu/​cprc; www.umbc.edu/​psyc/​
habits). The questionnaires typically contain two to four questions
about activities that would represent each of the processes, and clients
are asked to indicate how frequently each activity occurs. Because
change processes differ somewhat for diverse problems, we have adapted
this format to a variety of problems, such as alcoholism, overeating,
depression, and exercise. These questionnaires have shown robust
consistency across problem areas (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1986), and
principal component analyses have yielded 10 or more consistent
components in their use with both clients and therapists. Processes of
Change Scales can be used to assess change processes before, during, and
after therapy to examine how therapy interventions affect utilization of
processes (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1985). Change process activity has
been found to relate to therapist theoretical orientation (Prochaska &
Norcross, 1983) and client activity in the various stages of change
(DiClemente & Hughes, 1990; Snow et al., 1992; Tejero et al., 1997) and
to be predictive of successful movement through the stages of change
(Carbonari & DiClemente, 2000). The Level of Attribution and Change
(LAC) Scale contains four or more questions representing each of the
five levels of change used in the transtheoretical model. In addition,
five other levels are assessed because people do not attribute their
problems only to psychosocial sources. Individuals often blame bad
genes, bad luck, or bad karma for their inability to change. Other
levels of attribution include spiritual determinism, biological

170

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

determinants, insufficient effort, and preferred lifestyle (Norcross et
al., 1984,1985; Norcross & Magaletta, 1990; Penny, 1987).

this should be an important secondary goal if treatment or incarceration
goals are to be maintained after the individual is released into the
community. In working with intentional change, the APPLICABILITY AND
STRUCTURE transtheoretical approach is quite compatible with the
traditional structure of psychotherapy The transtheoretical model
applies to all clin- (Connors et al., 2013). Weekly, hour-​ long ical
problems of psychological origin as well sessions can implement the
treatment proas to many health problems that require beha- cess. Because
we envision psychotherapy as vior change (Marcus et al., 1992;
Prochaska, an adjunct to self-​ change, what occurs beNorcross et al.,
1992). Thus, the approach is ap- tween therapy sessions is as important
as what plicable to psychopathology and health-​related happens within
therapy sessions. A longer, problems. In addition, the framework can
cate- more intense therapy session with the inclugorize treatment
delivery systems according to sion of significant others may be needed
for an the types of clients and problems they primarily individual in
precontemplation to overcome address. defenses. Less frequent sessions
can be used Because we often intervene first at the for individuals in
contemplation and maintesymptom/​situational level, the transtheoretical
nance. For the former, more time between sesapproach can be used in both
a short-​term and sions can allow clients time to use the processes a
long-​term format. Ideally, length of therapy, of consciousness-​ raising
and self-​ reevaluation setting, and modality will be determined more in
the service of decision-​making. For the latter, by the stage of change,
level of problem in- time between sessions can be used to monitor
volvement, and type of change processes em- temptation levels and
encounter any obstacles ployed rather than a predetermined set on to
continued action or maintenance that occur the part of the therapist. A
family intervention less frequently. Thus, in effect, therapy sessions
that brings family members together to make become booster sessions. an
effective intervention with the patient can The goal of our clinical and
research work is be used for an alcohol-​dependent individual to identify
the variables most effective in helping in precontemplation. Individual
and couples clients move through the stages of change retherapy can work
through contemplation garding a particular problem. In this context, and
achieve effective action when working treatment selection is too generic
a term. In the with sexual dysfunctions. Group therapy can best spirit
of using case formulation, we idenbe tailored to patients in all stages
of change tify which tasks of a particular stage need to be (Velasquez
et al., 2015). addressed and which processes will prove most Because the
transtheoretical approach effective in helping an individual move from
concentrates on intentional change, one stage to the next. The decision
to engage contraindications are settings or problems a particular
process is multiply determined. where intentional change is not the
primary Rather than stating a priori that countercondigoal. In a
correctional setting or in managing tioning (e.g., exposure, cognitive
therapy, bethe self-​destructive behavior of a child, control, havioral
activation) is the treatment of choice not intentional change, may be
the primary for phobic or depressive problems, we prefer to goal.
However, external behavioral control analyze first the stages and levels
of change beappears to be the treatment of choice using the fore making
prescriptive matches. processes of contingency control and stimulus We
realize that this approach places a sizcontrol. Once the immediate
threat to self or able burden on the therapist. However, simothers has
been managed, therapists can bring plicity can be a source of mediocrity
and the problem behaviors under intentional self-​ confusion. We have
found, for example, that control rather than external control. In fact,
insufficient use of consciousness raising in the

Transtheoretical Approach

contemplation stage forces individuals to rely excessively on
self-​liberation or will power in their efforts to change and leads to
what Janis and Mann (1977) have called post-​decisional regret. The
overuse of self-​reevaluation during maintenance and while abstinent, on
the other hand, is predictive of relapse (DiClemente & Prochaska, 1985).
Thus, matching patients with change processes requires both a general
knowledge of the stages, processes, and levels of change as well as
specific information about individual clients and what they have been
using, underusing, or overusing to effect changes in their lives.
Although stage matching is a complex process, mismatches are readily
apparent. A therapist committed to consciousness raising and exploration
of all the levels of change prior to taking action may frustrate a
client ready to take action at the symptomatic level. An action-​oriented
therapist may be constantly disappointed by clients in precontemplation
who drop out quickly or fail to implement suggested behavioral
techniques. A family therapist insisting that change take place at the
family systems level with the whole family present may be unable to
engage a system with a key member in precontemplation. Treatment
matching should be to the process of change and not simply to the
problem being addressed. From our perspective, the problem with using a
more medical model in psychotherapy is that it focuses on diagnosis and
cure rather than process and intentional change. Even with most physical
health problems and chronic conditions that require health behavior
modification, the medical model has proved problematic. Medication
compliance, diet control, and exercise all require intentional change
and are not simply solved with a prescription or advice. Disorder is an
important concept for developing a taxonomy that enables us to bring
together certain symptoms and syndromes for classification. Although
this information is valuable in understanding a problem, knowledge of a
disorder by itself has limited value in prescribing therapy
interventions when intentional behavior change is an important part of
the remedy (Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this volume).

171

THERAPY RELATIONSHIP Although psychotherapists have not struggled with
all the problems faced by their clients, all therapists have experience
with the processes of change. This is the common experiential ground
that forms the basis of the relationship between therapist and client.
In general, the therapist is the expert on change---​not in having all
the answers, but in being aware of the crucial dimensions of change and
offering assistance. Clients have potential resources as self-​changers
that must be actualized to effect a change. In fact, clients shoulder
much of the burden of change and look to the therapist for consultation
on how to conceptualize the problem and on methods to free themselves to
move from one stage to another. As with any interactive endeavor,
rapport must be built to accomplish the work. However, the type of
relationship will vary with the stage and level of change being
addressed. Initiation of therapy with a precontemplation client, for
example, takes on a different flavor. A client's unwillingness to see or
own a problem is not viewed as resisting the therapist or being
uncooperative but as resisting change and preserving autonomy.
Therapists must become aware of how frightening and anxiety-​ provoking
the prospect of change can be. With this shift in perspective, the
therapist can take on the role of a concerned advisor or nurturing
parent who can help the individual explore the problem (DiClemente,
1991). The therapist becomes an ally rather than another person
attempting to coerce change. For a person contemplating change, the
therapist takes care not to be too impatient. Contemplation can be a
lengthy, frustrating stage---​not only for the patient, but also for the
therapist. Although therapists should not support chronic contemplation,
they must tolerate ambivalence and avoid blame, guilt, and premature
action. To decide to change, patients must see that change is possible
and in their own best interests. The therapist, like a Socratic teacher,
can challenge clients by making explicit the pros and cons of both the
problem behavior and the change. Support, understanding, compassion, and
a relationship that enables

172

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

the therapist to make explicit the hopes, fears, and concerns of the
client are needed during this time. During the action stage, the
therapist assumes a more formal teaching and coaching relationship.
During these stages, the client is likely to idealize the therapist.
When initiating action, the client needs the support of a helping
relationship and may need to lean on the confidence of the therapist
rather than a self-​generated sense of efficacy. Initial efforts are
likely to be tentative, and seeing the therapist as a change expert can
prove comforting. However, as soon as is feasible, it is important for
the client to develop more self-​confidence and independence. For
therapists who need to be needed, this can pose a difficult problem. In
the maintenance stage, the therapist becomes an occasional
consultant---​preventing relapse, consolidating gains, and identifying
potential trouble spots. Letting go, saying goodbye, and helping the
client assume ownership of the change are the final tasks of the therapy
relationship.

will likely revert to previous patterns once the coercion is removed.

PROCESSES OF CHANGE

1.  Empowerment, resilience, and taking responsibility are important
    elements of the process of change and represent values of a more
    individualistic culture. In more collectivist cultures, processes
    and tasks may have to be broadened to include involvement of family
    and community. Conversations about change will include cultural
    considerations and understanding how the cultural context will
    impact the process as well as the problem.
2.  The process of change requires cultural humility. Pros and cons,
    emotional experiences, and values that move individuals through
    precontemplation and contemplation are culturally influenced and
    must be respected. Action plans and coping activities also need to
    be acceptable and accessible to clients and may need to be adapted
    (reinforcement, counterconditioning). Some emotional and
    re-​evaluation processes may need to be adapted to include different
    experiences and values.

As already noted, the transtheoretical approach identified the processes
that are most effective in producing change at different stages. The
mechanisms that move someone from precontemplation to contemplation are
different from the processes that move someone from preparation to
action (Velasquez et al., 2015). The important issue here is that
intentional change, such as occurs in psychotherapy, is only one type of
change that can move people. Developmental and environmental changes can
also cause people to alter their lives. However, imposed change often is
not sustained (Stotts et al., 1996). The transtheoretical approach
focuses primarily on facilitating intentional change, but it recognizes
and, at times, relies on other types of change when working with
clients. We assume, however, that unless developmental or environmental
changes produce intentional change as well, clients can feel coerced by
forces not of their choosing and

DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS Intentional change is a universal human
phenomenon, and the concepts and approaches described in this chapter
have been translated and are being used in a wide range of countries and
cultures. Researchers and practitioners from around the world---​
including Britain, Brazil, France, Poland, South Korea, Australia,
India, New Zealand, the Philippines, China, Mexico, and Japan---​have
found these concepts useful, which supports focusing on process and not
simply problems. At the same time, it is important to consider cultural
diversity for clients of historically marginalized backgrounds related
to sex, gender, ethnicity, race, poverty, education, and heritage when
using this approach. Here are some examples and suggestions for
incorporating diversity into the application of the transtheoretical
model.

Transtheoretical Approach

3.  Racism, poverty, stigma, and ethnic alienation create unique
    barriers to engaging in the process of change. Often, these forces
    keep people in precontemplation and contemplation, making it
    difficult to see the pros of change. These systemic forces also tend
    to promote coercive rather than intentional change, thus further
    undermining choice and the ability to move through the intentional
    process of change.
4.  Poverty, lack of education, and lack of opportunity create a
    maelstrom of problems that overwhelm the capacity of the client to
    address change effectively. Lack of resources and multiple problems
    interfere with contemplation and preparation activities and make it
    difficult for individuals to use processes of change. Multiple
    problems overwhelm the self-​regulation system needed to accomplish
    tasks of the stages. These individuals tend to be reactive and not
    proactive and are often labeled unmotivated rather than overwhelmed.
    These clients will require structural and well as relational
    support.
5.  Beliefs systems in cultures and subcultures about sex, gender, and
    race influence the opportunities for change and can limit the
    capacity of individuals in these cultures to make change decisions
    that go against the cultural norms. Therapists must proceed
    cautiously in imposing views about change that are not cognizant of
    cultural views. Behavioral change described in this chapter can be
    used to understand change at an individual as well as a system
    level. Culture can constrain and can liberate the potential for
    intentional change. As with all issues of diversity, understanding
    the individual, the context, and the culture as experienced by that
    individual is the only certain way to address differences and
    diversity competently and to support empowerment and resilience.

173

take a series of cases to reflect the full range of stages, levels, and
processes of change used with a diversity of patients. Thus, if the
reader were looking over the shoulder of a transtheoretical therapist,
the therapist's interventions would vary tremendously depending on the
needs of specific clients. Nevertheless, we will illustrate our approach
through the treatment of a distressed client partially within the
context of couple therapy. Tom is a 50-​ year-​ old white heterosexual
school teacher referred for marital therapy by a mental health colleague
who had been working with Tom's wife, Barbara, in individual therapy for
about a year. Barbara's therapist did not believe that Tom would stay in
treatment for more than three sessions, even though he was quite
distressed and needed individual therapy. Tom agreed to go to therapy
only if they went as a couple. Tom and Barbara were seen together in the
first session to assess their problems and ability to work together at
the interpersonal level. The first problem at hand in this case was
Tom's resistance to therapy. Addressing the problem directly
communicates that the therapist cares about the client's concerns and
that the client need not be defensive. It also communicates the
therapist's hope that there may be something to make it easier for the
client to become a more willing participant. Many spouses have said that
partners would never come to therapy or stay. And yet we have found that
almost all reluctant partners will come in for at least one session if
the therapist asked, and most would continue. Tom: I don't believe
therapy is worthwhile. My wife has been going to therapy for a year, and
she's still always lying and spending money like it's going out of
style. Therapist: Sounds like you might be angry at her therapist. Tom:
You're damn right! He just feeds into her wasting money. Therapist: Have
you let him know you're angry? Tom: No, he doesn't want to talk to me.

CASE EXAMPLE By its very nature, an integrative therapy cannot be
illustrated by a single case. Rather, it would

Therapist: Would you like me to let him know you're angry? Tom: Yeah, I
would appreciate that.

174

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

So, we're off and running. Tom's resistance is being addressed, and he
does not have to be defensive about his defensiveness. He may learn to
experience the therapist as someone who cares about his defensiveness
and is trying to understand it. He may, to his surprise, experience the
therapist as being helpful in dealing both with his resistance and with
his anger. At the same time, the therapist has to be concerned with
Barbara experiencing the therapist as Tom's ally. The therapist could
have addressed Tom's anger toward his wife for what he labels "lying and
wasting money." But this would have risked putting Barbara on the
defensive, and, if she counterattacked, the couple could slip into the
blame game.

Barbara also resented Tom's preoccupation with money. If he wasn't
preoccupied about her spending money, then he was preoccupied with his
compulsive gambling. Tom denied that his gambling was a problem. From
the transtheoretical perspective, it appeared that Tom was in
precontemplation about most of his problems. The exception was his
gambling, which Tom had changed on his own to relatively controlled
gambling. Barbara, on the other hand, had been contemplating changes in
her marriage for the past year in psychotherapy that most likely would
be divorce. Few couples present asking for divorce therapy. Assessing
whether a couple is likely to be a divorce case rather than a marital
case can make a considerable difference in therapeutic approach
Therapist: It must be hard to have your husband and outcomes. Elsewhere,
we present in detail accusing you of lying and wasting money. the subtle
and not so subtle signs of impending I knew I was still risking the
blame game but divorce that we use to assess a couple's case I felt that
I wanted to empathize with her as well (Prochaska & DiClemente, 1984).
as with Tom. I also wanted to communicate that In the current case,
obvious signs included the I appreciated that there are two sides to
every fact that Barbara had been contemplating divorce marital conflict,
and her perspective was as con- for some time and told some of her
family and sequential as Tom's. friends. When people go public, they are
moving These opening segments indicate that closer to action. Barbara
had also lost excess transtheoretical treatment usually begins imme-
weight and engaged in other self-​improvement acdiately. There usually is
not a formal assessment tivities, often a preparatory action when
heading period, although assessment occurs right from the for divorce.
Barbara had also been in individual start. In the course of the first
two sessions, the fol- treatment for a year working on increased
indelowing information was shared. Tom's mood was pendence and autonomy.
usually depressed, he couldn't relax, had trouble Tom, on the other
hand, was psychologically dissleeping, was irritable and often verbally
abusive, tressed. He had not been contemplating divorce, alfelt lousy
about himself, and was having trouble though he knew that Barbara was.
On the contrary, relating to his students, his colleagues, and the he
was obsessed with trying to control Barbara's customers that sought his
services in his after-​ actions to prevent losing her. Tom was resistant
to school job. Tom's distress increased whenever he change and
distressed by the prospect of having approached Barbara to be sexual and
she refused. the drastic change of divorce imposed on him. Barbara was
incensed with Tom. She was angry Imposition of change/​the loss of
control is one of about his constant accusations about her lying, the
most common causes of psychological distress. spending money behind his
back, and having afPsychological distress caused by imposed fairs when
she went out on Friday night with her change is likely to lead to people
resisting change female friends. He would check the phone bill to
(DiClemente, 2018) since change is experienced see whom she had been
calling, open her mail to as a threat, not an opportunity, and people
may dig see what money she owed, and sometimes follow more deeply into
precontemplation. Moreover, her to see if she was seeing other men. How
as they become cognitively impaired by discould she want to make love
when they were in tress, they have trouble contemplating change, a game
of "cops and robbers?" Tom coerced her making decisions, and taking
action, even action into having intercourse a couple of times, and she
that could lead to self-​enhancement (Mellinger resented it. et al.,
1983).

Transtheoretical Approach What to do with spouses in different stages of
change, which is common in couple therapy? What do we do when we have
spouses in different stages for divorce, which is even more common in
divorce therapy (DiClemente & Wiprovnick, 2017)? The most common pattern
is one spouse in precontemplation and one ready for action, like Tom and
Barbara. When we are treating psychological distress precipitated by an
impending and imposed divorce, we need to slow down the spouse who is
ready for action and speed up the spouse who is resisting change.
Barbara was willing to spend some time trying to resolve their
interpersonal problems. The therapist made it clear that they were going
to work at the interpersonal level to improve their relationship whether
they stayed together or got divorced. Either way, they were going to
have a relationship because they shared two lovely daughters. The couple
needed to become more conscious of the interactive nature of their
conflicts. The therapist presented feedback based on his assessment of
what was transpiring at the interpersonal level. Tom and Barbara agreed
that their struggles over control produced the most conflict. Tom's
actions appeared to be based on his intention to keep the marriage going
and was based on values of closeness and togetherness. Barbara, on the
other hand, had developed an increased need for independence; her
actions were based on values of individuality and separateness. The
problem was that, in a vicious cycle, the more Tom tried to control
their being together, the more Barbara felt a need to be apart. Barbara
agreed. Conversely, the more Barbara pulled apart, the more Tom felt the
need to control her to keep them together. Tom agreed. The needs and
values that Tom was expressing set off opposite needs and values in
Barbara. The blame game rests on our preference for linear
causality---​one partner acts, and the other partner reacts. Circular
causality, on the other hand, can help couples appreciate that they both
act and react---​that their behavior is both a cause and an effect of
their ongoing relationship (cf. Wachtel & Gagnon, Chapter 9, this
volume). Tom and Barbara became more conscious of how they personally
contributed to their control struggles. They were also re-​evaluating
their partner's behavior to some extent. Togetherness

175

is more positive than dependence. Separateness is something different
from selfishness. With the help of the therapist's mini-​ lectures based
on his experience with family life education (Prochaska & Prochaska,
1982), Tom and Barbara became aware that a more mature relationship
includes both togetherness and separateness. They were taught that
individuals mature in their relationships from dependence to
independence to interdependence, which is the caring and sharing of two
independent individuals. As they moved into preparation, the therapist
recommended that Tom be in charge of separate activities and Barbara be
in control of shared activities. Tom was going to liberate himself from
a vicious circle by acting more like Barbara and vice versa. The longer
they could continue such reversal of roles, the more they would
condition themselves to respond with new alternatives. This plan worked
for a while. Tom took charge of recording on the calendar Barbara's
nights out with her friends and his golfing dates. Barbara recorded
their dates together on the calendar and was in charge of initiating
shared activities. They were communicating better and feeling better.
Tom's chief complaint was that Barbara was not initiating sex. Because
they were doing better, the therapist recommended that gradual
involvement in sexual relating could help them overcome anxieties about
sexual performance. They had been avoiding sex for quite a while, and
the initial steps of sensate focusing (Masters & Johnson, 1970) might
give Barbara, in particular, a chance to deal with her feelings about
gradually getting close again. They agreed with the idea that they would
start with light massage. Tom came alone to the next session. "Barbara
is not coming back again. She said she knows she just wants out of the
relationship." The therapist probably had made a mistake in too quickly
encouraging them to move to action in their sexual relationship. After
the session, the therapist called Barbara, expressed his concern that he
might have made a mistake, and inquired if she would be willing to come
in to talk about how she was feeling. Barbara came in for a couple of
sessions. She said that the only thing the therapist's

176

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

recommendation had done was force her to realize that she did not want
to be close to Tom anymore. The fact that their relationship had
improved made her even more aware that she did not feel the same about
him. She was concerned that Tom would not handle a divorce, but she
wanted out. Tom was distressed but not devastated. Fortunately,
psychotherapy had become a place where he could be open about his
feelings. He was not alone as he had feared. He allowed himself to
relive the memories of losing his first love as a young man. He had felt
more rejected then than he felt now. He had so many regrets about not
having tried harder in that relationship. But this time he had been
trying. Back then, he withdrew from everyone. He stayed in his room. He
wasn't able to eat. He couldn't work. No wonder he avoided contemplating
divorce with Barbara. He never, ever wanted to go through such emotional
hell again. He thought he could not handle another rejection, but now
realized that he did not have to go through it alone this time. Not only
was therapy available, but he had other helping relationships. Now, Tom
could talk more openly and rely on the social supports in his natural
environment. Tom was making many self-​changes after 22 therapy sessions
but was puzzled by his reluctance to move out and get a place of his
own. He told himself that it was because he wanted to be close to his
daughters, but he knew he was really afraid that Barbara might turn them
against him. He also realized that he was still concerned about money
and did not want to spend the money on an apartment. Furthermore,
staying in the house was a safe way of expressing his resentment at
Barbara for rejecting him. At a deeper level, Tom became aware that
leaving his home stirred up painful feelings about when he had to leave
his family of origin's home. And, at an intrapersonal level, Tom became
aware that he did have unresolved dependency problems. He had, for
example, never lived alone. The therapist helped Tom to appreciate that
moving out and living on his own was a maximum impact action that could
facilitate further progress at each level of his life. At a situational
level, Tom would be moving into a new environment that would reflect the
new era of his life, free from all

the reminders that elicited so many painful thoughts and feelings. At a
cognitive level, Tom would be challenging his catastrophizing tendencies
that added to his distress, such as his belief that it was awful that he
was the one to have to move when he did not want the divorce in the
first place. At the interpersonal level, Tom could let go of his desire
to control his relationship with Barbara. As long as Barbara wanted him
out and he refused to leave, Tom felt in control. But he could let go of
this need to control and accept that Barbara was getting the house. At
the family level, Tom was tempted to move back with his parents. Moving
on his own, however, would enable Tom to separate further from his
parents without rejection or resentment. And, at the intrapersonal
level, Tom could experience himself as becoming more fully adult. He
would be moving beyond dependence to independence. After a couple of
months of encouragement in therapy and additional harassment at home,
Tom was ready to leave the nest. This was a major move in his life.
Moving out was transformative. Tom felt more fully connected to life
than he had ever known. For the first time in his life he began to
appreciate activities like concerts and plays. He asserted himself and
found women responding rather than rejecting. Certainly, he felt lonely
at times, but never alone. He even felt a spiritual awakening. Tom made
a remarkable transformation from a distressed and defensive individual
preoccupied with a small portion of his existence to a growth-​ oriented
person functioning more freely and fully at each level of life. What
process or processes account for such rewarding changes? First, Tom had
been facing turning 50 and had the benefit of developmental changes
urging him to a new stage of life. Second, he faced dramatic but
distressing environmental changes being imposed upon him. Third,
psychotherapy had helped Tom shift from a resentful and resistant
position in precontemplation to becoming more conscious of and committed
to the self-​liberating qualities of intentional change. The last time
the therapist talked to Tom, not only was he doing well with his woman
friend, his family, his daughters, his friends, and himself; he also won
\$750 in the lottery two weeks in a row.

Transtheoretical Approach

177

underutilized, overutilized, or utilized appropriately (Prochaska et
al., 1988) temptations One influential line of research has examined and
self-​ efficacy across the most important the stages and processes of
change in substance smoking situations (Velicer et al., 1990); and abuse
treatment. Patients entering alcohol techniques for coping with specific
situations. and substance abuse treatment have different The
personalized condition (PITT) included profiles on the stages of change
(Carney & the stage-​ based manuals, computer reports, Kivlahan, 1995;
DiClemente & Hughes, 1990; and four proactive counselor calls. Except
for Heather et al., 1993). Using a motivational one call, counselors had
the computer reports readiness score based on the stages of change to
counsel clients about changes they were scales, Project MATCH
investigators found making on key process variables. that baseline
readiness scores were one of the The results were revealing. The two
strongest predictors of posttreatment drinking manual conditions
replicated each other outcomes for the 952 outpatients in this large
through the 12-​month follow-​up. At the 18-​ multisite alcoholism
treatment matching trial month follow-​up, however, the individualized
(DiClemente et al., 2003; Project MATCH, transtheoretical manuals (18.5%
abstained) 1997, 1998). Baseline stage predicted outcomes were
performing better than the standardized when treatment type did not
(DiClemente (ALA) manuals (11%). The interactive comet al., 2001).
Client motivation at baseline puter reports outperformed both manual
also related to how individuals engaged with conditions at each of the
four follow-​ ups, the therapist (working alliance) and how ac- producing
more than twice as much quitting tive they were in using the processes
of change at each follow-​up than the gold standard ALA and other
external resources to modify their manual (e.g., 25.2% vs. 11% at 18
months). drinking (DiClemente et al., 2003). Finally, The personalized
counselor calls doubled the post-​treatment stage and process of change
ac- quit rates of the two manual conditions up tivities during
treatment, particularly behavioral to the 12-​month follow-​up. By the
18-​month process activity, predicted drinking outcomes follow-​up,
effects from the PITT condition (Carbonari & DiClemente, 2000; Heather
appeared to have plateaued (18%) and only & McCambridge, 2013). Results
indicate outperformed the ALA manuals, whereas the that outcomes are
probably due more to what transtheoretical manual condition seemed
clients do than what therapists do (DiClemente to have caught up with
the counselor call et al., 2003). condition. During the past 25 years,
we have conducted These results suggest that interactive coma series of
clinical trials on the effectiveness of puter feedback on stage-​matched
variables can the transtheoretical model. In our first clin- outperform
the best self-​help program currently ical trial, we randomly assigned
770 smokers available. Providing smokers interactive feedin Rhode Island
by stage to one of four treat- back about their stages of change,
decisional ment conditions: standardized, individualized, balance,
processes of change, self-​efficacy, and interactive, and personalized
(Prochaska et al., temptation levels in crucial smoking situations
1993). The standardized treatment used the can produce greater success
than just providing best self-​help program available, the American the
best self-​help manuals currently available. Lung Association's (ALA's)
action and mainThe next controlled trial demonstrated the tenance
manuals. The self-​help manuals were efficacy of the expert system
applied to an enindividualized to the stage of change. The in- tire
population recruited proactively. With teractive condition (ITT)
involved computer-​ more than 80% of 5,170 smokers participating
generated progress reports with feedback about and fewer than 20% in the
preparation stage, we stage of change; decisional balance measures re-
demonstrated significant benefit of the expert garding quitting smoking
(Velicer et al., 1985); system at each 6-​month follow-​up (Prochaska up
to six processes of change that were being et al., 2001). Furthermore,
advantages over OUTCOME RESEARCH

178

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

proactive assessment alone increased at each follow-​ up for the full 2
years assessed. The implications here are that expert system
interventions in a population can continue to demonstrate benefits long
after the intervention has ended. In more recent research, we have been
enhancing our expert system to produce even better outcomes. In one
trial, we added a personal handheld computer designed to bring the
behavior under stimulus control (Prochaska et al., 2001) in a population
of smokers in a health maintenance organization (HMO). This innovation
was an action-​oriented intervention that did not enhance our expert
system program on a population basis. In fact, our expert system alone
was twice as effective as the system plus the enhancement. There are two
major implications: (1) more is not necessarily better, and (2)
providing interventions mismatched to stage can make outcomes markedly
worse. These results also support our assumption that the most powerful
behavior change programs for entire populations will be interactive
(Velicer et al., 1999). In the reactive clinical literature, interactive
interventions like behavioral counseling produce greater long-​term
abstinence rates (20--​30%) than do noninteractive ones such as self-​help
manuals (10--​ 20%). Providing assessment-​ driven interactive
interventions via computers is likely to produce greater outcomes than
relying on noninteractive communications, such as newsletters, media, or
self-​help manuals. We next extended the stage-​ matched expert systems to
treatments for populations with alternative problems, like psychological
stress. With a national sample suffering from stress symptoms, we
recruited more than 70% (N = 1,085) to a single behavior change program
(Evers et al., 2006). The transtheoretical program involved assessments
on each of the constructs to derive three expert system--​t ailored
communications for 6 months and a stage-​based self-​help manual. At the
18-​month follow-​up, the transtheoretical program group had more than 60%
of the at-​risk sample reaching action or maintenance in terms of stress
reduction compared to 42% for the control group.

This outcome was maintained during the next 12 months. Finally, we offer
some studies that focus on the effectiveness of transtheoretical therapy
for mental health disorders. Primary care patients experiencing major
depression or subclinical depression and not receiving treatment (n =
480) and those nonadherent with antidepressant medications were
randomized to receive transtheoretical-​based treatment (TTM) or usual
care. TTM condition participants were more likely to have clinically
significant improvement compared to usual care (35% vs. 25%) with an
odds ratio of 1.79. Patients with major depression also had greater
improvement (22% vs. 6%). This depression program received recognition
as an evidence-​based practice by Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA) (Levesque et al., 2011). In school-​
based trials examining TTM-​ based Internet programs compared to controls
in reducing bullying and violence, the TTM conditions outperformed the
control condition with both middle and high school youth. There were
decreases in the three roles of bully, victim, and passive bystander,
with a 40% decrease compared to 19% in middle school and 40% compared to
22% in high school youth (Evers et al., 2007). A meta-​analysis of 88
prospective, tailored interventions delivered by mail or computer across
smoking cessation, physical activity, healthy diet, and mammography
screening demonstrated an effect size of d = 0.18 for TTM-​ t ailored
interventions. This represents a 39% increase over assessment or usual
care (Krebs, Prochaska, & Rossi, 2010). With a population of patients in
Canada with diabetes, we proactively recruited 1,040 patients to a
multiple behavior change program for diabetes self-​management (Jones et
al., 2001, 2003). With this population, self-​ monitoring for blood
glucose (SMBG), diet, and smoking were targeted. Patients were randomly
assigned to standard care or TTM. The TTM program involved monthly
contacts that included three assessments, three expert system reports,
three counseling calls, and three newsletters targeted

Transtheoretical Approach

to the participant's stage of change. At 12-​month assessments, the TTM
group had significantly more patients in action or maintenance for diet
(41% vs. 32%) and for SMBG (38% vs. 25%). With smoking, 25% of the TTM
group were abstinent compared to 15% of usual care. Similar results were
found in a population-​based study in Hawaii (Rossi et al., 2002). We
believe that the future of behavior change interventions lies with
stage-​matched, proactive, and interactive interventions driven by
sensitive assessments that focus on client stages, processes, and levels
of change (DiClemente, 2018; Heather et al., 2009). Interventions should
offer what the client needs to achieve the tasks of the specific stages
and to engage in critical processes of change. Our research demonstrates
that interventions can promote change in interpersonal settings like
therapy as well as in telephone-​and Internet-​ based programs that
include feedback and tailored interventions. At a population level,
interventions generate greater impacts with proactive programs because
of much higher participation rates, even if efficacy rates are lower.
But we also believe that proactive programs reaching out to individuals
in various stages of change can produce comparable outcomes to
traditional reactive programs that wait until clients request help.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS The health of our nation and the health of our
healthcare systems cannot wait 25 more years for the dissemination of
psychotherapy integration. The top priority for the transtheoretical
approach is the rapid dissemination of available science and systems.
The first problems that are likely to be treated on a population basis
are high-​cost conditions, such as depression, addiction, and stress.
Populations with multiple behavior problems are also high-​risk and
high-​cost and are major candidates for population-​based treatments. We
are working with healthcare systems, employees, governments, and other
organizations to bring the most effective and cost-​efficient therapies
to these populations.

179

One clinical strategy that we are studying is a stepped care approach,
where we begin with the least intensive and least costly of treatments,
such as computer-​ based TTM programs. Participants who are progressing
with these programs would continue with them. Those who are not
progressing would be stepped up to a more intensive treatment, such as
telephone counseling. Those not progressing with this help would then be
stepped up to face-​to-​face psychotherapy with TTM-​ trained therapists.
Another is to focus on the self evaluations of individuals related to
decision making, processes of change and self efficacy (Shaw &
DiClemente, 2016; Velasquez et al., 2015). We also need to test the
limits on how many behavior problems can be treated simultaneously
without reducing effectiveness. To date, we have effectively treated
three behaviors on a population basis with no decreased efficacy but
with increased impacts on health and healthcare costs. Even single
behavioral targets, such as smoking, could benefit from multiple
behavior therapies that can treat major barriers to successful
cessation, such as stress, depression, alcohol abuse, and weight gain.
There are hopeful trends that encourage integrated care and precision
medicine in the future. Those trends view patients across differing
stages of change and in need of comprehensive treatments for multiple
health disorders (DiClemente et al., 2016; Prochaska & Prochaska, 2016).
Focusing on the individual's process of change will empower healthcare
practitioners of all professions and persuasions to provide targeted yet
integrative strategies.

References Bandura, A. (1977). Self-​efficacy: Toward a unifying theory
of behavior change. Psychological Review, 84, 191--​215. Bandura, A.
(1982). Self-​ efficacy mechanism in human agency. American Psychologist,
37, 122--​147. Begin, A. (1988). Levels of attribution of alcoholics,
their spouses and therapists at pre and post in-​ patient treatment.
Unpublished dissertation, University of Rhode Island.

180

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Brogan, M. M., Prochaska, J. O., & Prochaska, J. M. (1999). Predicting
termination and continuation status in psychotherapy by using the
transtheoretical model. Psychotherapy, 36, 105--​113. Carbonari, J. P., &
DiClemente, C. C. (2000). Using transtheoretical model profiles to
differentiate levels of alcohol abstinence success. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 68, 810--​817. Carney, M. M., &
Kivlahan, D. R. (1995). Motivational subtypes among veterans seeking
substance abuse treatment: Profiles based on stages of change.
Psychology of Addictive Behaviors, 9, 1135--​1142. Connors, G.,
DiClemente, C. C., Velasquez, M. M., & Donovan, D. (2013) Substance
abuse treatment and the stages of change: Selecting and planning
interventions (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. DiClemente, C. C. (1991).
Motivational interviewing at the stages of change. In W. R. Miller & S.
Rollnick (Eds.), Motivational Interviewing: Preparing people to change
addictive behaviors (pp. 191--​ 202). New York: Guilford. DiClemente, C.
C. (2018). Addiction & change: How addictions develop and how addicted
people change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. DiClemente, C. C.,
Carbonari, J., Zweben, A., Morrel, T., & Lee, R. E. (2001). Motivation
hypothesis causal chain analysis. In R. Longabaugh & P. W. Wirtz (Eds.),
Project MATCH: A priori matching hypotheses, results, and mediating
mechanisms (pp. 206--​ 222). National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism Project MATCH Monograph Series, Volume 8. Rockville, MD:
National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. DiClemente, C. C.,
Carroll, K. M., Miller, W. R., Connors, G. J., & Donovan, D. M. (2003).
A look inside treatment: Therapist effects, the therapeutic alliance,
and the process of intentional behavior change. In T. F. Babor & F. K.
DelBoca (Eds.), Treatment matching in alcoholism (pp. 166--​183). London:
Cambridge University Press. DiClemente, C. C., & Hughes, S. O. (1990).
Stages of change profiles in alcoholism treatment. Journal of Substance
Abuse, 2, 219--​235. DiClemente, C. C., Norwood, A. E., Gregory, W. H.,
Travaglini, L., Graydon, M., & Corno, C. (2016). Client Centered,
Collaborative, and Comprehensive Care: The Royal Road to

Recovery. Journal of Addictions Nursing, 27(2), 94--​100. DiClemente, C.
C., & Prochaska, J. O. (1982). Self-​ change and therapy change of
smoking behavior: A comparison of processes of change of cessation and
maintenance. Addictive Behaviors, 7, 133--​142. DiClemente, C. C., &
Prochaska, J. O. (1985). Processes and stages of change: Coping and
competence in smoking behavior change. In S. Shiffman & T. A. Wills
(Eds.), Coping and substance abuse (pp. 319--​ 344). New York: Academic
Press. DiClemente, C. C., Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., Fairhurst,
S., Rossi, J. S. & Velasquez, M. (1991). The process of smoking
cessation: An analysis of precontemplation, contemplation and
preparation stages of change. Journal of Consulting & Clinical
Psychology, 59, 295--​304. DiClemente, C. C., & Wiprovnick, A. E. (2017)
Precontemplation in couple and family therapy. In J. Lebow, A. Chambers,
& D. C. Breunlin (Eds.), Encyclopedia of couple and family therapy
(pp. 1--​3). New York: Springer. Evers, K. E., Prochaska, J. O., Johnson,
J. L., Padula, J. A., Prochaska, J. M. (2006). A randomized cliniscal
trial of a population and the transtheoretical model based stress
management intervention. Health Psychology, 25(4), 521--​529. Evers, K.
E., Prochaska, J. O., Van Marter, D. F., Johnson, J. L., Prochaska, J.
M. (2007). Transtheoretical-​ based bullying prevention effectiveness
trials I middle schools and high schools. Education Research, 49,
397--​414. Goldfried, M. (1980). Toward the delineation of therapeutic
change principles. American Psychologist, 35, 931--​950. Goldfried, M.
(Ed.). (1982). Converging themes in psychotherapy. New York: Springer.
Gottlieb, N. H., Galavotti, C., McCuan, R. S., & McAlister, A. L.
(1990). Specification of a social cognitive model predicting smoking
cessation in a Mexican-​American population: A prospective study.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 14, 529--​542. Hall, K. L., & Rossi, J.
S. (2003). Informing interventions: A meta-​analysis of the magnitude of
effect in decisional balance stage transitions across 43 health
behaviors. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 25(Suppl.), S180. Heather, N.,
Hönekopp, J., & Smailes, D. (2009). Progressive stage transition does
mean getting better: A further test of the transtheoretical

Transtheoretical Approach

181

model in recovery from alcohol problems. psychotherapy: Measurement and
sample Addiction, 104, 949--​958. profiles. Psychotherapy, 20, 368--​375.
Heather, N., & McCambridge, J. (2013). Post-​ Mellinger, G. D., Balte, M.
B., Uhlenhuth, E. H., treatment stage of change predicts 12-​month Cisin,
I. H., Manheimer, D. I., & Rickles, K. outcome of treatment for alcohol
problems. (1983). Evaluating a household survey measure Alcohol and
Alcoholism, 48, 329--​336. of psychic distress. Psychological Medicine,
13, Heather, N., Rollnick, S., & Bell, A. (1993). 607--​621. Predictive
validity of the Readiness to Change Norcross, J. C., & Magaletta, P. R.
(1990). Questionnaire. Addiction, 88, 1667--​1677. Concurrent validation
of the Levels of Janis, O. L., & Mann, L. (1977). Decision making: A
Attribution and Change (LAC) scale. Journal of psychological analysis of
conflict, choice, and Clinical Psychology, 46, 618--​622. commitment. New
York: Free Press. Norcross, J. C., Prochaska, J. O., Guadagnoli, E., &
Jones, H., Edwards, L., Vallis, T. M., Ruggiero, L., DiClemente, C. C.
(1984). Factor structure of Rossi, S. R., Rossi, J. S., . . . Zinman,
B.(2003). the Levels of Attribution and Change (LAC) Changes in diabetes
self-​care behaviors make a scale in samples of psychotherapists and
difference in glycemic control: The Diabetes smokers. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 40, Stages of Change (DiSC) study. Diabetes Care,
519--​528. 26, 732--​737. Norcross, J. C., Prochaska, J. O., & Hambrecht,
M. Jones, H., Ruggiero, L., Edwards, L., Vallis, T. M., (1985). The
Levels of Attribution and Change Rossi, S., Rossi, J. S., et al. (2001).
Diabetes (LAC) scale: Development and measurement. Stages of Change
(DiSC): Evaluation Cognitive Therapy and Research, 9, 631--​649.
methodology for a new approach to diabetes Ockene, J., Kristellar, J.,
Goldberg, R., Ockene, I., management. Canadian Journal of Diabetes
Merriam, P., Barett, S., et al. (1992). Smoking Care, 25, 97--​107.
cessation and severity of disease. The Coronary Krebs, P., Norcross,
J.C., Nicholson, J.M., Prochaska, Artery Smoking Intervention Study.
Health J.O. (2018) Stages of change and psychotherapy Psychology, 11,
119--​126. outcomes: A review and meta-​analysis. Journal Penny, D.
(1987). Levels of change attribution in of Clinical Psychology, 74,
1964--​1979. alcoholic and general psychiatric inpatients. Krebs, P.,
Prochaska, J. O., & Rossi, J. S. (2010) A Unpublished dissertation,
University of Rhode meta-​analysis of computer tailored interventions
Island. for health behavior change. Preventive Medicine, Prochaska, J.
M., & Prochaska, J. O. (1982). Dual 51, 214--​221. career families:
Challenges for spouses and Lam, C. S., McMahon, B. T., Priddy, D. A., &
agencies. Social Casework, 63, 118--​120. Gehred-​Schultz, A. (1988).
Deficit awareness Prochaska, J. O. (1979). Systems of psychotherapy: A
and treatment performance among traumatic transtheoretical analysis.
Homewood, IL: head injury adults. Brain Injury, 2, 235--​242. Dorsey
Press. Levesque, D. A., Van Marter, D. F., Schneider, R. J., Prochaska,
J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1983). Baurer, M. R., Goldberg, D. N.
Prochaska, J. Stages and processes of self-​change of smoking: O., &
Prochaska, J. M. (2011) Randomized trial Toward an integrative model of
change. Journal of computer-​tailored interventions for patients of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 51, with depression. American
Journal of Health 390--​395. Promotion, 26, 77--​89. PMID 22040388
Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1984). Marcus, B., Rossi, J. S.,
Selby, V. C., & Niaura, R. The transtheoretical approach: Crossing the
S. (1992). The stages and processes of exercise traditional boundaries
of therapy. Homewood, adoption and maintenance. Health Psychology, IL:
Dow-​Jones/​Irwin. 11, 386--​395. Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C.
(1985). Masters, W., & Johnson, V. (1970). Human sexual Common processes
of change in smoking, inadequacy. Boston: Little, Brown. weight control
and psychological distress. In McConnaughy, E. A., DiClemente, C. C., S.
Shiffman & T. Wills (Eds.), Coping and Prochaska, J. O., & Velicer, W.
F. (1989). Stages substance use: A conceptual framework (pp. of change
in psychotherapy: A follow-​up report. 345--​364). New York: Academic
Press. Psychotherapy, 4, 494--​503. Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C.
(1986). McConnaughy, E. A., Prochaska, J. O., & Toward a comprehensive
model of change. In Velicer, W. F. (1983). Stages of change in W. R.
Miller & N. Heather (Eds.), Treating

182

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

addictive behaviors: Processes of change (pp. 3--​ 24). New York: Plenum.
Prochaska, J. O., DiClemente, C. C., Velicer, W. F., Ginpil, S. E., &
Norcross, J. C. (1985). Predicting change in smoking status for self-​
changers. Addictive Behaviors, 10, 395--​406. Prochaska, J. O.,
DiClemente, C. C., Velicer, W. F., & Rossi, J. S. (1993). Standardized,
individualized, interactive and personalized self-​ help programs for
smoking cessation. Health Psychology, 12, 399--​405. Prochaska, J. O., &
Norcross, J. C. (1983). Psychotherapists' perspectives on treating
themselves and their clients for psychic distress. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 14, 642--​655. Prochaska, J. O., &
Norcross, J. C. (2018). Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical
analysis (9th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Prochaska, J. O.,
Norcross, J. C., & DiClemente, C. C. (1994). Changing for good. New
York: William Morrow. Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J. C., Fowler, J.,
Follick, M., & Abrams, D. B. (1992). Attendance and outcome in a work-​
site weight control program: Processes and stages of change as process
and predictor variables. Addictive Behavior, 17, 35--​45. Prochaska, J.
O., & Prochaska, J. M. (2016). Changing to Thrive. Center City
Minnesota: Hazelden Publishing. Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F.,
DiClemente, C. C., & Fava, J. L. (1988). Measuring processes of change:
Applications to the cessation of smoking. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 56, 520--​528. Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F.,
Fava, J. L., Rossi, J. S., & Tsoh, J. Y. (2001). Evaluating a
population-​ based recruitment approach and a stage-​ based expert system
intervention for smoking cessation. Addictive Behaviors, 26, 583--​602.
Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., Fava, J., Ruggiero, L., Laforge, R.,
Rossi, J. S., et al. (2001). Counselor and stimulus control enhancements
of a stage matched expert system for smokers in a managed care setting.
Preventive Medicine, 32, 23--​32. Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F.,
Prochaska, J. M., & Johnson, J. (2004). Size, consistency and stability
of stage effects for smoking cessation. Addictive Behavior, 29,
207--​213.

Project MATCH Research Group. (1997). Matching alcoholism treatments to
client heterogeneity: Project MATCH post-​ treatment drinking outcomes.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 58, 7--​29. Project MATCH Research Group.
(1998). Matching alcoholism treatments to client heterogeneity: Project
MATCH three-​ year drinking outcomes. Alcoholism Clinical and
Experimental Research, 22, 1300--​1311. Rosen, C. S. (2000). Is the
sequencing of change processes by stage consistent across health
problems? A meta-​analysis. Health Psychology, 19, 593--​604. Rossi, J.
S., Ruggiero, L., Rossi, S., Greene, G., Prochaska, J., Edwards, L., et
al. (2002). Effectiveness of stage-​based multiple behavior interventions
for diabetes management in two randomized clinical trials. Annals of
Behavioral Medicine, 24(Suppl.), S192. Shaw, M. A., & DiClemente, C. C.
(2016). Relapse vulnerability measure of the Alcohol Abstinence
Self-​Efficacy Scale predicting time to first drink and amount of
drinking. Journal of Studies on Alcohol and Drugs, 77, 521--​525.
doi:10.15288/​ jsad.2016.77.521 Snow, M. G., Prochaska, J. O., & Rossi,
J. S. (1992). Processes of change in alcoholics anonymous: Issues in
maintaining long-​ term sobriety. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 4,
107--​116. Stotts, A., DiClemente, C. C., Carbonari, J. P., & Mullen, P.
(1996). Pregnancy smoking cessation: A case of mistaken identity.
Addictive Behaviors, 21, 459--​471. Tejero, A., Trujols, J., Hernandez,
E., Perez de los Cobos, J., & Casas, M. (1997). Processes of change
assessment in heroin addicts following the Prochaska and DiClemente
Transtheoretical Model. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 47, 31--​37.
Velasquez, M. M., Crouch, C., Stephens, N. & DiClemente, C. C. (2015).
Group treatment for substance abuse: A stages of change therapy manual
(2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Velicer, W. F., DiClemente, C. C.,
Prochaska, J. O., & Brandenburg, N. (1985). A decisional balance measure
for predicting smoking cessation. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 48, 1279--​1289. Velicer, W. F., DiClemente, C. C., Rossi, J.
S., & Prochaska, J. O. (1990). Relapse situations and self-​ efficacy: An
integrative model. Addictive Behaviors, 15, 271--​283.

Transtheoretical Approach Velicer, W. F., Prochaska, J. O., Fava, J.,
Laforge, R., & Rossi, J. (1999). Interactive versus non-​interactive and
dose response relationships for stage matched smoking cessation programs
in a managed care setting. Health Psychology, 18, 21--​28.

183

Wilcox, N. S., Prochaska, J. O., Velicer, W. F., & DiClemente, C. C.
(1985). Client characteristics as predictors of self-​ change in smoking
cessation. Addictive Behaviors, 10, 407--​412.

9 Cyclical Psychodynamics and Integrative Relational Psychotherapy PAUL
L. WACHTEL AND GREGORY J. GAGNON

Cyclical psychodynamics is a theoretical approach that seeks to
reconcile the seemingly conflicting formulations of psychoanalytic,
cognitive-​behavioral, systemic, and humanistic-​ experiential
orientations. A key element in this integrative effort is a focus on the
vicious and virtuous circles that are prominent in personality dynamics
and development and that largely account for how early experiences and
interpersonal patterns can be powerfully influential even decades later.
Rather than viewing the residues of these early experiences as fixed and
buried "internal" representations, the cyclical psychodynamic
perspective traces the ways in which the perceptual and motivational
schemas that have their origins in earlier experiences lead to new
actions and relational experiences that, often ironically and
unwittingly, end up strengthening those very schemas

and setting the stage for still another repetition of the cycle.
Cyclical psychodynamic theory focuses especially sharply on the
relational events and experiences that constitute the center of most
people's emotional life and aims to incorporate in a consistent
theoretical formulation both the powerful role of early experiences and
the powerful role of what is happening in the present. The implications
of the past must be understood by the kind of present that past
experiences make likely, and the impact of the present must be
understood in terms of the sensitivities, proclivities, and perceptual
tendencies the person brings to the present on the basis of past
experiences (Wachtel, 2014a, 2014c, 2017d). This integrative
conceptualization highlights both the importance of what are often
called "internal" structures and the

184

Cyclical Psychodynamics

equally crucial role of what are often described as "external"
variables. Among the putatively internal sources of our behavior and
experience are the unconscious motivations and fantasies emphasized by
psychoanalytic thinkers (especially as reconceptualized by D. B. Stern
\[1997\] in terms of unformulated experiences); the kinds of schemas and
cognitive processes variously conceptualized by Piaget, by cognitive
therapists, and by contemporary cognitive psychology and cognitive
neuroscience; and the emotional schemas and processes emphasized by
experiential and interpersonal therapists. Among the influences often
depicted as external or environmental are discriminative stimuli and
reinforcement contingencies, the immediate relational context of
intimate interactions with others, and the larger social and cultural
context (Wachtel, 1999, 2014a, 2017b). From the vantage point of the
cyclical psychodynamic perspective, these past and present and internal
and external influences are seen as different facets of a larger
explanatory web (Wachtel, 2017c). As the name implies, cyclical
psychodynamics, although drawing on multiple perspectives, has at its
core the psychodynamic point of view, into which it assimilates ideas
deriving from other sources. It can, in that sense, be seen as a clear
example of assimilative integration (Messer, 1992; Stricker & Gold,
1996). In addition to its reworked emphasis on such traditionally
psychoanalytic ideas as unconscious motivation, conflict, defense, and
transference, it draws on interpersonal conceptualizations (e.g.,
Horney, Sullivan), social and cultural explorations (e.g., Fromm and
Erikson), the impact of new relational experience (e.g., Alexander &
French, 1946; Christian, Safran, & Muran, 2012; Frank, 1999; Kohut,
1977, 1984; Weiss & Sampson, 1986), and the emerging relational
synthesis in psychoanalytic thought (e.g., Aron, 1996; Mitchell, 1988,
1993). Complementing its psychodynamic emphasis, cyclical psychodynamics
includes as well such behavioral and cognitive-​behavioral concepts as
reinforcement and exposure. Thus, what psychodynamic clinicians call

185

"interpretations" can be seen as interventions bringing the person into
contact with thoughts, feelings, and modes of interaction that had been
fearfully avoided, thereby promoting exposure. In this way, these
thoughts and feelings can become less frightening and can be
reassimilated into the person's evolving sense of self (for more detail
on how this perspective modifies the ways that interpretations are
offered and integrated into the overall therapeutic strategy, see
Wachtel, 1997, 2008, 2011a, 2011b). In cyclical psychodynamics, the
distinction between the person's "inner world" and his or her "external"
reality breaks down, and they are seen as continually defining and
redefining each other in recursive fashion (Wachtel, 2017c). Behavioral,
experiential, and systemic treatment elements complement the
psychoanalytic emphasis on insight, exploration, and articulation of
feelings and desires. Rather than assuming that change will follow
insight rather automatically, cyclical psychodynamics conceptualizes
change as a synergistic process in which new behaviors and feedback
promote new insights, and such insights in turn generate increased
motivation to try new behaviors. THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH In order to
avoid awkward locutions and referring to oneself in the third person
when discussing the origins of cyclical psychodynamics, this section of
the chapter, written by PLW, will be in the first-​person singular: I was
originally trained in the psychodynamic tradition. My doctoral training
at Yale emphasized psychoanalytic ego psychology, complemented by a
strong dose of Hullian learning theory, as mediated by the work of
Dollard and Miller (1950). My psychoanalytic training, in the New York
University postdoctoral program in psychoanalysis and psychotherapy,
combined a further grounding in classical psychoanalytic theory and ego
psychology with a strong exposure to interpersonal and existential-​
phenomenological models. These experiences proved seminal for me; I have
remained strongly interested in and committed to psychoanalytic ideas to
this day. Over

186

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

time, however, I became increasingly dissatisfied with a number of
features of psychoanalytic thought, which seemed to me both problematic
and far less essential to the psychoanalytic point of view than is
commonly assumed. Overemphasis on Early Experience One of the most
significant sources of dissatisfaction was an excessive emphasis on very
early experiences formulated in a way that made it seem as if those
experiences remained unchanged by later events and circumstances,
preserved in their original form like woolly mammoths buried under the
Arctic ice (see Wachtel, 1997, 2008, 2011b, 2014a). Such an emphasis
leads the therapist to pay insufficient attention to the influence of
ongoing events in the person's life and, indeed, places theoretical
obstacles to full consideration of such influences. Both daily personal
observation and my reading of the results of empirical research (see
later discussion) persuaded me of the powerful and continuous impact of
ongoing life events. Both our behavior and our experience vary greatly
in different contexts, and a theory that did not fully and readily
accommodate this obvious fact was unnecessarily limited. I sought an
alternative that could retain the important insights and observations
deriving from the psychoanalytic tradition, yet could integrate into its
account the important role of environmental context (Wachtel, 1973).
Overemphasis on Insight Around the same time, I began to be skeptical
that insight was the major source of therapeutic change, as
psychoanalytic accounts of that era emphasized. The insights patients
achieved could too readily remain abstract and cognitive, and although
the distinction between intellectual and emotional insight reflected an
appreciation of this issue, it was conceptually problematic. Later, as
behavior therapy evolved into cognitive behavior therapy, I became
similarly skeptical about its overly cognitive, intellectualized
features as well (Wachtel, 1997). More recently, deriving from

clarifications that first emerged in cognitive psychology and cognitive
neuroscience, I have come to see my initial interest in behavior therapy
(in contrast to the cognitive approach of Beck and Ellis), as part of a
broader shift in emphasis from the declarative/​explicit dimension of
language and symbolic thought as the key to therapeutic change to the
procedural/​implicit dimension of nonverbal, directly experiential, and
"how-​to" learning (see, in this regard, Boston Change Process Study
Group, 2010). Relatedly, I began to view behavioral methods as a means
of providing corrective emotional experiences (cf. Alexander & French,
1946), an important component of therapeutic change that mainstream
psychoanalytic thought had problematically disparaged. As behavior
therapy evolved into cognitive-​ behavior therapy, it seemed to me that
this more experiential and procedural way of working that behavior
therapy offered was shunted aside by an excessively rationalistic
approach that at times seemed to treat emotion as a mere epiphenomenon.
Focusing on the half-​truth that how we feel about something depends on
how we think about it, this rationalistic viewpoint seemed to virtually
ignore the equally important ways that how we feel about things
powerfully influences how we think about them (cf. Fosha, 2000;
Greenberg, 2016). As I observed videos of the work of behavior
therapists from whom I had learned a great deal in the early years of my
integrative efforts, it seemed to me that, under the sway of this
rationalistic philosophy, they were essentially trying to talk clients
out of their feelings, to demonstrate that if only the client would
learn to think "rationally," there would be no need to feel distressing
emotions. More recently, as cognitive and cognitive-​ behavioral
therapists have themselves increasingly articulated differences between
"rationalist" and "constructivist" approaches to cognitive therapy
(Arnkoff & Glass, 1992; Neimeyer, 2009; Neimeyer & Mahoney, 1999;
Winter, 2008), I have found myself increasingly interested in the
convergences between the constructivist branch of cognitive therapy and
the relational approaches to psychoanalysis

Cyclical Psychodynamics

(Wachtel, 1997, 2008). I have as well been interested in convergences
with "third-​ wave" cognitive-​behavior therapies such as dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT) and acceptance and commitment therapy (ACT)
(Hayes, Follette, & Linehan, 2004) and in the ways that my initial
interest in the more experiential encounters that were part of
behavioral methods such as exposure, behavior rehearsal, and graded
challenges in daily life could be further complemented by the methods of
the humanistic-​experiential tradition, especially emotion-​ focused
therapy (Greenberg, 2016).

187

inattention" in Sullivan's (1953) terminology, or in terms of the
response of "not-​thinking" in Dollard and Miller's conceptualization,
what is being addressed is a tendency to not notice, to reinterpret, to
change the subject, or in other ways to avoid or attenuate the
experience of the forbidden. Everything we know about the extinction of
anxiety associated with more overtly observable cues suggests that what
is crucial is repeated exposure to the frightening stimulus in
circumstances where the expected harmful consequence does not occur.
Generally, this exposure must occur on many occasions, and the reduction
of anxiety occurs only gradually. Insufficient Exploitation of Freud's
Such a perspective offers a different way of Revised Anxiety Theory
understanding what in the psychoanalytic litHaving been trained at Yale
during the days erature is referred to as "working through." It when
John Dollard and Neal Miller were should be noted, however, that
research on the there, I was alerted early to the possibilities of
phenomenon of memory reconsolidation holds understanding the
observations of Freud and out the intriguing possibility that
therapeutic later analysts in ways that differed somewhat reworking may
eventually be more rapid and from standard psychoanalytic language and
decisive (Lane et al., 2014). that opened up new possibilities. In
particular, From the perspective of this integration of I saw their
discussions of extinction of anxiety psychodynamic and behavioral
viewpoints, as better capturing the implications of Freud's one of the
key functions of "interpretations" (1926/​1959) late insights into the
role of anx- is that they are comments that either interrupt iety in
neurosis than did the standard psychoan- the person's way of avoiding
cues associated alytic literature (Dollard & Miller, 1950). with the
feared thought or feeling (defense Dollard and Miller's analysis, rooted
in interpretations) or, by stimulating associations psychoanalytic
observations as well as those and/​or saying out loud the thought that
can't be deriving from the laboratory, suggested that spoken, increase
the likelihood that the patient the cues patients avoided were not
limited to will begin to be exposed to the therapeutically external cues
of the sort typically emphasized relevant cues. It is not enough merely
to "see" by behavior therapists. They could include as what you have
blinded yourself to; it is essential well what Dollard and Miller called
"response-​ to undergo repeated exposures to the forbidden produced
cues"---​ cues associated with the or frightening experience. person's
own thoughts and affective reactions. In this way, Dollard and Miller
forged a link Active Intervention and Attention to the between the
psychoanalytic concept of represRole of Social Skills sion and the
avoidances addressed by behavior therapists. As implied in a related way
in Freud's The complex social skills required of every notion of signal
anxiety, when the individual adult in an advanced society take many
years to begins to perceive cues that are even margin- learn, and their
effective learning requires both ally associated with a thought that has
become careful observation of others and much practice a source of
anxiety, there is a strong inclina- of one's interactional style. That
much of this tion to avoid those cues. Whether described observation and
practice goes on automatically, in terms of "repression" or "defense" in
psy- without self-​consciousness or even awareness choanalytic
terminology, in terms of "selective that one is doing such things, does
not diminish

188

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

its ubiquity or importance. If anxieties make it more comfortable to
avoid certain kinds of experiences early in life, and the countless
practice sessions that life offers are not encountered, there will be an
impact on one's ability to negotiate the shoals of social interaction.
These and other considerations led me to believe that much more active
intervention into people's difficulties was both possible and desirable
than I was taught by my psychodynamic teachers. I began to be struck by
the possibilities inherent in the interventions developed by behavior
therapists, whose assumptions did not prevent them from intervening
actively. The cyclical psychodynamic perspective was in large measure a
reconceptualization aimed at enabling these interventions to be employed
in a way that retained the different and equally important strengths of
the psychodynamic approach. Vicious Circles and the Recursive Dynamics
of Personality-​in-​Context Attention to vicious circles originally was a
means to reconcile the largely environmental emphasis of behavior
therapy and the predominantly intrapsychic emphasis of psychoanalysis.
Over time, however, both approaches evolved. Behavior therapy became
more cognitive and mediational, psychoanalysis more relational and
contextual. But, as it turned out, attention to how ways of thinking,
feeling, and acting are maintained by the consequences they generate
remained illuminating, pointing to sequences and interactions that are
at the heart of how personality patterns and clinical problems persist
over time (Wachtel, 1994, 2009, 2010b, 2014c, 2017d). As a consequence,
it continued to be central to the effort to create a more comprehensive
therapeutic strategy that could draw on both the distinctive and the
overlapping strengths of the separate orientations that currently
dominate clinical practice. The key to moving beyond the particular
siloed viewpoints that seem to their proponents to be competing and
incompatible was attention to the largely circular nature of causality
in human affairs: the events that have a causal

impact on our behavior are frequently also a function of our behavior
and the impact of that behavior on others. Thus, a therapy grounded in
attention to the subtleties and complexities of emotional experience,
fantasy, perception, cognition, or fearful expectations is not
antithetical to a therapy focused on the relational systems in which the
patient participates (Wachtel & Wachtel, 1986) or in which detailed
examination of behaviors in daily life or the employment of modeling,
role-​playing, or graduated opportunities to practice were prominent.
Expanding beyond the original interest in integrating behavioral methods
into a therapy grounded in psychodynamic principles (Wachtel, 1977) and
the subsequent efforts to integrate systemic perspectives and
interventions (Wachtel & Wachtel, 1986), more recent explorations have
included attention to "third-​wave" cognitive-​behavioral approaches
(Hayes et al., 2004), methods deriving from an experiential or emotion-​
focused perspective (e.g., Greenberg, 2016), attention to processes of
rupture and repair in the therapeutic relationship (Safran, Muran, &
Shaker, 2014), and attention to attachment (Wachtel, 2010b, 2017a;
Wallin, 2007). ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION Treatment from a cyclical
psychodynamic point of view requires a clear understanding of the
sources of the patient's problems and the dynamics that maintain them.
The process of assessment and the development of a formulation that can
guide the treatment effort may be more prominent early in the therapy,
but it in fact takes place over the entire course of treatment as new
understandings continue to emerge. The inquiry and the formulation share
many of the features typically found in other approaches (e.g., inquiry
into the frequency, chronicity, and severity of symptoms; current social
support; history of loss and trauma). We will forgo a discussion of
these more general or common dimensions of assessment and formulation
and will instead address those components that are particular to
cyclical

Cyclical Psychodynamics

psychodynamics; namely, identifying vicious circles, identifying
accomplices, finding strengths as well as weaknesses, and
contextualization. By contextualization, we mean identifying the
circumstances under which a particular problem or way of interacting is
most likely to be manifested and those under which it is less likely.
Critical as well is the clinician's immersing herself in the patient's
experience in order to grasp his subjectivity as fully as possible. (For
purposes of clarity, throughout this chapter, when, as in this sentence,
"the patient" or "the therapist" is referred to in general or abstract
ways, the therapist will be referred to as "she" and the patient as
"he.") During the assessment phase, as throughout therapy, the therapist
searches particularly for indications of thoughts, feelings,
perceptions, memories, hopes, and fears that have been excluded from
awareness or warped and constrained because they have become associated
with anxiety, guilt, or shame. The cyclical psychodynamic formulation of
this pattern of avoidance builds on psychodynamic concepts of defenses
and unconscious conflict. But, in contrast to versions of psychodynamic
thought that regard the aspects of experience that are excluded from
awareness as "buried" in the unconscious, we view them primarily as
being dissociated or unformulated (Stern, 1997) as a result of a self-​
perpetuating cycle of avoidance. The very avoidance deprives the patient
of opportunities to learn that the thought or feeling experienced as
forbidden in childhood can be safely integrated into his adult life,
especially because the avoidance also prevents the practicing and
sharpening of skills that enable the feeling to be expressed in
appropriate and effective ways.

Identifying Vicious Circles The vicious circle is a critical
psychological unit and a phenomenon often at the heart of the patient's
problems. Unacknowledged and unintegrated aspects of the personality
remain frightening and subjectively unacceptable because of the very
kinds of real-​life experiences

189

their dissociation is likely to bring about. The vicious circles that
underlie the patient's difficulties include cognitive, affective,
behavioral, and systemic elements, and the cyclical psychodynamic
account integrates these into a single formulation without privileging
any one dimension by assigning it primary causal status. Instead, the
aim is to identify the self-​ reinforcing pattern that organizes these
diverse elements in order to find points of intervention to break the
cycle.

Identifying Accomplices Complementing and extending the cyclical
psychodynamic focus on identifying vicious circles, the identification
of accomplices---​ those people in the patient's life whose ways of
interacting with him end up maintaining the vicious circles undergirding
his experience of distress---​is a critical feature of the formulation
(Wachtel, 2011b, 2014a). Much time can be spent articulating the
intrapsychic, cognitive, and affective aspects of the patient's
difficulties, but it is essential as well to understand how others in
the patient's life are pulled, often unwittingly, to confirm the
expectations that contribute to perpetuating the problem. Appreciation
of the ways in which the patient's suffering is not simply a result of
"distortions," but a response to things that are really
happening---​though perhaps happening for reasons that the patient may
not understand well---​is an essential feature of the approach. To be
sure, there are ways in which the patient's perception of events is
likely to be idiosyncratic and problematic---​perceiving rejection, say,
when it is not intended by the other or anger when it is not there. But
the irony often evident in these vicious circles includes ways in which
what was initially a distortion or misperception becomes, through the
dynamics of mutual interaction, a self-​ fulfilling prophecy. Much of
this process goes on with little or no awareness, but it is no less
powerful for this. Indeed, the absence of clear awareness is an
important element in how the pattern can be repeated over and over
despite its problematic consequences.

190

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

The point is not a bland "you're not so bad, there are good things,
too." Rather, it is to unCentral to our way of understanding and
derstand when things are different, in what working with patients is an
emphasis on the circumstances does another side of you show? patient's
strengths and not only his problems. This helps as well to understand
what is going Understanding the patient's problems in on when the person
does act angrily or timidly depth, in a clear-​eyed way that does not
shrink or self-​centeredly. Those behaviors and attitudes from difficult
truths and yet does so without can then be understood not as a taint but
as a pathologizing, is a central aim, both with response to experiences
one is encountering individuals (Wachtel, 2011a, 2011b) and with and
ways of construing those experiences that couples (Wachtel, 2016). In
part, this reflects one has learned. In understanding better what the
aim of a fully comprehensive evaluation---​ enables the patient to act
more adaptively or feel people have strengths as well as weaknesses.
more confident in some situations than others, But it reflects, as well,
a view that, to promote we help break the monolithic perceptions that
change effectively, the patient must be engaged can plague not only
patients but therapists, too. in a collaborative enterprise in which he
feels the therapist is on his side and understands how the world looks
through his eyes. The skills of APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE a good
therapist lie significantly in broaching difficult truths with the
patient---​whether those Cyclical psychodynamic psychotherapy is be
feelings and desires the patient may initially typically practiced as a
long-​ term outpatient view with shame or ways in which he has been
treatment although, given the incorporation an active contributor to the
patterns in his life of active interventions, treatment may also in that
plague him---​in a way that is not accusa- some cases be briefer, as in
the case presented tory (Wile, 1984) and that enables him to main-
later, which lasted about 8 weeks. Rapid change, tain his self-​respect
(Wachtel, 2011b). Without when it occurs, is viewed as a desirable
consean appreciation for the patient's potential for quence of the
treatment, rather than as a "flight change, for his capacity to develop
new ways of into health." Upon resolution of the problem being and
experiencing, the therapist will likely that brought the patient to
therapy, patient and encounter difficulty in her efforts to bring about
therapist may explore together whether there that change. are other
issues the patient wishes to address. Finding Strengths as Well as
Weaknesses

Contextualizing Formulations Parallel to the emphasis on strengths---​
and often a critical part of it---​is attention to the ways the patient's
behavior and experience can vary from one context to another.
Pathologizing formulations tend to be monolithic---​the patient is
narcissistic, angry, avoidant. The cyclical psychodynamic formulation
certainly attends to these phenomena and experiences, but it also seeks
to notice how exceptions to the general tendency can be obscured by
overly broad trait descriptions. When is the "angry" person gentle or
caring? When is the "avoidant" person ready to pick up on a challenge?
We find that almost always those exceptions can be found and that they
are a key element in building toward new ways of living.

Cyclical psychodynamic treatment can be applied to a broad range of
neurotic and characterological difficulties. As in the case example
presented later, it is also applied fairly commonly to a range of
symptomatic complaints, particularly involving anxiety and interpersonal
difficulties. It can be applied alongside psychopharmacological
treatment when such treatment is likely to help the patient to
participate more successfully in breaking the vicious circles in which
he is caught. Though most often applied to individual treatment, the
cyclical psychodynamic perspective can be applied to couple therapy as
well (E. F. Wachtel, 2016). Even in an individual treatment, occasional
sessions with a spouse or partner to address a particular impediment are
common, as are occasional sessions, primarily for the purpose of gaining
additional perspective, with

Cyclical Psychodynamics

other individuals who play a significant role in the patient's life
(Wachtel & Wachtel, 1986). THERAPY RELATIONSHIP In keeping with the
findings of a vast quantity of research (see, for example, Norcross &
Lambert, 2018), we view the therapy relationship as a key element in
successful psychotherapy. The impact of the relationship is viewed from
a number of different vantage points, drawing, for example, from
Alexander's concept of the corrective emotional experience (Alexander &
French, 1946); broader relational reformulations of that concept (e.g.,
Aron, 1996; Frank, 1999); the notion of epistemic trust (Fonagy &
Allison, 2014); rupture and repair in the therapeutic alliance (e.g.,
Safran et al., 2014); and implicit relational knowing and moments of
meeting (Boston Change Process Study Group, 2010). In contrast with many
approaches that highlight the impact of the therapeutic relationship,
however, the cyclical psychodynamic perspective equally highlights
processes of change occurring outside of the consulting room or the
specific relationship with the therapist (Wachtel, 2008, 2017d). The
relationship is not only a direct source of change-​generating
experiences, but is as well a powerful catalyst for promoting
experiences outside the relationship that are critical to change.
Consistent with the differentiated understanding of personality that
highlights the significance of different experiences of self, other,
relationship, and affect in different contexts, it is assumed that some
important features of the patient's personality are especially well
engaged in the context of the transference but that, in contrast to many
psychodynamic formulations, not all important relationship
configurations are engaged in that context. The therapist, as a specific
person rather than a "universal donor," will elicit only a portion of
the potentially relevant emotional reactions. Consequently, attention to
how other people in the person's life elicit different reactions and are
implicated in different therapy-​relevant patterns is an important part
of the work.

191

DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS The cyclical psychodynamic perspective applies
to people of all backgrounds. The therapy is not manualized to create a
different treatment package for every potential patient group, but
rather relies on a set of principles that guide the therapeutic work.
This reliance on broad principles and processes of change rather than
narrowly specified protocols for each different group applies as well to
work with people of diverse sexual orientations or ethnic, racial, and
class backgrounds. As a highly contextual approach, cyclical
psychodynamics treats socioeconomic and cultural dimensions of the
person's psychological makeup as highly relevant in understanding the
challenges the patient faces (see, e.g., Wachtel, 1999, 2014a, 2017b).
This is the case whether the person has considerable wealth and
privilege or is disadvantaged by reason of social inequity. Thus, there
is not a separate version of cyclical psychodynamic therapy for each
racial, ethnic, or socioeconomic group, but rather these dimensions of
people's lives are a central concern of clinical work with all patients.

CASE EXAMPLE John N is a quite prominent member of his profession who
had, to his great consternation, never passed the licensing exam. He had
taken the exam five times and had failed each time, despite the fact
that his professional stature was such that his own work was
occasionally addressed on the exam. Although he presented himself as a
case of "test anxiety" and informed me (PLW) of that self-​ diagnosis in
the first session, it quickly became clear that more was involved. John
had grown up in a prominent Boston family and had been taught by his
parents, who were quite demanding and status-​conscious, that he must not
only excel but also appear to do so effortlessly. This was not something
that John could say directly at the outset. At first, I was merely
struck by his various efforts to let me know, indirectly but most
assuredly, who it was I was dealing

192

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

with. He worked very hard at conveying both his stature in his
profession and his social status and seemed uncomfortable with being in
the role of patient. In looking for a way to inquire into this tendency
that did not leave John feeling criticized or put down (see Wachtel,
2011b; Wile, 1984), I wondered out loud if his parents had been
concerned about status and what the impact on him might have been. At
this, he seemed to experience a good deal of relief and immediately
relaxed some. He said yes, they were like that and it felt very
oppressive to him. John's conscious views were much more liberal than
those of his parents, and this added further to his dilemma: he could
not readily acknowledge his concerns about status or appreciate the role
those concerns played in his life because he had struggled hard to
disavow them and, as far as he knew, he had done so. By raising them as
his parents' concerns, I made it possible for him to begin addressing
them while still maintaining his view that he himself did not endorse
them---​indeed, while expressing his distaste for them. Attempting to
open further a path for John's exploration of attitudes that I sensed
were a crucial part of his difficulties, I added that it must have been
difficult growing up in such an environment not to adopt some of their
views simply in self-​ defense. With their relentless emphasis on status
and success, it would have been extremely painful not to attend to this
himself. This comment seemed to make it a bit easier for John to look at
his own concerns about status, most likely because it implicitly
conveyed that it was not his fault that he felt this way. Through this
process of gentle and gradual confrontation with his disavowed status
concerns, John began to recognize that he had felt defensive and
humiliated by having to take the exam and had, as a consequence, not
prepared seriously enough. This was somewhat the case even the first
time he took the exam: he felt he had to act cool and casual about his
preparation despite considerable anxiety---​anxiety largely prompted by
the internal necessity not just to pass but to do spectacularly well and
to do so without "sweating it." Needless to say, the pressure became
even greater as he took and failed the exam over and over.

This initial bit of insight-​oriented work modified the behavioral
interventions that were to be employed. Although, as I will describe
shortly, I did indeed use imaginal systematic desensitization to help
John overcome his test anxiety (the treatment John had expected), I
also, on the basis of the exploratory aspects of this initial work,
concentrated more than I otherwise might have on his preparing more
thoroughly for the challenge the exam represented. By helping him to see
the unacknowledged feelings and ideas that had led him to treat the exam
dismissively, the initial work enabled John to address the exam more
seriously this time. As he came to see, it was not only a matter of
anxiety that had to be overcome. The anxiety, while in certain respects
excessive and certainly interfering with his exam performance, was not
entirely unrealistic: it was based in part on his unacknowledged
perception that he had not taken the exam seriously enough to be
properly prepared. After working a good deal on the internal pressures
that had led John to be dismissive toward the exam and on how he could
study for it more seriously this time, we did conduct desensitization.
Initially, the major dimension for the development of a hierarchy was a
temporal one. The images moved from a period considerably before the
exam, through increasingly close approaches to actually appearing at the
door, to his sitting down at the desk, to his confronting the
experiences he would encounter when actually taking the exam. As will be
apparent later, the "insight" part of the work did not come to an end
once systematic desensitization began. Indeed, some of the most useful
and interesting insights came during the course of the systematic
desensitization itself. If the therapist approaches systematic
desensitization, or any other intervention, in a spirit of openness to
the patient's experience, there is not a sharp dichotomy between
insight-​oriented work and active interventions (Frank, 1999). For
example, as we went through the images in John's original hierarchy, the
nature of his discomfort became clarified in a number of specific
situations. Thus, when he pictured walking into the exam room, he became
aware of the crowd of exam takers pressing in together, and

Cyclical Psychodynamics he experienced a strong sense of indignity at
being pushed and at having his identity checked. This, more than any
concern about failure, was his primary source of distress with these
images. We discussed this in relation to the legacy of his upbringing,
and it led to an important discussion of his strategy for studying for
the exam. He was struggling with dual inclinations to study much harder
than anyone else taking the exam and to study much less. We worked on
images of his being "just one of the crowd" until he could imagine this
with little discomfort. He found that this image/​thought enabled him as
well to have a much clearer sense of what would be an appropriate amount
of preparation: he could do it "just like everyone else." Similarly
revealing was John's reaction to the image of approaching the door of
the exam building. It became clear as he immersed himself in the image
that another source of discomfort was seeing the guard at the door. He
recalled that the same man had been on duty on several occasions and
felt pain at the idea that this man would see that he was taking the
exam still again. He worked on this image for much of a session, finally
overcoming the anxiety when he pictured himself taking the bull by the
horns and saying "Good morning" instead of trying to slink in unnoticed
(as he realized at some point he was doing in the image). The most
interesting developments occurred when John imagined himself visiting
the exam room the day before the exam. The goal in this set of imagery
exercises was for him to acclimate himself to the setting in which the
exam would take place and thereby to experience a reduction in anxiety.
He was asked to look carefully around the room, to touch the various
surfaces such as the desk and walls, to experience the lighting, and so
forth. When he began the imaging, however, a fascinating series of
associations and new images came forth. At first, he spontaneously had
the association that the room seemed like a morgue and then that the
rows of desks seemed like countless graves covering the site of a
battlefield. Then he felt overcome with a feeling of impotence. I asked
him if he could picture himself as firm and hard, ready to do battle. (I
left it ambiguous whether he

193

should take this specifically to mean having an erection or as an image
of general body toughness and readiness.) He did so and said he felt
much better, stronger, and then spontaneously had an image of holding a
huge sword and being prepared to take on a dragon. He associated this
image to our multiple discussions of his treating the exam as a worthy
opponent, taking it seriously yet mastering it. He was exhilarated by
this image, and I suggested he engage in such imagery at home between
sessions, a suggestion he endorsed with great enthusiasm. In the next
session, we began with his again picturing himself visiting the exam
room the day before the exam. For a while, as he checked out the various
features of the room, he felt calm and confident. But suddenly he felt a
wave of anxiety, as if something was behind him. I asked him (staying in
the realm of imagery) to turn around and see what was there. He reported
seeing a large cat, a panther. Here, I made a kind of interpretation. I
offered that the panther represented his own power and aggression and
that it was a threat to him only so long as he kept it outside of him or
out of sight. I asked him if he could reappropriate the panther part of
him, adding that what he was feeling threatened by was his own power,
his own coiled intensity. He pictured the panther being absorbed into
himself and the anxiety receded. I then elaborated---​quite
speculatively, to be sure, but in a way rooted in the understanding we
had achieved together ---​ on why he had chosen a panther in particular
to represent the part of himself that needed to be reappropriated. I
noted that panthers were not only strong and purposeful but were also
meticulous and supremely respectful of their prey. Despite being awesome
creatures, I suggested, panthers did not take their prey lightly. They
did not act as if it were beneath their dignity to stalk for hours,
crawling on their bellies. Panthers, I said, were diligent students who
became experts on the habits of the creatures they tracked---​and whose
expertise was the result not just of instinct or superb natural
equipment but of attention to detail and a respect for the difficulty of
the task of conquest nature required of them. Their grace might look
effortless, but it was far from casual; panthers were supremely serious.

194

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Now in all this it is impossible for me to distinguish how much
reflected an empathic grasp of the actual layers of meaning that led to
John's experiencing that particular image (what Freud might call the
"latent content") and how much was simply suggestion on my part
(Wachtel, 2011b). The "interpretation" seems plausible, but I was at the
very least gilding the lily, using the panther image to point toward
attitudes I felt it would be useful for him to incorporate in light of
his conflicts, whether they were the actual sources of the image or not.
What was key was that my comments proved meaningful to the patient. They
resonated with the ripples of meaning that the image engendered, and
they amplified and consolidated the utility of the image itself, which
was, after all, John's creation. In further work on the test anxiety
and---​ significantly---​later on his own in dealing with a range of other
concerns, John made great use of the panther image and its variants. He
aided his efforts at relaxation, for example, by imagining himself as a
big cat, relaxing and licking himself. When faced with a challenge he
imagined again himself and the panther as one and felt that he knew deep
inside he was capable of whatever was necessary. Sometimes he would even
imagine himself emitting low murmuring sounds deep in his throat that,
as he put it, "remind the panther that it's a panther." One of my
favorites of his spontaneous creative uses of the panther image came
later in the desensitization work. We were at the point of his imagining
sitting and taking the exam when a wonderful smile appeared on his face.
He told me he had just had an image that the point of the pencil with
which he was writing the exam was actually the claw of the panther; that
the panther was firmly within him, incorporated and channeled, and as
the claws came through the tips of his fingers they were pencils which
were writing out exam answers with sharp points. This time around, his
points were indeed sharp. After having failed the exam five times, he
not only passed but excelled. I cannot, of course, determine whether he
would have passed even without therapy of any kind, or whether a more
orthodox course of either behavior therapy or psychoanalytic therapy
alone (or of any other

approach for that matter) would have done just as well. Only systematic
research can enable us to sort out with confidence the many questions
that cases like this raise. Further Comment on the Case This case was in
certain respects a turning point, or at least a marker along the way, in
the evolution of cyclical psychodynamic practice. The degree of
synthesis of differing methods, the extent of the "seamlessness" of the
therapeutic effort, was greater than had typically been achieved in my
previous efforts. Previously, therapy often was characterized by
incorporating procedures derived from different therapeutic traditions
at different times in the work. Although they fit together into a
coherent framework, they were nonetheless still clearly identifiable as
separate parts. Increasingly, as in this case, what has evolved is a
more seamless integration in which the procedures at any given moment
are not quite what most behavior therapists would do and not quite what
psychoanalysts would do, but rather emergent procedures more fully
integrative in their form and implementation. The case differs from most
seen in cyclical psychodynamic psychotherapy in that it had a rather
narrowly defined goal. A variety of intriguing characterological issues,
fantasies, and conflicts became evident during the work, but John made
it clear that what he was coming for was simply to overcome the anxiety
that had impeded his passing the exam. Had John been interested in
pursuing further how these attitudes and anxieties influenced his life
in other ways, the therapy would have addressed them more extensively
and more in depth. This is the more typical course of the work from a
cyclical psychodynamic perspective. But it is another essential feature
that one must understand and respect the goals of the patient; there is
a difference between a therapist and a missionary. John's case,
nonetheless, illustrates well a number of features of the cyclical
psychodynamic point of view. To begin with, we see a number of vicious
circles evident in John's difficulties, which interweave influences from
his past, from his motivational conflicts and internal necessities,

Cyclical Psychodynamics and from his daily transactions with the world.
John's conflicting needs to be outstanding and to appear to do
everything effortlessly made it difficult for him to study sufficiently
to do well on the exam and made the first failure especially painful.
These influences then fed on themselves. Feeling so humiliated and
embarrassed, John's anxiety increased, making still further failure more
likely. Moreover, his need defensively to deride the exam and also not
to appear shaken and therefore not to study too hard both repeated the
state of affairs associated with the first failure and set the stage for
the next. An additional circular process, reinforcing the interlocking
set of influences just described, involved the excessively high
standards that John had absorbed from his parents. Those standards were
perpetuated as a continuing psychological irritant, not only by his
attachments to the objects and images of his earlier days, but by the
new relationships he established with others. By presenting himself as
special, John evoked expectations of being special and created a life
structure that replicated the circumstances of his childhood in this
way. That he was in fact highly talented enabled this potentially
fragile structure to be maintained, but at a high psychic cost. It
should also be apparent from this case illustration how a cyclical
psychodynamic therapy integrates the exploration of warded off
experiences and inclinations with direct and active efforts at promoting
change. Although active interventions were employed, the target of the
therapeutic efforts depended considerably on the initial exploratory
work. Enabling John to acknowledge and understand how he had kept
himself from appreciating the extent of his status concerns, and why he
had needed to do so, was critical in developing the treatment focus.
Attending to his conflict over working hard to prepare for the exam and
to the unrecognized need he had to make it all appear effortless (not
only to others but to himself), led to further active interventions
directed toward helping John study more effectively and take the exam
more seriously. Moreover, understanding the indignity John experienced
in the process and his embarrassment at retaking the exam provided
another focus for desensitization, as well as for further

195

explorations of how these feelings (and how he dealt with them) affected
his life more generally. John's spontaneous panther imagery and the
(partly whimsical, but deeply serious) discussion we had about its
meaning were both a marker of his having engaged these issues and an
indicator of the anxiety they still aroused and the potential for change
and expanded personal power they represented. The case illustrates, as
well, some of the subtleties of the therapist's use of language that
have increasingly been at the center of the cyclical psychodynamic
approach (Wachtel, 2011b). The inquiry into John's status concerns---​
concerns which at first he vigorously disavowed---​began by addressing
his parents' concerns and proceeded only gradually to inviting him to
explore his own. Moreover, the latter exploration was undertaken in a
way designed to enable John to examine these concerns in a manner that
maintained his self-​respect. Ultimately, the aim was for John to
acknowledge and sympathetically examine his attitudes. The way the
therapy proceeded suggests that he indeed did so.

RELEVANT RESEARCH The research foundations for both cyclical
psychodynamic theory and the therapeutic approach that derives from it
are broad and diverse. The cyclical psychodynamic approach to therapy
has not been characterized by a fixed, manualized set of procedures
designed to be employed in randomized controlled trials or targeted to a
single diagnosis derived from the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders (DSM) or the International Classification of Disease
(ICD). In fact, the logic of the cyclical psychodynamic viewpoint has
led to critiques of the overemphasis on this approach to so-​ called
empirically supported or evidence-​based treatment (Wachtel, 2010a,
2018). The evidence for this approach rests instead on a range of basic
research areas and on research on the basic principles and processes
applied in the therapeutic effort. (For complementary discussions of a
principles-​based,

196

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

rather than a package/​brand name--​based approach to therapy and its
evidence base, see also, Castonguay & Beutler, 2006; Pachankis &
Goldfried, 2007). The principles and processes relevant to cyclical
psychodynamic therapy derive from all of the current major therapeutic
orientations. Thus, within the integrative framework of cyclical
psychodynamic theory, the vast body of research demonstrating the
efficacy of exposure in diminishing anxiety (e.g., Abramowitz, Deacon, &
Whiteside, 2011) is brought to bear on understanding not only how
patients overcome anxiety associated with specific phobic objects or
traumatic events, but how anxiety associated with the person's own
thoughts and feelings can similarly be overcome (Dollard & Miller, 1950;
Wachtel, 1997, 2011b). These latter anxieties, emphasized more by
psychodynamic approaches, have been thought of from that perspective as
primarily addressed via interpretations and insights. But from the
cyclical psychodynamic perspective, a key characteristic of a good
interpretation is that it promotes exposure to the previously avoided
thought or feeling. Thus, both the extensive empirical literature on
exposure and the domain of research on the problematic consequences of
retreating from feelings, yearnings, and ways of interacting with others
that have come to be associated with anxiety (e.g., Chawla & Ostafin,
2007; Cramer, 2006) bear on the integrative approach under discussion
here. Relatedly, the very substantial body of research conducted by
proponents of emotion-​ focused therapy (Greenberg, 2016, 2017) can be
understood both as pointing to the critical importance of short-​
circuited emotional experience and as highlighting alternative means of
promoting effective exposure to emotional cues that have been associated
with anxiety. The enormous research literature on attachment points to
an additional factor leading people to experience some of their own
thoughts and feelings as threatening. In addition to the more familiar
explanations (from both behavioral and psychodynamic sources) in terms,
essentially, of aversive conditioning, research on the dynamics of
attachment

and attunement (Cassidy & Shaver, 2016; Mikulincer & Shaver, 2016; Obegi
& Berant, 2010) suggests that thoughts and feelings can become
associated with anxiety if they do not elicit responsive, attuned
behavior from the caregiver. Even when the thought or feeling is not
overtly forbidden or criticized, the developmental need for attunement
can give rise to discomfort when an aspect of the self does not elicit
parental engagement and responsiveness (Wachtel, 2017a). Expectancies
and the Self-​Fulfilling Prophecy One area of research that is
particularly relevant to cyclical psychodynamic theory concerns the
related topics of self-​fulfilling prophecies, interpersonal expectancy
effects, and behavioral confirmation (Bandura, 1997; Jussim, 2012; Madon
et al, 2011; Snyder & Klein, 2005; Trusz & Bąbel, 2016). Studies in this
area elucidate the variables contributing to the vicious circles at the
heart of cyclical psychodynamic theory in which problematic expectations
lead us (often unwittingly and contrary to our intentions) to elicit
from others the very responses that are most likely to reinforce those
expectations. Self-​fulfilling prophecies were first defined by
sociologist Robert K. Merton (1948) and have since been investigated for
their role in a host of social problems, including those related to race
(Snyder, 2016; Wachtel, 1999), social class (Darley & Gross, 1983),
mental health (Clement et al., 2014), and sexual orientation (Dasgupta &
Rivera, 2006). Although the effects of expectancies in inducing behavior
in others have appeared to be modest in some research on the phenomenon
(Jussim, 2012), there are circumstances in which they grow in
importance. For example, self-​ fulfilling prophecies become especially
powerful when they involve the maintenance of an individual's
self-​image, a phenomenon termed "self-​verification" (Swann, 2012).
According to self-​verification theory, people seek out information that
confirms their self-​view, whether positive or negative, because a stable
self-​view lies at the heart of an individual's knowledge

Cyclical Psychodynamics

about the world. Strikingly, people with negative self-​views may exhibit
anxiety and physiological arousal in response to positive---​and
therefore inconsistent---​feedback (Ayduk et al., 2013) and report poorer
health after positive life events (Shimizu & Pelham, 2004). In intimate
relationships, the effects of self-​verifying processes increase over
time (Campbell, Lackenbauer, & Muise, 2006). Further indicating the
important role of expectancies within close relationships, parents'
expectancies for their children's maladaptive alcohol use have been
found to shape children's later drinking (Madon et al., 2004; Madon,
Willard, Guyll, & Scherr, 2011). Another clinically relevant form of
expectancy is rejection sensitivity (RS), "the disposition to anxiously
expect, readily perceive and overreact to rejection" (Downey & Feldman,
1996, p. 1338). Rejection expectancies lead people to interpret
ambiguous events as rejections. Crucially, these perceptions ironically
elicit the very behavior that high RS people are attempting to avoid,
thus creating a self-​ fulfilling prophecy (Downey, Freitas, Michaelis, &
Khouri, 2004; Romero-​Canyas & Downey, 2013; Romero-​Canyas et al., 2010).
The findings of this research, discussed largely in terms of the
attachment and social cognition literatures, converge substantially with
the premises of cyclical psychodynamic theory. In a separate line of
research, which applies the methodologies of social cognitive
researchers to the phenomenon psychoanalysts call transference, Andersen
and colleagues (e.g., Andersen & Przybylinski, 2014; Chen et al., 2013;
Miranda, Andersen, & Edwards, 2013) have focused on situations in which
individuals' representations of significant others from the past
influence the way they interact with new people in the present.
Consistent with cyclical psychodynamic premises, these perceptions can
then perpetuate these early, emotion-​ laden expectations by inducing
behavior that "confirms" them in the present (e.g., Berk & Andersen,
2000). In understanding these and similar findings, occurring without
either perceiver or target being aware of what was being evoked or
stirred, Andersen

197

and colleagues note resemblances to the psychoanalytic concepts of
transference and countertransference. Developmental Studies of Cyclical
Processes Decades of developmental research have demonstrated that
humans are attuned to interpersonal experience from the earliest moments
of life. At the same time, the influence of the caretaker, rather than
simply an "external" or "environmental" shaper of behavior and
experience, is itself responsive to the evolving properties of the
infant. Several influential lines of infant research have demonstrated
the pervasiveness of processes between infants and their caregivers that
parallel the conceptualization of cyclical psychodynamic theory. These
processes have variously been described in terms of "reciprocity"
(Brazelton, Koslowski, & Main, 1974), "mutual influence" (Beebe &
Lachmann, 1988, 2014), and "bidirectional influence" (Cohn & Tronick,
1988). As evident from this research, each member of a mother--​child
dyad is attuned (if always imperfectly) to the expressive state of the
other and responds to the expressive state of the other in a dynamically
evolving system. Infants rely on this attunement for regulation of their
emotions and level of arousal, and repeated experiences of attunement
(or misattunement) with mothers and other caregivers shape the infant's
later interpersonal expectancies and symbolic functioning (Beebe et al.,
2016; Beebe & Steele, 2013; Bigelow et al., 2010; Markova & Legerstee,
2006). A similar process is evident as well in the evolution and
maintenance of models of attachment, what Bowlby called internal working
models. There, too, rather than the infant's (or older child's or
adult's) attachment representations simply being fixed or "internal,"
they are a continuing product of mutual interaction, self-​fulfilling
prophecies, and cyclical dynamic processes (Wachtel, 2010b). The
findings by developmental researchers of dyadic reciprocity in mother--​
infant interaction and the ways that expectations become self-​
replicating and self-​ sustaining have had

198

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

increasing impact within the broader therapeutic community on
therapeutic work with adults. The Boston Change Process Study Group
(2010) has been in the forefront of this translation from infant
research to clinical practice. Extrapolating from a wide range of
developmental and interactional studies, both by members of their group
and by others, they argue that "conflicts and defenses are born and
reside in the domain of interaction," that understanding people in depth
requires understanding of "specific exchanges at the local level of the
interaction," and that "the past is carried forward into the present at
the level of lived experience" (Boston Change Process Study Group, 2007,
p. 856). Psychotherapy and Psychopathology Research Consistent with the
focus of such developmental studies and with the premises of cyclical
psychodynamic theory, both process research in psychotherapy and
research in psychopathology have become increasingly attuned to the
subtle, moment-​ to-​ moment, verbal and nonverbal exchanges that occur
between patient and therapist or between the patient and his
accomplices. As part of this, methods of data collection and analysis
are being continually refined to better model these reciprocal,
interactive phenomena. These models and research designs have great
relevance to the cyclical psychodynamic point of view (e.g., Bolger &
Laurenceau, 2013; Sadler, Ethier, & Woody, 2011). Thanks in part to
these methodological advances, researchers are now able to illuminate
such clinically relevant questions as how changes in therapeutic
alliance over time predict therapeutic outcome (Zilcha-​Mano et al.,
2016), what sequences of emotional expression lead to improvement in
distressed couples (McKinnon & Greenberg, 2017), and what sequences of
self-​states characterize a patient's depression (Osatuke et al., 2011).
While the complexity of human interaction is daunting, these
developments represent a significant increase in our ability to study in
systematic fashion the reciprocal and often

self-​perpetuating processes that are at the center of the cyclical
psychodynamic point of view. FUTURE DIRECTIONS The cyclical
psychodynamic perspective originally developed in the effort to
integrate psychoanalytic and behavioral approaches (Wachtel, 1977). It
then became apparent that its emphasis on reciprocal causal influences
and the role of vicious and virtuous circles had much in common with
many of the core premises of family therapy, and the integrative effort
was extended to include attention to and work with family systems
(Wachtel & Wachtel, 1986). A direction currently being pursued aims to
enhance the scope and effectiveness of the integrative effort by
incorporating methods from experiential and emotion-​focused approaches
(Greenberg, 2016) and attending to the procedural dimension in
therapeutic change (Lyons-​ Ruth, 1998; Stern et al., 1998). From the
beginning, the impetus for the integrative effort was to promote greater
experiential contact with desires, thoughts, and feelings that had been
fearfully avoided. The aim was to move beyond what seemed like an
excessive emphasis in the therapeutic approaches of the time on knowing
about those warded-​off aspects of the self and to enable the patient to
directly experience and reassimilate their potential into his evolving
experiential and behavioral repertoire. As part of this experiential
emphasis, the patient was also encouraged to try out new modes of
interacting with others that gave more direct expression to those
previously unexpressed yearnings and that, through direct experiential
learning, enabled him to modify the interpersonal feedback central to
maintaining the problematic patterns. Behavioral methods were viewed, in
this context, not as the application of a behavioristic methodology, but
as a means of achieving this more experiential aim. The increasing
employment of methods from therapeutic approaches more explicitly
defined in terms of an experiential, emotion-​ focused point of view is
thus a natural extension of the original integrative agenda. So,

Cyclical Psychodynamics

too, is the current emphasis on exploring the therapeutic implications
of the distinction between semantic/​ declarative learning and more
procedural dimensions of learning and memory. In contrast to the
emphasis in many therapeutic approaches on the explicit recovery of
memories and the promotion of conscious insights (Fonagy, 1999), a
procedural emphasis highlights change promoted through lived experience.
It is this procedural emphasis, including attention to the subtle, often
out-​of-​awareness exchanges that promote implicit relational knowing
(Lyons-​ Ruth, 1998), that represents one of the key directions toward
which cyclical psychodynamic practice is moving. A second major vector
in the evolution of the cyclical psychodynamic point of view is the
continuing elaboration of its focus on the therapist's use of language
(Wachtel, 2011b). This strong interest in language and attention to how
small differences in the words and phrases the therapist uses can
advance or impede progress might at first seem inconsistent with the
shift in emphasis from declarative/​semantic to procedural dimensions of
the therapeutic change process. The aim of this focus on language,
however, is not so much to promote verbalized (declarative) insights as
it is to take account of language's being a critical medium of
relationship and human interaction. Language contributes to evoking
emotions, to creating trust or mistrust, to generating confidence or
hesitancy, and to promoting new ways of acting and experiencing or to
strengthening old ways. Viewing language in this way, and attending to
how common phrases and linguistic habits of therapists can unwittingly
create shame and discouragement in the patient, the cyclical
psychodynamic therapist thus approaches language itself in a fashion
consistent with the shift from a declarative to a procedural emphasis.
Part of that shift includes attending not just to the content of the
message but to the meta-​ messages (Wachtel, 2011b)---​ the emotional
tone, the implied message about how the therapist feels about the
patient, the promptings to action, the implicit generation of
alternative meanings, and so forth. These dimensions and strategies of
therapeutic communication

199

contribute to change in many of the same ways that behavioral
interventions do (e.g., by generating exposure or promoting new, more
adaptive behaviors), but they fit more comfortably and less intrusively
into an exploratory or psychodynamic approach. A third vector of
cyclical psychodynamic theory is its applications to larger social
questions. The integrative framework points to the importance of
attending not just to the immediate interpersonal context but to the
larger social, economic, and cultural context as well (Wachtel, 2014a).
Applications have included explorations of phenomena of race and racism
(Wachtel, 1999), greed and materialism (Wachtel, 2003, 2005), and the
psychological factors that impede our ability to address the challenges
of climate change, environmental degradation, and economic inequality
(Wachtel, 2017b). The well-​being of our patients depends not only on
their individual psychological inclinations or the quality of their
personal relationships but also on the culture and society in which they
live. Psychotherapists have tended to leave out this broader foundation
of well-​being. A current and future goal of cyclical psychodynamics is
to move these social and cultural considerations increasingly to the
center of psychotherapists' concerns. Such a shift does not represent a
retreat from understanding individuals in depth or from attention to the
intimate relationships that contribute so powerfully to shaping who we
become. Rather, it reflects the view that it is in attending to the ways
that individuals both shape and are shaped by their contexts that we
gain the most effective understanding for helping people live richer and
fuller lives.

References Abramowitz, J. S., Deacon, B. J., & Whiteside, S. P. H.
(2011). Exposure therapy for anxiety: Principles and practice. New York:
Guilford. Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946). Psychoanalytic therapy:
Principles and application. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
Andersen, S. M., & Przybylinski, E. (2014). Cognitive distortion in
interpersonal relations: Clinical implications of social cognitive
research on

200

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

person perception. Journal of Psychotherapy psychodynamic meaning:
Implicit process in Integration, 24(1), 13--​ 24. doi:10.1037/​ relation
to conflict, defense and the dynamic a0035968 unconscious. International
Journal of Psycho-​ Arnkoff, D. B., & Glass, C. R. (1992). Cognitive
Analysis, 88(4), 843--​860. therapy and psychotherapy integration. In D.
Boston Change Process Study Group. (2010). K. Freedheim (Ed.), History
of psychotherapy: A Change in psychotherapy: A unifying paradigm.
century of change (pp. 657--​694). Washington, New York: Norton. DC:
American Psychological Association. Brazelton, T. B., Koslowski, B., &
Main, M. (1974). Aron, L. (1996). A meeting of minds: Mutuality in The
origins of reciprocity: The early mother--​ psychoanalysis. Hillsdale,
NJ: Analytic Press. infant interaction. In M. Lewis & L. A. Ayduk, Ö.,
Gyurak, A., Akinola, M., & Mendes, Rosenblum (Eds.), The effect of the
infant on its W. B. (2013). Consistency over flattery: Self-​ caregiver.
New York: Wiley. verification processes revealed in implicit Campbell,
L., Lackenbauer, S. D., & Muise, and behavioral responses to feedback.
Social A. (2006). When is being known or adored Psychological and
Personality Science, 4(5), by romantic partners most beneficial?
538--​545. doi:10.1177/​1948550612471827 Self-​ perceptions, relationship
length, and Bandura, A. (1997). Self-​ efficacy: The exercise of
responses to partner's verifying and enhancing control. San Francisco:
W. H. Freeman. appraisals. Personality and Social Psychology Beebe, B.,
& Lachmann, F. M. (1988). The Bulletin, 32(10), 1283--​ 1294.
doi:10.1177/​ contribution of mother-​infant mutual influence
0146167206290383 to the origins of self-​and object representations.
Cassidy, J., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (2016). Handbook Psychoanalytic
Psychology, 5(4), 305--​337. of attachment: Theory, research, and
clinical doi:10.1037/​0736-​9735.5.4.305 applications (3rd ed.). New York:
Routledge. Beebe, B., & Lachmann, F. M. (2014). The origins of
Castonguay, L. G., & Beutler, L. E. (2006). attachment: Infant research
and adult treatment. Principles of therapeutic change that work. New
York: Routledge. New York: Oxford University Press. Beebe, B.,
Messinger, D., Bahrick, L. E., Margolis, A., Chawla, N., & Ostafin, B.
(2007). Experiential Buck, K. A., & Chen, H. (2016). A systems view
avoidance as a functional dimensional approach of mother--​infant
face-​to-​face communication. to psychopathology: An empirical review.
Developmental Psychology, 52(4), 556--​571. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 63(9), 871--​890. doi:10.1037/​a0040085 doi:10.1002/​jclp.20400
Beebe, B., & Steele, M. (2013). How does microanalysis Chen, S.,
Boucher, H. C., Andersen, S. M., & of mother--​ infant communication
inform Saribay, S. A. (2013). Transference and maternal sensitivity and
infant attachment? the relational self. In J. A. Simpson & L. Attachment
& Human Development, 15(5-​6), Campbell (Eds.), The Oxford handbook of
close 583--​602. doi:10.1080/​14616734.2013.841050 relationships
(pp. 281--​305). New York: Oxford Berk, M. S., & Andersen, S. M. (2000).
The University Press. impact of past relationships on interpersonal
Christian, C., Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2012). behavior:
Behavioral confirmation in the social-​ The corrective emotional
experience: A cognitive process of transference. Journal of relational
perspective and critique. In L. G. Personality and Social Psychology,
79(4), 546--​ Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Transformation 562.
doi:10.1037//​0022-​3514.79.4.546 in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences
Bigelow, A. E., MacLean, K., Proctor, J., Myatt, across cognitive
behavioral, humanistic, and T., Gillis, R., & Power, M. (2010). Maternal
psychodynamic approaches (pp. 51--​ 67). sensitivity throughout infancy:
Continuity and Washington, DC: American Psychological relation to
attachment security. Infant Behavior Association. & Development, 33(1),
50--​ 60. doi:10.1016/​ Clement, S., Schauman, O., Graham, T., Maggioni,
j.infbeh.2009.10.009 F., Evans-​ Lacko, S., Bezborodovs, N., & Bolger,
N., & Laurenceau, J.-​ P. (2013). Intensive Thornicroft, G. (2014). What
is the impact longitudinal methods: An introduction to diary of mental
health-​ related stigma on help-​ and experience sampling research. New
York: seeking? A systematic review of quantitative Guilford. and
qualitative studies. Psychological Boston Change Process Study Group
(BCPSG) Medicine, 45(1), 11--​ 27. doi:10.1017/​ (2007). The foundational
level of S0033291714000129

Cyclical Psychodynamics

201

Cohn, J. F., & Tronick, E. Z. (1988). Mother--​ Psychotherapies, 16(2),
106--​117. doi:10.1080/​ infant face-​ to-​ face interaction: Influence is
14779757.2017.1330702 bidirectional and unrelated to periodic cycles
Hayes, S. C., Follette, V. M., & Linehan, M. M. in either partner's
behavior. Developmental (2004). Mindfulness and acceptance: Expanding
Psychology, 24(3), 386--​ 392. doi:10.1037/​ the cognitive-​ behavioral
tradition. New York: 0012-​1649.24.3.386 Guilford. Cramer, P. (2006).
Protecting the self: Defense Jussim, L. (2012). Social perception and
social reality: mechanisms in action. New York: Guilford. Why accuracy
dominates bias and self-​fulfilling Darley, J. M., & Gross, P. H. (1983).
A hypothesis-​ prophecy. New York: Oxford University Press. confirming
bias in labeling effects. Journal of Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration
of the self. Personality and Social Psychology, 44(1), 20--​33. New York:
International Universities Press. doi:10.1037/​0022-​3514.44.1.20 Kohut,
H. (1984). How does analysis cure? Dasgupta, N., & Rivera, L. M. (2006).
From (A. Goldberg & P. E. Stepansky, Eds.). automatic antigay prejudice
to behavior: The Chicago: University of Chicago Press. moderating role
of conscious beliefs about Lane, R. D., Ryan, L., Nadel, L., &
Greenberg, L. gender and behavioral control. Journal of (2014). Memory
reconsolidation, emotional Personality and Social Psychology, 91(2),
268--​ arousal, and the process of change in 280.
doi:10.1037/​0022-​3514.91.2.268 psychotherapy: New insights from brain
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. (1950). Personality and science. Behavioral
and Brain Sciences, 38, e1. psychotherapy. New York: McGraw-​Hill.
doi:10.1017/​S0140525X14000041 Downey, G., & Feldman, S. I. (1996).
Implications Lyons-​ Ruth, K. (1998). Implicit relational of rejection
sensitivity for intimate relation­ knowing: Its role in development and
ships. Journal of Personality and Social psychoanalytic treatment.
Infant Mental Psychology, 70(6), 1327--​ 1343. doi:10.1037/​ Health
Journal, 19(3), 282--​ 289. doi:10.1002/​ 0022-​3514.70.6.1327 (SICI)1097- ​
0 355(199823)19:3\<282:AID-​ Downey, G., Freitas, A. L., Michaelis, B., &
Khouri, IMHJ3\>3.0.CO;2-​O H. (2004). The self-​ fulfilling prophecy in
Madon, S., Guyll, M., Spoth, R., & Willard, J. (2004). close
relationships: Rejection sensitivity and Self-​ fulfilling prophecies:
The synergistic rejection by romantic partners. In H. T. Reis &
accumulative effect of parents' beliefs on C. E. Rusbult (Eds.), Close
relationships: Key children's drinking behavior. Psychological readings.
(pp. 435--​455). Philadelphia: Taylor Science, 15(12), 837--​ 845.
doi:10.1111/​ & Francis. j.0956-​7976.2004.00764.x Fonagy, P. (1999).
Memory and therapeutic action. Madon, S., Willard, J., Guyll, M., &
Scherr, K. C. International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 80, (2011).
Self-​fulfilling prophecies: Mechanisms, 215--​223. power, and links to
social problems. Social and Fonagy, P., & Allison, E. (2014). The role
of Personality Psychology Compass, 5(8), 578--​590. mentalizing and
epistemic trust in the doi:10.1111/​j.1751-​9004.2011.00375.x therapeutic
relationship. Psychotherapy, 51(3), Markova, G., & Legerstee, M. (2006).
Contingency, 372--​380. doi:10.1037/​a0036505 imitation, and affect
sharing: Foundations Fosha, D. (2000). The transforming power of affect:
of infants' social awareness. Developmental A model for accelerated
change. New York: Psychology, 42(1), 132--​ 141. doi:10.1037/​ Basic
Books. 0012-​1649.42.1.132 Frank, K. R. (1999). Psychoanalytic
participation: McKinnon, J. M., & Greenberg, L. S. (2017). Action,
interaction, and integration. New York: Vulnerable emotional expression
in emotion Analytic Press. focused couples therapy: Relating
interactional Freud, S. (1926/​1959). Inhibitions, symptoms, and
processes to outcome. Journal of Marital and anxiety: The standard
edition (Vol. 21, pp. 87--​ Family Therapy, 43(2), 198--​212. doi:10.1111/​
172). London: Hogarth. jmft.12229 Greenberg, L. S. (2016).
Emotion-​focused therapy, Merton, R. K. (1948). The self-​fulfilling
prophecy. Revised edition. Washington, DC: American The Antioch Review,
8(2), 193--​210. doi:10.2307/​ Psychological Association. 4609267
Greenberg, L. S. (2017). Emotion-​focused therapy Messer, S. B. (1992). A
critical examination of depression. Person-​Centered & Experiential of
belief structures in integrative and

202

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

eclectic psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross Sadler, P., Ethier, N., &
Woody, E. (2011). Tracing the & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
interpersonal web of psychopathology: Dyadic psychotherapy integration.
(pp. 130--​ 165). data analysis methods for clinical researchers. New
York: Basic Books. Journal of Experimental Psychopathology, 2(2),
Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (Eds.). (2016). 95--​138.
doi:10.5127/​jep.010310 Attachment in adulthood: Structure, dynamics,
Safran, J. D., Muran, C., & Shaker, A. (2014). and change (2nd ed.). New
York: Guilford. Research on therapeutic impasses and ruptures Miranda,
R., Andersen, S. M., & Edwards, T. in the therapeutic alliance.
Contemporary (2013). The relational self and pre-​ existing
Psychoanalysis, 50(1-​2), 211--​232. doi:10.1080/​ depression: Implicit
activation of significant-​ 00107530.2014.880318 other representations
exacerbates dysphoria and Shimizu, M., & Pelham, B. W. (2004). The
evokes rejection in the working self-​concept. unconscious cost of good
fortune: Implicit and Self and Identity, 12(1), 39--​ 57. doi:10.1080/​
explicit self-​ esteem, positive life events, and 15298868.2011.636504
health. Health Psychology, 23(1), 101--​105. Mitchell, S. (1988).
Relational concepts in doi:10.1037/​0278-​6133.23.1.101 psychoanalysis.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Snyder, M. (2016). Self-​fulfilling stereotypes.
In P. University Press. S. Rothenberg & S. Munshi (Eds.), Race, class,
Mitchell, S. (1993). Hope and dread in psychoanalysis. and gender in the
United States: An integrated New York: Basic Books. study (10th ed.,
pp. 541--​546). New York: Worth Neimeyer, R. A. (2009). Constructivist
psychotherapy: Publishers. Distinctive features. New York: Routledge.
Snyder, M., & Klein, O. (2005). Construing and Neimeyer, R. A., &
Mahoney, M. J. (Eds.). (1999). constructing others: On the reality and
the Constructivism in psychotherapy. Washington, generality of the
behavioral confirmation DC: American Psychological Association.
scenario. Interaction Studies, 6(1), 53--​67. Norcross, J. C., & Lambert.
M. J. (Eds.). (2018). doi:10.1075/​is.6.1.05sny Psychotherapy
relationships that work (3rd ed.). Stern, D. B. (1997). Unformulated
experience: From New York: Oxford University Press. dissociation to
imagination in psychoanalysis. Obegi, J. H., & Berant, E. (Eds.).
(2010). Attachment Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. theory and research in
clinical work with adults. Stern, D. N., Sander, L. W., Nahum, J. P.,
New York: Guilford. Harrison, A. M., Lyons-​ Ruth, K., Morgan, Osatuke,
K., Stiles, W. B., Barkham, M., Hardy, A. C., Bruschweiler-​Stern, N., &
Tronick, E. G. E., & Shapiro, D. A. (2011). Relationship Z. (1998). Non-​
interpretive mechanisms in between mental states in depression: The
psychoanalytic therapy: The 'something more' assimilation model
perspective. Psychiatry than interpretation. International Journal of
Research, 190(1), 52--​ 59. doi:10.1016/​ Psychoanalysis, 79, 903--​921.
j.psychres.2010.11.001 Stricker, G., & Gold, J. R. (1996). Psychotherapy
Pachankis, J. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (2007). An integration: An
assimilative, psychodynamic integrative, principle-​ based approach to
approach. Clinical Psychology: Science and psychotherapy. In S. G.
Hoffman & J. Weinberger Practice, 3(1), 47--​58. doi:10.1111/​j.1468-​
(Eds.), The art and science of psychotherapy (pp. 2850.1996.tb00057.x
49--​68). New York: Routledge. Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal
theory of Romero-​Canyas, R., & Downey, G. (2013). What psychiatry. New
York: Norton. I see when I think it's about me: People low in Swann, W.
B., Jr. (2012). Self-​verification theory. In rejection-​sensitivity
downplay cues of rejection P. A. M. Van Lange, A. W. Kruglanski, & E. T.
in self-​ relevant interpersonal situations. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of
theories of social Emotion, 13(1), 104--​ 117. doi:10.1037/​ psychology
(Vol. 2, pp. 23--​42). Thousand Oaks, a0029786 CA: Sage. Romero-​ Canyas,
R., Downey, G., Berenson, K., Trusz, S., & Bąbel, P. (Eds.). (2016).
Interpersonal Ayduk, O., & Kang, N. J. (2010). Rejection and
Intrapersonal Expectancies. New York: sensitivity and the rejection-​
hostility link in Routledge. romantic relationships. Journal of
Personality, Wachtel, E. F. (2016). The heart of couple therapy: 78(1),
119--​148. doi:10.1111/​j.1467-​6494. Knowing what to do and how to do it.
2009.00611.x New York: Guilford.

Cyclical Psychodynamics Wachtel, E. F., & Wachtel, P. L. (1986). Family
dynamics in individual psychotherapy: A guide to clinical strategies.
New York: Guilford. Wachtel, P. L. (1973). Psychodynamics, behavior
therapy, and the implacable experimenter: An inquiry into the
consistency of personality. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 82(2), 324--​
334. doi:10.1037/​h0035132 Wachtel, P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and
behavior therapy: Toward an integration. New York: Basic Books. Wachtel,
P. L. (1994). Cyclical processes in personality and psychopathology.
Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 103(1), 51--​54.
doi:10.1037/​0021-​843X.103.1.51 Wachtel, P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis,
behavior therapy, and the relational world. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Wachtel, P. L. (1999). Race in the mind of
America: Breaking the vicious circle between blacks and whites. New
York: Routledge. Wachtel, P. L. (2003). Full pockets, empty lives: A
psychoanalytic exploration of the contemporary culture of greed. The
American Journal of Psychoanalysis, 63(2), 103--​ 122. doi:10.1023/​
a:1024037330427 Wachtel, P. L. (2005). Greed as an individual and social
phenomenon: An application of the two-​configurations model. In J.
Auerbach, K. Levy, & C. Schaffer (Eds.), Relatedness, self-​ definition
and mental representation: Essays in honor of Sidney J. Blatt (pp. 241--​
254). London: Brunner-​Routledge. Wachtel, P. L. (2008). Relational
theory and the practice of psychotherapy. New York: Guilford. Wachtel,
P. L. (2009). Knowing oneself from the inside out, knowing oneself from
the outside in: The 'inner' and 'outer' worlds and their link through
action. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 26(2), 158--​170. doi:10.1037/​a0015502
Wachtel, P. L. (2010a). Beyond 'ESTs': Problematic assumptions in the
pursuit of evidence-​based practice. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 27(3),
251--​272. doi:10.1037/​a0020532 Wachtel, P. L. (2010b). One-​person and
two-​person conceptions of attachment and their implications for
psychoanalytic thought. The International Journal of Psychoanalysis,
91(3), 561--​581. doi:10.1111/​j.1745-​8315.2010.00265.x

203

Wachtel, P. L. (2011a). Inside the session: What really happens in
psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Wachtel, P. L. (2011b). Therapeutic communication: Knowing what to say
when (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Wachtel, P. L. (2014a). Cyclical
psychodynamics and the contextual self: The inner world, the intimate
world, and the world of culture and society. New York: Routledge.
Wachtel, P. L. (2014c). An integrative relational point of view.
Psychotherapy, 51(3), 342--​349. doi:10.1037/​a0037219 Wachtel, P. L.
(2017a). Attachment theory and clinical practice: A cyclical
psychodynamic vantage point. Psychoanalytic Inquiry, 37(5), 332--​342.
Wachtel, P. L. (2017b). The poverty of affluence (2nd ed.). Brooklyn,
NY: ig Publishers. Wachtel, P. L. (2017c). Psychoanalysis and the
Moebius strip: Reexamining the relation between the internal world and
the world of daily experience. Psychoanalytic Psychology, 34(1), 58--​68.
doi:10.1037/​pap0000101 Wachtel, P. L. (2017d). The relationality of
everyday life: The unfinished journey of relational psychoanalysis.
Psychoanalytic Dialogues. Wachtel, P. L. (2018). Pathways to progress
for integrative psychotherapy: Perspectives on practice and research.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 28(2), 2020212. Wallin, D. J.
(2007). Attachment in psychotherapy. New York: Guilford. Weiss, J., &
Sampson, H. (1986). The psychoanalytic process: Theory, clinical
observations, and empirical research. New York: Guilford. Wile, D. B.
(1984). Kohut, Kernberg, and accusatory interpretations. Psychotherapy:
Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 21(3), 353--​364.
doi:10.1037/​h0086097 Winter, D. A. (2008). Cognitive behaviour therapy:
From rationalism to constructivism? European Journal of Psychotherapy &
Counselling, 10(3), 221--​229. Zilcha-​ Mano, S., Muran, J. C., Hungr, C.,
Eubanks, C. F., Safran, J. D., & Winston, A. (2016).The relationship
between alliance and outcome: Analysis of a two-​person perspective on
alliance and session outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 84(6), 484--​496. doi:10.1037/​ccp0000058

D. Assimilative Integration

10 Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy GEORGE STRICKER AND JERRY
GOLD

Our patients and our work as psychotherapists have puzzled us,
tantalized us, humbled us, and ultimately taught us to question the
validity of a "one truth" position in the world of psychotherapy. We
both were trained as psychodynamic psychotherapists and remain committed
to that orientation. Yet we have learned much from colleagues of all
orientations and have found that our psychodynamic ideas and methods can
be empowered by, and can synergize with, concepts and techniques from
several therapeutic schools. INTEGRATIVE APPROACH The Assimilative
Psychodynamic model refers to a broadly psychodynamic therapy into which
active interventions (cognitive-​ behavioral,

experiential, and family-​systems techniques) are assimilated, producing
an altered purpose and expanded impact of those interventions and an
enlarged view of psychodynamic functioning (Gold & Stricker, 2001, 2013,
2015; Stricker, 2010; Stricker & Gold, 2002). Our approach to
psychotherapy integration grew out of a number of experiences,
individual and shared, academic, collegial, and clinical, that taught us
about psychotherapy integration in general and about its role in
psychodynamic psychotherapy in particular. One of us (GS) was an initial
organizer of the Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy
Integration (SEPI; /​www.sepiweb.org/​) and, as such, has been involved in
this scholarly and clinical movement since its beginnings. Stricker has
been privy to, and a contributor to, the central conversations about
psychotherapy

207

208

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

integration for more than 30 years and has contained in this book, and
the integrative inpresented at almost all of the SEPI conferences
tervention strategies therein, remain important during that period. A
particularly formative foundations of our integrative model. experience
occurred at Iguazu Falls, a beauThe relative flood of integrative
writing that tiful spot in Argentina. He was excited to be followed
Wachtel's (1977) watershed publicathere but uncomfortable with the
heights, and tion has influenced us as well. Important conhe challenged
one of the editors of this book temporary integrative writers who have
taught (MG) to help him with it. A combination of us much include Ryle
(cognitive-​ analytic some breathing exercises and a great deal of
therapy; Ryle &Kerr, 2002), Beutler (Beutler support made the event a
memorable one and et al., 2013), and Lambert (2007). We also have
underlined the potential value of cognitive-​ been influenced by Messer's
(1992) seminal behavior therapy (CBT) to a confirmed psycho- writing on
assimilative integration; our integradynamic psychotherapist (Stricker,
1995). tion of active interventions from therapies other The second
author (JG) was editor of the than psychoanalysis conforms to this
contextual Journal of Psychotherapy Integration and, in that
perspective. role, examined many scholarly contributions to This
collective of innovators all demonstrated psychotherapy integration.
Gold was Stricker's that psychodynamic changes can and do follow
doctoral student just prior to the founding of from behavioral changes
as frequently and as SEPI, and during our work together on what
powerfully as when insight precedes change. would become Gold's (1980)
doctoral disser- Essentially, all of these therapists place insight
tation, we discussed early papers and books and psychodynamic variables
within a mulon psychotherapy integration, which remain tidirectional and
multidimensional model of shared influences. These included Dollard and
psychological change. It then follows that new Miller's (1950) seminal
integration of learning learning and the provision of new experiences
theory and Freudian psychoanalysis; Alexander and new relationships, as
well as interpretation and French's (1946) radical revision of psycho-
and insight, are crucial in a psychoanalytically analytic therapy, in
which the concept of the cor- informed integrative therapy. It was from
this rective emotional experience was introduced; conceptual and
technical foundation that our and classic articles on the integration of
various approach grew. psychotherapies. Some of the more influential
Another "brick" in the foundation of our papers were French's (1933)
examination of model was our own effort (Stricker & Gold, the relation
between Pavlovian conditioning 1988) to conceptualize personality and
perand Freudian theory; Rosenzweig's (1936) de- sonality disorders
within an expanded psychoscription of common factors in psychotherapy;
dynamic theory that would take into account Alexander's (1963)
description of the therapist conscious cognitive and perceptual
processes, as a source of rewards, punishments, and cor- as well as
overt behavior and interpersonal rective learning experiences; Beier's
(1966) relationships. Although not meant as an description of the way in
which therapists re- overtly integrative theory at the time, we have
inforce unconscious mental processes; and the returned to this model
repeatedly (Gold & psychodynamic behavior therapy contributed Stricker,
1993, 2001; Stricker, 2010; Stricker & by Feather and Rhodes (1972).
Gold, 1996) and have explored its integrative A critically important
influence on implications in the development of Assimilative both
authors was the seminal book by Paul Psychodynamic Psychotherapy. This
"three-​ Wachtel (1977), Psychoanalysis and Behavior tiered" theory
(behavior, cognition and emoTherapy: Towards an Integration, which we
tion, and psychodynamics) allowed us to read together soon after its
publication and consider how to incorporate nonanalytical ideas which
was a serendipitous find as we struggled and methods in a flexible but
systematic way. to conceptualize the research questions that Our
conceptual foundation fits best into the shaped Gold's (1980)
dissertation. The the- relational group of psychoanalytic therapies
oretical model of cyclical psychodynamics (Greenberg & Mitchell, 1983;
Wachtel, 2007).

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

That is, we believe that each person's psychological structures and ways
of consciously and unconsciously remembering and representing our
experiences accrue in the context of significant interpersonal
relationships. Central to our model is the traditional psychoanalytic
notion that those memories and experiences that are painful and that
contradict our cherished notions of who we are and of who our parents
and other loved ones were are excluded from consciousness yet continue
to influence our thinking, behavior, and emotional experience. As
integrative theorists and therapists, and following our own three-​tiered
model, we believe that consciousness and its components (emotion,
cognition, and perception) and behavior play significant roles in
psychopathology and often require direct intervention as well.
Furthermore, we assume that there are dynamic linkages among the tiers
that reinforce and maintain phenomena at all levels. In other words, we
have found that problematic thinking and troubling interpersonal
relationship patterns often express and stabilize unconscious conflicts
and prevent interpretive work from being completely effective. As a
result, there are times when we must intervene directly in the patient's
behavior and consciousness, in much the same ways as do cognitive,
behavioral, experiential, and systemic therapists. This leads to the
assimilative nature of this therapy. When employing an intervention that
is meant to change thinking, emotional processing, or behavior, we do so
with two purposes: to change the targeted psychological issue and, at
the same time, to intervene in the psychodynamic sphere that is
connected to that issue. Our selection of interventions is guided
primarily by clinical experience and necessity and by our reliance on
psychodynamic principles, but we are aware of, and use whenever
possible, empirical guidelines. In doing so, we rely on evidence-​based
interventions rather than empirically supported techniques, as the
latter are more narrow and restrictive. Our psychoanalytic interventions
reflect our training and ongoing experience as clinicians, yet we also
rely on research findings that substantiate the clinical

209

effectiveness of psychodynamic exploration and of interpretation of
transference (cf. Luborsky, 1996; Shedler, 2010; Weiss & Sampson, 1986).
Similarly, when an active intervention is assimilated into our
psychodynamic approach, we do so first with an eye toward the immediate
and long-​term clinical needs of the patient, but also with awareness of
the literature on prescriptive matching of patient, problem, and
evidence-​based methods (Beutler et al., 2013; Consoli & Beutler, Chapter
7, this volume). Finally, and of crucial importance, we are cognizant of
the compelling research support for the impact of the therapeutic
relationship (Norcross & Lambert, 2018) as well as of the therapy
technique. Interestingly, this brings us full circle, as that was the
crucial finding of Gold's (1980) dissertation. ASSESSMENT AND
FORMULATION Although we assign patients diagnoses for record keeping and
for insurance purposes, we have not found any diagnostic typology to be
of much use in the complex environment of ongoing psychotherapy. Our
assessment begins with the first contact with the patient and continues
throughout the treatment. It usually is interwoven in a relatively
seamless way with the psychotherapeutic process. This is inherent in an
exploratory, psychodynamically informed psychotherapy, wherein a central
goal of the treatment is the progressive expansion of our understanding
of the patient. We do not separate the treatment into phases of formal
assessment and psychotherapy, but, as new material and understanding
emerges, we revisit our initial assessment and formulation. We are not
adverse to the use of formal tests or questionnaires to answer specific
questions about issues such as diagnosis, risks, or psychological
abilities and disabilities, but our assessment is not linked to such
instruments, and we use them only as a particular need emerges with an
individual patient. We do rely on outcome assessments (Lambert, 2007).
Our assessment and formulation of each patient relies heavily on the
three-​tiered model of

210

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

psychological functioning that we introduced earlier in this chapter
(Stricker & Gold, 1988). These tiers are behavior and interpersonal
relatedness (Tier 1); cognition, perception, and emotion (Tier 2); and
psychodynamic conflict, self-​representations, and object representation
(Tier 3). We evaluate the patient's functioning, strengths, and
weaknesses at each tier and look in particular for the linkages between
variables in each tier and for the ways in which problems and processes
in one tier may express or maintain a problem in another tier. We also
evaluate deficits and skills at each level of experience and try to
identify how filling in these gaps, or using specific strengths, might
support change at the other levels. In general, we try to spot those
issues in Tiers 1 and 2 that would prevent effective psychodynamic work
and that, if ameliorated, could serve as the kernels of "corrective
emotional experiences" and thus as the seeds of new images of self and
of others (Gold & Stricker, 2001). That is, current interactions with
others (Tier 1) are motivated, skewed, and limited by unconscious
perceptions, motives, conflicts, and images (Tier 3) yet can be and are
limiting factors in the patient's ability to change these issues.
Similarly, one's conscious thinking and perception (Tier 2) exist in an
ongoing, circular interaction with the people in one's life. Finally,
each patient's set of character traits, or enduring patterns of adapting
to the interpersonal world, limits the chance for new interaction with
others and for new experiences at Tiers 1 and 2. At the same time, these
traits are not carved in stone but seem inflexible and enduring, at
least in part due to the contributions of others in the patient's life
who channel his or her actions down well worn, familiar paths. The
three-​tier individual, usually represented by a triangle, is placed in a
field that includes many other triangles. Our index patient, in an
expansion of the three-​tier theory, is shown as relating, through mutual
influence, to each of the other triangles (Stricker, 2010) and doing so
within a larger circle representing the culture in which we function.
This amplification captures the relational functioning crucial to our
model and the cultural impact necessary for any model.

As an example, consider the patient who suffers from a Tier 2 problem of
self-​critical thinking. In addition to thinking about ways to help this
person to test these thoughts and to modify them, we explore the
possible role of Tier 3 (psychodynamic) factors in motivating such
thinking, and we consider such thoughts to be a potential defense
against unconscious conflicts such as hostility toward a loved one with
whom the patient is identified. Then, we ask ourselves---​and attempt to
explore clinically---​ the question of whether these thoughts can and
need be changed through exploration of their unwitting symbolic and
defensive role or whether their modification via the use of active,
cognitive techniques would be a more effective step that would lead us
to the same exploratory goal. Additionally, we consider how the people
in the patient's world are relating to them in a way that maintains this
problem. Another component of this assessment piece would be to think
about the interpersonal or transferential impact of the active
intervention. Will the patient experience our active intervention in
their problematic thinking to be an expression of concern or an
intrusion? Will the patient take away a sense of being worthy of care
and of the therapist as being caring, which will help the patient to
revise old self and object representations? Or, will our attempt to help
unwittingly reinforce the patient's sense of vulnerability and images of
authorities who are arbitrary and condescending? Will we be providing a
corrective emotional experience or a repetition of a previous experience
(participating in an enactment)? We begin to develop a case formulation
at the beginning of the treatment and add to or revise this formulation
on an ongoing basis. Our formulation serves as a general, cognitive-​
experiential roadmap that allows us to organize the vast array of data
that emerges in each session and during the course of many sessions.
However, we do not go into each session with an agenda based on this
formulation and are quite willing to abandon its guidance when the
clinical situation dictates otherwise. This follows from our belief,
common to most psychodynamic and humanistic therapies, that it is the
patient who determines the course of

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

the therapy, and it is from the patient that we take the lead in
prioritizing goals (Bohart & Tallman, 1999; Hubble, Duncan, & Miller,
1999). We are willing to live with this tension but, at the same time,
consider there to be a difference between the long-​term goals of the
therapy, which are set by the patient, and the clinical needs of the
patient, which are to be identified and met by the therapist.
APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE We believe that assimilative psychodynamic
psychotherapy is suitable for a broad range of patients and that, in
fact, it extends the range of applicability of traditional psychodynamic
therapies beyond their usual limits. We have found that most adult
patients who are seen in private therapy offices or in outpatient
clinics can benefit from and are successfully treated with this
psychotherapy. We do not believe that this approach would be
particularly useful in a hospital or other confined institutional
setting as we present it here. However, it is very likely that
therapists working in inpatient units or residential settings might use
our assimilative perspective, especially if their models are
psychodynamic. As such, we conclude that it is indicated for adults who
have anxiety disorders, stress-​ related disorders, mood disorders, and
personality disorders. Due to both its psychodynamic foundation and its
integrative assimilation of active techniques, this model permits and
encourages easy shifting between a more immediate, symptomatic focus and
a more extended, exploratory, personality-​ oriented focus. These
parallel tracks allow the therapist to assist the patient in lessening
the patient's current suffering, as well as in exploring and changing
the underlying patterns implicated in that suffering. The decision to
start off with a symptom reduction focus or an exploratory focus is
based on the therapist's assessment of patients' beginning psychological
state, including their level of suffering, ability to tolerate that
suffering, capacity to delay gratification,

211

psychological sophistication, and interest in self-​understanding. With
patients who are relatively high on these variables, we usually begin
the treatment in a fairly standard psychodynamic mode, using
integrative, active techniques as indicated. With those patients whose
suffering is too great to delay symptom reduction, or for whom
psychological exploration is too great a strain, we begin the therapy in
a more active, cognitive-​behavioral or experiential mode and move
gradually toward psychodynamic work as the patient improves. We have
found that this approach allows more fragile or volatile patients
(perhaps those who might be diagnosed with personality disorders,
especially borderline and narcissistic disorders) to experience early
success in therapy. This contributes to improvement in the patient's
self-​esteem, to the attainment of an expanded sense of competence and
mastery, and to the perception of the therapist as a positive and
helpful presence. These experiences in turn lend themselves to the
establishment of a solid therapeutic alliance and to the lessened
likelihood of destructive hostility and negative transference. We do not
believe that this approach is particularly useful with patients whose
primary problems are substance abuse, schizophrenia, other active
psychotic disorders, organic disorders, or acute relationship (e.g.,
marital conflicts) disturbances. This therapy probably is
contraindicated in acute emergencies and crises when management and
safety are crucial. We have not tested this approach with children, but
others (Grehan & Freeman, 2009) have applied it to adolescent patients.
The effectiveness of the short-​term psychodynamic psychotherapies are
likely to be enhanced by the type of assimilative integration that we
propose. Indeed, certain of the more influential and demonstrably
effective therapies of this type, such as Levenson's (1995) time-​limited
dynamic psychotherapy, are highly similar to our model in their
integrative perspectives. This therapy usually is conducted on a once
weekly basis for 45--​50 minutes, though not infrequently we see people
twice weekly for extended periods. The therapy usually is designed as
long-​ term and open-​ ended, though more

212

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

and more often we find that third-​party issues, such as insurance and
managed care limits, force therapy to be constructed as short-​term or to
end sooner than we would like. The typical therapy lasts a year to 2
years and consists of approximately 40--​100 sessions, though both
authors have had several patients with whom we have worked for many
years and for many hundreds of sessions, usually with a great deal of
mutual satisfaction. We often work in combined formats where a patient
in individual therapy is referred to couple, family, or group therapy or
to a psychiatrist for medication. Usually, these supplementary
treatments are carried out by colleagues. We conceptualize these
referrals within the same assimilative framework as we do when using an
active intervention in the patient's individual therapy. That is, we
make these referrals for at least two simultaneous purposes: first, to
assist the patient in changing troublesome symptoms and patterns of
relating at Tiers 1 and 2; and second, to remove a problem that may be
expressing, reinforcing, and warding off Tier 3 (psychodynamic)
phenomena that we have not been able to reach within the context of
psychotherapeutic exploration. PROCESSES OF CHANGE Among the main
reasons for our ongoing interest in psychotherapy integration is our
shared goal of enlarging the range of change factors that can be used in
the comprehensive therapy. At the same time, we hope to preserve the
inclusion of insight, in all of its myriad forms, as a crucial change
factor. The literature on psychotherapy integration (Prochaska &
DiClemente, 1992; Wachtel, 1977) has emphasized repeatedly that change
accrues from many factors. We are happy to make use of as many of those
factors as is possible, noting that each person changes somewhat
differently and that, as a result, each therapy is constructed somewhat
differently as well. We believe that change can and does result from
insight, from exposure to fearsome internal and external stimuli, from
the

modification of cognition and perception, from observational learning
and via operant conditioning, from the ability to access and to
symbolize emotional experiences, and from the internalization of benign,
corrective interpersonal contacts. We emphasize exploratory work in
which insight in its broadest sense is a central mechanism of change. We
believe that an enhanced and expanded awareness of the warded off,
unconscious meanings of one's life experience, of the effects of
intrapsychic conflict, and of an appreciation for the ways in which we
unwittingly repeat our histories and find our parents and significant
others in current relationships often leads to therapeutic outcomes. We
try to accomplish this expansion and deepening of meaning in typical
psychodynamic ways. This is done through a detailed inquiry into past
and present relationships, fantasies, dreams, behavior, and feelings,
and through the gradual building up of a series of hypotheses and
inferences about the connections between past and present, intrapsychic
and interpersonal, desire and fear that eventually leads to
clarification and interpretation. We thus rely on historical insight and
interactional insight in a mutually influential way. Understanding the
role of the past in shaping the present can inform, and is informed by,
patients attaining a more complete understanding of their current
interactions and the ways in which these relationships keep the past
alive (Wachtel, 1977).We do not prize one source of insight above any
other. Therefore, at times, we work with patients to better understand
the past and its role in determining their current sense of self,
whereas at other times the work focuses exclusively on the present and
on clarifying what is going on in the patient's significant contacts
with others. At other times, we work within the therapeutic
relationship, trying to unravel the ways in which we have stepped into
the patient's intrapsychic and interpersonal world and the symbolic
manifestations of transference, countertransference, resistance, and
interpersonal enactment as they emerge. To this point, our description
of assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy does not differentiate it
clearly from any other variant

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

of psychoanalytic treatment. The differences emerge most clearly when we
approach the limits of insight as a change factor or when we discover
that our exploratory, interpretative approach is not the best way to get
to certain conflicts, meanings, or other (Tier 3) psychodynamic issues.
We understand that people often need to learn new skills or to unlearn
maladaptive skills in order to change. We often are humbled by the power
of old images of significant others and their staying power in the face
of interpretation and insight and by the need for the therapist to do
something different from those figures from the past for the patient to
change. We have repeatedly seen how helping patients to expose
themselves to a feared situation, experience, or emotion can lead to new
discoveries, which neither the patient nor the therapist had learned
about through exploratory work. When we find that we are stuck
temporarily, that exploration has led to a dead end, that the patient is
too pained by a symptom or problem to continue, or when the transference
seems too real and too hot to explore, we make an assimilative,
technical shift. We attempt to use other change factors for a dual
purpose: to change the immediate problem situation and to clear the way
for the emergence of the potential new meanings and other psychodynamic
factors that may be implicated in the current problem or stalemate.
Traditional psychodynamic therapists consider the points at which
insight and exploration stall to be those moments during which the
patient's conflicts and pain have stimulated defenses, the manifestation
of which are the source of resistance to the therapy. These therapists
explore and interpret such conflicts, defenses, and resistance much as
they do any other material or phenomena, often with success. We often
use this approach as well, but find that an unvarying interpretive
approach can be unsuccessful and sometimes reflects an unwitting
enactment of a past relationship in which the patient was misunderstood,
hurt, or neglected (Frank, 1999; Gold & Stricker, 2001). For example, it
is not uncommon for psychodynamic work to stall around a "crisis" in

213

a relationship for which the patient demands immediate help, or when a
symptom, such as a fear of air travel, comes to dominate the sessions
leading up to the patient's vacation. These issues often reflect the
impact of defenses against warded-​off conflicts, self-​images, object
representations, and transference reactions. Yet they are real concerns
as well, and they may be worsened by the therapist's refusal to
intervene actively because of allegiance to theoretical principles, even
though he or she knows how to do so. Such an interaction may represent a
reenactment of a parental disregard of or refusal to respond to the
patient's need and may reinforce an underlying pessimism on the part of
the patient. It also may provide convincing evidence to patients that
they are not deserving of help. Frequently, these issues only become
accessible after the therapist has made an assimilative shift,
introducing a technique that can help quiet a conflict in a relationship
or lessen severe anxiety. The therapist's willingness to respond, to be
flexible, and to demonstrate immediate concern often constitutes a
powerful corrective emotional experience. Such a powerful interpersonal
event may allow the patient to access, express, and resolve old feelings
about that past relationship and to use this new positive experience as
the kernel of a new self-​image and images of others. We (Gold &
Stricker, 2001; Stricker, 2006; Stricker & Gold, 2002) have identified
several clinical situations in which we have found it to be advantageous
to make such an assimilative shift. These situations include those
mentioned earlier (exposure and extinction of anxiety, resolution of
transference that cannot be handled though interpretation alone, and
provision of a corrective emotional experience) as well as two others:
correction of developmental deficits through skill building and success
experiences, and support of a patient's active attempts to change
through active intervention (Gold, 2000). We use cognitive-​behavioral
and other didactic methods when exploration reveals that the patient
suffers from a faulty learning history and that the necessary Tier 1 and
Tier 2 skills

214

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

cannot easily be gained in the context of the their own minds and their
psychological detherapeutic relationship. Systematic and pur- velopment,
and some capacity for delay of poseful filling in of cognitive,
behavioral, and gratification and tolerance of frustration. If
experiential deficits leads to new successes, the patient is interested
in this type of work, enhanced self-​ esteem, and internalization of a
relative lack of these capacities (as might be the therapist as an
effective, benign, and helpful found with patients suffering from
personality parent substitute. Similarly, making suggestions disorders)
can be overcome by starting with acabout ways of thinking or behaving
and then tive interventions and then moving toward a standing by as a
supportive audience often more exploratory approach. allows the patient
to actively and creatively exBut even highly intelligent and socially
sucperiment with new ways of relating outside of cessful persons may not
make good use of this therapy and provides the patient with the expe-
therapy if they simply "want results" (symptom rience of being
encouraged to explore his or her relief, interpersonal change) without
caring own creative powers. This type of experience about the
intrapsychic journey toward those also can modify and correct many of
the more results. For example, a talented, mature man malignant self-​and
object images with which of significant financial means recently sought
the patient has been burdened. out psychotherapy with one of the
authors. He Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy came to therapy due
to the great pain that he places considerable demands on the psycho- was
in because of his wife's recently disclosed therapist as a person and as
a professional. infidelity. He stated that he wanted "some psyAny
treatment that is psychoanalytic in na- chological techniques that would
work like pills, ture requires a considerable amount of self-​ that will
make me able to handle this pain and awareness and of self-​reflection,
as well as the go on functioning." He worked diligently with ability to
delay gratification, to remain silent cognitive-​behavioral techniques,
such as relaxafor relatively long periods, and to tolerate high tion and
self-​soothing, and obtained some relief. levels of ambiguity and
uncertainty for ex- Yet he also made it clear that he had no interest
tended stretches of time. In addition to these in exploring anything
other than the obvious characteristics, the assimilative psychodynamic
meanings of this event and that he considered therapist must be able to
acknowledge and to his developmental history to be off-​limits and be
aware of the limits of the psychodynamic irrelevant. As such, once he
had achieved the approach, must be familiar with theories and maximal,
but far from complete, relief from the methods from other therapies, and
must not circumscribed techniques in which he was inget caught up in
ideological conflicts or "clan terested, he ended the treatment.
loyalties" at the patient's expense. Unresolved issues about being true
to one's family of origin that express themselves in the therapist's
beha- THERAPY RELATIONSHIP vior as interfering with assimilative shifts
or in too rapid shifting away from psychodynamic ex- The therapeutic
relationship consists of a ploration when it is called for will
compromise unique interpersonal environment that patients this
psychotherapy. may experience as a supportive safe haven Success in
assimilative psychodynamic psy- from which they may embark on the tasks
of chotherapy seems more or less likely depending psychodynamic
exploration and participation on the patient's interest in and ability
to tolerate in potentially mutative experiences (Stricker and enjoy a
depth-​oriented, developmentally & Gold, 2002). In spite of the
inevitability of influenced psychotherapy in which the expan-
transference and countertransference that press sion of awareness is a
central goal. Such patients the therapist to repeat or to enact past,
pathotypically have, or develop during therapy, a genic relationships
with the patient, it is the certain level of psychological mindedness,
an therapist's job to observe, identify, and underinterest in their own
history, a curiosity about stand the phenomena in which they have been

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

215

ensnared. Furthermore, the therapist must The relational stance of the
therapist is a find a way to react differently and correctively, crucial
variable in determining the emotional allowing exploration of new
intrapsychic, be- valence of the therapeutic alliance and of the
havioral, experiential, cognitive, and interper- effectiveness of the
therapeutic process. A carsonal possibilities and pathways. toon
suggested by Stricker and featured in an As noted earlier, we rely on
the explo- article by Goldfried (1999) illustrates our point ration and
analysis of the transference--​ very well: A patient and therapist meet
for the countertransference matrix. We have found first time. In the
thought bubble above the that acceptance, warmth, and concern also
patient's head is the worrisome idea, "I hope are powerful antidotes to
the past. In this way, he treats the problem I have," while the theraour
ideas about the relationship converge with pist frets, "I hope she has
the problem I treat." client-​centered therapy (Rogers, 1961) and more
Goldfried used this cartoon to help explain his closely with
self-​psychology (Kohut, 1977). movement toward psychotherapy
integration. However, the impact of the relationship goes We refer to it
to underscore our attempt to tailor further than described in a
non-​psychodynamic the therapeutic interaction to the needs of the system
of therapy, and we are equally con- patient rather than to the dictates
of any particcerned with the provision of new experiences ular
therapeutic ideology. within the therapeutic relationship. We attempt to
ascertain quickly whether We have found that, as patients feel ac-
patients would benefit most from active cepted, secure, and understood
in the context interventions that are symptom-​focused, and, of therapy,
they are more willing and better able if so, is this the best approach
to solidify their to explore life in new ways: to take chances, to trust
and confidence in the therapist and the question previously drawn
conclusions, and to therapy? Or, are these patients for whom acown and
tolerate painful emotions, perceptions, tive interventions would be
experienced as and other previously unacknowledged internal pressured
and intrusive and therefore would states. As Bowlby (1980) noted,
exploration is be met best with a more gentle, empathic, only possible
when one has a secure base of at- and reflective approach? Or, are these
people tachment figures to whom to return. We suggest who can and are
interested in "diving into" the that most patients, regardless of their
diagnosis relative depths of the unconscious nuances of or presenting
problems, were and are lacking transference analysis, dream
interpretation, in this foundation. If the therapist can supply a and
free association? We consider all of these substitute for this lack,
then the task of psycho- approaches potentially to be equally valid and
therapy can proceed more confidently and with possible starting points,
and we move from one a much greater chance of success. relationship path
to the other as the therapy As we have and will stress repeatedly, new
unwinds and reveals itself. experience with the therapist becomes the
stimFor example, we would not typically ulus for change at all three
tiers of experience. start with active interventions with a patient When
a patient tries out a new way of thinking whose presenting complaints
are clustered or acting with the therapist and meets with ac- around
chronic dissatisfaction with intimate ceptance and approval, those
changes are likely relationships or with work and who has some to be
experimented with outside of therapy. At sense that these problems are
connected to a deeper level (Tier 3), the therapist's (perhaps) his or
her developmental history. To start with unanticipated positive reaction
can go a long active interventions with this person might way to correct
powerful, unconscious images of contribute to the patient feeling
belittled, the self and of others that have been maintained
infantilized, or disrespected and could interfere by the patient's fears
and inhibitions and by greatly with the establishment of an effective
alinterpersonal responses from others who are liance. With such a
person, the therapeutic seambiguous or as negative as the patient had
quence may be characterized by long periods of anticipated, thereby
providing a corrective inquiry, interpretation, and transference
analemotional experience. ysis interspersed with occasional episodes of

216

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

active intervention when the need to alleviate a symptom emerges or when
the development of new skills might help the exploratory work move
forward. In psychodynamic psychotherapy, the analysis of transference
and countertransference is a crucial, if not the crucial, ingredient.
Because we believe that the provision of corrective emotional
experiences is a central change process, it is an important goal for us
to adjust our interaction with the patient in such a way as to provide
new, ameliorative experiences. This requires us to be thinking about the
potential impact of our behavior and language on patients, to study
their associations for clues about that impact, to interpret our
hypotheses about the relationship when indicated, and to find ways to
correct the interaction when it has become an enactment (i.e.,
unconscious repetition) of a past relationship. The therapist's role may
change considerably as therapy continues, or it may stay relatively
constant. To be most effective, the therapist's role should be a
reflection of the predominant clinical issues, needs, goals, and
intentions of the patient, including the patient's latent and overt
sense of what types of interactions and techniques would be most helpful
(Bohart & Talman, 1999; Hubble, Duncan, & Miller, 1999). When a
particular patient can be served best by more radical shifts in
understanding and technique, then the therapist's activity will be quite
different at various points in therapy: in the case of a more fragile
patient, the therapist may start out in a very active, structuring, and
didactic role (much like a cognitive-​behavioral therapist) and only
later shift into a less active psychodynamic position in which her or
his tasks are empathic reflection, questioning, and occasional
interpretation. We have found that, with most patients, active
interventions occur most frequently in the middle phase of the therapy,
with the beginning being dominantly based on inquiry, empathic
reflection, and some tentative interpretative work, and the final phase
being characterized by deeper psychodynamic exploration and transference
analysis.

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES We rely on questioning, clarification,
confrontation (pointing out of an immediate behavior or experience about
which the patient seems to be unaware), and interpretation as standard
interventions that occur during psychodynamic therapy. At those times
when active intervention is called for, we use such methods as behavior
rehearsal, social skills training, relaxation in many of its forms,
cognitive monitoring, guided imagery, systematic and in vivo
desensitization, response cost, and experiential techniques such as the
empty chair and two-​chair methods. Patients differ to some degree with
regard to which of these methods they find most engaging. Patients with
different personality structures, relational styles, and psychological
capacities seem to be best engaged with different techniques. In this
perspective, we are in agreement with those (e.g., Consoli & Beutler,
Chapter 7, this volume; Lazarus & Lazarus, Chapter 6, this volume) who
argue for prescriptive matching of patient and intervention. Patients
who are more thoughtful, internally focused, and concerned with the
"whys" of their behavior seem to be best engaged, at least at first, by
the traditional methods of person-​ centered therapy and psychoanalysis:
empathic exploration, reflection of feelings, and detailed inquiry into
the historical sources and current manifestations of intrapsychic
events. More action-​ oriented, externally directed patients may be more
interested in the "whats" of life and often are engaged more effectively
by action-​ oriented, skill-​directed interventions: cognitive
restructuring, social skills training, in vivo-​ and imagery-​ based
desensitization, or gestalt techniques such as the empty chair
technique. However, we also believe that matching patient and technique
is only part of effective engagement. The patient's sense of the
therapist's genuine commitment to being helpful to the patient may be
the most important effective ingredient or common factor in all
therapies. Commitment probably is demonstrated in any number of ways,
including the therapist's warmth, genuineness, and positive regard
(Rogers, 1961), as well as by his or her ability

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

217

to recognize and to respond to the individu- ask also, are these issues
being replayed? This ality of the patient, free of the constraint of any
type of inquiry often enables the resistance to therapeutic ideology. It
may be that willingness be resolved, as insight into its sources allows
on the part of the therapist to assimilatively patients relief from the
fear that brought it integrate new techniques is more helpful in about
and enables them to consider taking the engaging the patient because it
demonstrates risk of expanding their self-​experience in a new concretely
the therapist's commitment than relationship with the therapist. because
of the utility of those or any other Sometimes, resistances are
manifested or techniques. are caused by problems and deficits in Tiers 1
It is the therapist's job, first and foremost, (behavior) and 2
(conscious experience) and to listen to the patient. Listening is a
skill can best be resolved by active intervention at that is in short
supply in the world. Listening those levels. A socially phobic patient
may use conveys and expresses commitment, warmth, psychodynamic
exploration, the need to know and prizing, and only through empathic,
com- more about the historical sources of their intermitted listening
can effective assessment and personal discomfort, as a way of avoiding
trying formulation occur. From listening follows out new social
behaviors. This may keep new questioning, which also is a commodity that
is insights from being pursued. This point was in short supply in most
lives. made first by Freud (1912/​1958), who argued Out of listening and
questioning grow un- that, at certain crucial points in psychoanalysis,
derstanding on the part of both participants the analyst had to compel
the phobic patient in the therapy. When the therapist's under- to face
the object of his fears lest the treatment standing outpaces or precedes
the patient's un- become stale and intellectualized. (We are not
derstanding, it is the therapist's job to share that the first to think
that Freud might have been understanding in the form of interpretation
(if the first integrative therapist!) Thus, it is cruwhat is understood
is some possible meaning cial to suggest an active intervention, such as
of an interaction or event) or suggestion of an social skills training
combined with in vivo active intervention (if what is comprehended is
assignments to try out these new skills, in order some way for the
patient to gain new skills or to to avoid or overcome this resistive
pattern. overcome a particular symptom). It is also the We explore with
the patient the meaning therapist's job to accept the patient's existing
of the active intervention before, during, and and newly attained
insights, to help the patient after its introduction and have found that
such to articulate and to make use of the patient's exploration enhances
the patient's ability to theory of change (Hubble, Duncan, & Miller,
cooperate with these techniques. In our expe1999), and to accept and to
use the patient's rience, a good deal of noncompliance with or feedback
and observations of the therapist's im- resistance to experiential,
cognitive, and behavpact on the therapy. This is enhanced by formal
ioral interventions can be avoided or undone outcome assessment
(Lambert, 2007). by exploring the psychodynamic meanings and Our usual
approach to a patient's resist- defensive purposes of the symptoms at
which ance to exploration is to explore the meaning these interventions
are aimed and by underand the utility of such phenomena for the standing
the interpersonal and transferential patient. Resistance signals
potential self-​ impact of the suggestion of such techniques. discoveries
for which patients feel unprepared As many symptoms and problematic ways
and about which they are frightened. We look of functioning are
maintained because they for the survival value in these defensive
efforts ward off anxiety and other dysphoric feelings, (Singer, 1965);
that is, how, in past and present there are times when patients find
symptom-​ relationships, did the patient benefit from not oriented
techniques threatening and painful knowing or accepting some piece of
experi- rather than helpful. For example, we (Gold & ence, some wish,
fear, or interpersonal percep- Stricker, 1993) have found that certain
patients tion? How, in the transference relationship, we are reluctant
to use cognitive restructuring to

218

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

change depressogenic thoughts because these thoughts unconsciously
represent and defend against awareness of the patient's attachment to
and identification with a parent. Similarly, patients sometimes are
embarrassed by experiential techniques or by behavioral methods in which
role-​playing is required, often because these scenarios are connected
unwittingly to situations in which the patient was shamed or felt
exposed. Alternation between active use of these interventions at Tiers
1 and 2 and psychodynamic exploration seems to allow more compliance in
work at all three levels. Recognition that the tiers are played out
within an interpersonal matrix, as captured by our expanded model
(Stricker, 2010), is also crucial to our approach. The assimilative
psychodynamic therapist is prone to the same kinds of mistakes as is any
psychotherapist in terms of failing to listen well or to be tactful and
considerate in responding to the patient, and to overlook important
psychodynamic material in and outside of the transference relationship.
The most serious errors that are unique to this approach involve too
rapid or too infrequent shifts from one therapeutic stance and technique
to another. There are important times when "staying the course" is the
most crucial, useful approach, and a shift from psychodynamic
exploration to active intervention may reflect a misunderstanding of the
patient's need or a countertransference issue that is "too hot" and is
thus avoided by shifting the therapeutic focus. At other times, the
therapist may err by overlooking the opportunity to expand or deepen the
therapy by moving from exploration to active intervention. At times,
this may be experienced as a repetition of a parental failure to respond
to the patient's distress and may therefore have serious but undisclosed
consequences (Frank, 1999). In particular, this lack of responsiveness
may deepen the patient's conviction that help is unavailable or
undeserved and thus represent an enactment of previous difficulties. We
try to announce or prepare the patient for shifts to experiential,
cognitive, and behavioral techniques in a tentative, experimental

way, allowing the patient to decide whether to use them. We have found
that a patient's decision to use or not use an active intervention can
be as or more important than the impact of that intervention. These
decisions can tell us much about patients' real and transferential
perceptions of the therapist, their lack of trust, their motivation for
change, and about conflicts and memories that are stimulated by the
therapist's assumption of a more active and directive stance. We have
not developed any explicit guidelines with regard to relapse prevention
and maintenance sessions; however, these are included frequently. For
example, as termination of any therapy nears, we often taper down the
frequency of sessions (from weekly to biweekly to monthly) and then
discuss with the patient the possibility of follow-​up sessions after the
official termination session. Quite often, these are issues that are
brought up first by the patient, and, as frequently as possible, we
follow the patient's suggested changes in schedule and desire for
posttermination contacts. With patients who have made specific gains
that seem tenuous (such as having overcome shyness or other social
inhibitions or who have modified long-​standing dysfunctional thoughts),
we may engage in relapse prevention practice sessions (Marlatt & Gordon,
1985). Finally, especially in these days of time-​limited psychotherapy
because of insurance limitations, it is important to prepare the patient
for a possible return to treatment so that any potential future
difficulties are viewed as a natural occurrence rather than a failure of
treatment. DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS Diversity, as we understand it,
embraces all of the dimensions of human difference. As such, it refers
to differences in race and ethnicity, culture and social class, sex,
gender, and orientation, religious and political beliefs, physical
appearance and abilities, age, and myriad other dimensions that are not
listed. Sensitivity to diversity requires sensitivity to what makes the
patient a human being and implies a high level of empathy.

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy is well-​suited to deal with
issues of diversity, as are any other integrative approaches that do not
rely on a manual. As long as the therapist is free to respond to the
patient in a flexible and empathic manner, diversity will be taken into
account. Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy is particularly
well-​suited because our revised three-​tier model understands the full
range of human response, including behavioral, conscious, and
unconscious factors; places them in a bidirectional relational context;
and views everything within a cultural context. The ability to shift
interventions according to patient needs also allows for a response to
any human dimension that may be present. However, it must be noted that
this depends on the ability of the therapist to be aware of inevitable
blind spots and not to allow these to disrupt an empathic relationship.
This can lead to a rupture, and it is important that such ruptures be
identified as early as possible. For that reason, outcome assessment is
an important component of our approach.

CASE EXAMPLE This young adult was treated on a once-​per-​week basis for
approximately 17 months by one of us (JG). The presentation of this case
will focus on the specific points in the therapy at which active
interventions were assimilated into a standard psychodynamic approach.
These interventions were selected to accomplish the simultaneous
purposes of furthering psychodynamic exploration while alleviating
symptoms and building new skills. Presenting Problems and Background
Ms. M is a 30-​year-​old married Caucasian woman who presented for therapy
complaining of chronic anxiety and periods of moderate depression. She
was particularly concerned with periods of what she called "fuzziness,"
during which she experienced accelerating anxiety, physical distress
that included rapid heartbeat, intense perspiration, and an altered
state of perception in which things seemed vague and out of focus to
her. Ms.

219

M described herself as a chronic "worrywart," to the point that "if I
can't remember what I was just worrying about, I worry about that." She
stated that most recently her worries had clustered around fears that
her "fuzziness" meant that she was going to lose her mind and around the
health and well-​being of her 2-​year-​old son. Ms. M was a college
graduate who recently had returned to work as an accountant in a small
tax firm. She had been married for 6 years to a middle school teacher,
whom she described as kind and loving, but who was increasingly
concerned about her emotional state. Their son had been planned, and the
couple hoped to have another child in a few years. Ms. M was the older
of two children born to a small business owner and his stay-​at-​home
wife. She described her childhood as horrific. Her father spent many
hours at his store and, when not working, was absent from their home.
These absences were explained simply as being "out" and were the source
of ongoing bitterness and screaming fights between her parents. Her
mother often accused the patient's father of having affairs, which he
neither admitted nor denied. He in turn told his wife that she was crazy
and unfit to be a mother. Ms. M reported that her father rarely spent
time with her or spoke to her and that her mother's approach to her was
critical and demeaning. Ms. M had few friends and coped with her family
life by retreating into television programs, books, and schoolwork. A
good student, she had attended an out-​ of-​ state college where she had
met her future husband. Once married, they settled in a town about an
hour's drive from her parents. She reported that her parents visited
once or twice a month, and she visited them at about the same frequency.
These visits were described as awful: her parents argued and fought with
each other, and her mother criticized Ms. M's parenting, home, and
husband on a constant basis. Ms. M reported that her anxiety,
"fuzziness," and depression worsened in the days prior to and after
these visits, which she anticipated with dread. Beginning the Treatment
The treatment began with an attempt at engaging Ms. M in a standard
psychodynamic framework. Ms. M was encouraged to speak freely while the

220

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

therapist conducted a detailed inquiry in a gradual and supportive way.
It soon became apparent that this approach would not be useful and in
fact might lead to grave problems. Weeks 1 through 15 encompassed
assimilative use of cognitive and behavioral techniques to establish an
alliance and manage resistance. Ms. M had never been in psychotherapy
and was quite frightened and ashamed at the prospect of beginning this
treatment. She believed that a need for help indicated that she was in
danger of losing her mind and was a sign of weakness and failure. Her
discussion of these fears also seemed to point to an unconscious
identification with the criticisms her father had hurled at her mother.
Ms. M was tentative and uncomfortable with the therapist and seemed to
have rapidly developed a negative transference that combined elements of
the worst aspects of both of her parents: her father's neglectful lack
of presence and her mother's critical, demeaning attacks. These issues
clearly presented major obstacles toward the establishment of a
therapeutic alliance and were the sources of immediate and powerful
resistances in the sessions. Ms. M could not make eye contact,
frequently was silent for long periods, and when she did speak seemed
either to be defending herself from criticism or to be pleading for
attention. Psychodynamic exploration seemed both counterproductive and
impossible. Exploration of her fear and shame seemed to come across as
critical and shaming. Instead, it seemed necessary to use active
interventions to change her experience of psychotherapy and to help her
to view the therapist as different from her parents. To alleviate
Ms. M's shame and fear over her need for therapy, the therapist
suggested that she do some research about successful and famous people
who had been public about their own psychological treatment. As noted,
reading had been an important source of solace during her troubled
childhood. She also had mentioned that she was a fan of rock music, and
so the therapist advised her to look into the autobiographies written by
such celebrities as Bruce Springsteen and Eric Clapton, and to read
interviews with other musicians such as John Lennon and Sting, all of
whom described the positive role of psychotherapy in their lives.

She also was encouraged to do some research about anxiety disorders,
their prevalence, and the frequency of use of psychotherapy in the
general populations. These interventions were chosen as ways of
acknowledging Ms. M's intellectual strengths, the comfort she took from
reading, and as a way of reassuring her without directly challenging her
doubts and fears. Along with these and other psychoeducational efforts
came the use of self-​ talk, imagery, and acceptance-​based techniques to
assist the patient in managing her anxiety. These techniques were
emphasized for purposes that included but went beyond the standard
benefits that might accrue from their use. Certainly, symptomatic relief
for the patient was of central importance. The therapist hoped that
improvement in the patient's symptoms would also lead to an improved
therapeutic relationship. If the patient were to experience the
therapist as accepting, kind, and helpful, then perhaps this would
increase her ability to see him more clearly, thus reducing her fearful
transference reactions and her need to defend herself in the sessions.
Ms. M experienced "a bit" of relief from her shame about psychotherapy
through her reading and research. She had concluded that her concerns
about therapy and the prospect of "losing her mind" probably were
exaggerated and that her form of psychological disorder was in the range
of the "common cold." She expressed some gratitude for the book
recommendations and also reported that she had read interviews with
former President Carter and (then current) First Lady Michelle Obama
that recounted their positive experiences in psychotherapy. These
interviews also reassured her and offered positive figures with whom to
identify as well. As a result of the reduction of Ms. M's discomfort,
she spoke more openly and made active use of specific cognitive
techniques to work on her anxiety. The first technique used was a simple
"mantra-​like" phrase of saying, "focus on what is going on, rather than
what could be," whenever she started to worry. She also was taught how
to use distraction and distancing techniques, such as imagining her
worries on a television screen and then changing the channel. Another
technique involved imagining her worries being enveloped

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy in a large soap bubble and then
floating away. These techniques were practiced in sessions and in
homework assignments.

As the patient developed more comfort and competence with these methods,
she found herself somewhat less anxious and more positive about being in
therapy. She seemed more comfortable, spoke more freely, made eye
contact, and reported that she had started to look forward to her
sessions. She also began to bring up questions about her reactions to
therapy and the therapist, wondering about why she had been so fearful
and uncomfortable, when in fact she could now see him in a more
realistic way. An alliance had been established, and the interfering
parental transferences and subsequent resistances had been resolved
enough to allow the work to proceed. In particular, Ms. M discussed her
new perceptions of the therapist as a potential ally and accepting
parental figure. It was at this point, through mutual agreement, that
fruitful psychodynamic exploration was begun. Middle Phase of Treatment
Sessions 16--​ 47 were characterized by periods of active intervention to
enhance and expand psychodynamic change. Ms. M's involvement in therapy
and her curiosity about her mind and its workings increased as her
anxiety symptoms diminished. She was most concerned with the causes and
meanings of the "fuzziness" and eventually reached the understanding
that this altered state of experience was the result of unacknowledged
anger, particularly at her parents. She became aware of the correlations
between being "fuzzy" and the times she found herself thinking about her
parents or interacting with them. She frequently asked herself, in and
out of sessions, "If I'm angry, why don't I feel it?" Interpretations of
possible guilt and fear interfering with awareness of anger made sense
to her but did not lead to changes in her experience. At this point, the
therapist suggested the use of a mindfulness technique to circumvent
this situation. Ms. M was instructed to use her "fuzzy" states as a
signal to explore what was going on in her mind and body as fully as
possible, rather than

221

trying to change them. After much practice, she was able to fully
immerse herself in these states and reported feeling the beginnings of
an urge to break things, scream, and insult whoever was around. The
similarities to her mother's behavior during fights with the patient's
father became apparent to Ms. M She concluded that one reason anger was
so difficult for her was that it made her seem, to herself, that she and
her mother were more alike than she could tolerate. This identification
with the worst aspects of her mother's personality was very troubling to
Ms. M, who asked if she could learn to use anger more effectively and
appropriately than had her parent. To accomplish this goal, and to
promote separation of her view of herself from this old and painful
identification, we employed a series of social skills exercises. These
exercises allowed Ms. M to experience and express angry feelings in
moderate and appropriate ways while differentiating her self-​perception
from her view of her parents, thus allowing psychological maturation to
proceed in a positive direction. As Ms. M developed greater tolerance
for anger and continued to perceive herself as a distinct individual,
she brought to her sessions dreams, memories, and fantasies that yielded
a deeply felt understanding of the depth and extent of the hurt, rage,
and fear that had accumulated during her childhood and adolescence. She
came to realize that her worries and her "fuzzy" states of mind served
as ways of avoiding and disconnecting from these feelings and the
murderous and destructive fantasies that they provoked. She also became
aware of the guilt and fear that she harbored about these fantasies and
feelings, particularly in connection to wishes to hurt or kill her
parents. She also gradually learned that her worries about her son were
an expression of her unconscious identification with the hurtful
characteristics of her parents: she unknowingly feared that she would do
to him as they had done to her. So, as her view of herself changed in a
more individuated and positive way, the frequency and intensity of her
worry diminished as well. It is difficult to convey, in this short
space, the full extent of the interplay between psychodynamic work and
active intervention during this long phase of the therapy. Even during
the

222

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

most intense moments of exploration, there were frequent references to
the use of cognitive techniques, which allowed Ms. M to stay with the
work. These brief digressions allowed her to tolerate long-​avoided
wishes, feelings, thoughts, and memories, and modified the destructive
meanings with which they were connected. In a similar vein, longer
periods of active intervention were infiltrated with moments of
interpretation of unconscious meanings, often following the spontaneous
emergence of an unexpected feeling, memory, or fantasy that seemed to be
"liberated" by active change on the patient's part. One of the more
important changes in Ms. M that occurred during this part of the therapy
accrued in about equal measure from the psychodynamic and cognitive-​
behavioral interventions. Ms. M developed a mature sense of pride and
confidence in her new-​found abilities to accept anger in all of its
extreme---​even murderous---​forms and in her corresponding ability to
express these feelings in mature ways. She emphatically connected
improvements in her self-​esteem to her new insights and abilities,
especially as these changes provided her with an identity distinct from
her parents. It also is worth noting that the patient's comorbid
depression improved significantly without much direct work on that
problem. She and the therapist both came to understand that these mood
problems were driven by her anxiety and its intrapsychic and
interpersonal sources. The alleviation in depression was probably due to
the gains she had made in these primary problems. Ms. M also frequently
discussed her sense of being accepted and approved of by the therapist
and of her sense that his attitude toward her served as a permanent
"antidote" to the destructive familial experiences. She reported that it
was particularly important to her that the therapist had been willing to
work in both an exploratory and active, instructional way as her needs
changed. As the therapy progressed, she had educated herself about the
various debates in psychotherapy and, on her own, had come to the
conclusion that a therapist who stuck to one approach, in spite of the
demonstration of her needs to the contrary, might have unwittingly
recreated

some of the negative aspects of her childhood experiences. The Final
Phase After about a year of treatment, Ms. M's functioning was markedly
improved, and she had begun to think about ending the therapy. She
decided to put off this ending because she was troubled by occasional
flare-​ups of anxiety and worry, usually, if not always, connected to a
visit or phone conversation with her parents. Ms. M was aware that her
now 3-​year-​old son, and her parenting of him, had become the targets of
her mother's criticisms, which hurt Ms. M deeply. Ms. M also was
distressed by her father's indifference to his grandson, expressed by an
unwillingness to play with the boy or to show affection to him. Ms. M's
ability to manage her feelings about these interactions and to make any
changes were complicated by her relationship with her husband. She
described him as generally supportive and affectionate, but also as
bullied by her parents and as fearful of any confrontation. He often
advised her to "not rock the boat," especially as her parents had been
helpful to the couple financially and he seemed afraid of losing that
monetary support. Ms. M used the final phase of the therapy to explore
these interactions and, specifically, her fears of confronting her
parents, of setting limits on their critical and indifferent behaviors,
and of differing with her husband. These sessions yielded considerable
insight into core feelings and fear of abandonment, her long-​warded-​off
sense of being worthless and unlovable in her parents' eyes, and much
anger and disappointment. In addition, a pervasive sense of grief for
the love and well-​ being she had been deprived of emerged into awareness
and was painfully worked though. As these issues were explored and
integrated, in-​session work often incorporated active practice in
assertive limit-​ setting and confrontation of unacceptable behavior on
the part of her husband and parents. Ms. M was able to "rock the boat"
and to tolerate her husband's initial disapproval and concern, leading
eventually to a better connection between the two. She also made it
clear to her parents that any criticism or neglect of her son would lead
to visits ending and to

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy less frequent contact with her
and the boy. She demonstrated this to them on several occasions; the
result was that their behavior moved in a more positive direction. Most
importantly, Ms. M found that her bouts of anxiety had decreased
significantly in frequency and intensity, and while she often felt
"unhappy" before and after visits to her parents, her level of distress
was quite manageable. She took great pride in having protected her son
and separating her own sense of self-​worth from the old feelings of
worthlessness that had become conscious in this last part of therapy. It
was at this point that the therapy was ended with plans for follow-​up
sessions at intervals of 2 months and 6 months beyond the termination
date. Ms. M was seen at those two times and reported that she had
maintained her gains with regard to her anxiety. She had, with sadness
but with resolve, greatly limited her contact with her parents due to
their failure to live up to her (minimum) standards for their behavior
toward her and her son. She was enjoying her work and being a parent,
and her marriage was stable. She and the therapist agreed that no
regular meetings need be scheduled, though she could call if the need
did arise. There have been no meetings since this last one, and the only
contact was a holiday card in which Ms. M described continued well-​being
and life satisfaction.

OUTCOME RESEARCH There is only a little empirical evidence concerning
the effectiveness of assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy, but there
is ample support for the efficacy of psychodynamic therapy. Multiple
meta-​analyses find that psychodynamic therapy, in general, proves
effective for many disorders. A meta-​analysis of 42 treatment samples,
totaling 1,615 patients, found a large effect size of d of 1.01 between
pretreatment and posttreatment across all studies (Town et al., 2012). A
recent meta-​ analysis tested the efficacy of psychodynamic therapy in 39
randomized controlled trials (Leichsenring et al., 2015). It showed
that, by rigorous criteria

223

used to define what works, psychodynamic therapy can be considered
efficacious for major depression, social anxiety disorder, borderline
personality disorder, and somatoform pain disorder. It can be considered
possibly efficacious for complicated grief, panic disorder, substance
abuse, and generalized anxiety disorder. The empirical evidence has
steadily accumulated on its efficacy for multiple disorders routinely
encountered in daily practice. Lilliengren has posted a comprehensive
compilation of randomized controlled trials (RCTs) involving
psychodynamic treatments (www. researchgate.net/​publication/​317335876).
That list, as of November 2017, has 200 entries, making it clear that
psychodynamic treatment is both testable and efficacious. There is a
notion that CBT represents the gold standard for effective
psychotherapy, a conclusion that has been based on researcher allegiance
and limitations in the quality of the studies (Leichsenring & Steinert,
2017). Although a bias against psychodynamic therapy (Abbass et al.,
2017) may be present, it is belied by the evidence. Sophisticated
meta-​analyses repeatedly demonstrate the equivalence of psychodynamic
therapy to other established treatments (Steinert et al., 2017). There
also have been a series of studies that directly look at the impact of
psychotherapy integration in general and assimilative psychodynamic
psychotherapy in particular. A study of videotaped sessions by master
therapists found that integrative therapists used more psychodynamic
techniques than CBT therapists and more CBT interventions than
psychodynamic therapists (Pitman et al., 2017), showing that integration
does occur. The integration of CBT and psychodynamic techniques has been
repeatedly related to a more positive therapeutic alliance (e.g.,
Goldman et al., 2013, 2016; Zilcha-​Mano & Errazuriz, 2015).

FUTURE DIRECTIONS Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy rests on a
foundation of psychodynamic theory

224

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

and practice, as well as the practice (and perhaps the theory) of many
other treatment approaches. Further developments, therefore, will rely
on each of these areas. Perhaps the most important questions we must ask
concern effectiveness. Is this therapy equally as effective as, or is it
more effective than, the component therapies (psychodynamic,
cognitive-​behavioral, or experiential) that are assimilated? Equally
important is the question of whether this therapy is more effective than
any other systems of treatment. Associated with these queries are such
concerns as the degree to which this therapy can be prescribed for
particular diagnoses, psychological characteristics, problems, and
persons. Research that is guided by, and can test, theoretical issues
such as our assimilative modifications of psychoanalytic theory also is
necessary. We believe there is an important need for research that can
investigate the incremental validity of our expansion of the
psychodynamic perspective when compared to its traditional
conceptualization. Finally, questions of generalizability come to the
fore. For example, can we identify and offer empirical guidelines that
instruct us as to when and how to move from one technique to the next,
or must clinical intuition remain our guide? Psychodynamic theory is an
area of evolving development (Wachtel, 2007). In previous years, there
has been a change from a one-​ person treatment that emphasized the
internal processes of the patient to a two-​person treatment that gave
much more emphasis to relationship issues. Our approach has kept stride
with this change and is based on a theoretical model that emphasizes
relationships with others. It is difficult to foresee future areas of
growth in theory, but every step toward integration that is based on
assimilation should be complemented by a step that produces an
accommodation of the theory to the new clinical observations. Perhaps it
was the clinical observations of the importance of relationship issues
(e.g., the corrective emotional experience) that led to the expansion of
psychodynamic models (e.g., interpersonal psychoanalysis,
self-​psychology). As the success of assimilation becomes clear, the need
for accommodation opens an exciting path to theory development.

Psychodynamic technique also has changed as the underlying theory has
changed. The silent therapist of prior years has been replaced by a more
active therapist who deals with relationship issues inside and outside
the consulting room. Our model, particularly when behavioral, cognitive,
and experiential techniques are being employed, calls for even more
therapist activity, and we expect that the future will move in this
direction while continuing to retain the value of silent listening and
empathy during the course of treatment. As we indicated at the outset of
this chapter, assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy relies on the
incorporation of techniques from other orientations to treatment.
Techniques that are used today either were not available or were little
known during our earlier training. As the other orientations grow, we
must remain aware of these developments and be alert to the possibility
that they may offer to our work with our patients. Two areas of current
research must be taken into account when looking to the future. The
first is outcome assessment, as exemplified by the influential research
programs of Lambert (e.g., 2007, 2018) and Duncan (e.g., Duncan &
Sparks, 2017). This research has repeatedly demonstrated the value of
frequent evaluation of both the therapeutic relationship and treatment
outcome. The integration of outcome measures into assimilative
psychodynamic psychotherapy represents an important addition. The second
research challenge is that one approach to therapy is not reliably
better than any other (the Dodo Bird effect; e.g., Laska, Gurman, &
Wampold, 2014). This latter finding has often been attributed to common
factors that account for the majority of outcome variance. Whether we
are discussing assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy or any other
integrative approach, it is necessary to show that the approach has some
value added as compared to single-​ school approaches, which themselves
have not differentiated from each other. Finally, although we have
detailed directions that are more specific to assimilative psychodynamic
psychotherapy, other research issues clearly exist. Issues related to
the relative

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy

value of different approaches, the generalizability of clinical
observations, and the potential disentangling of assimilative methods
all remain to be studied. During this time, it behooves every
practitioner to adopt the stance of a local clinical scientist (Stricker
& Trierweiler, 1995; Trierweiler & Stricker, 1998), treating each
patient as a small research project and learning from each clinical
encounter something that will be of use with the next patient.

References Abbass, A., Luyten, P., Steinert C, & Leichsenring F. (2017).
Bias toward psychodynamic therapy: Framing the problem and working
toward a solution. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 23, 361--​365.
Alexander, F. (1963). The dynamics of psychotherapy in the light of
learning theory. American Journal of Psychiatry, 120, 440--​448.
Alexander, F., & French, T. (1946). Psychoanalytic therapy. New York:
Ronald Press. Beier, E. G. (1966). The silent language of psychotherapy.
Chicago: Aldine. Beutler, L. E., Forrester, B., Holt, H., & Stein, M.
(2013). Common, specific, and cross-​ cutting psychotherapy
interventions. Psychotherapy, 50, 298--​301. Bohart, A. C., & Tallman, K.
(1999). How clients make therapy work. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Bowlby, J. (1980). Attachment and loss. New
York: Norton. Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and
psychotherapy. New York: McGraw-​Hill. Duncan, B., & Sparks, J. (2017).
The Partners for Change Outcome management system. In J. L. Lebow, A. L.
Chambers, & D. C. Breunlin (Eds.), Encyclopedia of couple and family
therapy (pp. 1--​10). New York: Springer. Feather, B. W., & Rhodes, J. W.
(1972). Psychodynamic behavior therapy I: Theory and rationale. Archives
of General Psychiatry, 26, 496--​502. Frank, K. (1999). Psychoanalytic
participation. Hillsdale, NJ: Analytic Press. French, T. M. (1933).
Interrelations between psychoanalysis and the experimental work of
Pavlov. American Journal of Psychiatry, 89, 1165--​1203.

225

Freud, S. (1912/​1958). Recommendations to physicians practicing
psychoanalysis: The standard edition (pp. 111--​120). London: Hogarth
Press. Gold, J. (1980). A retrospective study of the behavior therapy
experience. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, Adelphi University,
Garden City, NY. Gold, J. (2000). The psychodynamics of the patient's
activity. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 207--​220. Gold, J.,
& Stricker, G. (2001). Relational psycho­ analysis as a foundation for
assimilative integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 11,
47--​63. Gold, J., & Stricker, G. (2013). Psychotherapy integration and
integrative psychotherapies. In I. B. Weiner (Ed.), Handbook of
psychology (Vol. 8, 2nd ed., pp. 345--​366). New York: Wiley. Gold, J., &
Stricker, G. (2015). Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy: An
active, integrative psychoanalytic approach. In J. Bresler & K. E. Starr
(Eds.), Relational psychoanalysis and psychotherapy: An evolving synergy
(pp. 39--​56). New York: Routledge. Gold, J. R., & Stricker, G. (1993).
Psychotherapy integration with personality disorders. In G. Stricker &
J. R. Gold (Eds.), Comprehensive handbook of psychotherapy integration
(pp. 323--​336). New York: Plenum. Goldfried, M. (1999). A participant-​
observer's perspective on psychotherapy integration. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 9, 235--​242. Goldman, R. E., Hilsenroth, M.
J., Gold, J. R., Owen, J. J., & Levy, S. R. (2016). Psychotherapy
integration and alliance: An examination across treatment outcomes.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 28(1). doi: 10.1037/​int0000060
Goldman, R. E., Hilsenroth, M. J., Owen, J. J., & Gold, J. R. (2013).
Psychotherapy integration and alliance: Use of cognitive-​ behavioral
techniques within a short-​term psychodynamic treatment model. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 23, 373--​385. Greenberg, J., & Mitchell, S.
A. (1983). Object relations in psychoanalytic theory. Cambridge MA:
Harvard University Press. Grehan, P. M., & Freeman, A. (2009). Neither
child nor adult: Applying integrative therapy to adolescents. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 19, 269--​290. http://​dx.doi.org/​
10.1037/​a0017067 Hubble, M., Duncan, B., & Miller, S. (1999). The heart
and soul of change. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

226

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Kohut, H. (1977). The restoration of the self. New York: International
Universities Press. Lambert, M. (2007). What we have learned from a
decade of research aimed at improving psychotherapy outcome in routine
care. Psychotherapy Research, 17, 1--​14. Laska, K. M., Gurman, A. S., &
Wampold, B. E. (2014). Expanding the lens of evidence-​based practice in
psychotherapy: A common factors perspective. Psychotherapy, 51,
467--​481. Leichsenring, F., Leweke, F., Klein, S., & Steinert, C.
(2015). The empirical status of psychodynamic psychotherapy---​an update:
Bambi's alive and kicking. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84,
129--​148. doi: 10.1159/​000376584 Leichsenring, F., & Steinert, C.
(2017). Is cognitive-​ behavioral therapy the gold standard for
psychotherapy? The need for plurality in treatment and research. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 318, 1323--​1324. Levenson, H.
(1995). Time-​limited dynamic psychotherapy. New York: Basic. Luborsky,
L. (1996). The symptom-​context method. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Marlatt, G. A., & Gordon, J. R. (1985).
Relapse prevention: Maintenance strategies in the treatment of addictive
behaviors. New York: Guilford. Messer, S. (1992). A critical examination
of belief structures in integrative and eclectic psychotherapies. In J.
C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
integration (pp. 130--​168). New York: Basic. Norcross, J. C., & Lambert,
M. J. (Eds.). (2018). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist
contributions and responsiveness to patients (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Pitman, S. R., Hilsenroth, M. J., Goldman, R. E.,
Levy, S. R., Siegel, D. F., & Miller, R. (2017). Therapeutic techniques
of APA master therapists: Areas of difference and integration across
theoretical orientations. Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 48, 156--​166. Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (1992).
The transtheoretical approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried
(Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 300--​ 334). New York:
Basic. Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.

Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some implicit common factors in diverse methods
of psychotherapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412--​415.
Ryle, A., & Kerr, I. B. (2002). Introducing cognitive-​ analytic therapy:
Principles and practice. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Shedler, J. (2010). The
efficacy of psychodynamic psychotherapy. American Psychologist, 2010,
98--​109. Singer, E. (1965). Key concepts in psychotherapy. New York:
Basic. Steinert, C., Munder, T., Rabung, S., Hoyer, J., & Leichsenring,
F. (2017). Psychodynamic therapy: As efficacious as other empirically
supported treatments? A meta-​analysis testing equivalence of outcomes.
American Journal of Psychiatry, 174, 943--​953. Stricker, G. (1995).
Comment: Confessions of a reformed psychodynamicist. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 5, 266--​267. Stricker, G. (2006).
Assimilative psychodynamic psychotherapy integration. In G. Stricker &
J. Gold (Eds.). A casebook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 55--​ 63).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Stricker, G. (2010).
Psychotherapy integration. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Stricker, G., & Gold, J. (1988). A psychodynamic approach
to the personality disorders. Journal of Personality Disorders, 2,
350--​359. Stricker, G., & Gold, J. (1996). An assimilative model for
psychodynamically oriented integrative psychotherapy. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 3, 47--​58. Stricker, G., & Gold, J.
(2002). An assimilative approach to integrative psychodynamic
psychotherapy. In J. Lebow (Ed.), Comprehensive handbook of
psychotherapy: Vol. 4. Integrative/​ eclectic (pp. 295--​316). New York:
Wiley. Stricker, G., & Trierweiler, S. J. (1995). The local clinical
scientist: A bridge between science and practice. American Psychologist,
50, 995--​1002. Town, J. M., Abbass, A., Driessen, E., Diener, M. J.,
Leichsenring, F., & Rabung, S. (2012). A meta-​analysis of psychodynamic
psychotherapy outcomes: Evaluating the effects of research-​ specific
procedures. Psychotherapy, 49, 276--​ 290. doi: 10.1037/​a0029564

Assimilative Psychodynamic Psychotherapy Trierweiler, S. J., & Stricker,
G. (1998). The scientific practice of professional psychology. New York:
Plenum. Wachtel, P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy:
Toward an integration. New York: Basic. Wachtel, P. L. (2007).
Relational theory and the practice of psychotherapy. New York: Guilford
Press.

227

Weiss, J., & Sampson, H. (1986). The psychoanalytic process. New York:
Guilford. Zilcha-​Mano, S., & Errázuriz, P. (2015). One size does not fit
all: Examining heterogeneity and identifying moderators of the
alliance-​outcome association. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 62,
579--​591.

11 Cognitive-​B ehavioral Assimilative Integration LOUIS G. CASTONGUAY,
MICHELLE G. NEWMAN, AND MARTIN GROSSE HOLTFORTH

The three authors of this chapter define themselves, with more or less
conviction, as cognitive-​ behavior therapists. Operationally, this means
that we believe that distressing behaviors, cognitions, and emotions
should be primary targets of our interventions. We also assume that both
situational (e.g., external contingencies) and intrapersonal (e.g.,
inaccurate cognitions) factors are involved in the etiology and/​ or
maintenance of our clients' impairments. As cognitive behavior
therapists, we further believe that a fruitful clinical strategy is to
identify the determinants of clients' difficulties by conducting
comprehensive functional analyses and case formulations that are
grounded in known empirical knowledge. However, while it is clear to us
that psychotherapy can reduce clients' impairments,

we are convinced that cure is not a possibility. Even after successful
therapy, the difficulties of life will likely continue to trigger
vulnerabilities that are linked to years of complex learning, implicit
meaning structures, biological processes, and genetic predispositions.
In our opinion, the ultimate goal of therapy is to facilitate the
acquisition of coping skills (emotional, cognitive, and behavioral) that
will help clients cope with life's stressful demands. Along with the
theoretical writing of leading figures in cognitive-​behavioral therapy
(CBT), our clinical experience has suggested that the traditional
techniques of this orientation are not always sufficient to treat
clients' distress and to help them develop better ways of dealing with
life's difficulties. On more than one occasion, we have found it helpful
to let clients

228

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

talk extensively about early relationships with their parents, to
encourage them to experience and "stay with" painful feelings, or to
draw links between what is taking place in the therapy relationship and
what has occurred in their interpersonal relationships outside of
therapy. The beneficial use of what many would consider "non-​CBT"
interventions has raised the question of how best to incorporate
techniques derived from (or consistent with) humanistic, psychodynamic,
interpersonal, or systemic approaches into our CBT practice. The
integrative approach described in this chapter represents our effort to
improve the efficacy of CBT via a systematic and theoretically cohesive
assimilation of treatment procedures typically associated with other
psychotherapy orientations. THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH Our integrative
approach is based on the assumption that clients' improvement is due in
part to principles of change that cut across different forms of therapy
(Castonguay, 2000). As described by Goldfried (1980; Goldfried &
Padawer, 1982), we believe that most techniques associated with
particular orientations are idiosyncratic manifestations of common
principles. These principles include the fostering of positive
expectations toward therapy, the increase in awareness about self and
others, the establishment of a therapeutic alliance, the facilitation of
new and/​or corrective experiences, and the generalization of therapeutic
change in the client's daily life. More about principles of change can
be found in Eubanks and Goldfried (Chapter 4, this volume). From a
clinical standpoint, our approach is based on the premise that the
repertoire of interventions of a particular orientation (e.g., CBT) can
be increased by adding techniques that reflect general principles of
intervention while allowing this specific approach to address more
directly or adequately certain dimensions of human functioning. Based on
research findings, as well as on conceptual critiques and modifications
of CBT, we believe that a

229

fruitful way to improve CBT's efficacy is to add techniques aimed at
facilitating interpersonal functioning and emotional deepening.
Interpersonal Focus Several authors have criticized CBT (and especially
cognitive therapy) for not paying sufficient attention to interpersonal
factors involved in psychopathology (e.g., Coyne & Gotlib, 1983;
Goldfried & Castonguay, 1993; Robins & Hayes, 1993). There is convincing
evidence that cognitive-​ behavioral therapists focus less on
interpersonal experience than do psychodynamic-​ interpersonal (PI)
therapists (e.g., Blagys & Hilsenroth, 2000). In addition, while one
preliminary study found that CBT therapists tended to focus more on
interpersonal issues than intrapersonal issues (Kerr et al., 1992), the
reverse was found in two later studies (Castonguay et al., 1995;
Castonguay, Hayes et al., 1998). More importantly, interpersonal focus
in CBT has been found to be unrelated to client's improvement in two
studies (Castonguay, Hayes et al., 1998; Kerr et al., 1992). Moreover,
one study found that the therapist's focus on interpersonal cognitions
is negatively related to outcome in cognitive therapy (Hayes,
Castonguay, & Goldfried, 1996). By contrast, evidence suggests that when
PI therapists focus on interpersonal issues, such focus is positively
linked with outcome (Castonguay, Hayes, et al., 1998; Kerr et al.,
1992). Furthermore, process studies suggest that clients do improve when
cognitive-​behavior therapists focus on the kinds of interpersonal issues
typically emphasized in psychodynamic treatment. For instance, Hayes et
al. (1996) found a positive relationship between the therapist's focus
on early attachment patterns and client's improvement in CBT. Other
studies (Ablon & Jones, 1998; Jones & Pulos, 1993) also found that the
therapist's connections between the therapeutic relationship and other
relationships were among a set of psychodynamic techniques positively
related to therapeutic change in CBT. Taken together, these findings
suggest that adding techniques from the psychodynamic and interpersonal

230

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

traditions to address client's maladaptive relationship patterns might
increase the therapeutic impact of CBT. Emotional Deepening Prominent
authors in the field have criticized CBT for approaching emotions as
phenomena to be controlled rather than experienced (e.g., Mahoney,
1980). One study (Wiser & Goldfried, 1993) provided evidence to suggest
that cognitive-​behavior therapists see the reduction of emotional
experiencing as a significant event during the session, whereas PI
therapists view good sessions as involving an increase in emotional
experiencing. Recent studies lend very strong support for the notion
that PI focuses more than CBT on the expression of patients' emotions.
As noted by Blagys and Hilsenroth (2000, p. 172), these empirical
findings also support the notion that PI therapy attempts to evoke the
expression of patients' emotion while CB therapy attempts to control or
reduce patients' feelings. The propensity of PI therapy to focus on
affect not only conveys a greater emphasis on cathartic expression, but
also a greater focus on emotional insight and a greater encouragement to
identify, stay with and/​or accept emotions.

Interestingly, a number of studies have found that the client's
emotional experience in CBT is positively linked with outcome
(Castonguay et al., 1996; Castonguay, Pincus et al., 1998). Indeed, a
recent meta-​analysis of 42 studies (N = 925) found that patient
affective experiencing and expression in session was robustly associated
with and predictive of (d = .85) favorable outcomes in psychotherapy
(Peluso & Freud, 2018). That was the case with all types of
psychotherapy, including CBT (Ablon & Jones, 1998, 1999; Coombs,
Coleman, & Jones, 2002; Jones & Pulos, 1993). The decision to emphasize
both interpersonal and emotional issues when attempting to improve CBT
has also been influenced by Safran's expansion of cognitive therapy
(Safran, 1998; Safran & Segal, 1990). Although endorsing the concept of
schema, Safran has argued that such mental representation of self

is intrinsically interpersonal. Relationships with others are implicitly
or explicitly embedded in our understanding of who we are. In addition,
core schemas are not purely cognitive. Rather, they are
cognitive-​affective structures, or "hot" cognitions. The interpersonal
and emotional nature of our core schema reflect the fact that our views
of self are deeply shaped by our relationships with significant others.
The ways we perceive and treat ourselves are based on the way important
others (past and current) have viewed and treated us. Within this
context, an emotionally immediate exploration of the clients'
problematic relationships with important others (parents, spouse,
therapist) provides a unique opportunity to better understand their
interpersonal needs and fears, as well as to correct their maladaptive
schema of self and others and their behavioral relationship patterns.
Safran's model has provided us with a conceptual framework accounting
for and addressing interpersonal and emotional dimensions of human
functioning when, as cognitive-​behavioral therapists, we attempt to
provide a new perspective of self, to facilitate positive experience,
foster more adaptive ways of dealing with reality, and to enhance or
repair our therapeutic alliances. Having described the bases of our
integrative approach, we now turn to a more pragmatic question: How do
we actually combine traditional CBT techniques with interpersonally and
emotionally focused interventions that are derived from (or consistent
with) interpersonal, psychodynamic, and humanistic orientations?
APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE The main efforts described in this chapter
to increase the effectiveness of CBT have evolved via the development
and empirical testing of treatments for depression (Castonguay et al.,
2004) and generalized anxiety disorders (GAD; Newman et al., 2004).
Because it is the most comprehensive of the two, the GAD treatment will
be the main focus of this chapter. CBT includes multiple techniques that
directly address situational and intrapersonal factors involved in the
etiology or maintenance

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

of GAD. Numerous studies have demonstrated that this treatment leads to
statistically and clinically significant change in the short and long
term (Borkovec & Ruscio, 2001). As summarized in an overview of both
psychopharmacological and psychosocial treatments for mental disorders,
"\[r\]‌ ecent studies suggest that CBT approaches are most successful for
generalized anxiety disorder" (Nathan & Gorman, 2015, page xxi). Yet,
there is also evidence that a substantial number of clients with GAD
still show clinical symptoms after CBT (Borkovec & Ruscio, 2001;
Borkovec & Whisman, 1996). The evolution of integrative therapy for GAD
had its origins in the seminal work of Thomas Borkovec, especially the
basic and therapy outcome research on GAD he conducted from 1984 to 1995
(Borkovec, 1996). The fact that many clients in these earlier therapy
trials were not returned to normal levels of anxiety by the end of
treatment suggested that a therapeutic focus solely on intrapersonal
processes proves insufficient. On the other hand, evidence has
indicated, both then and now, that interpersonal as well as
intrapersonal processes are likely involved in the origins and
maintenance of GAD (Newman & Erickson, 2010). Specifically, worry is
most closely associated with social-​ evaluative fears (Borkovec et al.,
1983) and interpersonal topics (Roemer, Molina, & Borkovec, 1997). In
addition, social phobia is the most common comorbid diagnosis among GAD
clients (Brown & Barlow, 1992). GAD clients also report elevated levels
of attachment problems with their primary caregivers in childhood
(Cassidy, 1995; Newman, Shin, & Zuellig, 2016; Schut et al., 1997),
suggesting potential interpersonal problems with others. Moreover,
several studies have found that a majority of GAD clients report
interpersonal problems related to being intrusive, cold, exploitable and
nonassertive that likely cause difficulties for them in their current
relationships (Przeworski et al., 2011; Salzer et al., 2008). More
recent studies also suggest that whereas hostile interpersonal problems
of GAD individuals are reported by significant others, those with GAD
tend to report more

231

affiliative problems (Erickson et al., 2016; Shin & Newman, 2017) and
that those with GAD under-​or overestimate their hostile impact (Erickson
& Newman, 2007). Dimensions of interpersonal problems also significantly
predict posttherapy and follow-​ up clinical improvement (Borkovec et
al., 2002; Newman et al., 2017; Salzer et al., 2011). To address
interpersonal difficulties experienced by several clients with GAD, the
integrative approach added interpersonal and experiential techniques to
CBT based, in part, on Safran and Segal's (1990) work. Despite the
incorporation of techniques from different theoretical orientations,
Borkovec was comfortable with the fact that empirical knowledge allowed
such techniques to be used from within CBT. Interpersonal therapy can be
viewed from within CBT as an approach that examines and then attempts to
modify by emotionally focused and interpersonally focused methods the
cause-​and-​effect links that exist among (a) environmental events; (b)
the client's cognitive, affective, behavioral, and interpersonal
processes; and (c) the consequences of the client's interpersonal
behaviors. Moreover, the use of the therapeutic relationship to provide
feedback to the client about his or her interpersonal effect on the
therapist is fully in line with CBT principles of change (e.g.,
Kohlenberg & Tsai, 1991). Finally, the use of emotional deepening
techniques (prescribed in both experiential and interpersonal therapies)
turned out to fit the behavioral learning view quite well once empirical
advances were made concerning GAD and the emotional process in general.
Specifically, evidence has indicated that GAD clients largely ignore
some of their emotions and indeed may be fearful of many of them,
including positive ones (Borkovec, Alcaine, & Behar, 2004). These
findings suggested that worry, the cardinal symptom of GAD, may actually
serve the role of cognitive avoidance of affect. From a CBT perspective,
therefore, emotional deepening techniques can be used as exposure
methods for the sake of full emotional processing of fear (Foa & Kozak,
1986). The structure of the GAD treatment is unique. Rather than
involving a simultaneous

232

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

blend of theoretically diverse intervention, our assimilative
intervention involves a sequential application of two "pure" forms of
therapy. Specifically, therapists are trained to conduct a 50-​ minute
segment of CBT, which is immediately followed by a 50-​ minute segment of
interpersonal/​ emotional processing (I/​ EP) therapy (Newman et al.,
2004). This structure has been dictated by a specific scientific
purpose. If this treatment combination (CBT + I/​ EP) can be shown to be
superior to the combination of CBT and a supportive listening (SL)
condition (CBT + SL), then research could not only provide evidence that
CBT can be improved but also that such incremental improvement might be
causally attributable to the added interventions. Such an additive
design is one of the few process research designs that can adequately
address a major question that drives science: Causality (Borkovec &
Castonguay, 1998). The concern with internal validity comes at a price
of external validity. This integrative treatment, the way it has been
structured, is not easily transportable to the clinical setting.
Effectiveness research will hopefully be conducted to assess the
feasibility and impact of a treatment structure more in sync with the
way psychotherapy is typically conducted (e.g., a 1-​hour session
involving a more permeable implementation of the two treatments).
However, we should mention that during the studies described later in
this chapter, our therapists and clients did not find it onerous to work
within a particular orientation for 50 minutes and then shift to a
different treatment approach for another 50 minutes (with the exception
of having to schedule a 2-​hour appointment every week). In fact, our
therapists frequently mentioned that the sequential structure helped
them to focus on the tasks specific to each segment and had on many
occasions prevented them from prematurely shifting to an "off-​t ask"
intervention. Although we have developed the integrative approach
specifically for GAD, we believe that it could be applied to other
clinical problems. We predict that CBT may be improved by adopting parts
of our treatment when targeting

any problems for which the etiology and maintenance involve
interpersonal difficulties or the avoidance of painful emotions. On the
other hand, we would assume that this assimilative approach might not be
relevant or sufficient to adequately address a number of clinical
problems, such as psychotic diagnoses and severe substance dependence.
We have no evidence to suggest that the addition or removal of
psychoactive medication can be either beneficial or detrimental when
implementing this approach. In the two studies that we conducted thus
far (see later discussion), we did not exclude clients who were
currently using a stable dose of medication for anxiety as long as they
consented (and their prescribing physician approved) to maintain their
dose constant during the treatment. In general, however, we do believe
that the use or increase of psychotropic medication to reduce anxiety
has the risk of reducing the client's full exposure to both internal and
interpersonal triggers of his or her worry---​and thus may potentially
interfere with the corrective mechanism assumed to underlie both CBT and
the interpersonal/​emotional components of the integrative approach.
ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION Because the GAD treatment was developed and
used in the context of clinical trials, the clients were assessed by two
independent administrations of a semi-​structured interview---​ the Albany
Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule -​IV (ADIS; Brown, DiNardo, & Barlow,
1994). The ADIS determined whether an individual suffered from the
clinical disorder targeted by the treatment and identified the specific
content of the client's worries. Moreover, it systematically assessed
comorbid conditions that were likely to influence case formulation. For
instance, knowing that a client also struggled with social phobia helped
determine intervention targets (e.g., social skills) when addressing
interpersonal issues. The assessment also involved a number of
questionnaires that the therapists used to identify negative cognitions
that may reflect

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

and contribute to the client's worry and anxiety (i.e., Dysfunctional
Attitude Scale; Beck et al., 1991), as well as to better understand the
client's relationship patterns (e.g., Inventory of Interpersonal
Problems; Alden, Wiggins, & Pincus, 1990). The daily monitoring of
clients' anxiety and the systematic monitoring of their relationships
also helped therapists conduct functional analyses of clients'
problematic reactions. During treatment, the information derived by such
an extensive assessment was used to construct case formulations, which
in turn guided an idiographic application of the CBT and I/​ EP
techniques. In CBT, therapists developed their case formulations around
the following questions: What are the early cues (situational and
internal) of the client's anxiety reaction? What are the maladaptive
elements (cognitive, imaginal, physiological) of such reaction that
could be replaced by more adaptive responses? In I/​EP, the case
formulations were centered around the following questions: What are the
clients' most central interpersonal schema (i.e., core views of self in
relation to others)? What do clients want and fear from others? What do
they do to get their needs met? What is the impact they have on others?
Are there specific emotions that they are avoiding and that might tell
them what they want from others? PROCESSES OF CHANGE We assume that a
substantial part of the process of change can be attributed to general
principles that cut across different forms of psychotherapy (including
CBT and I/​EP). However, the ways in which these principles were
implemented vary from one segment to another. Early in therapy,
therapists work toward creating positive expectations for the clients.
This is accomplished by providing a rationale explaining factors that
might have contributed to their difficulties, as well as a description
of techniques that will be used to address these factors. In CBT, the
rationale focuses on situational and intrapersonal issues. Specifically,
clients are informed that their experiences of

233

uncontrollable worry and anxiety are learned responses to threat cues,
which involve maladaptive and habitual interactions among cognitive,
behavioral, and physiological systems. For example, GAD patients
frequently have a preattentive bias to indications of danger that can
trigger images of negative events, which can in turn lead to defensive
somatic reactions. As one component in the spiraling intensification of
anxiety, such somatic responses can result in greater attention to
physiological activity, which can interfere with a client's attention to
(and realistic appraisal of) external reality and further increase his
or her internal response of worry and rumination. The goal of CBT is to
identify early cues that indicate that an anxiety spiral is beginning
and to help the client replace these maladaptive reactions with adaptive
coping responses. In the I/​EP segment, the rationale focuses on both
interpersonal and emotional issues. Clients are informed that
chronically anxious individuals frequently develop interpersonal styles
that contribute to their anxiety. Therapists tell their clients that
when they interact with others, anxious people tend to focus more on
avoiding what they fear rather than trying to get what they need.
Unfortunately, attempts to avoid what one fears sometimes lead to the
specific---​and anxiety-​provoking---​reactions from others that one tried
to avoid (e.g., being extra-​attentive to another's need in order to not
be ignored can lead the other to move away from the relationship because
he or she is feeling intruded upon). The attention to what they fear has
become such an automatic focus for chronically anxious persons that they
are frequently unaware of many of their interpersonal needs. Clients are
informed that one way to become aware of what they need from others is
to explore their emotions. Accordingly, the goal of I/​EP is to help
clients become aware of---​and then change---​the maladaptive ways in
which they interact with others, including the therapist. By exploring
and owning emotions that are triggered by their relationship
difficulties, clients will increase their abilities to get what they
want and better deal with what they fear from others.

234

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Another principle of change underlying each segment of this integrative
treatment is the provision of a new perspective. By offering an
explanation of the etiology and maintenance of GAD symptoms, the
rationales described earlier intrinsically serve this principle. As
described in the next section, each segment of the treatment includes
additional procedures to foster a new understanding, such as (a) helping
the client challenge inaccurate thoughts, cognitive errors, and
maladaptive attitudes; (b) experiencing and expressing previously
implicit emotions and meanings; and (c) exploring wishes and fears about
others, interpersonal schemas, and maladaptive relationship patterns.
While implementing the same general principle of change, these
interventions focus on different dimensions of human functioning (i.e.,
cognitive, emotional, interpersonal). Our clinical observations suggest
that clients recognize multiple types of determinants involved in their
difficulties, as well as establish meaningful connections among them.
For example, they realize that some of their ways of thinking at times
parallel their ways of relating with others or that being more open
about their emotions will help them to become less rigid about their
appraisal of themselves. Several of the techniques described later in
this chapter directly serve the principles of corrective experience and
continued testing with reality. For example, relaxation and self-​control
desensitization techniques are used during CBT segments and between
sessions to help the client to learn and rehearse new, more adaptive
coping responses to anxiety-​provoking cues. Similarly, attempts at
fostering new and more meaningful ways of relating with others are made
by paying attention to the interaction with the therapist during I/​EP
segments, as well as between the client and others in his or her daily
life. Interestingly, while different techniques are used to foster these
two principles of change, some of the techniques are based on the same
learning processes. For instance, exposure in CBT is designed to help
the client gain control over his or her anxiety. In I/​EP, it is aimed at
helping the client to stay with and own his

or her painful emotions. In both situations, the mastery of previously
intolerable situations is experienced as a positive corrective event.
Modeling and problem-​ solving skills are also involved in the techniques
in each segment to correct maladaptive responses, learn more adaptive
reactions, and implement them in situations outside the sessions. For
example, such learning processes are at play when therapists help
clients to react more adaptively to anxiety-​provoking cues or when they
help them to find better ways to get what they want from others.
Finally, as in all forms of psychotherapy, the use of the therapeutic
relationship reflects a core principle of change in this integrative
treatment. The ways in which therapists attend to the working alliance
in each of the segment are described in the next section. THERAPY
RELATIONSHIP In both segments of the integrative treatment, therapists
pay careful attention to the development and maintenance of a positive
therapeutic relationship. There is, of course, a good reason for this,
as different aspects of the therapeutic relationship stand as robust
predictors of change in psychotherapy (Norcross, 2011). Thus, during the
whole course of the treatment, therapists make all possible efforts to
be empathic, warm, and supportive toward their clients and to foster
mutual agreement on the goals and tasks of therapy. However, there is a
theoretical and clinical difference in how the relationship plays a role
in the process of change underlying the two segments of this integrative
therapy. In the CBT segment, the relationship is primarily viewed as a
precondition for change. Therapists, in other words, adopt a supportive
attitude mainly to build the client's trust in the treatment rationale
and procedures, as well as to foster the client's willingness to do what
he or she needs to do to develop better coping skills. It is assumed
that if a good therapeutic bond (based on mutual respect and affection
for each other) is created, that if the therapist genuinely understands
the

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

client's subjective experience, if he or she is flexible and tactful in
the use of the prescribed technique, and if he or she encourages and
reinforces the client's engagement in the treatment task, then it is
likely that the client will face what he or she had avoided in the past
and will implement, during and between sessions, new ways of reacting to
anxiety cues. The same assumption is held in the interpersonal and
emotional processing segment of the intervention. A good relationship is
viewed as necessary for the client's engagement in the demanding and
anxiety-​ provoking tasks prescribed in this therapy segment. In this
segment, however, the therapeutic relationship is also used as a change
process. Therapists use what takes place during the session to help
clients gain awareness of, and change, their maladaptive patterns of
interpersonal interaction. Therapists, in other words, not only attempt
to build a positive relationship in I/​EP but also work with the
relationship to deepen authentic emotions and to modify interpersonal
habits that have contributed to clients' anxiety. In addition, specific
techniques are included in I/​EP to deal with alliance ruptures. Although
therapists are asked to pay attention to markers of alliance ruptures in
both the CBT and I/​ EP segments, these markers are addressed only during
the I/​EP portion. METHODS AND TECHNIQUES Although some principles of
change cut across the two segments of this integrative treatment for
GAD, the techniques used to implement these principles differ. Before
describing these various techniques, however, it is important to mention
that the stance of the therapist in both segments is fairly directive.
Specifically, therapists ensure that the session is in line with the
respective goals of each segment. While focusing on different aspects of
functioning in each segment, therapists help clients to be more
cognizant of what they perceive as dangers (e.g., specific external
events, internal images, negative emotions, interpersonal issues) and to
replace their earlier coping responses

235

(e.g., catastrophizing, scanning physiological reactions, avoidance of
emotion, engaging in fear-​ reducing interpersonal behaviors) with ones
that are more effective and less maladaptive. Helping clients to develop
new skills to deal with anxiety requires that the therapist be
task-​oriented and directive, irrespective of the stimuli feared and the
skills to be taught. Cognitive-​Behavioral Work The CBT segment is
primarily aimed at modifying and reducing internal responses to specific
threats. Following is a brief overview of standard methods employed in
the CBT segment to achieve this therapeutic task (Newman, 2002)
Self-​Monitoring and Early Cue Detection Clients are taught to identify
their earliest reactions to perceived threats and their reactions to
these early reactions, as well as the spiraling chain of internal events
(attention, thoughts, images, bodily sensations, emotions, and
behaviors) that then occur. Clients can begin to discover early signs of
anxious responding by describing typical worry and anxiety experiences
and/​or imagining situations involving different components of their
anxiety responses. Therapists can also help clients detect early cues of
anxiety by asking them to intentionally worry about a personal concern.
Therapists also pay great attention to noticeable shifts in the clients'
affective states as they occur during the therapy session. Immediately
pointing out such a shift can sharpen the client's own early cue
detection. In addition to these in-​session experiences, the client is
asked to self-​monitor his or her worrying and anxiety responses on a
daily basis. As sessions progress, clients are increasingly asked to
attend to and process immediately available experiences, both in the
environment and internally. The goal is to help clients shift attention
to present-​moment reality and away from the illusions of the future and
of the past that their worrying and rumination create.

236

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Stimulus Control Methods Once clients have learned to detect early cues
for anxiety, stimulus control is used to reduce the amount of time spent
worrying and to decrease the habit strength of worrying. For example,
clients are instructed to postpone any early-​detected worrying during
the day to a fixed period of worrying---​30 minutes at the same time and
in the same place every day---​during which they can engage in problem-​
solving about the worry or apply cognitive restructuring skills to it.
Such a deliberate postponement of worry enables clients to refocus
attention to the present environment and the task at hand. Relaxation
Methods As part of the natural response to perceived threats ("fight or
flight"), anxiety reactions are closely associated with the activation
of the sympathetic nervous system. One way to attenuate the sympathetic
nervous system at the early detection of anxious responding is by
activating the parasympathetic system through learning and repeatedly
using applied relaxation methods (Bernstein, Borkovec, &
Hazlett-​Stevens, 2000). Multiple relaxation methods are taught to
encourage flexibility in the use of coping resources and to find those
that are most helpful for clients in different situations or in response
to different internal cues. Slowed, paced, diaphragmatic breathing is an
ideal starting point to provide the client with an immediate and
noticeable effect of treatment and to teach him or her ways to reach a
rapid relaxation response that is easy to learn and readily applicable
in daily living. The client is instructed to slow down breathing and to
shift it from the chest to the stomach by letting the diaphragm rise and
fall without expanding the chest. Progressive muscle relaxation is aimed
at reducing muscle tension and sympathetic activation via systematic
tensing and releasing various muscle groups. Meditational techniques can
be combined with relaxation to facilitate the client's shift away from
anxiety-​provoking cues and toward pleasant internal stimuli.

At the end of each relaxation practice session, the client can be
instructed to focus on a meaningful, pleasant internal stimulus (an
image, a word) that is associated with safety, comfort, security, love,
and/​or tranquility. A related technique, guided imagery, can be used to
deepen the relaxation by leading the patient through a sequence of
tranquil and pleasant images. The use of applied relaxation allows the
client to cultivate a more relaxed life style and to cope adaptively
with perceived threats as they occur in day-​to-​day living. It is applied
on a moment-​to-​moment basis during the course of the day whenever
clients recognize early cues of anxiety (and, eventually, any time
clients are aware of the absence of a calm or tranquil state), and it is
intended to shift attention away from tension/​anxiety and toward
relaxation. The therapist helps clients to acquire and practice this
coping skill during the session by frequently asking them to apply the
relaxation response whenever therapists or clients observe signs of
increased anxiety. Self-​Control Desensitization Self-​ control
desensitization (Goldfried, 1971) involves the rehearsal of relaxation
responses (and, later in therapy, cognitive perspective shifts) while
imagining frequently occurring anxiety-​ provoking situations (both
environmental cues and internal cues). First, the client is asked to
imagine him-​or herself in a situation in which he or she detects anxiety
cues. Second, the therapist repeatedly guides the client through
imagining successfully applying relaxation techniques in that situation.
In the course of therapy, self-​control desensitization is practiced with
several sets of anxiety cues in order to generalize this adaptive coping
response to various situations. Clients are also asked to include this
coping skill at the end of their daily relaxation practice. Finally, in
the course of cognitive therapy (described next), images of the most
likely outcomes for worrisome topics are created, and these are to be
imagined vividly as soon a worry is detected.

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

237

environmental cues and by focusing less on the past or the future, the
client also learns Clients' inaccurate perceptions are impor- to be
fully immersed in his or her present retant components of their worry
and anxious ality, to process environmental information experiences. As
such, numerous cognitive as needed, and to be confident that he or she
techniques are used to help them develop can deal with smaller or bigger
challenges to cognitions that more closely correspond with come. Indeed,
the eventual goal in therapy is environmental information. Clients are
first to move from inaccurate expectations about the instructed to
observe their environment, as well as future to relatively more accurate
expectations to monitor the content of their anxious thoughts and,
ultimately, to no expectations at all. Such on a daily basis. Clients'
inaccurate perceptions expectancy-​free living is our cognitive therapy
and/​or interpretations are then challenged by di- method for
contributing to the goal of living in verse methods, such the search for
evidence to the present moment, wherein there can be little support and
reject clients' cognitions, the gener- anxiety or depression. ation of
alternative perspectives, and the identiFinally, clients are encouraged
increasingly fication of core beliefs (or nonadaptive attitudes) to make
use of intrinsically motivated behaviors underlying many of their
specific inaccurate for approaching worrisome or anxiety-​ thoughts and
negative images. Because worry provoking situations and for taking an
active frequently involves an exaggeration of the nega- approach to
daily living to maximize joy in life. tive implications of specific
events, the cognitive Thus, drawing from the values that clients hold
technique of decatastrophizing (i.e., a step-​by-​ near and dear to their
hearts, the therapist helps step analysis of what it is that the client
fears them to create emotional and cognitive sets remight happen,
including the probability of each flective of those values and
facilitative of a true, of these steps and the client's coping resources
whole-​organism approach to each life situation to deal with them) is
particularly useful for that they are about to enter. GAD clients.
Perhaps differing from some CBT approaches, special emphasis is placed
on the Interpersonal/​Emotional Processing creation of multiple
perspectives for any given situation to maximize flexibility in
thinking. I/​EP has been added to CBT so that therapists Clients also
complete a Worry Outcome can address clients' problematic relationships
Diary, wherein they write down (a) their worries and facilitate
emotional deepening. Briefly when detected, (b) what they fear will
happen, put, the goals pursued in this segment are to and (c) the actual
outcome once it occurs. The facilitate clients' identification of
interperpurpose of this information is to help clients sonal needs,
fears, and schemas and to help to build a new history of evidence of the
way them develop behaviors that will better satisfy things actually are
and to facilitate their pro- their personal needs. Although the focus of
cessing of all available information from their interventions and the
techniques used differ environments, instead of only the negatively bi-
from CBT, the general goal is the same: to ased information. help
clients to live in the present---​to focus on Behavioral experiments are
also use to test their immediate experience with others. Rather
unrealistic cognitions as well as to provide than paying attention to
the past or the future additional exposure to feared situations and (the
bad things that happened and/​or could opportunities to practice applied
relaxation happen), clients learn to focus on what they and perspective
shifts. On the basis of the data currently want from others, as well as
on what collected in these exercises, the clients learn to others want
from them. A greater awareness of treat their perceptions as hypotheses
and revise their contributions to maladaptive patterns of inaccurate
predictions or assumptions involved relating and the acquisition of new
social skills in the spiraling intensification of their anxiety. will
also help clients to reduce their negative By learning to pay less
attention to negative impact on others. Cognitive Therapy

238

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

As in the CBT segment, I/​EP directly targets the GAD clients' tendency
to avoid. Clients are encouraged to expose themselves to feared
emotions, feared critical feedback about their impact on others, and
their fear of being vulnerable to other people by showing who they are.
By trying to confront their immediate fear, clients become aware of how
their avoidance of negative emotions in the short term comes at a great
cost in the long term. The therapist also helps clients to shift their
attentional focus away from danger anticipation and toward openness,
spontaneity, and vulnerability with others as well as toward a greater
empathic attention to the needs of others. Exploring and Changing
Interpersonal Functioning Early in the I/​EP segment, the task of the
therapist is to get a sense of the client's interpersonal history.
Responses to open-​ ended questions about relationships with past and
current significant others provide the therapist with a general
understanding of clients' perceptions of their interpersonal needs and
fears, as well as their typical attempts to deal with them. As early as
in the second or third session, the primary focus of treatment shifts
away from a description of these past and/​or current relationships to an
exploration, in an emotionally immediate way, of the therapeutic
relationship. It is assumed that clients' maladaptive patterns of
relating are likely to be repeated in the therapeutic relationship. As
such, an important task for the therapist is to identify when and how
they have been participating in clients' interpersonal schemata. Safran
and Segal (1990) have suggested that therapists actually need to be
"hooked" into clients' maladaptive ways of relating to others---​to be
pulled by clients into behaving consistently with clients'
expectations---​to help them change the way they interact with others.
Adopting an attitude of a participant-​observer (Sullivan, 1953),
therapists pay constant attention to signs of having been hooked, such
as a feeling of being emotionally detached from the client or the
realization of having frequently let the client

tell long tangential stories. Another indicator of therapists being
hooked is when they and/​or their clients are trying to find out why
clients are reacting (or not reacting) in a particular way instead of
helping clients to become aware, own, or deepen their emotional
experiences. Once hooked, the therapist stops acting in ways that are
consistent with the client's expectations. Instead, he or she is ask to
explore what is taking place in the relationship to help the client gain
awareness of his or her maladaptive ways of relating, as well as the
rigid construal of interpersonal relationships that underlies these
patterns. Such exploration first requires the therapist to disclose, in
an open and nondefensive manner, his or her reaction to what transpired
in the relationship, such as saying "I feel pushed away when you don't
answer my questions." In some cases, the therapist's self-​disclosure
immediately leads clients to being open to their own emotional
experience. With GAD clients, however, we have rarely observed such an
ability or willingness to be vulnerable with another person. What is
typically required is gentle but repeated invitations for the client to
identify, experience, and express emotions triggered by the therapist's
self-​ disclosure and/​or the event that preceded it. The therapist's role
is then to empathize with and validate the affective experiences
expressed by the client, as well as to share his or her own reactions to
the client's self-​disclosures, such as saying "Of course, you would want
to avoid a topic that made you uncomfortable. However, not answering my
question also has an impact on me and makes me feel as though what I am
asking for isn't important." Therapists are also encouraged to observe
and communicate whether clients' responses to their openness help them
feel understood by clients. When used with warmth and support, these
interventions can help the client become aware of his or her impact on
another person. In addition, such an exploration of the therapeutic
relationship allows the therapist to model an open communication style.
By disconfirming the validity of the client cognitive-​interpersonal
schema (i.e., "It is dangerous to openly communicate with others"), this
way of working

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

239

with the therapeutic relationship---​ of meta-​ have been in other
sessions. Is that how you are communicating (Kiesler, 1996)---​can
provide feeling?"). Second, the therapist empathizes the client with a
unique corrective experience with the client's perception and emotions
and (Alexander & French, 1946; Goldfried, 1980). invites him or her to
express additional emotions Similar techniques of meta-​communication and
thoughts about what was unhelpful or are also used in I/​EP to repair
alliance ruptures. invalidating in the treatment. When the therIn fact,
the enactment of client interpersonal apist believes that the client
feels understood, schema during sessions, as when the client the
therapist should then recognize and comwalls off the therapist or pulls
for his or her ment on his or her own contribution to their hostility,
will at times create alliance ruptures. relationship difficulty. His
last step, elegantly This in no way suggests that clients are always
captured by Burns (1989) as a "disarming" responsible for alliance
problems. Such strains technique, requires the therapist to find some in
the alliance can be caused or exacerbated by truth in the client's
reaction, even when the rethe therapist's less than adequate level of
en- action may seem unreasonable. The use of this gagement, attention,
empathy, warmth, tact, or technique is based on the assumption that the
attunement to the client's needs. The therapist therapist has invariably
contributed in some may frustrate the client's desire to be helped by
way to the lack of synchrony between client not using an effective
technique, by failing to and therapist. It is also based on the
assumption competently execute a perfectly adequate inter- that the
therapist's openness to his or her own vention, or by being blinded by
his or her own experiences can lead to the client's openness to
interpersonal schema and its accompanying his or her experience, which
may in turn help emotion. Thus a therapist may avoid dealing them to
exit an unproductive cul-​de-​sac in their with core therapeutic issues
because of his or relationship (Castonguay, 1996). her own fears of
hurting the client or because Contrary to the client's expectation, he
or of personal frustration or annoyance (Wolf, she learns that being
emotionally vulnerable Goldfried, & Muran, 2017). From a cognitive-​ can
lead to stronger and safer relationships. interpersonal perspective
(Safran & Segal, The client also learns that when "living in the 1990),
alliance ruptures can be expected when moment" (such as when
experiencing and two individuals are involved in a complex, de-
exploring in an emotionally immediate way manding, and emotionally
meaningful rela- what is taking place in a relationship), he or she
tionship such as therapy. ceases to pay attention to the past and the
fuAccordingly, therapists are trained to rec- ture. Worries and
ruminations dissipate as one ognize markers of alliance ruptures, such
as becomes real and present with others. clients' overt expressions of
dissatisfaction, inIn addition to paying attention to the therdirect
expressions of hostility, disagreements apeutic relationship, therapists
help clients about the goals or tasks of therapy, overly to draw links
between interaction patterns compliant behavior, evasive behavior, and
observed in the session and patterns in clients' self-​esteem--​boosting
maneuvers (Safran et al., past or current relationships with significant
1990). Therapists are asked to attend to the others. Therapists,
however, are reminded markers of alliance ruptures during both the that
such connections are sometimes drawn CBT and I/​EP segments but, because
of the (by the client or themselves) as a way to avoid additive research
design noted earlier, these processing negative events taking place in
markers are only addressed during the I/​EP seg- the therapeutic
relationship. Such defensive ment which has an interpersonal focus.
maneuvers may prevent the client from fully Attempts are made to repair
the alliance experiencing his or her emotions and further reby following
three steps (Burns, 1989; Safran inforce long-​standing avoidance
strategies (e.g., & Segal, 1990). First, therapists invite clients
intellectualizing or "staying in his or her head" to talk about their
negative reactions (e.g., "I as opposed to being open and vulnerable
with have a sense that you aren't as engaged as you another person).
When part of an emotionally

240

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

immediate exploration of the client's experience, such connections with
outside interpersonal events frequently help clients gain a deeper
awareness of their rigid constructions of relationships and maladaptive
ways of relating. Therapists also ask clients to monitor and record
between sessions events taking place with significant others.
Specifically, clients are asked to describe specific interactions and to
take note of the emotions they felt during these interactions, what they
wanted and feared from the other person, what they did, and what
happened next. Such functional analyses of intrapersonal and
interpersonal factors frequently help clients to identify what they need
and what they actually get from others (McCullough, 2005; McCullough &
Schramm, Chapter 14, this volume). In particular, these analyses reveal
the negative impacts that some of the client's behaviors have on others.
When indicated, behavioral strategies (e.g., social skills training) are
then used to teach clients better ways to satisfy their interpersonal
needs. Facilitating Emotional Deepening Helping the client to
experience, deepen, and express his or her emotions is aimed in part at
extinguishing fear and avoidance (including worry as a cognitive
avoidance response) of emotion. As mentioned earlier, research has
suggested that when individuals with GAD worry, they do so in part to
avoid painful events (future bad outcomes or distressing emotions). As
such, worry is maintained, at least in part, by its negative
reinforcement (e.g., suppression of somatic aspects of anxiety or the
eventual nonoccurrence of low-​probability, but feared, negative events).
By exposing the client to his or her emotional experience, he or she
learns that although some emotions can be painful, they are not
dangerous (e.g., sadness and anger over another's betrayal). As such,
the safety of the therapeutic relationship provides clients with yet
another unique opportunity for corrective experiences. Indeed, if the
experience with and exploration of feeling repeatedly fails to be
intolerable, they learn that there is nothing

to fear from their emotional experience. And when there is nothing to
fear, there is no reason to avoid. Worry, as a consequence, loses its
reinforcing impact, and clients begin to gain access to primary affects
that can motivate and direct adaptive behaviors, as described later.
Emotions are an important source of information for what we need in life
(Grawe, 2002; Greenberg & Safran, 1987). As such, emotional deepening is
also used in I/​EP to help clients better understand what they need from
others. Guided by the work of Greenberg, Rice, & Elliott, (1996),
therapists track markers of emotionality in order to decide when to use
techniques aimed at deepening feelings. Examples of such markers are
changes in voice quality, the sound of sadness in the voice, and a
slowing or quickening of conversational pace. When such markers are
noted, clients are encouraged to stay with their emotions and to allow
themselves to fully experience them. Therapists also pay attention to
moments of emotional disruption or disengagement. When clients stop
emoting and/​or being attentive to their affective experience, therapists
invite them to focus on their immediate experience. For example, "What
just happened? You were allowing yourself to cry, and you quickly moved
away from your feeling." When markers of a self-​evaluative split---​
internal conflict experienced by clients---​ are observed, clients are
invited to take part in a two-​chair exercise. In the exercise, clients
distinguish the two parts of themselves---​as though they were two
separate people---​and then embody each one separately and repeatedly as
one part speaks to the other until clients have gained greater insight
into their feelings and their own needs in the internal conflict. In
contrast, markers of unfinished business---​ unresolved feelings toward a
significant other---​ are dealt with in an empty-​chair exercise. Here,
the client expresses his or her feelings while imagining another person
sitting across in an empty chair. The technique of systematic evocative
unfolding is also used to address markers of problematic reactions---​
when clients experience surprise or confusion about one of

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

their own reactions. Clients are asked to close their eyes and imagine
themselves back in the situation that evoked the reaction and play the
scene in slow motion in their imagination. They are asked to vividly
remember every aspect of the scene, describe in detail the events and
their feelings during the situation, and to pay attention to every
internal cue as they repeatedly describe the situation. By
reexperiencing fine-​ grained details and their reactions to them,
clients can better express and own the emotions that first surprised
them, as well as gain access to previously implicit emotions. Therapists
also encourage clients to focus on and own their emotions as they occur
in their day-​to-​day lives. It is indeed important to help clients
generalize the corrective experiences of expressing feelings in the safe
environment of the session to interpersonal relationships outside of
therapy. Continued attention to clients' experience and behavior in the
real world may well be crucial to help them overcome their fear of
vulnerability and achieve a lasting change in their habitual avoidance
of emotion. DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS Our integrative approach was
developed and used in the context of clinical trials. One of the
limitations of these trials (which are described later) is that they
have involved a very large majority of Caucasian clients. As a
consequence, we have no observations and evidence to rely on to make
reliable statements and inferences about whether our approach applies to
underrepresented ethnic and racial populations. It thus remains an open
question as to whether procedural modifications (cultural adaptations)
should be made to the treatment to optimize its impact for clients of
non-​Caucasian identity and whether some elements of our current
treatment are particularly attuned to or unresponsive to the needs of a
diversity of client populations. Needless to say, future investigations
of this integrative approach, within and/​ or outside of our own research
program, should pay close attention to these and other crucial diversity

241

considerations. At the same time, as with most approaches to
psychotherapy, our treatment entails personalization and making use of
client goals, strengths, and limitations to tailor our approach to
individual needs.

CASE EXAMPLE The following case was chosen because it illustrates the
major thrust of our assimilative integrative treatment. It demonstrates
how the addition of specific techniques to CBT allows therapists to work
with material not directly or adequately addressed in traditional CBT.
As such, the case description will mostly focus on the I/​EP segment of
the therapy. "Wendy" is a female, Caucasian undergraduate seen within
the context of an National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH)-​funded
study aimed at providing preliminary evidence for the feasibility and
impact of the CBT + I/​EP treatment for GAD (this study is presented in
detail in the next section). Although Wendy's primary diagnosis was GAD,
she was also diagnosed with comorbid social phobia, obsessive compulsive
disorder, and a specific phobia. She reported that she had previously
received 2 months of psychotherapy for an interpersonal problem. She was
not currently taking any medications nor had she taken any psychiatric
medications in the past. In terms of her GAD symptoms, she reported that
the current bout of GAD had been chronically ongoing for 7 years. She
reported that she was not aware of any formal diagnoses of any mental
health problems in her immediate family but that she would characterize
her mother as a worrier. Wendy was treated by a Caucasian male
psychologist who was primarily trained in CBT. In addition to his
full-​time private practice, the therapist had served as a therapist in
several CBT trials (e.g., Borkovec & Costello, 1993; Borkovec et al.,
2002). Wendy felt very comfortable during the CBT segments. She took the
therapist's directives to heart and actively complied with the
therapeutic tasks prescribed during and between sessions. On the other
hand, the I/​EP segments proved much more difficult for her, at least
initially. She was

242

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

reluctant to reveal herself, expressing minimal emotion and, when she
did, only in response to the therapist's persistent requests. Although
she wanted to please the therapist, he felt discounted by her lack of
authentic interpersonal and emotional behavior toward him, probably due
to her fear of being vulnerable. While she tried hard to understand and
follow the therapist's instructions (as the perfect client that she
wanted to be---​and felt that she could be in CBT), the therapist did not
believe that she wanted to connect with him or allow herself to be
emotionally close during the I/​EP segment. What was happening during
therapy paralleled what had been taking place in Wendy's interpersonal
relationships. Early on in I/​EP, she reported that she felt that she had
to be perfect with others. Her view of relationships was that she felt
obligated to take care of others' happiness. Not surprisingly, she felt
burdened by what she perceived to be the expectations of others, became
angry when friends asked her to socialize because it was taking time
away from her studies, and frequently avoided being with them. As
therapy progressed, it became clear that she had a hard time being
empathic with others. In part, because her attention was on her own
behavior (her attempt to please others), she did not fully listen to
others. She was so focused on her fear of failure in meeting their needs
that she had little energy left to listen to the needs they actually
expressed. She thus found herself trapped in an unfortunate paradox: she
spent so much time trying to do everything for others that she feet
burdened by others and thus discarded them. At the same time she was
surprised to learn that she did not meet their needs. For example, when
she asked the therapist after several sessions whether he liked her, she
was quite surprised by his reply that he did not know whether he liked
her or not because he had not yet met the real her. She thought that she
was doing everything he wanted her to do, including self-​disclosing.
Wendy was also expecting significant others in her life, including her
boyfriend, to have a similar view of relationships. Specifically, she
expected others to be vigilant and attentive to her needs. She expressed
considerable frustration at the fact that her boyfriend was not always
anticipating

what she wanted from him. As therapy helped her to focus on her
interpersonal needs, she became aware that she had difficulty being
spontaneous with others. One of her first realizations was that she felt
angry at others. This led her to be more assertive with her boyfriend,
but it also made it more difficult for her to be vulnerable, as well as
to be attentive to his needs. Wendy's interactions with her boyfriend
led the therapist to focus on her impact on others, including on the
therapist himself, which in turn led her to become more emotionally
expressive. The therapist then used emotional deepening techniques to
explore the origins of her fear of being vulnerable with others. The
therapist used a systematic evocation technique and allowed her to
reexperience her feeling of being betrayed by another person when she
was in high school. This incident appeared to play a formative role in
her fear of trusting others, of letting her guard down, of being
herself, of not worrying about (and therefore being burden by) others.
The use of an empty chair (where she expressed her feeling of being
betrayed and hurt) in the same session helped her to become aware that
the price paid for not being herself was social isolation, loneliness,
and sadness. She realized that she had missed her previous connections.
At the same time, Wendy was genuinely surprised by the therapist's
acceptance of her tears and sadness (of her vulnerability) expressed
during the evocation of these memories: "You like me when I'm like this,
really? This is what you were looking for?" Because the therapist's
reaction to her first authentic emotional reaction in therapy was
opposite to what she expected, it led to a corrective emotional
experience. In the following sessions, the client became more
emotionally present, displayed a wider range of and more intense
emotions, and began making numerous and adaptive changes in the way she
was relating to others outside of therapy. After completing the 14
sessions prescribed by the treatment (plus an additional "booster"
session planned in the research study), Wendy was followed-​up for 2
years. At pre-​therapy, her GAD severity level was 6; by follow-​up it
was 1. Also, the client demonstrated clinically significant change and
high end-​state functioning (i.e., her

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

243

Based on these preliminary findings, we conducted a second NIMH-​ funded
study (Newman et al., 2011). In this randomized clinical trial, 83 GAD
clients were assigned to either CBT + I/​EP or CBT + SL (i.e., supportive
listening). As previously mentioned, such an additive design was adopted
not only to assess whether our integrative treatment was superior to
traditional CBT, but also to determine, if this was the case, whether
the improvement OUTCOME RESEARCH was specifically due to the addition of
specific components (i.e., interpersonal focus and emoThis integrative
treatment for GAD has been tional deepening techniques). Contrary to the
object of two NIMH-​funded clinical trials. our prediction, however, the
analyses showed The first was a preliminary study aimed at de- no
statistically significant difference between termining whether it could
be implemented the integrative and the CBT + SL conditions and if its
outcome would suggest improve- (Newman et al., 2011). ment over
traditional CBT for GAD (Newman Because the integrative treatment showed
et al., 2008). higher percentages of clients having reached Eighteen
clients with GAD received the clinically significant change on almost
all outCBT + I/​EP described earlier. The treatment come scores, it is
possible that the lack of statiswas delivered by three experienced
therapists tical difference was due to the study's relatively (one
originally trained in CBT and two pri- small sample size. Another
interpretation, marily trained as psychodynamic therapists). more
empirically and clinically sound in our Numerous process findings and
adherence view, is that the analyses of main effects (i.e., checks
suggested that what took place during the comparisons of the two
conditions) might each segment of therapy was consistent with the have
actually masked more nuanced but real treatment manuals. An
observer-​rated measure of differences. Inasmuch as CBT has been
repeatthe therapist interventions, for example, showed edly shown to be
efficacious for a substantial that while therapists focused more on
interper- number of GAD clients, it may be that adding sonal issues in
I/​EP than in CBT, they focused components to CBT may increase it
efficacy for more on intrapersonal issues in CBT than in I/​ some clients
but not for others. EP (Castonguay et al., 2002). In addition, both To
test this possibility, secondary analyses self-​report (client and
therapist) and observation were conducted to assess the moderating
immeasures showed that, as predicted, higher levels pact of clients'
attachment problems (Newman of negative emotions (e.g., sadness) were
found et al., 2015). The findings of these analyses rein I/​EP. For a
number of positive emotions (e.g., vealed that clients with one
particular type of confidence, joy), however, higher levels of in-
attachment style (i.e., dismissive) benefitted tensity were found in CBT
(Castonguay et al., significantly more from the integrative therapy
1999, 2001), which is consistent with its focus on than the CBT + SL
condition, both at the end building skills and increasing self-​efficacy.
of therapy and at follow-​up assessments. In conThe outcome findings
obtained in this trast, clients with a primary angry attachment open
trial were promising. Pre-​/​posttreatment style showed the reverse
results---​but only at effect sizes indeed appeared to be superior to
posttreatment. Because dismissively attached those obtained by previous
studies conducted individuals tend to avoid both emotion and with
traditional CBT. In fact, the average intimacy, it makes sense,
conceptually and within-​ participant effect size from previous
clinically, that they might gain more from a CBT studies was 2.44,
whereas our pilot study treatment that helps them to recognize their
obtained a 3.5 effect size. affective needs and to develop interpersonal
score was within the range of a normative sample) on all six of GAD-​
associated symptoms (e.g., self-​ reported worry, self-​ reported trait
anxiety, assessor-​rated severity of GAD, and self-​reported diary measure
of worry). She showed at least 20% change and was within the range of a
normative sample on all measures.

244

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

connections. In contrast, an emphasis on emo- by one of the other two
therapists. The results tional deepening may have interfered with im-
indicated that the less effective therapist comprovement (at least in
the short term) of angrily mitted two types of errors. One type were
errors attached individuals, who tend to be emotion- of omission, when,
for example, the therapist ally reactive. failed to use (as a response
to clear markers of These results suggest that, although it is legit-
interventions) prescribed social skills training imate and important to
investigate whether inte- to help his client to be more assertive in her
grative therapies achieve better outcomes than interpersonal
relationships. The second type of pure forms of therapy, it may be more
fruitful mistake were ones of commission. These took to examine for whom
such treatments are more the form of relational problems, as manifested
appropriate than traditional approaches. These by the therapist's
frequent interruptions of the findings have also clinical implications
as they client disclosure. These errors were also techsuggest that while
some clients may benefit nical in nature. In the I/​EP segment, in
particmore from an integrative therapy, others may ular, therapists
repeatedly used interpretations improve less---​ in least in the short
term---​ when working with client worries. Rather than than they would
have if they had received a exploring and deepening the client's emopure
form of therapy. In our effort to improve tion that may have triggered
such worry, the therapy, and especially with the current em- therapist's
interpretations replaced one type of phasis on harmful effects
(Castonguay et al., thought with another---​essentially encouraging
2010), it is thus crucial to recognize an obvious the client to "stay in
her head." In doing so, the reality: clients matters. therapist appeared
to reinforce the client's cogIt is also clear that therapists matters.
nitive avoidance of emotion, which the I/​EP Research findings have
indicated that some segment was specifically aimed at correcting.
therapists are better than others, and that, inTaken together, the
studies conducted thus versely, other therapists are less effective than
far on the integrative therapy of GAD suggest the majority of
practitioners (Castonguay & that this treatment is promising but that
unHill, 2017). These findings have led us to ex- derstanding its helpful
impact requires a complore whether the main effects presented earlier
plex interaction of client, therapist, relational, did not also mask
other subtle differences. and technical variables---​which most certainly
Preliminary analyses conducted on the mirrors what therapists encounter
in routine randomized controlled trial (RCT) revealed practice. that the
clients of one of the therapists showed Preliminary outcome studies on
an integrapoorer outcomes than the clients of the other tive treatment
for depression have also been two therapists involved in the study (Youn
et al., conducted. In this treatment, only one of the 2017).
Furthermore, when new analyses were components of the I/​EP package is
added to conducted on the outcome data with the first traditional CBT.
Specifically, alliance ruptures therapist removed, results showed
significant are addressed in cognitive therapy. Conducted differences in
the predicted directions between with inexperienced therapists (graduate
the two conditions compared. In other words, students), the findings of
the first pilot study these findings suggest that there was a thera-
showed that this integrative cognitive treatpist effect and that this
effect may have hidden ment (ICT) was superior to a waiting-​list
condireal and predicted advantages of the integrative tion (Castonguay
et al., 2004). As a whole, the therapy over CBT. findings also compared
favorably with findings Based on these findings, intense (both quanti-
of previous results obtained with traditional tative and qualitative)
analyses were conducted CT. The effect size obtained for the Beck on
videotaped sessions involving three clients: a Depressive Inventory
(Beck et al., 1961), for client who failed to benefit from the
integrative example, was twice that estimated in a meta-​ treatment and
who was seen by the less effec- analysis of control studies comparing
cognitive tive therapist, and two clients who responded therapy (CT) and
wait-​list or placebo condition to treatment and were treated,
respectively, (Gloaguen et al., 1998).

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

In a subsequent pilot study, Constantino and colleagues (2008) examined
the efficacy of ICT by comparing it to CT. The findings showed that ICT
patients evidenced greater posttreatment improvement regarding
depressiveness and global symptomatology (with small to medium effects),
and ICT patients displayed more clinically significant change than did
CT patients. Furthermore, ICT clients also showed higher alliance and
empathy scores across treatment than CT clients. Because they have been
conducted with small samples of depressed clients (N = 21 and 22,
respectively), the results of these two studies should be considered
with caution. Taken together, however, they provide preliminary support
for the potential viability and effectiveness of integrating
rupture--​repair interventions into a standard CT for depression. Further
support for the enhancement of CBT via an assimilation of theoretically
"foreign" interventions toward the therapeutic relationship comes from
empirical studies on Brief Relational Therapy (BRT; Safran & Muran,
2000). Based on Safran's seminal contribution on the exploration and
repair of alliance ruptures, BRT shares strong conceptual and clinical
roots with the I/​EP segment of the integrative therapy for GAD and even
stronger (foundational) links with ICT for depression. In a study with a
sample of personality-​disordered clients, Muran, Safran, Samstag, and
Winston (2005) found that BRT was as effective as CBT and short-​term
dynamic therapy on outcome measures, but more successful at retaining
clients in therapy. In a more recent study aimed at improving
interpersonal interactions between clients and therapists in CBT for
outpatients with comorbid with Axis I and II disorders, Muran, Safran,
Eubanks, and Gorman (2018) trained novice therapists in a two-​step
protocol. First, therapists were trained to fidelity standards in CBT,
and, subsequently (after either 8 or 16 sessions), therapists underwent
alliance-​focused training (AFT) that draws on the same principles as
BRT. The results of this training provide further support to
supplementing CBT with alliance-​focused components. Although not the
main focus of this chapter, several other ways of enhancing CBT in line

245

with principles of assimilative integration have been developed
(Castonguay et al., 2015). These approaches vary by diagnostic
specificity and theoretical background, as well as by relative research
support. Two diagnosis-​ specific approaches with strong interpersonal
components are the cognitive-​behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy
for patients with chronic depression (CBASP; McCullough & Schramm,
Chapter 14, this volume) and the dialectic behavior therapy for patients
with borderline personality disorder (DBT; Heard & Linehan, 1993;
Chapter 12, this volume). Support has also been gained for schema
therapy (Young, Klosko, & Weishaar, 2003), which was created to treat
patients with challenging interpersonal problems by integrating
principles of CBT with object relations theory and gestalt therapy.
Developed in the United Kingdom, cognitive analytic therapy (Ryle et
al., 2014) integrates psychodynamic therapy with CBT principles in a
brief, user-​friendly relational therapy and has received empirical
evidence for its effectiveness for the treatment of a range of clinical
disorders. Other assimilative treatments have focused on specific
dimensions of psychological functioning, such as resistance, emotional
processing, or outcome expectation. For example, responsively
integrating motivational interviewing (MI) to address emerging patient
resistance to standard CBT for GAD has been shown to outperform CBT
alone on long-​term worry and distress reduction (Westra, Constantino, &
Antony, 2016). Furthermore, and consistent with MI's target, MI-​CBT
versus CBT patients experienced less during-​treatment resistance, which
mediated the superior treatment effect (Constantino et al., 2019; Westra
& Constantino, Chapter 13, this volume). Built to enhance
cognitive-​emotional processing in the depressed client, exposure-​ based
cognitive therapy (EBCT) systematically integrates principles of
exposure therapy for anxiety disorders with interventions of emotion-​
focused therapy (Hayes et al., 2005, 2015). At this time, evidence for
the efficacy of EBCT has been obtained in an RCT and two pilot trials
(grosse Holtforth et al., 2011, 2019; Hayes et al., 2005). Assimilating
strategies for

246

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

increasing patients' positive outcome expectations (identified by
Goldfried \[1980\] as a general principle of change) has also been shown
to improve CBT for depression in a small pilot trial (see Constantino,
2012).

FUTURE DIRECTIONS CBT is by far the psychotherapy that has received the
most research support, so it is encouraging, both from a scientific and
a clinical perspective, that several attempts have been made to improve
it based on the integration of complementary constructs and techniques
derived from other traditions. More is needed, however, to expand and
solidify the empirical bases of these CBT-​assimilative treatments. We
have envisaged a number of future directions for our own integrative
efforts---​directions that we believe might also prove beneficial for the
other CBT assimilations briefly mentioned in this chapter. Based on the
moderating findings reported earlier, it is clinically relevant to
assess experimentally whether or not integrative therapy is superior to
CBT with particular clients suffering from GAD. These moderating
variables may be associated with attachment problems and/​or other
individual differences. With these specific clients and/​or with GAD
individuals in general, the next empirical steps should also include the
investigation of our own integrative treatment at different sites, with
different investigators, and with more diverse ethnic clients. Moreover,
it would be useful to conduct investigations in more naturalistic
settings in order to investigate the effectiveness of the integrative
treatment. Directly relevant to effectiveness is the question of whether
it would be possible and advantageous to combine the techniques involved
in the integrative treatment within the same sessions---​ as opposed to
dividing them into different segments of therapy sessions. It would also
be interesting to examine whether the treatment developed for GAD can be
applied successfully to other clinical problems. Depression, for
instance, is likely to be an appropriate target as many of

the process findings and theoretical arguments that guided our selection
of the techniques to be added to traditional CBT emerged from the
depression literature. Much more research should also be done on the
less comprehensive protocol that has begun to be tested on depression.
In particular, studies with large sample sizes comparing ICT and CT are
required before it can be confidently asserted that adding techniques to
repair alliance ruptures improves the efficacy of CT for depression. As
with GAD, future research should not be restricted to efficacy studies.
For example, plans are being made to determine if training therapists to
use alliance repair techniques in their day-​to-​day practice
(irrespective of their theoretical orientation and across a variety of
clinical populations) can improve their effectiveness. We plan to
continue to develop and test treatment methods that might improve the
effectiveness of therapy. In particular, we hope that the studies
supporting the new model of worry and GAD proposed by one author of this
chapter (i.e., contrast model; Newman & Llera, 2011) will provide
fruitful heuristics for the potential improvement of CBT and other
treatment approaches. In addition to these research directions, we
believe that clinical developments could be beneficial for most GAD
clients and/​or for specific types of individuals---​such as ethnic/​racial
minority clients. In particular, we believe that the recent literature
on therapist effects might provide insightful ways to improve our
treatment (as well as many others) without imposing major changes in its
general structure. We know that therapist effects explain between 5% and
8% of outcome variance (Barkham et al., 2017). Research has also
identified a number of factors that explain why some therapists are
better than others, such as the ability to establish a good working
alliance, facilitative interpersonal skills, and deliberate practice
(Wampold et al., 2017). Based primarily on clinical observations,
clinical guidelines have been derived from those and other therapist
factors with the goal of enhancing treatment outcomes (Castonguay &
Hill, 2017). These guidelines address issues such as how to deal

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

with cultural microaggressions, how to regulate and use negative
emotions for therapeutic purposes, and how to foster engagement during
treatment. As we look to the future, we can and should assimilate, in
clinically cohesive ways, many of these guidelines into our integrative
efforts---​in the same way that these efforts have integrated methods
from diverse theoretical orientations.

247

Borkovec, T. D. (1996, June). The role of interpersonal factors in the
treatment of generalized anxiety disorder. Presented at the Society for
Psychotherapy Research, Amelia Island, FL. Borkovec, T. D., Alcaine, O.
M., & Behar, E. (2004). Avoidance theory of worry and generalized
anxiety disorder. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.),
Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice
(pp. 77--​108). New York: Guilford. Borkovec, T. D., & Castonguay, L. G.
(1998). What is the scientific meaning of "empirically References
supported therapy"? Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66,
136--​142. Ablon, J. S., & Jones, E. E. (1998). How expert Borkovec, T.
D., & Costello, E. (1993). Efficacy clinicians' prototypes of an ideal
treatment of applied relaxation and cognitive behavioral correlate with
outcome in psychodynamic and therapy in the treatment of generalized
anxiety cognitive-​behavioral therapy. Psychotherapy disorder. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Research, 8, 71--​83. Psychology, 61, 611--​619.
Ablon, J. S., & Jones, E. E. (1999). Psychotherapy Borkovec, T. D.,
Newman, M. G., Pincus, A., & process in the National Institute of Mental
Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of Health treatment of depression
collaborative cognitive behavioral therapy for generalized research
program. Journal of Consulting and anxiety disorder and the role of
interpersonal Clinical Psychology, 67, 64--​75. problems. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Alden, L. E., Wiggins, J. S., & Pincus, A. L.
(1990). Psychology, 70, 288--​298. Construction of circumplex scales for
the Inventory of Interpersonal Problems. Journal of Borkovec, T. D.,
Robinson, E., Pruzinsky, T., & DePree, J. A. (1983). Preliminary
exploration Personality Assessment, 55, 521--​536. of worry: Some
characteristics and processes. Alexander, F., & French, T. M. (1946).
Psychoanalytic Behaviour Research and Therapy, 21, 9--​16. therapy. New
York: Ronald. Barkham, M., Lutz, W., Lambert, M. J., & Saxon, Borkovec,
T. D., & Ruscio, A. (2001). Psychotherapy for generalized anxiety
disorder. Journal of D. (2017). Therapist effects, effective therapists,
Clinical Psychiatry, 62, 37--​45. and the law of variability. In L. G.
Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), How and why are some Borkovec, T. D., &
Whisman, M. A. (1996). Psychosocial treatment for generalized anxiety
therapists better than others? Understanding disorder. In M. R.
Mavissakalian & R. F. Prien therapist effects (pp. 13--​ 36). Washington,
(Eds.), Long-​term treatments of anxiety disorders DC: American
Psychological Association Press. (pp. 171--​ 199). Washington, DC:
American Beck, A. T., Brown, G., Steer, R. A., & Weissman, A.
Psychiatric Association. N. (1991). Factor analysis of the Dysfunctional
Attitude Scale in a clinical population. Brown, T. A., & Barlow, D. H.
(1992). Comorbidity among anxiety disorders: Implications for
Psychological Assessment, 3, 478--​483. treatment and DSM-​IV. Journal of
Consulting Beck, A. T., Ward, C. H., Mendelson, M., Mock, and Clinical
Psychology, 60, 835--​844. J., & Erbaugh, J. (1961). An inventory for
Brown, T. A., DiNardo, P. A., & Barlow, D. H. measuring depression.
Archives of General (1994). Anxiety Disorder Interview Schedule for
Psychiatry, 4, 561--​571. DSM-​IV. Albany, NY: Graywood. Bernstein, D. A.,
Borkovec, T. D., & Hazlett-​ Stevens, H. (2000). New directions in
progressive Burns, D. D. (1989). The feeling good handbook. New York:
Morrow. relaxation training: A guidebook for helping Cassidy, J. (1995).
Attachment and generalized professionals. Westport, CT: Praeger. anxiety
disorder. In D. Cicchetti & S. Toth Blagys, M. D., & Hilsenroth, M. J.
(2000). Distinctive (Eds.), Rochester symposium on developmental
features of short-​ term psychodynamic-​ psychopathology: Emotion,
cognition and interpersonal psychotherapy: A review of the
representation (pp. 343--​ 370). Rochester, comparative psychotherapy
process literature. NY: University of Rochester Press. Clinical
Psychology, 7, 167--​188.

248

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Castonguay, L. G. (1996). Integrative cognitive therapy. Unpublished
treatment manual, Pennsylvania State University, University Park.
Castonguay, L. G. (2000). A common factors approach to psychotherapy
training. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 263--​282.
Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J. F., Constantino, M. J., Goldfried, M. R.,
& Hill, C. E. (2010). Training implications of harmful effects of
psychological treatments. American Psychologist, 65, 34--​49. Castonguay,
L. G., Eubanks-​Carter, C., Goldfried, M. R., Muran, J. C., & Lutz, W.
(2015). Research in psychotherapy integration: Relevance of the past and
necessity for the future. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 365--​382.
Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue, P. J., & Hayes, A.
H. (1996). Predicting outcome in cognitive therapy for depression: A
comparison of unique and common factors. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64, 497--​504. Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, A. M.,
Goldfried, M. R., & DeRubeis, R. J. (1995). The focus of therapist's
intervention in cognitive therapy for depression. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 19, 485--​503. Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, A. M., Goldfried, M.
R., Drozd, J., Schut, A. J., & Shapiro, D. A. (1998, June).
Interpersonal and interpersonal focus in psychodynamic-​ interpersonal
and cognitive-​behavioral therapies: A replication and extension. Paper
presented at the 29th annual meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy
Research, Snowbird, Utah. Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds.).
(2017). How and why are some therapists better than others?
Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Castonguay, L. G., Newman, M. G., Borkovec, T. D., Schut,
A. J., Kasoff, M. B., Hines, C. E., & Reid, J. (2001, July). Client's
emotion in integrative psychotherapy. Paper presented at the annual
meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Montevideo, Uruguay.
Castonguay, L. G., Pincus, A. L., Agras, W. S., & Hines, C. E. (1998).
The role of emotion in group cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for binge
eating disorder: When things have to feel worst before they get better.
Psychotherapy Research, 8, 225--​238. Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J.,
Aikins, D., Constantino, M. J., Laurenceau, J. P., Bologh, L., & Burns,
D. D. (2004). Integrative cognitive therapy: A preliminary
investigation. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 14, 4--​20.

Castonguay, L. G., Schut, A. J., Newman, M. G., & Borkovec, T. D.
(1999). The therapist and client experience in integrative treatment for
generalized anxiety disorder. Paper presented at the 15th Annual Meeting
of the Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration. Miami
(April). Castonguay, L. G., Vives, A., Zuelling, A., Okruch, A., Wentz,
R., Schut, A. J., . . . Borkovec, T. D. (2002, June). The therapist's
focus of intervention in cognitive-​ behavioral and interpersonal/​
emotional processing treatments for generalized anxiety disorder. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy
Research, Santa Barbara, CA. Constantino, M. J. (2012). Believing is
seeing: an evolving research program on patients' psychotherapy
expectations. Psychotherapy Research, 22(2), 127--​138. Constantino, M.
J., Marnell, M., Haile, A. J., Kanther-​Sista, S. N., Wolman, K.,
Zappert, L., & Arnow, B. A. (2008). Integrative cognitive therapy for
depression: A randomized pilot comparison. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, 45, 122--​134. Constantino, M. J., Westra,
H. A., Antony, M. M., & Coyne, A. E. (2019). Specific and common
processes as mediators of the long-​term effects of cognitive-​behavioral
therapy integrated with motivational interviewing for generalized
anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy Research, 29, 213--​225. Coombs, M. M.,
Coleman, D., & Jones, E. E. (2002). Working with feelings: The
importance of emotion in both cognitive-​ behavioral and interpersonal
therapy in the NIMH treatment of depression collaborative research
program. Psychotherapy, 39, 233--​244. Coyne, J. C., & Gotlib, I. H.
(1983). The role of cognition in depression: A critical appraisal.
Psychological Bulletin, 94, 472--​505. Erickson, T. M., & Newman, M. G.
(2007). Interpersonal and emotional processes in generalized anxiety
disorder analogues during social interaction tasks. Behavior Therapy,
38, 364--​377. doi:10.1016/​j.beth.2006.10.005 Erickson, T. M., Newman, M.
G., Siebert, E. C., Carlile, J. A., Scarsella, G. M., & Abelson, J. L.
(2016). Does worrying mean caring too much? Interpersonal
prototypicality of dimensional worry controlling for social anxiety and
depressive symptoms. Behavior Therapy, 47, 14--​28. Foa, E. B., & Kozak,
M. J. (1986). Emotional processing of fear: Exposure to corrective
information. Psychological Bulletin, 99, 20--​35.

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

249

Gloaguen, V., Cottraux, J., Cucherat, M., & Jones, E. E., & Pulos, S. M.
(1993). Comparing Blackburn, I.-​M. (1998). A meta-​analysis of the the
process in psychodynamic and cognitive-​ effects of cognitive therapy in
depressed patients. behavioral therapies. Journal of Consulting and
Journal of Affective Disorders, 49, 59--​72. Clinical Psychology, 61,
306--​316. Goldfried, M. R. (1971). Systematic desensitization Kerr, S.,
Goldfried, M. R., Hayes, A. M., Castonguay, as training in self-​control.
Journal of Consulting L. G., & Goldsamt, L. A. (1992). Interpersonal and
Clinical Psychology, 37, 228--​234. and intrapersonal focus in
cognitive-​behavioral Goldfried, M. R. (1980). Toward the delineation and
psychodynamic-​interpersonal therapies: A of therapeutic change
principles. American preliminary investigation. Psychotherapy
Psychologist, 35, 991--​999. Research, 2, 266--​276. Goldfried, M. R., &
Castonguay, L. G. (1993). Kiesler, D. J. (1996). Contemporary
interpersonal Behavior therapy: Redefining clinical strengths theory and
research. Personality, psychopathology, and limitations. Behavior
Therapy, 24, 505--​526. and psychotherapy. New York: Wiley. Goldfried, M.
R., & Padawer, W. (1982). Current Kohlenberg, R. J., & Tsai, M. (1991).
Functional status and future directions in psychotherapy. analytic
psychotherapy: Creating intense In M. R. Goldfried (Ed.), Converging
themes in and curative therapeutic relationships. psychotherapy
(pp. 3--​49). New York: Springer. New York: Plenum. Grawe, K (2002).
Psychological therapy. Linehan, M. M. (1993). Cognitive-​behavioral
Toronto: Hogrefe and Huber. treatment of borderline personality
disorder. Greenberg, L. S., Rice, L. N., & Elliott, R. K. (1996). New
York: Guilford. Facilitating emotional change: The moment-​by-​ Mahoney,
M. J. (1980). Psychotherapy and the moment process. New York: Guilford.
structure of personal revolutions. In M. J. Greenberg, L. S., & Safran,
J. D. (1987). Emotion in Mahoney (Ed.), Psychotherapy process (pp.
psychotherapy: Affect, cognition, and the process 157--​180). New York:
Plenum. of change. New York: Guilford. McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2005).
Cognitive behavioral grosse Holtforth, M., Krieger, T., Zimmermann, J.,
analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP) Altenstein-​ Yamanaka, D.,
Dörig, N., Meisch, for chronic depression. In J. C. Norcross L., &
Hayes, A. M. (2019). A randomized-​ & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
controlled trial of cognitive--​behavioral therapy psychotherapy
integration (2nd ed., pp. 281--​ for depression with integrated
techniques 298). New York: Oxford University Press. from emotion-​focused
and exposure therapies. Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., Eubanks, C. F., &
Psychotherapy Research, 29, 30--​44. Gorman, B. S. (2018). The effect of
alliance-​ grosse Holtforth, M., Wilm, K., Beyermann, focused training on
cognitive-​behavioral therapy S., Rhode, A., Trost, S., & Steyer, R. for
personality disorders. Journal of Consulting (2011). Differential change
in integrative and Clinical Psychology, 86, 384--​397. psychotherapy: A
re-​ analysis of a change-​ Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., Samstag, L. W., &
factor based RCT in a naturalistic setting. Winston, A. (2005).
Evaluating an alliance-​ Psychotherapy Research, 21, 631--​643. focused
treatment for personality disorders. Hayes, A. M, Beevers, C. G,
Feldman, G. C, Psychotherapy, 42, 532--​545. Laurenceau, J.-​ P., &
Perlman, C. (2005). Nathan, P. E., & Gorman, J. M. (2015). A guide to
Avoidance and processing as predictors of treatments that work (4th
ed.). New York: Oxford symptom change and positive growth in an
University Press. integrative therapy for depression. International
Newman, M. G. (2002). Generalized anxiety Journal of Behavioral
Medicine, 12,111--​122. disorder. In M. Hersen & M. Biaggio (Eds.),
Hayes, A. H., Castonguay, L. G., & Goldfried, M. Effective brief
therapy: A clinician's guide (pp. R. (1996). The effectiveness of
targeting the 157--​178). San Diego: Academic Press. vulnerability
factors of depression in cognitive Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G.,
Borkovec, therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical T. D., Fisher, A.
J., Boswell, J. F., Szkodny, Psychology, 64, 623--​627. L., & Nordberg,
S. (2011). A randomized Hayes, A. M., Yasinski, C., Barnes, J. B., &
Bockting, controlled trial of cognitive-​behavioral therapy C. L. (2015).
Network destabilization and for generalized anxiety disorder with
integrated transition in depression: New methods for techniques from
emotion-​ focused and studying the dynamics of therapeutic change.
interpersonal therapies. Journal of Consulting Clinical psychology
review, 41, 27--​39. and Clinical Psychology, 79, 171--​181.

250

Integrative Psychotherapy Models

Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. D., Fisher, A. J., &
Nordberg, S. (2008). An open trial of integrative therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,
and Training, 45, 135--​147. Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec,
T. D., & Molnar, C. (2004). Integrative therapy for generalized anxiety
disorder. In R. G. Heimberg, C. L. Turk, & D. S. Mennin (Eds.),
Generalized anxiety disorder: Advances in research and practice
(pp. 320--​350). New York: Guilford. Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G.,
Jacobson, N. C., & Moore, G. A. (2015). Adult attachment as a moderator
of treatment outcome for generalized anxiety disorder: Comparison
between cognitive--​ behavioral therapy (CBT) plus supportive listening
and CBT plus interpersonal and emotional processing therapy. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83, 915--​925. Newman, M. G., &
Erickson, T. M. (2010). Generalized anxiety disorder. In J. G. Beck
(Ed.), Interpersonal processes in the anxiety disorders: Implications
for understanding psychopathology and treatment (pp. 235--​259).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/​12084-​009 Newman, M. G., Jacobson, N. C., Erickson, T. M., &
Fisher, A. J. (2017). Interpersonal problems predict differential
response to cognitive versus behavioral treatment in a randomized
controlled trial. Behavior Therapy, 48, 56--​68.
doi:10.1016/​j.beth.2016.05.005 Newman, M. G., & Llera, S. J (2011). A
novel theory of experiential avoidance in generalized anxiety disorder:
A review and synthesis of research supporting a Contrast Avoidance Model
of worry. Clinical Psychology Review, 31, 371--​382. Newman, M. G., Shin,
K. E., & Zuellig, A. R. (2016). Developmental risk factors in
generalized anxiety disorder and panic disorder. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 206, 94--​102. doi:10.1016/​ j.jad.2016.07.008 Norcross, J. C.
(2011). Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press. Peluso, P. R., & Freund, R. R. (2018).
Therapist and client emotional expression and psychotherapy outcomes: A
meta-​analysis. Psychotherapy, 55, 461--​472. Przeworski, A., Newman, M.
G., Pincus, A. L., Kasoff, M. B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L. G., &
Berlin, K. S. (2011). Interpersonal pathoplasticity in individuals with
generalized

anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 286--​298.
doi:10.1037/​a0023334 Robins, C. J., & Hayes, A. M. (1993). An appraisal
of cognitive therapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 61,
205--​214. Roemer, L., Molina, S., & Borkovec, T. D. (1997). An
investigation of worry content among generally anxious individuals.
Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 185, 314--​319. Ryle, A., Kellet,
S., Hepple, J., & Calvert, R. D. (2014). Cognitive analytic therapy at
30. Advances in Psychiatric Treatment, 20, 258--​268. Safran, J. D.
(1998). Widening the scope of cognitive therapy: The therapeutic
relationship, emotion, and the process of change. New York: Jason
Aronson. Safran, J. D., Crocker, P., McMain, S., & Murray, P. (1990).
Therapeutic alliance rupture as a therapy event for empirical
investigation. Psychotherapy, 27, 154--​165. Safran, J. D., & Muran, J.
C. (2000). Negotiating the therapeutic alliance: A relational treatment
guide. New York: Guilford. Safran, J. D., & Segal, Z. V. (1990).
Interpersonal process in cognitive therapy. New York: Basic. Salzer, S.,
Pincus, A. L., Hoyer, J., Kreische, R., Leichsenring, F., & Leibing, E.
(2008). Interpersonal subtypes within generalized anxiety disorder.
Journal of Personality Assessment, 90, 292--​ 299. doi:10.1080/​
00223890701885076 Salzer, S., Pincus, A. L., Winkelbach, C.,
Leichsenring, F., & Leibing, E. (2011). Interpersonal subtypes and
change of interpersonal problems in the treatment of patients with
generalized anxiety disorder: A pilot study. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, 48, 304--​ 310. doi:10.1037/​ a0022013
Schut, A., Pincus, A., Castonguay, L. G., Bedics, J., Kline, M., Long,
D., & Seals, K. (1997, November). Perceptions of attachment and self-​
representations at best and worst in generalized anxiety disorder. Paper
presented at the annual meeting of the Association for the Advancement
of Behavior Therapy, Miami, FL. Shin, K., & Newman, M. G. (2017,
November). Self-​and other-​ perception of interpersonal problems:
Moderation of agreement and bias by social anxiety, generalized anxiety,
and depression. Poster presented at the 51st annual meeting of the
Association for Behavioral and Cognitive Therapies (ABCT), San Diego,
CA.

Cognitive-Behavioral Assimilative Integration

251

Sullivan, H. S. (1953). The interpersonal theory of Wolf, A., W.,
Goldfried, M. R., & Muran, J. C. psychiatry. New York: Norton. (2017).
Therapist negative reactions: How Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., &
Antony, M. M. to transform toxic experiences. In L. G. (2016).
Integrating motivational interviewing Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.),
How and with cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for severe why are some
therapists better than others? generalized anxiety disorder: An
allegiance-​ Understanding therapist effects (pp. 175--​192). controlled
randomized clinical trial. Journal of Washington, DC: American
Psychological Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 84(9), 768.
Association. Wampold, B. E., Baldwin, S. A., Grosse Holforth, Youn, S.
J., Xiao, H., Kim, H., Castonguay, L. G., M., & Imel, Z. (2017). What
characterizes McAleavey, A., Newman, M. G., & Safran, J. effective
therapists. In L. G. Castonguay & D. (2017). Effective and less
effective therapists C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist effects (pp. 37--​53).
for generalized anxiety disorder: Are they Washington, DC: American
Psychological conducting therapy the same way. In L. G. Association
Press. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist effects Wiser, S. L., &
Goldfried, M. R. (1993). A (pp. 259--​ 283). Washington, DC: American
comparative study of emotional experiencing Psychological Association
Press. in pyschodynamic-​interpersonal and cognitive-​ Young, J. E.,
Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. behavioral therapies. Journal of
Consulting and (2003). Schema therapy: A practitioner's guide. Clinical
Psychology, 61, 892--​895. New York: Guilford.

PART III

Integrative Psychotherapies for Specific Disorders and Populations

A. Specific Disorders

12 Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Borderline Personality Disorder
HEIDI L. HEARD AND MARSHA M. LINEHAN

Psychotherapy integration synthesizes different theories and techniques
to develop a maximally efficacious therapy. In this way, the goal and
process of psychotherapy integration parallel the goal and process of
psychotherapy itself. Practitioners from various schools strive to
foster synthesis within their clients, whether by targeting the
incorporation of new skills into a client's behavioral repertoire or by
guiding the client toward the integration of disparate aspects of the
self. In dialectical behavior therapy (DBT; Linehan, 1993a, 2015a,
2015b), the emphasis on observing and creating syntheses within therapy
has developed into an integral part of helping clients achieve their
ultimate goals. DBT is integrative in the "dialectical/​ developmental"
sense of the word (Stricker & Gold, 1993), meaning that it emphasizes

the "open-​ended dialogical process in which differences are examined and
novel integrations are welcomed" (p. 7). Thus, while at any given moment
DBT constitutes a single, unified psychotherapy, it is also in a
continuous process of change in which new developments are accepted
rather than avoided, rather like a client effectively participating in
therapy. This chapter elaborates on the integrative aspects of DBT by
describing its application to individuals who meet criteria for
borderline personality disorder (BPD), the population on whom the
treatment was originally tested. First, it identifies the theoretical
and philosophical principles of the approach and the history of their
integration. It discusses "dialectics" in greater detail and describes
some of the ways in which the dialectical philosophy performs multiple
integrating roles throughout the therapy. The

257

258

Specific Disorders and Populations

chapter describes the initial assessment, case formulation, and
treatment modes. It focuses on the strategies and process that occur
within a therapy session, as well as how the therapy relationship
contributes to change. A case example illustrates the integration of the
various strategies. Finally, the chapter summarizes the results of
outcome research that examines the efficacy of DBT for BPD and considers
future directions for the treatment approach.

INTEGRATIVE APPROACH Development of Approach Linehan (1993a, 1993b)
originally developed DBT as a cognitive-​behavioral intervention to treat
individuals with a high risk for suicide and other difficult-​to-​treat
problems. Linehan then focused particularly on clients who had a
diagnosis of BPD because this patient population best fit the focus of
the treatment with respect to suicidal and other severe behaviors, and
research funding favored focusing on a specific mental disorder. To
explain the etiology and maintenance of problematic behaviors associated
with BPD, she combined capability deficit and motivational models of
behavioral dysfunction. Individuals who meet criteria for BPD lack
important skills (e.g., emotion regulation, interpersonal
effectiveness), and personal and environmental factors both inhibit
skillful behavior and reinforce problematic behavior. Linehan further
proposed a transactional theory of the etiology and maintenance of BPD
that combines biological, social, and developmental causes. To change
the problematic behaviors, DBT applies the principles of behaviorism
(e.g., Skinner, 1974) and social behaviorism (an integrative model
itself; Staats, 1975) and the traditional practices of
cognitive-​behavior therapy (CBT; e.g., Barlow, 1988; Goldfried &
Davidson, 1976; Masters et al., 1987; Wilson & O'Leary, 1980) that led
to the development of efficacious treatments for many other disorders.
To facilitate case conceptualizations and interventions capable of
addressing the multiplicity and complexity of behaviors associated

with BPD, DBT integrates and adapts traditional problem-​ solving
strategies such as skills training, exposure, and contingency
management. Clinical experience, however, suggested that these practices
alone would prove insufficient when treating BPD clients. Compared to
most clients who successfully complete behavioral programs, these
clients had significantly more behaviors to target, poorer treatment
compliance, and higher treatment dropout. Developing and maintaining a
collaborative relationship and a stable set of treatment goals while
encountering high suicidality, conflict in therapy, and other crises
made the straightforward application of CBT extremely challenging.
Therapy-​ interfering behaviors occur as a result of CBT's perceived
focus on changing behaviors, ranging from emotions and cognitions to
overt behaviors. Linehan suggested that the focus on change was
experienced by the client not only as invalidating specific behaviors
but as invalidating the client as a whole. Research (e.g., Swann,
Stein-​Serussi, & Giesler, 1992) may explain how such perceived
invalidation leads to problematic behavior in therapy. When an
individual's basic self-​constructs are not verified, the individual's
arousal increases. The increased arousal then leads to cognitive
dysregulation and the failure to process new information. The biosocial
model suggests that BPD clients are particularly sensitive to any
potentially invalidating cues and more likely to become highly aroused.
To balance the emphasis on change, Linehan began to integrate the
principles of Zen (e.g., Aitken, 1982) and the associated practice of
mindfulness (e.g., Hanh, 1987), which describe "acceptance" at its most
radical level. Zen encourages radical acceptance of the moment without
change. Practice includes focusing on the current moment, seeing reality
as it is without "delusions," and accepting reality without judgment.
The practice also encourages students to let go of attachments that
obstruct the path to enlightenment, to use skillful means, and to find a
middle way. Zen teaches that each moment is complete by itself and that
the

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

world is perfect as it is (Aitken, 1982). Zen focuses on acceptance,
validation, and tolerance instead of change. In contrast to the
experimental evidence required in psychology, Zen emphasizes
experiential evidence as a means of understanding the world. Although
Kabat-​ Zinn (1990, 1994) was developing a mindfulness-​based approach to
treat stress in behavioral medicine at about the same time, Linehan was
the first to integrate mindfulness into a psychotherapy (Swales, 2018).
The tensions arising from Linehan's attempt to integrate the principles
of behaviorism with those of Zen required a framework that could house
opposing views. The dialectical philosophy, which highlights the process
of synthesizing oppositions, provides such a framework. Through the
continual resolution of tensions between theory and clinical experience
as well as between Western psychology and Eastern practice, DBT evolved
in a manner similar to the theoretical integration described by
psychotherapy integration researchers (Arkowitz, 1989; Norcross &
Alexander, Chapter 1, this volume). Dialectical Principles Dialectics
describes the process by which the development and progress of therapy
occurs and by which conflicts that impede progress are resolved. The
American Heritage Dictionary (1979, p. 363) defines dialectics, in part,
as "The Hegelian process of change whereby an ideational entity (thesis)
is transformed into its opposite (antithesis) and preserved and
fulfilled by it, the combination of the two being resolved in a higher
form of truth (synthesis)." Linehan's application of dialectics was
influenced by evolutionary biology (Levins & Lewontin, 1985), cognitive
development (Basseches, 1984), and the evolution of self (Kegan, 1982).
Based on such sources, Linehan draws several assumptions about the
nature of reality that are particularly relevant to psychotherapy with
BPD clients. Three of these assumptions---​that reality is (1)
interrelated or systemic, (2) oppositional or heterogeneous, and (3)
continuously changing---​are discussed in greater detail.

259

Interrelatedness Dialectics stresses the fundamental interrelatedness
and unity of reality by emphasizing relationships within and between
systems. "Parts and wholes evolve in consequence of their relationship,
and the relationship itself evolves. These are the properties of things
that we call dialectical: that one thing cannot exist without the other,
that one acquires its properties from its relations to the other"
(Levins & Lewontin, 1985, p. 3). Behaviorism and Zen both recognize the
importance of interrelatedness. Though all CBT therapists are trained to
include the external environment in their search for controlling stimuli
and to evaluate the effect of behavioral antecedents and consequences,
the contextualist position described by Hayes (1987) most clearly
resembles the dialectical emphasis on attention to interrelatedness and
the whole. Zen and other Eastern practices (Wilber, 1979) highlight the
experience of connectedness to the universe and letting go of personal
boundaries. One of the most pervasive ways in which the principle of
interrelatedness influences treatment is that it encourages a systemic
approach to the analysis of behavior. The DBT therapist considers two
levels at which the client may experience dysfunction. The first level
encompasses mutually influential systems within the individual, such as
biochemical systems, affective regulation systems, and information
processing systems. For example, if a client's serotonin uptake is
dysregulated, this may lead to affective instability. Affective
dysregulation often interferes with cognition. If the cognitive
dysregulation includes a disruption of problem-​ solving abilities, then
this disruption could lead to a crisis that further dysregulates affect.
Although multiple dysregulations may require multiple treatments, a
systemic approach also foresees how any single intervention may
influence multiple systems. For example, effective pharmacotherapy may
regulate serotonin intake such that the chain just described never
begins. Alternatively, enhancing emotion regulation skills may help the
client to manage biological changes such that information processing and
problem-​solving are not impaired.

260

Specific Disorders and Populations

The second level of systemic dysregulation involves the interpersonal
systems, such as family, culture, and other environmental systems. To
obtain an accurate understanding of the client's behavior, DBT
therapists assess these influences as well as biological and
psychological factors. Many clients live in or interact with systems
that reinforce problematic behavior or punish skillful behavior. For
example, the hospitalization of a client for attempting suicide may
actually reinforce the behavior if the hospitalization provides
desirable consequences, such as more warmth and caring from staff than
the client received elsewhere or fewer onerous responsibilities (e.g.,
finding housing) that the client cannot otherwise avoid. Decreasing the
likelihood of attempting suicide may involve, in part, the therapist and
client working to diminish the likelihood that hospitalization leads to
such desirable consequences. Alternatively, a client's attempts to
search for employment may be punished by a family in which everyone else
lives on unemployment benefits. One of the most critical interpersonal
systems is, of course, the therapeutic relationship, which will be
discussed later.

change and acceptance is enhanced through combining aspects of CBT and
Zen practices. CBT provides the technology of change, Zen provides the
technology of acceptance. To maximize therapeutic progress, the DBT
therapist continuously interweaves acceptance strategies---​which
acknowledge the client as in the moment---​and change strategies, which
attempt to alter the client's behavior. The therapy strives to help the
client understand that certain behaviors may prove both valid and
problematic. For example, anxiety about not having sufficient skills to
cope when the therapist leaves town for a holiday is a valid response
from a client who has few coping skills and functions better when the
therapist remains in town. On the other hand, the therapist will leave
town, so learning relevant skills will be the most effective way forward
for the client. To validate the client while also solving a problem, the
therapist may offer the client an extra session prior to the holiday and
then focus exclusively during that session on skills to help the client
cope with the therapist's absence.

Opposition

Dialectics stresses change as a fundamental aspect of reality. All
therapies foster change, but they differ in the type and degree of
change they promote. As noted earlier, both behaviorism and Zen discuss
change, though in slightly different ways. CBT promotes change by using
interventions that require the client and/​or the therapist to actively
change emotions, thoughts, overt behavior, or the environment. In
contrast, neither the Zen student nor the master tries intentionally to
change but instead to mindfully observe experiences as they occur.
Whereas the cognitive-​ behavior therapist teaches the client how to
actively decrease dysfunctional behavior, the Zen master helps the
student learn to observe how emotions, cognitions, and urges, both
pleasant and aversive, naturally come and go without making any attempts
to change them. According to Zen, everything is impermanent and comes
and goes like waves in the ocean, thus the important emphasis on
acceptance.

Dialectics also highlights the complexity of nature by suggesting that
reality is composed of opposing forces, the thesis and the antithesis,
in tension with each other. Development occurs as these oppositions
proceed toward synthesis and as a new set of opposing forces emerges
from the synthesis. In psychotherapy, tensions can arise within the
client, within the therapist, between the client and therapist, or
between the client and/​or therapist and the larger treatment system.
Here, we focus on what DBT has identified as the central opposition for
the therapist: the tension between accepting the client and changing the
client. The relation between change and acceptance forms the basic
paradox and context of treatment. Therapeutic change can occur only in
the context of acceptance of what is, and the act of acceptance itself
is change. The ability of the DBT therapist to balance

Change

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

CBT and Zen practice therefore offer two approaches to change. For
example, whereas cognitive-​ behavioral procedures can reduce suicidal
behavior by teaching the client how to actively reduce suicidal urges,
Zen practice can reduce such behavior by teaching the client how to
allow and observe the urges without acting on them. These behavioral and
Zen approaches reciprocally enhance each other. On the one hand, an
important step in reducing suicidal urges is to increase awareness of
those variables that control the urges. On the other hand, if one
observes the urges without reinforcing them through action, the urges
will naturally decrease over time. In addition to promoting change in
the client's behavior, DBT allows therapists extensive freedom to change
their own behavior and some aspects of the treatment's structure. For
example, as the therapy relationship develops, the therapist may expand
various limits (e.g., willingness to accept phone calls, using examples
of self as a coping model) as one would expand limits in any other
relationship over time. This natural change is allowed to occur so that
the therapeutic context matches, as closely as possible, the "real
world." Alternatively, such limits may also contract as a result of
changes in the therapy relationship (e.g., client begins to phone the
therapist too often or shares the therapist's self-​disclosure with other
clients) or the therapist's life (e.g., therapist has a baby, is
studying for exams). The therapist does not try to protect the client
from natural change but instead tries to help the client learn to
respond effectively to change, viewing such changes as opportunities for
the therapy to actively address deficits in the client's ability to
adapt. For example, when DBT group skills trainers rotate into and out
of an ongoing group, the trainers may directly target the clients'
distress by helping them to practice some of the relevant skills that
they have learned during skills training. APPLICABILITY The first
randomized controlled trial (RCT; Linehan et al. 1991, 1994) examining
the applicability of DBT occurred in an outpatient

261

treatment program for women who had a history of attempted suicide,
nonsuicidal self-​ injurious behavior, or both and who met criteria for
BPD. This trial excluded individuals who met criteria for schizophrenia,
bipolar disorder, substance dependence, and intellectual disability, but
included individuals who presented with comorbidity for other disorders.
Because treatment programs for substance dependence often excluded
borderline individuals, Linehan (Linehan & Dimeff, 1997) decided to
develop DBT to treat borderline clients who also met substance
dependence or abuse criteria. More recently, an adaptation of Foa's
exposure treatment for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) has been
integrated into standard DBT for clients with comorbid PTSD, BPD, and
suicidal behavior (Harned, Korslund, & Linehan, 2014). The RCTs
examining the efficacy of standard, comprehensive DBT for BPD are
reviewed later in this chapter. In addition to the developments in DBT
for BPD, treatment developers and clinicians have applied DBT, either in
its original version or in an adapted form, to a range of mental
disorders, across the age spectrum, and in several clinical settings.
Only those developments with favorable results in RCTs are identified as
having demonstrated applicability for the purposes of this chapter.
Unlike the original DBT trial, many of these trials included male
clients. Diagnoses with evidence of efficacy include bulimia and binge
eating disorder (summarized in Safer, Telch & Chen, 2009; see Lenz et
al., 2014 for a meta-​analysis), mood disorders (e.g., Lynch et al.,
2003), comorbid clinical depression and personality disorder (Lynch et
al., 2007), clinical anxiety (Neacsiu et al. 2014), and attention
deficit disorder (e.g., Fleming et al., 2015). Regarding age, the age
range for DBT has been extended by adapting the treatment for suicidal
adolescents (McCauley et al., 2018; Mehlum et al., 2014; Miller, Rathus
& Linehan, 2007; Rathus & Miller, 2015). The adaptation also appears
efficacious for adolescents with bipolar disorder (Goldstein et al.,
2015). More recently, DBT has been adapted for even younger clients,
specifically children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder
(Perepletchikova

262

Specific Disorders and Populations

et al., 2017). At the other end of the age spectrum, DBT has been
adapted for depressed elderly clients (Lynch et al., 2003, 2007).
Although adaptations have extended its applicability, DBT has emphasized
the importance of implementation research before adapting the treatment.
For example, research on innovative treatments has supported first
adopting a treatment as originally developed and then adapting only as
necessary or as data suggest will not harm clinical outcomes.
Considering the principle-​ guided nature of DBT and the types of changes
made in its empirically supported adaptations, another way to approach
the issue may be to adopt the principles wholeheartedly and adapt the
practical aspects as needed. ASSESSMENT Standard DBT initially assesses
potential clients during a screening phase to determine whether they
meet the program's diagnostic, behavioral, and other inclusion criteria
and do not meet any of the exclusion criteria. Programs are encouraged
to use standardized assessments whenever possible. Though DBT emphasizes
the importance of objective, standardized diagnostic assessments, the
treatment maintains a behavioral view that suggests that a diagnosis of
BPD is simply a term to summarize a particular pattern of behaviors. If
the behaviors cease, so too does the diagnosis. Further, DBT therapists
approach the application of the diagnosis of BPD from a utilitarian
perspective. That is, DBT does not "believe in" the diagnosis per se but
uses it because it has been demonstrated to be effective. A diagnosis of
BPD functions to predict the prognosis of various types of treatments
and allows the therapist to develop a treatment plan. In standard DBT
programs, clients who successfully complete the screening phase receive
a DBT individual therapist who completes several "pretreatment" tasks,
including additional assessments. The therapist first assesses the
client's treatment goals, including short-​and long-​term, clinical and
nonclinical goals, and orients the client to how the treatment will

address these goals. The therapist then assesses the client's mental
disorders and behavioral problems not included in the screening and any
other presenting problems. The therapist also obtains a detailed history
of the client's most severe behaviors. Borderline individuals often
present with severe lack of behavioral control, engaging in multiple
unsafe or destabilizing behaviors or both. A single individual may be
suicidal, abuse substances, physically threaten others, and dissociate.
Because BPD clients often engage in behaviors that either directly
interfere with therapy (e.g., not attending, not completing homework,
remaining mute) or that lower the therapist's motivation to provide
treatment (e.g., insulting the therapist, threatening to complain about
the therapist to management, stalking the therapist), an assessment of
the individual's past treatment experiences may prove valuable as well.
For clients at this stage of dysfunction, DBT focuses on moving from
severe dyscontrol to behavioral control. The initial assessment of the
severe behaviors enables the therapist to develop a hierarchy of
behaviors to target. These target behaviors are as specific and as
clearly defined as possible. The target hierarchy is as follows: (1)
decreasing suicidal (e.g., nonsuicidal self-​ injurious acts, suicidal
urges, suicide threats) and other imminently life-​threatening behaviors
(e.g., homicidal behaviors); (2) decreasing therapy-​ interfering
behaviors of both patient and therapist; (3) decreasing severe, quality
of life-​ interfering behaviors (e.g., mental disorders, impulsive
spending leading to bankruptcy, behaviors leading to homelessness); and
(4) increasing behavioral skills such as distress tolerance, emotion
regulation, interpersonal effectiveness, and mindfulness. The client
tracks the target behaviors on a weekly diary card, along with other
variables related to those behaviors (e.g., emotions, thoughts, use of
DBT skills). The therapist and client use the most recent diary card to
identify an episode of the highest target for the week and then conduct
a thorough assessment of that episode (see section on "Behavioral Chain
Analysis"). Outcome variables in DBT

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

commonly consist of the top targets in the hierarchy. The identification
of treatment targets a tension between behavior therapy and Zen and a
paradox within Zen itself. Whereas the cognitive-​behavior therapist
helps the client to define where the client wants or needs to go, the
Zen master helps the student to realize that the student is already
there. The paradox within Zen is that, although one enters the practice
to achieve enlightenment, the more one focuses on enlightenment as a
goal during practice, the less likely one is to experience it. DBT
therapists balance requiring clients to work on treatment targets with
appreciating clients' inherent strengths. Of course, therapists also
attend to the many ways in which attention to treatment targets can
interfere with achieving them. For example, the client's fears of not
being able to stop drinking may actually cause anxiety that leads to
more drinking. CASE FORMULATION Formulation in DBT may be viewed as
occurring on two overlapping levels, a general case formulation and
specific behavioral formulations. The therapist first develops a
formulation of the case as a whole. Based on behavioral and dialectical
principles and the biosocial model, the case formulation provides a
general understanding of the development of the client's behaviors and
general guidelines for treatment, as well as the target hierarchy. This
formulation slowly evolves across sessions as the therapist first
addresses the same problem in various contexts and then moves on to
address other problems. Within a single session, a therapist first
selects an episode of the client's most severe behavior (e.g., cutting,
bingeing, dissociating) to target and then develops a behavioral
formulation for that specific episode. If the behavior reoccurs the
following week, the therapist will develop a behavioral formulation of
the new episode, incorporating information from both an assessment of
the current episode and from past formulations. Thus, the DBT therapist
develops a single case formulation that slowly

263

evolves and a series of behavioral formulations that may change more
quickly from session to session. Biosocial Model To explain the
development of the behaviors associated with BPD, Linehan (1993a;
Crowell, Beauchaine, & Linehan, 2009) proposes a biosocial model in
which BPD results primarily from a disorder within the system of emotion
regulation. She hypothesizes that the problems with emotion regulation
result from a dialectical transaction between a biologically based
proclivity toward emotion dysregulation and impulsivity on one side and
an invalidating social environment(s) on the other. This hypothesis
suggests that not only does the interaction of the individual's biology
and environment lead to problematic behaviors, but also that the biology
and environment reciprocally influence each other such that the
emotional dysregulation creates more invalidation and vice versa. The
pervasive emotion dysregulation experienced by borderline individuals
results from a biologically based emotional vulnerability combined with
insufficient emotion regulation. "Emotional vulnerability" refers to a
physiological predisposition to be highly sensitive to emotional
stimuli, to respond intensely to such stimuli, and to return slowly to a
less emotional baseline. Emotional vulnerability alone would not
necessarily prove problematic if the individual managed the emotions
well. To conceptualize emotion regulation, DBT has incorporated the work
of Gottman and Katz (1990), who have suggested that emotion regulation
requires the ability to (a) inhibit inappropriate behavior related to
strong negative or positive emotion, (b) decrease physiological arousal
induced by the affect, (c) refocus attention away from the affect, and,
finally (d) organize one's behavior toward coordinated action to achieve
the external goal (i.e., solve the problem that initially elicited the
affect). Though emotion dysregulation may cause some form of behavioral
problems by itself, only when such dysregulation occurs within an
invalidating environment over a period of time,

264

Specific Disorders and Populations

and the dysregulation and environment shape each other, does BPD
develop. An invalidating environment is "one in which communication of
private experiences is met by erratic, inappropriate and extreme
response" (Linehan, 1993a, p. 49). Such environments chronically reject
or otherwise punish the individual's communication of private
experiences (e.g., emotions, cognitions, physical sensations) or
self-​generated behaviors and oversimplify the ease of resolving
problems. Furthermore, these environments then intermittently reinforce
the escalation of emotional behavior. For example, an invalidating
environment may ignore expressions of distress until it leads to suicide
attempts, substance dependence, or bulimic behavior. Though individuals
diagnosed with BPD first encounter invalidating environments during
childhood, many find themselves in such environments (e.g., marriages,
employment, treatment systems) during adulthood as well. The potential
consequences of continual invalidation include difficulties in
effectively labeling and regulating emotions and distrusting one's own
experiences as valid responses. Additionally, the environment fails to
adequately teach the individual how to solve problems, to self-​regulate,
and to tolerate distress. Finally, the intermittent reinforcement of
escalated emotional reactions teaches the individual to fluctuate
between inhibition of emotions and extreme emotional behavior. Recently,
Linehan has clarified the concept of traumatic invalidation to describe
the severest type of invalidation and its consequences. As with the
traumatic events involved in PTSD, objective elements of an invalidating
event are used to define "traumatic," rather than just an individual's
response to the event. Invalidation events are, however, interpersonal
rather than physical. Traumatic invalidation events are events that are
reasonably capable of causing serious psychological injury to the
individual. The injury may be to the individual's integrity or
fundamental experience of self. For example, the event may lead to
confronting a belief that one is lovable, to destroying confidence about
having the skills to accomplish a goal, or to denigrating trust in one's
emotional responses.

Alternatively or additionally, the injury may be to the individual's
perception of how essential others value or view the individual. For
example, the event may lead to destroying the perception that one is
loved by parents, liked by friends, or appreciated by colleagues. In
addition to the extremity of the invalidating act, several other aspects
of the act determine whether the invalidation warrants the label of
"traumatic." One critical factor is the salience of the invalidator to
the individual (e.g., parent, leader of relevant social organization,
boss). For example, some clients who experienced sexual abuse as
children reported the abuse to their mothers only to have their mothers
respond in invalidating ways, such as accusing them of lying. Several of
these clients have described these interactions as traumatic, not so
much because of the implications for the abuse itself, but because the
invalidation indicated to them that the parent did not love them or
value them enough to believe them or take care of them. Other relevant
aspects include the frequency or repetition of the invalidation and the
pervasiveness of it by different invalidators. Although traumatic
invalidation commonly involves invalidating the valid, in some instances
the invalidator's communication or other action has some validity
regarding the individual's problematic behavior or inaccurate
cognitions. The traumatic aspect of the invalidation in these
circumstances results from the invalidator demeaning the individual
about the behavior or belief. In verbal communications, this usually
involves strong negative judgments or overgeneralizations (e.g., "You're
so fat, no one will ever love you"). For example, during their youth,
some clients experienced bullying that involved no physical threats, but
instead involved a valued social group repeatedly making extreme
invalidating statements about the client that caused the client
reasonably to perceive that no one would befriend him or her because of
personal traits. In several cases, the invalidating statements
highlighted socially problematic traits that the client did have and
needed to change to achieve his or her social goals, but the demeaning
style of the communications, often public, transformed potentially
useful information into traumatic invalidation.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

Traumatic invalidation has both psychological and behavioral
consequences. Some of these consequences resemble those associated with
physical trauma, including reexperiencing the event through memories,
images, thoughts, and even dreams and reacting with intense emotions to
any invalidating cue. The individual may experience higher levels of
shame or anger, or oscillate between the two. Paradoxically, the
individual may alternately avoid the invalidator as well as similar
situations and yet intensely attempt to obtain validation from the
invalidator. STRUCTURE In standard DBT for BPD, clients commit to an
initial year of treatment that includes weekly, hour-​ long individual
psychotherapy sessions, weekly 2.5-​hour group skills training classes,
and between-​ session telephone consultation. Inpatient programs often
have a shorter duration but more frequent sessions than outpatient
programs. Although DBT encourages "skills rather than pills," the
treatment emphasizes using all effective means, which sometimes involves
improving medication compliance. Similarly, DBT emphasizes problem-​
solving and skills-​ coaching rather than hospitalization as the response
to outpatient clients' suicidal crises. To facilitate applying DBT in
such crises, when the therapist may be emotionally dysregulated and less
able to think clearly, the intervention involves the suicide crisis
protocol (Linehan, 1993a) and the more recent addition of the Linehan
Risk Assessment and Management Protocol (Linehan, Comtois, &
Ward-​Ciesielski, 2012). If a client continues to engage in his or her
top target behavior, the therapist continues to target that behavior
throughout the year rather than ending the treatment for that behavior.
By the end of a year of DBT, however, if the client has not demonstrated
notable progress regarding the top target, the program will conclude
that DBT does not help the client and consequently will not extend the
treatment. In many programs, clients can renew their contract if they
have demonstrated notable progress

265

during the year yet have other clinical problems to address. Thus, DBT
establishes programmatic contingencies to reward progress rather than
stagnation or deterioration. To enhance its generalizability, DBT is
organized around treatment tasks or functions, rather than around
inflexible treatment modes (e.g., group skills training, phone
consultation). There are five primary treatment tasks based on the
capability deficit/​ motivational model. These tasks consist of (1)
enhancing client capabilities, (2) improving client motivation, (3)
generalizing client capabilities, (4) structuring the environment, and
(5) treating therapists. The dialectical model suggests that although
tensions may arise among the various tasks, the successful completion of
any task depends on how well it is integrated with the others. Enhancing
Client Capabilities To address the assumed capability deficit, the
treatment first requires a mode that enhances the client's capabilities.
Various modes, ranging from self-​ help books and videos to
pharmacotherapy, may address this task. Standard DBT employs
psychoeducational skills training groups (Linehan, 2015a, 2015b) as a
key mode to enhance capabilities. The DBT skills trainer teaches modules
or sets of skills that can be divided into those that promote change,
consisting of the emotion regulation and the interpersonal effectiveness
modules, and those that promote acceptance, consisting of the
mindfulness and the distress tolerance modules. To develop these skills,
DBT integrates research and applications not only from CBT but from both
the wider field of psychology (including social psychology, biological
psychology, and emotion research) and Eastern practices. In skills
training, the client first learns a wide variety of skills and then
works to integrate these skills into a repertoire. The client's job
resembles that of a technically eclectic practitioner who may select
from a variety of techniques to solve a therapeutic problem. For both,
the key question is what is effective in this situation.

266

Specific Disorders and Populations

Though the section that follows later in this chapter on outcome
research will review RCTs of comprehensive DBT for BPD, three studies
focusing on skills are relevant here. An analysis (Neacsiu, Rizvi, &
Linehan, 2010) of data from three of Linehan's studies with BPD clients
supports the importance of skills training. The analysis revealed that
DBT skills use mediated clients' decrease in suicide attempts and
depression and increase in anger control. Two RCTs have assessed the
impact of "skills only" (i.e., no DBT individual therapy or other
individual psychotherapy) interventions for suicidal BPD clients. The
first study (Soler et al., 2009) compared 13 weeks of DBT skills
training to nonbehavioral group therapy with psychodynamically trained
therapists. The second study (McMain et al., 2017) compared 20 weeks of
DBT skills training to a wait list control. Although neither adaptation
is as integrative as standard, comprehensive DBT, both studies obtained
sufficiently favorable results to warrant attempts to replicate with
more rigorous research designs. From an integrative perspective,
mindfulness skills may be of particular interest. These skills teach
clients to observe, describe, and participate without judgment, with a
focus on the present moment and with an emphasis on being effective.
These skills help clients to enhance their awareness of reality and are
an inherent part of the other skill modules. Before one can change what
is, one must first be aware of what is. As one of their early
assignments in the emotion regulation module, for example, clients
practice observing and describing the prompting event, interpretations,
facial expressions, actions, and so forth associated with a particular
emotional episode. Becoming aware of the many factors contributing to a
single emotional episode facilitates learning skills to change those
factors and thus better manage the corresponding emotion. Enhancing
Client Motivation As behavior is determined by motivational factors as
well as capabilities, DBT also focuses on improving motivation. Again, a
variety

of modes, including inpatient milieus (e.g., settings that provide
incentive systems, peer support/​pressure), couple sessions, and
pharmacotherapy (e.g., anxiolytics may decrease fear that inhibits
interpersonal skills), may address this function. For example, DBT for
substance abusers (Linehan & Dimeff, 1997) replaces illegal drugs with
legal medications (e.g., methadone for heroin users) to decrease the
motivation to use the illegal drugs. Standard DBT primarily addresses
the task of improving motivation in individual psychotherapy, where the
therapist conducts an extensive analysis of the factors that motivate
the client's behavior and employs strategies to improve the client's
motivation. The individual therapist also integrates the skills training
described earlier into the individual therapy (e.g., suggesting skills
as solutions to problems, rehearsing the implementation of those skills,
and reinforcing the use of skillful behavior). Also, if the client has a
problem with the skills training group (or any other mode), the
individual therapist consults with the client as to how the client can
best solve the problem. Similarly, the client could seek consultation
from the group therapist regarding a problem with the individual
therapist. Ensuring Generalization and Structuring the Environment Just
as the DBT therapist does not assume that the client will have
sufficient motivation to apply new skills, the therapist also does not
assume that skills practice will automatically generalize from
therapeutic settings to real-​life settings. The context of applying
skills may differ substantially from the context of learning skills,
particularly in terms of the client's degree of emotional dysregulation
and the environment's likelihood of providing a reinforcing response. As
a behavioral treatment, DBT emphasizes the importance of in vivo
treatment so that learning will generalize beyond the therapeutic
context. Possible treatment modes include inpatient milieus,
occupational therapy, and in vivo practice/​exposure with the DBT
therapist or a case manager.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

Outpatient DBT programs provide clients with the opportunity to phone or
otherwise contact their individual therapist or another designated DBT
team member for brief coaching interventions between individual therapy
sessions. Skills coaches accept phone calls whenever possible, within
their natural rather than arbitrary limits. These coaching interventions
help clients apply skillful solutions to an immediate problem. Clients
also learn how to ask for help in a more socially effective way. The
treatment's fourth function focuses on helping the client to structure
his or her environment in a way that promotes progress in other
contexts. Structuring the environment may involve removing environmental
cues that elicit problematic target behaviors, adding cues that elicit
skillful behavior and environmental consequences that reinforce it,
subtracting consequences that punish skillful behavior, and removing
reinforcing consequences for target behaviors. To address this function,
the therapist and client may involve other individuals, such as family,
inpatient staff or case managers. Enhancing Therapists' Capabilities and
Motivation Finally, dialectical principles guide the treatment to also
attend to the capabilities and motivation of DBT therapists. Linehan
observed that clients' behaviors sometimes emotionally dysregulate
therapists to the extent that the therapists experience excessive stress
and urges to quit and that they either ineffectively tried to control
patients or reject them entirely. At other times, she observed
therapists experiencing excessive empathy for clients to the extent that
they became despairing and noticed impulses to abandon these clients.
Also, with borderline clients, the transaction between client and
therapist may be such that the client punishes therapeutic behavior and
rewards iatrogenic behavior. Treating the therapist as well as the
client thus reinforces the dialectical frame of the therapy by attending
to the two primary subsystems within the therapeutic context. In
standard

267

DBT programs, consultation meetings among therapists address these
issues. Rather than focusing on clients, as is done in traditional case
management meetings, these consultation meetings focus on the
therapists, enhancing their DBT adherence and competence and minimizing
their distress. Implementation research finds that such team supervision
typically improves therapists' adherence and sometimes improves clients'
outcomes as well. It might be noted that DBT was one of the first to
integrate such team supervision as a standard part of the treatment
(Swales, 2018). One of the consequences of having multiple professionals
involved in the care of a single client is that tensions can arise among
them. Therapists on DBT consultation teams adhere to a set of
agreements, several of which help to reduce the likelihood of such
tensions and increase a sense of shared responsibility. Unsurprisingly,
consultation team members agree to remain dialectical in their
interactions with each other as well as with clients. The
consultation-​to-​the-​client agreement states that therapists do not
instruct each other about how to interact with a client; instead, they
coach the client on how to interact effectively with members of the
team. This removes one of the greatest causes of tension---​practitioners
telling each other how to do the other's job. Similarly, the consistency
agreement states, in part, that all team members need not have a
consistent response to a client. For example, a therapist covering for
an individual therapist on leave may provide more hours of phone
availability but may hospitalize more quickly if the client threatens
suicide. Such inconsistencies offer the client an opportunity to learn,
with the therapist's coaching, how to respond effectively when
inconsistencies and changes occur outside of therapy. The fallibility
agreement assumes that therapists will make mistakes. This encourages
therapists to present their own clinical problems to the team rather
than hide them for fear of being judged and to accept rather than defend
their clinical errors that other team members have identified. The
agreement also requires team members to identify and treat each other's
errors.

268

Specific Disorders and Populations

METHODS AND TECHNIQUES DBT is an integrative therapy that embraces many
techniques adapted from a variety of sources. Each technique, however,
fits within the therapy's theoretical framework. The primary techniques
or strategies are organized into sets of pairs, with one member of the
pair most strongly emphasizing change and the other most strongly
emphasizing acceptance. A dialectical set of strategies facilitates the
synthesizing of the other strategies. The relation between the
strategies resembles a figure skating pair in a rink. The members of the
pair have different steps, but the steps flow together and balance each
other, with one member's moves enhancing, not competing with, the moves
of the other. Attaining balance is difficult, of course, particularly as
the balance point continuously changes across clients and across time
for a single client. That the session is no longer progressing is the
primary indicator that one or more of the pairs of strategies have
become imbalanced. The most frequently used
strategies---​problem-​solving, validation, stylistic and dialectical
strategies---​are described next. Problem-​Solving Strategies DBT views
the problem-​ solving strategies as central to changing dysfunctional
behaviors. Within DBT, problem-​solving targets a specific problematic
behavior, applies behavioral principles to understand that behavior, and
focuses on current variables that maintain the behavior. Furthermore,
problem-​ solving applies empirically supported interventions to treat
the problematic behavior, integrates multiple CBT procedures, and
emphasizes behavioral rehearsal. Problem-​ solving can be divided into
two interconnected components: (1) a behavioral chain analysis, which
assesses the presenting problem(s), and (2) a solution analysis, which
generates and implements more effective solutions in response to the
problem(s). It is in the application of the problem-​solving strategies
that therapists may appear at their most "active," as they are asking
questions, analyzing answers,

generating solutions, and helping clients to implement solutions. Though
most of this activity involves thinking and verbalizing actions, DBT
therapists often engage in physical activity when modeling skills. How
directive the therapist becomes during problem-​solving usually depends
on the client's level of dysregulation. Behavioral Chain Analysis As
described earlier in the section on case formulation, DBT emphasizes the
development of a behavioral formulation within each session. To achieve
this formulation, the therapist conducts a behavioral chain analysis,
which involves defining a behavior to target, conducting a chain
analysis of that behavior, and identifying the function and other
variables that control that behavior. Using the target hierarchy, the
therapist and client first choose a specific incident of a defined
behavior. The therapist then assesses, in detail, the links in the chain
surrounding the target behavior, from the environmental event that
prompted the behavior through to the consequences that followed the
behavior. Other variables of interest include the client's cognitions,
emotions, sensations, urges, and overt behaviors. The therapist also
analyzes the relations among these links. With respect to assessing the
consequences of the behavior, the therapist is interested in both the
short-​and long-​ term psychological and environmental consequences. The
following is an example of a brief chain of an overdose. A client asked
her husband to spend more time with her. His refusal precipitated an
argument followed by his departure. The client's anger began to decrease
and be replaced by a sense of loneliness. This sense elicited thoughts
that the husband would never return and that she would not be able to
cope by herself. These thoughts then prompted fear, which escalated over
time as the client continued to ruminate. The escalating fear led to
thoughts that she might go crazy, which led the client to having
suicidal thoughts and urges and eventually to overdosing on prescribed
medication. Later, her husband found her unconscious and rushed her to
the hospital. During

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

her stay in the hospital, the nursing staff was very validating while
her husband visited her often and apologized profusely for having left
during their argument. The client enjoyed her husband's visits and hoped
that things would change when she returned home. During the behavioral
chain analysis, the therapist identifies variables that control the
target behavior. Behaviorists particularly focus on factors maintaining
the behavior in the current context as opposed to factors that initially
developed the behaviors. Because of the biosocial model, DBT therapists
also attend especially to the impact of emotions, such as the anger,
fear, and joy in the preceding example. Most importantly, behavioral
chain analyses help the therapist and client to gain insight into the
function of the target behavior. The client here overdosed with the
intent of escaping from extreme fear, and the behavior functioned in
this way. She did not expect the nurses to validate her nor her husband
to visit and apologize; she had expected to die, after all. This couple,
however, had a pattern of fighting, overdosing, and repairing, such that
overdosing increased the time spent with her husband more effectively.
Over time, the husband's attentive response to the overdosing had become
a secondary function. Once the function(s) is identified, along with
other controlling variables in the chain, then the therapist and client
can generate alternative solutions that will help the client to more
effectively achieve his or her goals. The behavioral chain analysis
should not stand alone but always be followed by a solution analysis.
Solution Analysis A solution analysis involves generating, evaluating,
and implementing more effective responses to problems. The first step,
generating solutions, requires the therapist and client to identify as
many potential responses as possible. Borderline clients frequently have
a tendency to generate solutions that require someone else (e.g.,
therapists, social services, family) to solve the problem for them
(Linehan, 1993a). For example, one client's only proposed solution to
his drinking problem was to ask his psychiatrist

269

for medication, and another's only suggested solution to forgetting
therapy appointments was to ask staff to remind him. To solve this
problem, solution generation should particularly search for options that
require the client's involvement. DBT also searches for the opportunity
to integrate a variety of CBT interventions. These interventions include
skills training, exposure, contingency management, and cognitive
restructuring. If the client does not have the requisite skills to solve
the problem, the therapist teaches the necessary skills. Alternatively,
if skillful behavior in the client's repertoire is inhibited by
unwarranted emotions, then the therapist applies exposure procedures. If
the skillful behavior has been either punished or not reinforced in the
client's environment, or if problematic behavior has been reinforced,
the therapist applies contingency management procedures. Finally, if
maladaptive cognitions interfere with skillful behavior, then the
therapist uses cognitive modification procedures. A single behavioral
analysis usually offers an opportunity to use several CBT interventions.
Solution generation itself presents a problem for many borderline
clients. As a result of growing up in an invalidating environment, some
clients never received adequate modeling of how to generate solutions.
Other clients have acquired the basics of solution generation, but the
behavior remains weak or inhibited because in the past their solutions
have failed or have been punished by others. For example, when one
client suggested higher education as a way to improve her quality of
life, her uneducated parents responded by asking "Who do you think you
are? Do you think that you are better than us?" To shape solution
generation, the DBT therapist reinforces any reasonable attempt by the
client to generate solutions and encourages the client to generate as
many solutions as possible before trying to evaluate potential
solutions. The behavioral chain analysis offers an opportunity to
demonstrate how a therapist and client may generate multiple solutions
for a single episode of behavior. Interpersonal effectiveness skills may
increase the likelihood that

270

Specific Disorders and Populations

the client's husband agrees to spend more time with her when she
initially asks. To manage that anger if the husband refuses, the client
might use emotion regulation skills and, to decrease cognitions that
perpetuate the anger, mindfulness skills. The therapist may also use
cognitive restructuring to change problematic cognitions. Distress
tolerance skills may decrease the sense of loneliness, while mindfulness
and/​or cognitive restructuring may decrease the subsequent worry
thoughts. With respect to addressing the fear, which provided the
primary motivation for the overdose, the therapist might suggest a
combination of additional emotion regulation skills and exposure. If
these strategies fail and the client has urges to overdose, having
aversive contingencies in place may help to prevent the client from
acting. For example, in standard DBT, clients lose their telephone
privileges for 24 hours following an episode of self-​harm. In case the
client does overdose, the therapist and client might alter the
contingencies, particularly the husband's response to the overdose.
Through consultation with the husband, they may try to change the
husband's behavior such that he becomes more attentive when she engages
in skillful behavior and less attentive when she engages in suicidal
behavior. After generating solutions, the therapist and client evaluate
the potential efficacy of the various solutions. The solution evaluation
should attend to long-​term as well as short-​term solutions. For example,
many clients report that they attempt suicide because it so immediately
reduces their negative emotions. In the long term, however, attempting
suicide creates more problems that lead to more negative emotions. The
evaluation should also identify potential obstacles to implementing
solutions. Like suicidal clients (Williams & Pollock, 2000), borderline
clients seem to emphasize the potential negative outcomes of potential
solutions. Though this emphasis may result from an information
processing bias, the client's worries may also result from an actual
lack of skills related to the solution, the anticipation or experience
of extreme affect, or the fact that the client's natural environment
will punish or at least not

reward adaptive solutions. CBT interventions can again be used to
resolve these obstacles. Finally, the client and therapist select a set
of solutions and then implement those solutions. If the solutions
include new or difficult skills, the client rehearses those skills
during the session. This rehearsal strengthens the skills, challenges
the client's expectations of failure, and allows the therapist and
client to identify and solve problems that might interfere with the
successful implementation of the skills outside of therapy. If the
solutions include any of the other CBT interventions, the therapist
conducts the appropriate procedures during the session. DBT generally
interweaves these procedures informally into the treatment rather than
following the more structured formats of traditional cognitive and
behavioral therapies. For example, if a client avoids asking the
therapist for help because the client fears that the therapist will
respond with rejection, exposure would probably serve as the primary
intervention. Prior to the exposure, however, some interpersonal skills
training might increase the likelihood that the client asks for help in
a way that the therapist can reinforce, while a cognitive modification
of expectations might increase the client's collaboration with the
exposure procedure. Finally, the therapist would reinforce the client's
appropriate request for help. Validation Strategies Balancing the change
focus of problem-​solving strategies, validation strategies focus on
acceptance. Validation occurs when "the therapist communicates to the
patient that her responses make sense and are understandable within her
current life context or situation" (Linehan, 1993a, pp. 222--​ 223).
There are at least six levels of validation: (1) listening and
observing, (2) accurately reflecting, (3) articulating the unverbalized,
(4) validating in terms of sufficient causes, (5) validating as
reasonable in the moment, and (6) treating the person as valid or
radically genuine (Linehan, 1997a). Levels 5 and 6 are most definitional
of validation in DBT. Level 5 validation requires

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

the therapist to communicate how a client's response makes sense or is
normal in terms of the current context rather than in terms of the
client's mental disorder or learning history. For example, in response
to a new client who indicates some distrust of the therapist, the DBT
therapist might say, "It makes sense that you have difficulty trusting
me considering that we have just met and you don't know me well." Level
6 requires the therapist to interact with the client simply as a fellow
human being, rather than as a fragile or volatile individual who is
incapable of learning. For example, a therapist may notice that a female
client who complains that the male clients in her skills training group
stare at her wears very revealing clothing to group. If the therapist
hypothesizes that the clothing contributes to the stares, a radically
genuine response would require the therapist to share this hypothesis
with the client. The therapist may then validate both the client's
"right" to dress as she wants and the normalcy of the male clients'
responses to her dress. These last two levels of validation most clearly
reflect the Zen emphasis on the current moment, on searching for truth,
and on the inherent capability of discovering it. Though validation is
an end in itself, it also facilitates change. The development of
validation was strongly influenced by research indicating that the
verification of an individual's beliefs about the self tends to enhance
the processing of new information (Linehan, 1997b; Swann,
Stein-​Seroussi, & Giesler, 1992). This research indicates that
interweaving problem-​ solving with validation might increase the
likelihood that the client will process the information provided by the
problem-​solving. For example, a therapist may validate the function of a
target behavior ("It makes sense that you want to stop feeling so
anxious, and drinking is very effective at immediately numbing your
feelings"), challenge the use of the target behavior ("But drinking
perpetuates your anxiety in the long run"), and then suggest alternative
skills to achieve the same function ("We must find more effective ways
to help you decrease your anxiety"). In addition to balancing
problem-​solving strategies, validation may function directly as a

271

change strategy by providing information about what is valid, modeling
how clients can self-​ validate, and reinforcing skillful behavior.
Stylistic Strategies Stylistic strategies refer to the manner in which
the therapist interacts with the client. These strategies attend to the
how, as opposed to the what, of the therapist's communications to the
client. The therapist balances the tension between two opposing sets of
strategies, reciprocal communication and irreverent communication. The
reciprocal strategies refer to those that communicate the therapist's
interest in and attachment to the client and that foster a collaborative
relationship. Part of reciprocal communication requires mindfully
attending to the client by noticing responses by the client and by not
allowing preconceptions or judgments to interfere with the attention.
Zen applies a similar responsive approach to achieving a state of the
mind at rest: "Nothing carries over conceptually or emotionally . . . we
do not react out of a self-​centered position. We are free to apply our
humanity appropriately in the context of the moment according to the
needs of people" (Aitken, 1982, p. 42). In contrast to the reciprocal
strategies, the irreverent strategies include techniques designed to
attract the client's attention and temporarily "unbalance" a client
engaged in dysfunctional behavior. Procedures include reacting matter-​
of-​factly to a client's extreme communication and directly confronting
dysfunctional behavior. Therapists also reframe behaviors and situations
in unorthodox ways. For example, if a client commits to decreasing
judgmental thinking, the therapist might respond to in-​ session
judgmental statements by lightheartedly saying, "Did you notice that you
were judging? We know that you already have that skill, so you don't
need to practice it any more. Let's practice a skill that you don't have
yet. Try just describing what happened." The irreverent strategies
integrate techniques from Whitaker's (1975) irreverent style in
experiential family therapy and were influenced by Ellis's (1962, 1987)
style in his rational-​ emotive therapy.

272

Specific Disorders and Populations

The irreverent strategies also reflect the style of unorthodox responses
employed by Zen masters with their students (Braverman, 1989). Such
responses function to interrupt habitual thinking patterns that
interfere with a student achieving enlightenment. Dialectical Strategies

direct confrontation that could produce conflict. The therapist joins
with the client, allows the behavior to progress naturally to the point
intended by the client, and then extends the behavior beyond the point
intended by the client. For example, a client may say, "You are a
horrible therapist, I'm going to write a complaint about you," with
little intent of writing a complaint but with the expectation that the
therapist will resist the client's threat and will focus on repairing
any damage to the therapy relationship to prevent the client from
writing. A therapist using extending, however, would accept the client's
desire to write such a letter and, extending the client's threat, may
offer to spend the session time helping the client to write the letter
because it is the therapist's job to help the client to be as effective
as possible.

The dialectical strategies permeate the application of all other DBT
strategies. Dialectical strategies refer both to a specific set of
techniques, which inherently include elements of acceptance and change,
and to strategies that facilitate dialectical processes within the
session (i.e., the development of syntheses in place of tensions). With
respect to developing syntheses, the therapist and client attend to the
entire context of a problem, frequently asking what has been forgotten
or ignored. As discussed earlier under dialectical PROCESSES OF CHANGE
assumptions, when tensions arise, the therapist and client search for
the validity of var- As in other aspects of DBT, a dialectical perious
viewpoints and the syntheses between spective influences the
understanding of the them. The therapist also responds to dialec-
processes of change. Indeed, dialectics ittical tensions by interweaving
change strategies self may be viewed as a theory of change. As with
acceptance strategies (e.g., problem-​ described earlier, change occurs
continuously. solving with validation, irreverence with re- Thus, an
individual's behaviors will change, for ciprocal communication).
Furthermore, the better or worse and regardless of whether the therapist
balances adherence to the treatment individual receives treatment or
not. The role of manual with responsiveness to the client, just
treatment is to direct and propel change along as dancers follow both
the steps of the dance the most effective path toward a client's long-​
term goals and to facilitate the client's acceptand the movements of
their partners. Dialectical techniques all share an in- ance of such
change. Dialectics highlights the occurrence of oppoherent synthesis of
acceptance and change. Though some of the techniques, such as meta-
sitional positions and the creation of syntheses phor (Barker, 1985;
Rosen, 1982) and "playing between these positions. Indeed, the creation
devil's advocate" (Goldfried, Linehan, & of such syntheses may be viewed
as one mechSmith, 1978), are traditional psychotherapy anism of change.
DBT itself was created by ininterventions, other techniques are adapted
tegrating behavioral principles of learning with from Eastern practices.
For example, extending Zen principles of acceptance. Insight and
behavioral rehearsal are two is a translation of a technique used in
Aikido, a Japanese martial art (Saposnek, 1980; Windle & mechanisms of
change that sometimes have Samko, 1992). The therapist produces change
been polarized. One or the other may prove sufby extending or taking
more seriously than the ficient (e.g., interpersonal contingencies often
client a problematic position originally taken shape behavior out of
awareness), but, more by the client. The intent is to unbalance the
often, the DBT therapist interweaves them to client so that the
therapist can shift the client enhance the impact of each. For example,
inaway from the problematic position without sight about self-​blaming
thoughts may increase

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

273

the client's motivation to rehearse more effec- that if a client became
verbally aggressive every tive ways of thinking. time the therapist
tried to address a presenting DBT also incorporates several theories re-
problem, the therapist may become less likely garding principles of
learning (e.g., classical to target that problem. In this scenario, the
conditioning, operant conditions), as well as client would have punished
the therapist's thereach theory's corresponding techniques (e.g.,
apeutic behavior, and the therapist may have exposure, contingency
management). Though reinforced the client's aggressive behavior. It the
theories could compete with each other, is the borderline client's
tendency to shape in DBT, each theory and its techniques solve a the
therapist's behavior in a detrimental diparticular part of the clinical
puzzle. Principles rection that necessitates therapist supervision/​ to
determine which solution fits where were consultation. In this way, DBT
reflects a crudescribed in the section on solution analysis. cial
element of Zen that requires the student The emphasis in dialectics on
the transac- to practice overcoming the delusions that intional nature
of development underlines the terfere with practicing Zen or attaining
enimportance of attending to the interdepend- lightenment (Aitken,
1982). DBT therapists do ence of mechanisms of change, as well as to not
view therapy-​interfering behaviors simply their opposition. The success
of problem-​ as obstacles to be avoided or removed so that solving
strategies, for example, depends therapy can proceed, but instead view
them as partly on interweaving them with validation examples of the very
behaviors that occur in strategies. Problem-​solving strategies also rely
clients' lives outside of therapy and as the most on, or at least
support, each other. For example, immediate opportunities to change
problema client's tolerance for behavioral and solution atic patterns.
analyses depends on one following the other. As within any system,
tensions will arise beEither alone is experienced as invalidating or
tween the therapist and client. Three examples otherwise aversive.
Examples of interweaving of relationship tensions are the client's
belief that the solutions themselves was described in the taking drugs
is the solution and the therapist's earlier section on solution
analysis. belief that taking drugs is the problem; the client's belief
that only hospitalization will prevent suicide now and the therapist's
belief that THERAPY RELATIONSHIP hospitalization may increase the
probability of a future suicide; and the client's wish for more The DBT
therapist attends to the therapy rela- contact with the therapist and
the therapist's tionship and to the tensions and the consequent wish to
observe natural limits. therapy-​ interfering behaviors that can arise.
To resolve such conflicts, the therapy Dialectical principles direct the
therapist's at- searches for syntheses. The most effective tention
toward transactions that occur within syntheses are generally those that
validate some the therapeutic context and accept that the aspect of both
sides of the debate and move totherapist is part of and, therefore,
influenced ward more effective behavior. For example, in by the
therapeutic context. The DBT therapist the first example, if the client
considers drugs as views therapy as a system in which the therapist a
solution because they decrease overwhelming and client reciprocally
influence each other. anxiety, the therapy may achieve a synthesis by
Thus, the client's experience of and behavioral identifying anxiety
reduction as a valid therapy responses toward the therapist are examined
for goal. With this as the accepted goal, drug abuse their validity
within the context of the current would no longer be a valid solution as
it will relationship and not only as transferences from tend---​directly
and indirectly---​to increase, not past relationships. decrease, anxiety
in the long term. The therapy Just as the therapist shapes the client's
be- would instead focus on the client developing havior, so the client
shapes the therapist's be- more skillful means to prevent and manage
havior. For example, one can easily imagine anxiety.

274

Specific Disorders and Populations

When therapy tensions have not been successfully resolved, they often
result in therapy-​ interfering behaviors. For example, if a therapist
simply confronted a client about the use of drugs but never offered
alternative solutions that could achieve the client's goal of regulating
affect, the client may begin to lie to the therapist about drug use.
When such behaviors occur, the therapist targets the behavior and
applies the problem-​ solving, dialectical, and other strategies
described in earlier sections (Heard, 2018). Though balancing,
integrating, or synthesizing may prove the most effective ways forward,
how to balance or integrate in any particular situation is not always
obvious or easy. Success requires comprehensive and detailed
assessments, rapid movement among the strategies, and rigorous
application of the therapy as a whole. Such demands can be
intellectually and emotionally exhausting for the therapist and client
alike. The therapy can stop or even reverse if the therapist then
becomes emotionally dysregulated or cognitively distracted by worries of
what may happen next, by beliefs that the therapist should find a
synthesis more easily, or by judgments that the client should not have
placed the client and therapist together in this situation in the first
place. Perhaps the most crucial element in not becoming overwhelmed by
the demands of therapy is conducting therapy as mindfully as possible.
Mindfulness requires the therapist to nonjudgmentally focus on the
moment and what is effective, to be aware of unmindful thoughts and
urges, and to refocus on solving the problem at hand. Also drawing from
Zen practice, the therapist strives toward balancing compassion and
detachment. Of course, therapists also use for themselves any or all of
the skills and interventions that they teach their clients. DIVERSITY
CONSIDERATIONS The biosocial model and other DBT principles provide a
solid base from which to adapt the treatment to a wide range of
cultures,

including marginalized cultures. Indeed, the treatment is often adopted
by other cultures without any changes other than language. As described
in the biosocial theory, the treatment was developed for individuals
with experiences of severe and persistent invalidation, who were often
judged as being "wrong" even when their behavior wasn't pathological.
Moreover, they may also have been frequently rejected by their
communities as well as their families. Indeed, for many years, clients
with a diagnosis of BPD often were marginalized by their mental health
systems by being considered untreatable. As a behavioral treatment, DBT
considers any environmental variable as a possible controlling variable
for a target behavior and also considers a wide range of solutions for
problematic environmental variables. For example, if an adult client's
suicidal urges are partially controlled by a parent's judgmental
statements about the client's sexuality, the client might use
interpersonal skills to change the parent's behavior, refocus attention
away from the parent or topic, challenge inaccurate interpretations
regarding the parent being judgmental, use self-​ validation, seek
validation from someone else, or minimize contact with that parent. As a
principle-​ guided treatment, DBT is designed to be applied flexibly in
various settings while still maintaining fidelity to the model. For
example, the content and style of an irreverent statement may sound
different in one culture than another, but every culture has ways of
being irreverent and consequently capturing clients' attention in a way
that stops problematic behavior in that moment. Over the years, DBT has
developed across a number of diverse cultures. Indeed, every continent
has countries that have developed DBT programs. Within Europe, DBT
programs range from Ireland to Istanbul and from Scandinavia to Italy. A
review of the international implementation of DBT (Dubose, Botanov, &
Ivanov, 2018) describes the extent of implementation beyond the United
States, lists the empirical trials of DBT contributed by various
countries, and discusses some of the challenges of implementing DBT in
other cultures.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

With respect to subcultures within the United States, some studies have
occurred within communities that have large minority populations or have
directly targeted minority subcommunities as part of their participant
recruitment efforts. A recent pre-​ /​ post study (Beckstead et al., 2015)
focused on American Indian and Alaska Native populations. Integrating
DBT with local cultural, traditional, and spiritual beliefs, the study
successfully applied DBT to adolescents diagnosed with substance use
disorders.

275

(4) increasing skills, including mindfulness, emotion regulation,
    distress tolerance, and interpersonal effectiveness skills. The
    therapy-​interfering behaviors emerged over time and included
    frequently phoning the therapist prior to the therapist's
    out-​of-​town trips, missing the session following the therapist's
    trips, sobbing when the therapist challenged passive
    problem-​solving, and impulsively responding with "That won't work"
    to suggested solutions. Several factors may have initially
    transacted to shape C's problematic behavior. She was an only child
    whom her mother described as "colicky" and difficult to soothe as an
    infant. Her mother had recurrent episodes of major depression CASE
    EXAMPLE throughout the client's childhood. C described C is a woman
    in her late twenties who met criteria her relationship between her
    mother and father for BPD. She had completed college and, at the as
    "conflicted." Her father left the family when beginning of therapy,
    was a married homemaker C was 8 years old, though he maintained
    regwith no children. She was referred for treatment ular but
    infrequent contact with her. Her mother following a suicide attempt
    by overdose. accused the father of being an alcoholic, but C C
    reported a history of overdosing with varying believed him only to
    be heavily drinking. She also degrees of suicidal intent during the
    previous described his occasional outbursts of anger. After 3 years.
    On average, she overdosed every other her father departed, her
    mother became more demonth, but only half of these required medical
    pressed and irritable and less tolerant of emotions treatment. Early
    in her history of overdosing, most expressed by C, though she never
    abused or episodes requiring medical treatment also led to
    neglected C. brief psychiatric inpatient stays, but during the
    Though it would prove difficult to differentiate year prior to
    entering DBT, the client had only the relative impact of nature
    versus nurture, some been hospitalized twice. of the sequelae of
    their transactions are clearer. C reported no other types of
    suicidal behavior The client presented as emotionally vulnerable,
    but did meet criteria for recurrent major depres- with a
    particularly high reactivity to emotional sive disorder, panic
    disorder, and subclinical bu- stimuli. Her mother failed to model
    emotion limia. C described a history of supportive therapy
    regulation and tended to either ignore or othas helping "me to feel
    better but nothing really erwise punish C's emotional communications
    changed." She stated that she had not had any unless they became
    extreme (e.g., sobbing). C problems with the therapy, but her past
    therapist believed that her father used alcohol to manage had
    described her as "dependent" and "occasion- his emotions but also
    remembers that he did try ally manipulative" in sessions. "to
    reassure" her when she worried. When posDuring pretreatment
    sessions, C identified sev- sible, he would also solve problems for
    her (e.g., eral goals for therapy, including no longer being
    financial). C learned to inhibit her emotions as suicidal, having a
    "better relationship" with her much as possible, to become extreme
    when she husband, and "feeling better" about herself. She failed to
    manage them, and to depend on others initially contracted for 1 year
    of treatment. The to solve problems. Also, she did not learn either
    to DBT therapist and C developed the following tolerate or to
    resolve interpersonal conflict. These target hierarchy: (1)
    decreasing suicidal overdoses patterns were maintained in her
    relationship with and urges to overdose; (2) decreasing therapy-​ her
    husband. interfering behaviors; (3) decreasing bingeing The client
    received all of the traditional DBT and purging, panic attacks, and
    depression; and modes during the first year of treatment. She

276

Specific Disorders and Populations

attended individual psychotherapy and group skills-​ training regularly,
missing approximately eight sessions of each during the course of the
first year. She also regularly used after-​ hours phone contact for
skills coaching. When the therapist became aware of the extent to which
the husband's responses influenced C's motivation, the therapist and C
arranged several conjoint sessions with the husband. These sessions
focused on changing the husband's responses that reinforced target
behaviors, particularly overdoses and panic attacks. They appeared
effective, in part, perhaps, because the husband shared his wife's
treatment goals and was motivated to help. Her psychiatrist had
prescribed a variety of antidepressants and anxiolytics prior to C's
entry into DBT. By the end of the treatment year, C had stopped using
anxiolytics. During individual therapy sessions, the therapist and
client targeted the highest behavior in the hierarchy that had occurred
during the past week. If C had not overdosed or had strong urges to
overdose during the past week, the therapy focused on one of the
quality-​of-​life--​interfering behaviors. Therapy-​ interfering behaviors
topped the agenda only in the case of missing a session or phoning
beyond the therapist's limits. Other therapy-​interfering behaviors, such
as sobbing or passive problem-​solving, usually occurred while targeting
suicidal or quality-​of-​life--​interfering behaviors. If these behaviors
occurred, the therapist would briefly shift the focus to the in-​session
behavior, solve the problem, and return to the original target. For
example, when the client sobbed in session, the therapist would usually
coach the client on mindfulness and emotion regulation skills until the
client had stopped sobbing and would then proceed with engaging the
client in actively solving problems related to the original target. This
response not only encouraged the client to use skills, but it also
functioned as a contingency management intervention in which the
therapist did not reinforce the client's avoidance (via sobbing) of
active problem-​solving. After selecting a target behavior, the therapist
and client completed behavioral and solution analyses of the target
behavior. An example of a behavioral chain analysis and the
corresponding solution analysis for one of C's overdoses is

provided in the previous section on problem-​ solving. Most of her
overdoses were precipitated by a disagreement with her husband that led
to strong emotions, with fear as the predominant emotion. Solution
analyses included the full range of skills and other interventions, with
mindfulness and emotion regulation seemingly the most crucial skills.
Major therapy-​ interfering behaviors and quality-​of-​life--​interfering
behaviors received similar treatment. For example, panic attacks
sometimes occurred in the chain leading to overdosing, and, if so, they
received treatment like other links in the chain. In the absence of
overdosing or strong urges to overdose, panic attacks often served as
the primary target. Analyses of this behavior revealed a similar chain
of events. Standard behavioral treatment, interwoven with mindfulness
skills, served as the main intervention for the panic attacks
themselves, while a range of skills and interventions, similar to those
used to treat overdosing, addressed the other links in the chain. By the
end of 1 year of treatment (approximately 44 individual sessions and 40
group skills-​ training sessions), C had become notably more stable. She
had not required hospitalization at any time during the year. During the
last 4 months, she only infrequently had a strong urge to overdose and
never acted on this urge. C stopped missing sessions in response to the
therapist's travels and seldom exceeded the therapist's limits on
telephone calls. The frequency of panic attacks decreased from weekly to
monthly, and their intensity and duration were significantly less.
Bingeing and purging decreased in a similar way. By the end of the year,
C reported a notable decrease in depression, as measured by the Beck
Depression Inventory (BDI), though her score remained within the
clinical range. C decided to renew her treatment contract for another
year. During this second year, DBT focused on continuing to decrease
quality-​ of-​ life--​interfering behaviors and to increase skillful
behavior. By the end of the second year, the bingeing, purging, and
panic attacks had stopped. C no longer met criteria for major depression
but did have occasional periods of "low mood." The therapy also moved
into a more advanced stage of treatment where targets included
emotionally

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

277

Analyses (Harned et al., 2008) of outcomes for those Axis I disorders
experienced by many of the participants indicated that those receiving
DBT had significantly more drug and alcohol abstinent days and a
significantly greater probability of achieving full remission. The two
conditions did not differ in anxiety disorders, OUTCOME RESEARCH eating
disorders, or major depressive disorder. Following the replication
trial, Linehan This section reviews the RCTs of DBT for and colleagues
(2015) dismantled the treatclients diagnosed with BPD. Linehan and ment
to evaluate the importance of the skills colleagues have published five
clinical trials training component for the same client popof DBT for
BPD, three involving clients with ulation evaluated in the two previous
studies. suicidal behaviors and two involving clients This trial
compared two treatments to standard, with substance-​ related disorders.
The initial comprehensive DBT. In the DBT-​ S conditrial of DBT compared
1 year of the therapy tion, participants received the standard skills to
treatment-​as-​usual (TAU) in the community training group plus case
management, to pro(Linehan et al., 1991, 1994). The participants vide
participants in this condition with the were women who met criteria for
BPD and same access to individual treatment time that had a recent
history of "parasuicidal" (i.e., su- participants in the standard DBT
condition reicide attempts and nonsuicidal self-​injurious) ceived. The
case managers received training behavior. The results suggested that,
after in the DBT crisis protocol and assisted "with 1 year, participants
receiving DBT had signifi- solving problems." In the DBT-​ I condition,
cantly fewer parasuicides, less medically severe participants received a
modified version of DBT parasuicides, higher treatment retention rates
individual psychotherapy that did not include (DBT = 83% vs. TAU = 42%),
fewer psychi- DBT skills. Participants in this condition also atric
inpatient days, lower anger, and higher received an activity-​based
support group equal social and global functioning than TAU. The in time
to DBT skills training groups. The two groups did not differ, however,
with respect results of the trial revealed no difference among to
depression or suicidal ideation. Additional the conditions in the
frequency and severity of analyses suggested that DBT is also a cost-​
suicide attempts. Compared to DBT-​ I, howeffective treatment (Heard,
2000). Outcome ever, the other two conditions did report signifiresults
were weaker but generally maintained cantly fewer episodes of
nonsuicidal self-​injury. during a 1-​year follow-​up (Linehan, Heard, &
After the initial trial of DBT for suiArmstrong, 1993). cidal behaviors,
Linehan (Linehan et al., Linehan and colleagues (2006) later 1999)
evaluated the efficacy of modifications replicated the initial trial
although with a more to standard DBT for the treatment of substance
rigorously controlled design. All participants disorders. The
participants in this trial were in the control condition (CTBE) received
women who met criteria for BPD and either treatment from nonbehavioral
therapists substance abuse or substance dependence. identified as local
experts in treating this pop- After a year of treatment, DBT
participants ulation. DBT participants were significantly had
significantly greater reductions in subless likely to make a suicide
attempt and more stance abuse compared to TAU participants. likely to
remain in treatment (DBT = 81% vs. The treatment retention rate was 55%
for DBT CTBE = 57%). DBT participants also had sig- and 19% for TAU. The
conditions did not differ nificantly fewer psychiatric hospitalizations
with respect to psychiatric inpatient treatment, and psychiatric
emergency department visits, anger, social functioning, or global
functioning. and their suicide attempts and nonsuicidal During a 4-​month
follow-​up, however, DBT self-​injuries had significantly less medical
risk. participants had significantly greater gains in processing issues
from her childhood, finding and maintaining employment, and improving
the way she related to her husband. Therapy ended after 2 years because
the therapist relocated.

278

Specific Disorders and Populations

global and social adjustment as well as significantly greater reductions
in substance abuse. Linehan and associates (2002) then examined the
efficacy of this modified form of DBT with women who met criteria for
BPD and opioid dependence. All participants received levomethadyl
acetate hydrochloride as replacement medication, while half received DBT
and the other half received a control treatment consisting of
comprehensive validation plus 12-​step program (CVT + 12S). The control
treatment consisted of individual therapy and Narcotics Anonymous (NA)
meetings. Individual therapists used all of the DBT acceptance-​based
strategies (e.g., validation, reciprocal communication, and
environmental intervention) as their primary strategies and used
problem-​ solving only to reduce imminent suicide risk and to ensure
treatment attendance and medication compliance. The control treatment
also encouraged participants to meet weekly with a 12-​ step sponsor and
to attend as many NA meetings as possible. The results of this trial
suggested that both treatments effectively reduced opioid use.
Interestingly, the validation plus 12-​step participants were more likely
to remain in therapy (DBT = 64% vs. CVT + 12S = 100%), but the DBT
participants were more likely to maintain treatment gains. Several other
researchers also have published RCTs examining the efficacy of DBT with
BPD. Three RCTs involving comprehensive DBT included a standardized
assessment of therapist adherence to DBT. In the first of these studies,
Koons and colleagues (2001) conducted an RCT comparing standard DBT to a
predominantly CBT control condition. The participants were female
veterans who met criteria for BPD, only 40% of whom had a recent history
of parasuicidal behavior. After 6 months of treatment, DBT participants
had a significantly greater reduction in suicidal ideation, depression,
hopelessness, and anger expression than TAU participants. The two
conditions did not differ with respect to treatment retention (DBT = 77%
vs. TAU = 82%), parasuicidal acts, anger experienced, and dissociation.

Next, van den Bosch and colleagues (2002; Verheul et al., 2003) examined
the efficacy of 12 months of DBT versus treatment as usual for
borderline women referred through either addiction or psychiatric
services. At the end of this trial, DBT participants had significantly
higher treatment retention rates (DBT = 63% vs. TAU = 23%) and greater
reductions in self-​ mutilating and self-​ damaging impulsive behaviors
(e.g., substance misuse, binge eating, gambling) when compared to TAU
participants. Additional analyses suggested that DBT had the greatest
impact on self-​mutilating behavior among those patients who had reported
higher baseline frequencies for the behavior. McMain and colleagues
(2009) conducted an RCT involving individuals diagnosed with BPD and
having engaged recently in suicidal behavior. Participants received 12
months of either comprehensive, outpatient DBT or general psychiatric
management. Psychiatric management consisted of weekly psychodynamic
individual therapy, case management, and medication management. No
differences between conditions appeared in any of the primary outcome
variables, including suicidal behavior and utilization of health care
services. Three other RCTs (Carter et al., 2010; Clarkin et al., 2007;
Turner, 2000) included comprehensive DBT conditions. These studies,
however, either described significant deviations from the model or did
not assess adherence to the model using a standardized assessment (Miga
et al., 2018). The findings from these studies present a more mixed
picture, with DBT having better outcomes compared to another
psychotherapy in the first study (Turner, 2000), better outcomes
compared to one psychotherapy but not another in the second study
(Clarkin et al., 2007), and mixed outcomes compared to a wait-​list in
the third study (Carter et al., 2010). In summary, both individual
studies and meta-​analyses for BPD clients (Cristea et al., 2017; Kliem
et al., 2010) demonstrate the superior effectiveness of DBT in treating
individuals diagnosed with BPD compared to no treatment and TAU. Of
particular note are the favorable outcomes for treating suicide
attempts,

Dialectical Behavior Therapy

nonsuicidal self-​injurious behavior, substance abuse, and general
psychopathology in BPD clients. The RCTs also suggest that DBT may prove
efficacious for other comorbid mental disorders, but thus far these
disorders have been assessed only as secondary outcomes, with some
participants never having the disorder, or have been examined as a
primary outcome in only a single study.

279

effect skills generalization or primary clinical outcomes? Third, the
treatment's development may benefit from attention to improving the
treatment of DBT therapists themselves. In particular, a notable number
of therapists persist in their emotionally controlled
therapy-​interfering behaviors, especially in response to suicidal
behaviors, despite attending the consultation team. How can the
consultation team better treat such therapists' behaviors and their
related FUTURE DIRECTIONS emotions? Fourth, artificial intelligence may
offer an In the previous edition of this Handbook, we di- opportunity
for healthcare systems to deliver vided the future directions for DBT
into three DBT programs at a high quality with more conpathways:
development of the treatment, dis- sistency and less cost. Clients have
welcomed semination to clinicians, and delivery in clinical phone apps
for skills generalization as an adsettings. Though these directions are
divided dition to their DBT treatment programs, but here for the
purposes of discussion, they may artificial intelligence could be
developed to be considered integrative in that they transact identify
which skills a client needs to learn with each other. and then to teach
those skills, to identify conWith respect to treatment development,
trolling variables leading to a target behavior, DBT principles are
expected to remain the and to analyze and help implement appropriate
same, although techniques and modes will solutions for those variables.
Indeed, artificial continue to evolve as new data become avail-
intelligence likely would excel at the pattern able from research. A few
areas of develop- recognition aspect of problem-​solving. ment, however,
seem to warrant particular Though not as prolific as treatment
develattention. First, a review of DBT RCTs (Miga opment research, a
notable amount of research et al., 2018) identified several areas for
future evaluating the effectiveness of DBT dissemidevelopment that apply
to studies of DBT nation has begun to appear. An early research for
clients with BPD: the need for systematic (Hawkins & Sinha, 1998)
examined the imassessment of therapist competency, for op- pact of
introductory and advanced education erational definitions, for delivery
of evidence-​ in DBT on clinician's DBT conceptual knowbased training and
supervision, and for clarity ledge. The study reported that performance
on on treatment adaptations. Second, treatment an examination of DBT
knowledge correlated development will need evaluations of the rel-
specifically with DBT training. The study also ative impact of the
treatment modes, their reported that background education
genercombinations, and their doses. For example, ally did not predict
performance, except that many programs provide "DBT skills-​only" de-
psychologists scored significantly higher than spite the lack of RCTs
comparing skills-​only to other professions. standard DBT for clients
with BPD. How does Another set of investigators (Dimeff et al., this
significant change impact client outcomes? 2009) conducted an RCT on
three methods Similarly, many programs do not provide of teaching DBT
skills to practitioners. The after-​hours skills coaching. Does the
notable practitioners experienced significantly greater reduction in
therapist availability result in sig- satisfaction with online and
instructor-​ led nificantly higher rates of suicidal behavior, training
compared to reading the treatment emergency room visits or
hospitalizations, or manual and found that online training resulted in
slower progress? How does using text, email, in a significantly greater
increase in skills knowor phone skills apps rather than phone calls
ledge compared to the other two conditions.

280

Specific Disorders and Populations

Dissemination would benefit, however, from research analyzing which
types of DBT training produce the greatest adherence and competence in
therapists and the greatest fidelity in programs. The delivery of DBT in
clinical settings offers several future directions for research on the
treatment's effectiveness. Walton and Comtois (2018) have suggested
analyzing why routine clinical settings have notably lower treatment
retention rates compared to rigorous RCTs and what can be done to alter
this. She also highlights the importance of learning how program
restrictions on skills coaching effects client outcomes. Much work also
remains to be done in the future respecting how to maximize the
cost-​effectiveness of DBT. Though progress over the next decade is
difficult to predict with any precision, it is hoped that several DBT
principles will continue to guide this progress. DBT has behavioral
science as a foundation, and scientific principles apply to each of the
three main future directions. Dialectics is another foundational
principle. Thus, transactions among the various future directions, in
addition to change in each direction, are to be expected. Most
importantly, the ultimate goal of every future direction is the enhanced
functioning and reduced suffering of clients.

References Aitken, R. (1982). Taking the path of Zen. San Francisco:
North Point. Arkowitz, H. (1989). The role of theory in psycho­ therapy
integration. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 8,
8--​16. Barker, P. (1985). Using metaphors in psychotherapy. New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Barlow, D. H. (1988). Anxiety and its disorders: The
nature and treatment of anxiety and panic. New York: Guilford.
Basseches, M. (1984). Dialectical thinking and adult development.
Norwood, N.J.: Ablex. Beckstead, D. J., Lambert, M. J., DuBose, A. P., &
Linehan, M. M. (2015). Dialectical behavior therapy with American
Indian/​ Alaska Native adolescents diagnosed with substance use
disorders: Combining an evidence based

treatment with cultural, traditional, and spiritual beliefs. Addictive
Behaviors, 51, 84--​87. Braverman, A. (1989). Mud and water: A collection
of talks by the Zen master Bassui. San Francisco: North Point. Carter G.
L., Willcox C. H., Lewin T. J., Conrad, A. M., & Bendit, N. (2010).
Hunter DBT project: A randomized controlled trial of dialectical
behaviour therapy in women with borderline personality disorder.
Australian and New Zealand Journal of Psychiatry, 44, 162--​173. Clarkin,
J. F., Levy, K. N., Lenzenweger, M. F., & Kernberg, O. F. (2007).
Evaluating three treatments for borderline personality disorder: A
multiwave study. American Journal of Psychiatry, 164, 922--​928. Cristea,
I. A., Gentili, C., Cotet, C. D., Palomba, D., Barbui, C., & Cuijpers,
C. (2017). Efficacy of psychotherapies for borderline personality
disorder: A systematic review and meta-​analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 74,
319--​328. Crowell, S. E., Beauchaine, T. P., & Linehan, M. M. (2009). A
bio-​social developmental model of borderline personality: Elaborating
and extending Linehan's theory. Psychological Bulletin, 135, 495--​510.
Dimeff, L. A., Koerner, K., Woodcock, E., Beadnell, B., Brown, M. Z.,
Skutch, J. M., . . . Harned, M. S. (2009). Which training method works
best? A randomized controlled trial comparing three methods of training
clinicians in dialectical behavior therapy skills. Behavioral Research
and Therapy, 47, 921--​930. Dubose, A. P., Botanov, Y., & Ivanov, A.
(2018). International Implementation of dialectical behavior therapy:
The challenge of training therapists across cultures. In M. Swales
(Ed.), Oxford handbook of dialectical behaviour therapy (pp. 909--​ 930).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Ellis, A. (1962). Reason and
emotion in psychotherapy. New York: Lyle Stuart. Ellis, A. (1987).
Handbook of rational-​ emotive therapy. New York: Springer. Fleming, A.
P., McMahon, R. J., Moran, L. R., Peterson, A. P., & Dreessen, A.
(2015). Pilot randomized controlled trial of dialectical behavior
therapy group skills training for ADHD among college students. Journal
of Attention Disorder, 19, 260--​271. Goldfried, M. R., & Davidson, G. C.
(1976). Clinical behavior therapy. New York: Holt, Rineholt & Winston.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy Goldfried, M. R., Linehan, M. M., & Smith,
J. L. (1978). The reduction of test anxiety through cognitive
restructuring. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 46,
32--​39. Goldstein, T. R., Fersch-​ Podrat, R. K., Rivera, M., Axelson, D.
A., Merranko, J., Yu, H., . . . Birmaher, B. (2015). Dialectical
behavior therapy for adolescents with bipolar disorder: Results from a
pilot randomized trial. Journal of Child and Adolescent
Psychopharmacology, 25(2), 140--​149. Gottman, J. M., & Katz, L. F.
(1990). Effects of marital discord on young children's peer interaction
and health. Developmental Psychology, 25, 373--​381. Hanh, T. N. (1987).
The miracle of mindfulness: A manual on meditation. Revised edition.
Boston: Beacon. Harned, M. S., Chapman, A. L., Dexter-​ Mazza, E. T.,
Murray, A., Comtois, K. A., & Linehan M. M. (2008). Treating co-​
occurring Axis I disorders in recurrently suicidal women with borderline
personality disorder: A 2-​year randomized trial of dialectical behavior
therapy versus community treatment by experts. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 76, 1068--​1075. Harned, M. S., Korslund, K. E., &
Linehan, M. M. (2014). A pilot randomized controlled trial of
Dialectical Behavior Therapy with and without the Dialectical Behavior
Therapy Prolonged Exposure protocol for suicidal and self-​injuring women
with borderline personality disorder and PTSD. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 55, 7--​17. Hawkins, K. A., & Sinha, R. (1998). Can line
clinicians master the conceptual complexities of dialectical behavior
therapy? An evaluation of a State Department of Mental Health training
program. Journal of Psychiatric Research, 32, 379--​384. Hayes, S. C.
(1987). A contextual approach to therapeutic change. In N. S. Jacobson
(Ed.), Psychotherapies in clinical practice: Cognitive and behavioral
perspectives. New York: Guilford. Heard, H. L. (2000).
Cost-​effectiveness of dialectical behavior therapy for borderline
personality disorder. Ann Arbor, MI: UMI. Heard, H. L. (2018).
Responding to clients' in-​session clinical behaviors. In M. Swales
(Ed.), Oxford handbook of dialectical behaviour therapy (pp. 345--​366).
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Kabat-​Zinn, J. (1990). Full
catastrophe living: The program of the stress reduction clinic at the

281

University of Massachusetts Medical Center. New York: Delta. Kabat-​Zinn,
J. (1994). Wherever you go, there you are: Mindfulness meditation in
everyday life. New York: Hyperion. Kegan, R. (1982). The evolving self:
Problem and process in human development. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. Kliem, S., Kröger, C., & Kosfelder, J. (2010).
Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline personality disorder: A
meta-​ analysis using mixed-​effects modeling. Journal of Consulting &
Clinical Psychology, 78, 936--​951. Koons, C. R., Robins, C. J., Tweed,
J. L., Lynch, T. R., Gonzales, A. M., Morse, J. Q., . . . Bastian, L. A.
(2001). Efficacy of dialectical behavior therapy in women veterans with
borderline personality disorder. Behavior Therapy, 32, 371--​390. Lenz,
A. S., Taylor, R., Fleming, M., & Serman, N. (2014). Effectiveness of
dialectical behavior therapy for treating eating disorders. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 92, 26--​35. Levins, R., & Lewontin, R.
(1985). The dialectical biologist. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press. Linehan, M. M. (1993a). Cognitive-​behavioral treatment of
borderline personality disorder. New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M.
(1993b). Skills training manual for treating borderline personality
disorder. New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M. (1997a). Validation and
psychotherapy. In A. Bohart & L. Greenberg (Eds.), Empathy reconsidered:
New directions in psychotherapy (pp. 353--​392). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Linehan, M. M. (1997b). Self-​ verification
and drug abusers: Implications for treatment. Psychological Scientist,
8, 181--​184. Linehan, M. M. (2015a). DBT skills training manual (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M. (2015b). DBT skills training
handouts and worksheets (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M.,
Armstrong, H. E., Suarez, A., Allmon, D., & Heard, H. L. (1991).
Cognitive-​ behavior treatment of chronically parasuicidal borderline
patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 48, 1060--​1064. Linehan, M.
M., Comtois, K. A., Murray, A. M., Brown, M. Z., Gallop, R. J., Heard,
H. L., . . . Lindenboim, N. (2006). Two-​ year randomized controlled
trial and follow-​ up of dialectical behavior therapy vs therapy by

282

Specific Disorders and Populations

experts for suicidal behaviors and borderline personality disorder.
Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 757--​766. Linehan, M. M., Comtois,
K. A., & Ward-​Ciesielski, E. F. (2012). Assessing and managing risk with
suicidal individuals. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 19, 218--​232.
Linehan, M. M., & Dimeff, L. A. (1997). Dialectical behavior therapy
manual of treatment interventions for drug abusers with borderline
personality disorder. Seattle: University of Washington. Linehan, M. M.,
Dimeff, L. A., Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K. A., Shaw Welch, S.,
Heagerty, P., & Kivlahan, D. R. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy for
the treatment of opioid dependent women meeting criteria for borderline
personality disorder. Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 13--​26. Linehan,
M. M., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1993). Naturalistic follow-​up
of a behavioral treatment for chronically parasuicidal borderline
patients. Archives of General Psychiatry, 50, 971--​974. Linehan, M. M.,
Korslund, K. E., Harned, M. S., Gallop, R. J., Lungu, A., Neacsiu, A., .
. . Murray-​ Gregory, A. M. (2015). Dialectical behavior therapy for high
suicide risk in individuals with borderline personality disorder: A
randomized clinical trial and component analysis. JAMA Psychiatry, 72,
475--​482. Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H., Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C.,
Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999). Dialectical behavior therapy for
patients with borderline personality disorder and drug dependence.
American Journal on Addictions, 8, 279--​292. Linehan, M. M., Tutek, D.
A., Heard, H. L., & Armstrong, H. E. (1994). Interpersonal outcomes of
cognitive behavioral treatment for chronically suicidal borderline
patients. American Journal of Psychiatry, 151, 1771--​1776. Lynch, T. R.,
Cheavens, J. S., Cukrowicz, K. C., Thorp, S. R., & Bronner, L. (2007).
Treatment of older adults with co-​ morbid personality disorder and
depression: A dialectical behavior therapy approach. International
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22, 131--​143. Lynch, T. R., Morse J.
Q., Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. (2003). Dialectical behavior therapy
for depressed older adults: A randomized pilot study. The American
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11, 33--​45.

Masters, J. C., Burish, T. G., Hollon, S. D., & Rimm, D. C. (1987).
Behavior therapy: Techniques and empirical findings (3rd ed.). Orlando,
FL: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. McCauley, E., Berk, M. S., Asarnow, J.
R., Adrian, M., Cohen, J., Korslund, K., . . . Linehan, M. M. (2018).
Efficacy of Dialectical Behavior Therapy for Adolescents at High Risk
for Suicide: A Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA Psychiatry, 75, 777--​785.
McMain, S. F., Guimond, T., Barnhart, R., Habinski, L., & Streiner, D.
L. (2017). A randomized trial of brief dialectical behaviour therapy
skills training in suicidal patients suffering from borderline disorder.
Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavia, 135, 138--​148. McMain, S. F., Links, P.
S., Gnam, W. H., Guimond, T., Cardish, R. J., Korman, L., & Streiner
D.L. (2009). A randomized clinical trial of dialectical behavior therapy
versus general psychiatric management for borderline personality
disorder. American Journal of Psychiatry, 166, 1365--​1374. Mehlum, L.,
Tørmoen, A. J., Ramberg, M., Haga, E., & Diep, L. M. (2014). Dialectical
Behavior Therapy for adolescents with repeated suicidal and self-​harming
behavior: A randomized trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 53, 1082--​1091. Miga, E. M., Neacsiu, A. D.,
Lungu, A., Heard, H. L., & Dimeff, L. A. (2018). Dialectical behavior
therapy from 1991--​ 2015: What do we know about clinical efficacy and
research quality? In M. Swales (Ed.), Oxford handbook of dialectical
behaviour therapy (pp. 415--​466). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miller, A. L., Rathus, J. H., & Linehan, M. M. (2007). Dialectical
behavior therapy and suicidal adolescents. New York: Guilford. Morris,
W. (1979). The American heritage dictionary of the English language.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Neacsiu, A. D., Eberle, J. W, Kramer, R.,
Wiesmann, T., & Linehan, M. M. (2014). Dialectical behavior therapy
skills for transdiagnostic emotion dysregulation: A pilot randomized
controlled trial. Behavioral Research and Therapy, 59, 40--​51. Neacsiu,
A. D., Rizvi, S. L., & Linehan, M. M. (2010). Dialectical behavior
therapy skills use as a mediator and outcome of treatment for borderline
personality disorder. Behavior Research and Therapy, 48, 832--​839.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy Perepletchikova, F., Nathanson D., Axelrod
S. R., Merrill C., Walker A., Grossman M., Walkup, J. (2017). Randomized
clinical trial of dialectical behavior therapy for preadolescent
children with disruptive mood dysregulation disorder: Feasibility and
outcomes. Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent
Psychiatry, 56, 832--​840. Rathus, J., & Miller, A. L. (2015). DBT skills
manual for adolescents. New York: Guilford. Rosen, S. (Ed.). (1982). My
voice will go with you: The teaching tales of Milton H. Erickson,
M.D. New York: Norton. Safer, D. L., Telch, C. F., & Chen, E. Y. (2009).
Dialectical Behavior Therapy for binge eating and bulimia. New York:
Guilford. Saposnek, D. T. (1980). Aikido: A model for brief strategic
therapy. Family Process, 19, 227--​238. Skinner, B. F. (1974). About
behaviorism. New York: Vintage. Soler, J., Pascual, J. C., Tiana, T.,
Cebria, A., Barrachina, J., Campins, M. J., . . . Pérez, V. (2009).
Dialectical behaviour therapy skills training compared to standard group
therapy in borderline personality disorder: A 3-​month randomised
controlled clinical trial. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 47, 353--​358.
Staats, A. W. (1975). Social behaviorism. Homewood, IL: Dorsey.
Stricker, G., & Gold, J. (Eds.). (1993). Comprehensive handbook of
psychotherapy integration. New York: Plenum. Swales, M. A. (2018).
Dialectical Behaviour Therapy: Development and distinctive features. In
M. Swales (Ed.), The Oxford handbook of dialectical behavior therapy
(pp. 3--​22). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.

283

Swann, W. B., Stein-​ Seroussi, A., & Giesler, R. B. (1992). Why people
self-​ verify. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 62,
392--​401. Turner, R. M. (2000). Naturalistic evaluation of dialectical
behavior therapy-​oriented treatment for borderline personality disorder.
Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 7(4), 413--​419. Van den Bosch, L.,
Verheul, R., Schippers, G. M., & van den Brink, W. (2002). Dialectical
behavior therapy of borderline patients with and without substance use
problems: Implementation and long-​term effects. Addictive Behaviors, 2,
911--​923. Verheul, R., van den Bosch, L. M. C., Koeter, M. W. J., de
Ridder, M. A. J., Stijnen, T., & van den Brink, W. (2003). Dialectical
behavior therapy for women with borderline personality disorder. British
Journal of Psychiatry, 182, 135--​140. Walton, C. J., & Comtois, K. A.
(2018). Dialectical Behavior Therapy in routine clinical settings. In M.
Swales (Ed.), Oxford handbook of dialectical behaviour therapy
(pp. 467--​ 496). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. Whitaker, C.
(1975). Psychotherapy of the absurd: With a special emphasis on the
psychotherapy of aggression. Family Process, 14, 1--​16. Wilber, K.
(1979). No boundary. Boulder, CO: New Science Library. Williams, J. M.
G., & Pollock, L. R. (2000). The psychology of suicidal behavior. In K.
Hawton & K. van Heeringen (Eds.), The international handbook of suicide
and attempted suicide (pp. 79--​94). Chicester, UK: John Wiley & Sons.
Wilson, G. T., & O'Leary, K. D. (1980). Principles of behavior therapy.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-​Hall. Windle, R., & Samko, M. (1992).
Hypnosis, Ericksonian hypnotherapy, and Aikido. American Journal of
Clinical Hypnosis, 34, 261--​270.

13 Integrative Psychotherapy for Generalized Anxiety Disorder HENNY A.
WESTRA AND MICHAEL J. CONSTANTINO

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH When facing change, people are often fraught
with competing and even contradictory motives and feelings. Familiarity
is seductive and compelling despite the suffering it may promote.
Psychopathology often represents efforts at self-​protection and cohesion
(Mahoney, 2003); thus, whereas people might desire change, they often
simultaneously fear and resist it. For instance, individuals who worry
excessively typically see worry both as a problem and an asset (e.g.,
"my worry is motivating," or "worrying protects me and prepares me for
negative events") and are therefore ambivalent about relinquishing it
(Borkovec, 1994; Westra & Arkowitz, 2010). Appreciating this bind,
motivational interviewing (MI) is a person-​centered approach in which
the therapist strives not to direct clients toward change, but rather to
support clients' own self-​ efficacy and personal

advocacy for change (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Recognizing that clients
are the best experts on themselves, the central tenet of MI is to have
the therapist work from a "spirit" of empathy, collaboration, evocation,
and preservation of client autonomy while employing strategies that
assist clients to work through their ambivalence and ultimately argue
for self-​change. The first author's (HW) attraction to MI arose from
working primarily within a cognitive-​ behavioral orientation early in my
career to treat clients with anxiety disorders. I realized that although
cognitive-​ behavioral therapy (CBT) could benefit many clients, it fell
flat for others. Realizing that CBT strategies worked well if clients
used them, I began advocating vigorously for their adoption with my less
engaged clients, with predictably (in retrospect) poor results. Rather
than facilitating change, my strong CBT advocacy seemed to distance
further these already minimally engaged

284

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

285

clients. Such interactions would often end motivation and is less likely
in approaches, like in argument, frustration (on both sides), and MI,
that are foundationally person-​ centered. stalemates. It turns out that
my experiences Although integrating MI has various beneficial were
shared by many CBT practitioners. For impacts on therapy process, the
most important example, in a survey of CBT experts, the most impact is
reducing levels of resistance, which in frequently cited reasons for
clients' insufficient turn improves outcomes relative to CBT alone
treatment response were "lack of engagement (Aviram & Westra, 2011;
Constantino, Westra in behavioral experiments" and "noncompli- et al.,
2017). ance" (Sanderson & Bruce, 2007). Our MI + CBT approach has, to
date, foAt the same time, MI was emerging as an cused on generalized
anxiety disorder (GAD), evidence-​based treatment for addictions, and the
least CBT-​ responsive of the anxiety it seemed to me that its methods
might be disorders (Cuijpers et al., 2014). This relaequally applicable
to my disengaged anxious tively poor response rate perhaps owes partly
clients who were "stuck." Integrating MI into to traditional CBT's
failure to address the inCBT offered a more satisfying way of viewing
terpersonal problems that characterize GAD and working in harmony with
clients, rather (Newman et al., 2013), such as being under-​ than
wrestling with them. With its complemen- agentic and overly communal,
often to the tary supportive, reflective methods and ways of point of
exploitability (Gomez Penedo et al., being, MI balanced CBT's action
orientation. 2017; Przeworkski et al., 2011). In session, reSince those
early days of my practice, the sistance can represent a client's rare
risk-​t aking integrated approach presented in this chapter attempt at
agency/​ assertiveness, initiated to has evolved substantially, and the
position of protect one's need to retain worry and to make MI within CBT
has become increasingly clear one's own choices about change (Westra,
2012). to us. This evolution has been primarily in re- It is plausible
that a CBT therapist pushing for sponse to the growing insights derived
from change in the face of client resistance would systematic component
studies and process-​ inadvertently recapitulate the common interoutcome
research (on ambivalence and re- personal pattern in GAD of pulling for,
and sistance; on mediators and moderators of deferring to, others'
dominance (Constantino MI + CBT vs. CBT alone), clinical experi- &
Westra, 2012; Coyne et al., in press). Such ence in training others in
MI + CBT, and the reinforcement might render CBT methods less
developments in context-​ responsive psycho- effective, whereas
preserving clients' autonomy therapy integration (Constantino et al.,
2013; when they resist and encouraging exploration Constantino, Westra
et al., 2017). We regard of this experience might redress these
interperthe assimilation of MI into CBT as a respon- sonal dynamics and
enhance the agency that is sive solution to a specific process challenge
typically lacking in persons with GAD. of client resistance (tensions in
the alliance, From this perspective, MI's benefit resides in
noncollaboration, working at cross-​purposes)---​ its ability to help
therapists learn a specific ina pernicious challenge that relates to
poorer terpersonal skill of "rolling with" ambivalence treatment
outcomes. Resistance arises from a and resistance. When applied
contextually over mismatch between a client factor (being am- time, this
approach should reduce client defbivalent about change) and therapist
action erence, thereby reducing an etiological charin this context
(taking control, advising, and acteristic of GAD and facilitating
healthier persuading, as opposed to supporting, under- social
interactions. This corrective experience standing, preserving autonomy,
and evoking). notion has been corroborated by several qualThus,
sustained resistance is a result of the itative studies of clients with
GAD receiving clinician's skill error (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). MI +
CBT versus CBT (Khattra et al., 2017; Such a mismatch is most likely to
arise in more Macaulay et al., 2017; Morrison et al., 2017). directive,
or action-​ oriented approaches, like The second author (MC) also has a
history CBT, that require a high degree of change of administering and
studying CBT for GAD.

286

Specific Disorders and Populations

However, his connection to MI + CBT came not from loyalty to either
brand or from a sole interest in GAD pathology, but rather from a
broader dissatisfaction with the idea that evidence-​based practice (or
therapist expertise) reflects adherence to standardized treatment
packages. Drawing on research demonstrating that when therapists
perseverate in adhering to the treatment model in the face of negative
process, it correlates negatively with patient outcome (e.g., Castonguay
et al., 1996), I became interested in clinical flexibility and how
therapists can most effectively "depart" when a given treatment, and the
relationship on which it is built, are not working. This if-​then focus,
the hallmark of the context-​responsive framework, was a conceptual fit
for MI: if client resistance to the direction of the therapist presents
itself, then depart (at least temporarily) to MI to address it
(Constantino et al., 2009).The biggest bang for our clinical buck may
boil down to therapists using responsive behaviors (e.g., MI and its
spirit) known to have a therapeutic impact in precise moments (e.g.,
when clients resist). In this chapter, we elaborate on our systematic
integration of MI into CBT for GAD. We present assessment and
formulation methods; summarize the application and structure of MI
interventions; describe the processes of change, therapeutic
relationship, and core techniques in MI + CBT; consider diversity
elements; and provide a case example. We review supporting research both
throughout the chapter and in a devoted section on the central findings
from two randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and we then highlight
future directions for this integrative treatment.

ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION The Case for Observation A prerequisite for
responsively using MI skills, especially evoking clients' own
motivations, is to identify the key moments and markers that call for
the person-​centered approach. In this sense, assessment is ongoing and
inexorably tied to treatment. Research on client motivational

language and resistance has indicated that not all moments are equally
significant, and some, such as disagreements and misattunements in the
therapy relationship, are more likely to predict poor response (Hunter,
Button, & Westra, 2014; Sijercic et al., 2016). It is during these
moments when an MI stance/​ spirit may be especially therapeutic (Aviram
et al., 2016), though this runs counter to traditional psychotherapy
training and research designs that have largely focused on intervention
(doing) more than observation (seeing). In MI, which is predicated on
matching action to the moment-​ to-​moment context, the ability to observe
key process markers accurately is paramount. Such observation is
challenging as signals of disharmony or misattunement are often subtle,
with complex interpersonal cues reflecting opposition (tone, inflection,
pauses, posture, gestures, etc.). Difficulties in detecting such signals
are further complicated by clients' reluctance to express openly their
concerns about therapy (Rennie, 1993), as well as therapists' own blind
spots for negative processes in which they are participating (Binder &
Strupp, 1997). Indeed, resistance has been found to be associated with
outcome when rated by observers, but not therapists (Hara et al., 2015).
Such findings indicate that therapist observation is a needed and
presumably trainable skill (considering that research observers are
generally also clinicians). In essence, a therapist striving to be a
good participant-​observer is collecting vital feedback on a
moment-​to-​moment basis about research-​ supported process markers (e.g.,
How engaged is this person? Are there signals of disharmony or
opposition? Are there markers of ambivalence or, alternatively, signals
of readiness to begin changing?). In contrast, reliance on self-​report
measures of motivation is discouraged, given their proneness to ceiling
effects and response bias and their generally weak and inconsistent
relation to outcome (Westra, 2011, 2012). Accordingly, we have adapted
and successfully applied two observational coding systems, discussed
next, that facilitate the identification of ambivalence and resistance
markers.

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

287

direction or demand in the context of a client who is ambivalent about
changing. In these exchanges, the client and therapist are in The
Motivational Interviewing Skills Code essence "acting out" the
ambivalence rela(MISC 1.1; Hagen Glynn, & Moyers, 2009) tionally
(vs. helping the client work through assesses client motivational
statements as either the ambivalence intrapersonally), with the change
talk (arguments for change) or counter-​ therapist typically advocating
for change and change talk (arguments against change). Often, forcing
the ambivalent client to defend the a client will indicate ambivalence
about change status quo with counter-​change talk. Thus, by expressing a
reason to change and then im- a good question for clinicians to ask
themmediately expressing reluctance or fear of doing selves is: "Who is
making the arguments for so. These statements capture competing motives
change?" If it's the therapist, the process is of approach and
avoidance, such as yes-​but (e.g., likely off track. "I want to relax,
but I'm afraid that I'll become The presence of resistance in the
therapy relazy," or "I know worry doesn't help, but I feel lationship
can operate as a type of stop signal like I have to do it"). They can
also be expressions that indicates that the therapist is working ahead
of the benefits of the status quo (e.g., "Part of of the client's level
of readiness; that is, placing the reason things turn around is because
I do demands on the client to do, be, think someworry and as I'm
worrying, I'm coming up with thing for which he is not ready. Continuing
to the strategic alternatives on how to approach put one's foot on the
gas (direct), instead of the something"). Relatively more counter-​
change brake (slow down, support), when the signal is talk statements
reflects resistance to change or red is an unresponsive, ineffective,
and poten"stuckness," whereas relatively more change talk tially harmful
process. In such instances, resistindicates a client who is more decided
on change ance to therapist demands represents clients' and its
benefits. efforts to protect their autonomy to explore personally valid
counter-​change positions. The Observing Resistance in Patient--​Therapist
onus is on the therapist to attend to and support such messages in order
to reestablish collaboInterpersonal Process rative attunement and to
address ambivalence In addition to client language, which is more more
productively. intrapersonal, direct resistance---​ which is Ongoing
attentiveness to and observations of more interpersonal---​ represents a
signal that the therapy process can provide valuable inforthe
interaction or alliance is in jeopardy. mation about a client's
engagement in therapy We have adapted a version (Westra, Aviram, and
level of readiness to change. Given our et al., 2009) of the Client
Resistance Code focus on using MI as a contextual process in(CRC:
Chamberlain et al., 1984) to codify re- tervention embedded in
change-​oriented CBT, sistance as any behavior that opposes, blocks, this
attention to emerging process informs the diverts, or impedes the
direction set by the short-​ term process goal of matching clinical
therapist. The CRC proper includes multiple style (supportive or
directive) to client moticategories of resistant behavior, but our
adapted vation level. Such matching more effectively version collapses
these categories into one addresses client resistance (Beutler et al.,
global rating capturing the presence or absence 2011; Westra &
Norouzian, 2018). This in turn of any resistance. facilitates the
long-​term outcome goals of a corResistance can manifest as the thera-
rective interpersonal experience (i.e., having pist making a suggestion
and the client an important other---​ the therapist---​ defer to
responding with silence or little enthusiasm. the client's atypical
resistant behavior), interOr, the therapist might make a reflection
personal change (i.e., taking more autonomy that the client protests or
ignores. Each ex- in directing oneself toward improvement), ample
reflects resistance that is stimulated and corresponding worry reduction
in clients and sustained by the presence of therapist with GAD.
Observing Ambivalence from Client's In-​Session Language

288

Specific Disorders and Populations

APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE

would seem universally facilitative, it is possible that clients need to
have a minimum level of reality testing, psychological mindedness, some
connection to emotional experience, and communication abilities to
capitalize on what often amounts to a process dialogue. That being said,
we are hard pressed to identify clinical scenarios where being
validating and supportive of client agency is contraindicated. Unless
future research uncovers clear contraindications, the current evidence
base compellingly supports the clinical utility of MI in context, as
well as the associated alliance and Rogerian facilitative conditions
(Norcross & Lambert, 2018). Also, whereas our discussion centers on
individual therapy, client resistance certainly manifests in other
formats, such as couple, family, group, or Internet-​mediated therapies.
We suspect that the current considerations for MI would remain
applicable in these other formats, though the dynamics would be more
complex when expanded beyond a two-​person psychology.

As our approach remains grounded in CBT, the applicable clinical
situations are any in which CBT is traditionally administered. With our
focus on clients with GAD, the present descriptions predominantly apply
to individual outpatient psychotherapy of a time-​limited nature.
Consistent with CBT length parameters, the latest clinical trial that we
conducted on MI + CBT included 15 weekly sessions, with MI integrated
responsively vis-​ à-​vis markers of client ambivalence/​ resistance
(Westra, Constantino, & Antony, 2016). Such a treatment approach can be
adapted to lengthier psychotherapy contacts and to more intensive
treatment settings, such as partial hospitalization programs, but we are
unaware of any published studies conducted on CBT + MI in those settings
yet. As noted, our integrative approach has centered on GAD for three
central reasons: (1) CBT generates relatively humble success rates for
this particular anxiety disorder (i.e., \< 50%; Cuijpers et al., 2014);
(2) individuals with GAD are often ambivalent about relinquishing the
PROCESSES OF CHANGE cardinal feature of their condition---​ worry---​ as
it can be experienced both as problem- For our integrative approach, CBT
change atic and functional; and (3) the interpersonal mechanisms remain
foundational in treating underpinnings of GAD pathology (i.e., low GAD
(e.g., psychoeducation about anxiety and agency and excessive communion)
set the worry, self-​monitoring, physiological change via stage for MI to
be a corrective interpersonal relaxation, cognitive restructuring).
However, experience that shifts relational patterns and the essence of
our integrative model is to create reduces worry. an additive effect
that improves client response However, the responsive MI principles
beyond traditional, change-​oriented CBT. To are not limited to this
client population. As this end, the primary purported mechanism
perseverative therapist adherence in the face is the superior resolution
of resistance via MI of client resistance or alliance tensions can ad-
versus standard CBT. Achieving this effect versely affect any
psychotherapy for most types requires the therapist to use both the MI
spirit of problems, we argue that MI can be widely and specific MI
strategies for resolving emerapplied for effectively addressing the
disruptive gent resistance in the therapy relationship. process of
client resistances. Put differently, MI can be a transtheoretical and
transdiagnostic MI Spirit strategy to use for many types of disorders
(e.g., substance use, health behaviors, gambling) Applying MI begins
with its underlying spirit, when a current treatment is not working
which is particularly useful at times of client (Lundahl et al., 2010).
opposition and/​or ambivalence (Aviram et al., Although applying the
person-​centered prin- 2016). More than simply being a directive
interciples of empathy, collaboration, and evocation vention where
clients are told what to do, and

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

consistent with its origins in person-​centered therapy, MI is
fundamentally a way of being with clients that promotes a safe,
collaborative atmosphere in which clients can resolve their conflicting
feelings about change, moving toward their most valued self. MI
therapists operate as evocative consultants in the client's journey,
consistently communicating the message, "I don't have what you need, but
you do. And I will help you find it." In supporting client autonomy, MI
helps clients recognize themselves as the authority. Accordingly, the MI
therapist resists the temptation to supply expertise to correct client
deficiencies when markers of ambivalence and resistance are present.
Indeed, in client accounts of their experiences of MI, therapist
empathy, the provision of safety, and the freedom to explore have
emerged as prominent recollections (e.g., Marcus et al., 2011). Although
MI is decidedly person-​centered, it is also directive in several ways.
First, the MI therapist focuses on the exploration of clients' feelings
and ideas about change. Second, an active therapist deliberately listens
for motivational process markers (e.g., ambivalence, resistance, change
talk). Thus, our approach involves "learning to hear" process markers
that signal the therapist to use specific skills and to move in
particular directions. In this sense, the therapist complements the
client's expertness on their own content (i.e., problems or their
resolution) by being an expert on the therapy and relational process.
Working with Resistance to Change Ambivalence is the tension between
perceived benefits of the status quo and perceived benefits of change.
In working with the status quo voice, the therapist helps the ambivalent
or stuck client explore and understand the needs that are being met
(e.g., "What's good about worrying?") and the arguments against change
(e.g., "What would be bad about not worrying?"). Asking about the
developmental origin of the behavior is also useful in developing
understanding of and compassion for the motives to worry (e.g., "Where
did you get

289

the idea that it was important to worry about others? To be perfect?"
etc.). What appears maladaptive on the surface is often driven by core
needs, such as the desire for comfort, safety, connection, control,
familiarity, success, freedom from aversive consequences, and so forth.
The status quo often offers familiarity, predictability, and a sense of
control, whereas change, and the steps to produce it, are fraught with
risk, uncertainty, unfamiliarity, discomfort, and ambiguity (e.g., "Can
I do it? Who will I be? What if I fail? How will others regard me?").
Stated differently, it is naïve to assume that "change is all good"; if
a client is stuck, there is typically a dominant voice that warns
against and fears change---​a voice that needs to be heard and validated.
Then (typically later), in working with the change voice, the therapist
helps the client understand "What are the costs of staying the same?"
(e.g., problems created, excessive distress) and "What would be good
about change?" (new opportunities, desired ways of being, freedom from
distress). Such change talk is often "emergent" when the therapist backs
away from coercive attempts to promote change and seeks to genuinely
hear and validate the needs, motives, and fears being expressed by the
status quo position. And thus change talk represents the client's
attempts to intrapsychically understand and resolve his or her own
resistance to change. Exploration of ambivalence is not a linear,
straightforward process. There is a natural ebb and flow as exploration
of one side naturally evokes consideration of the other side. At any
given moment, the therapist works to capture what is most alive. For
example, if clients express substantial change-​talk, the therapist
explores, elaborates, and empathically understands the part of the
person that wishes to change. Even if the therapist suspects that the
client is ambivalent about change, she can nonetheless explore what is
most salient for the client at that moment, trusting that if significant
ambivalence about change is there, it will surface. Working within the
MI spirit, therapists avoid pejorative perceptions of clients as
unmotivated or difficult. Rather, ambivalence and resistance are viewed
as a normal part of

290

Specific Disorders and Populations

the vicissitudes of change, but, even more so, they are regarded as
meaningful therapeutic opportunities. Ambivalence and resistance contain
important information that needs to be attended to, understood, and
integrated. Rather than trying to defeat resistance to change, the
therapist "rolls with it." The therapists' curiosity about and openness
to exploring resistance translates into clients developing a more
complex and compassionate view of the beliefs, motives, and behaviors
that often frustrate them and keep them stuck. In MI, the therapist
works with, rather than against, resistance (Miller & Rollnick, 2002).
Having helped clients achieve a fuller understanding of the forces for
and against change, opportunities arise to develop discrepancy between
these positions. For example, parents who value their relationship with
their children may find it unsettling to consider if their
overprotectiveness alienates the children. Discrepancy also arises
between the reasons for the status quo on the one hand and the
consequences or outcomes on the other (e.g., "Worrying is a way of
gaining control, yet I also hear it makes you feel out of control").
Therapists seek to identify such discrepancies, not to confront the
client, but rather to invite the client to wrestle with and ultimately
resolve these discrepancies for themselves, given that such
discrepancies naturally pull for resolution to reestablish
value--​behavior alignment (Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Although MI spirit
and strategies are grounded in a specific orientation (i.e., person-​
centered therapy), we see the responsive use of MI in moments of client
resistance as a common factor. That is, no matter what type of
therapeutic approach is being applied, its effectiveness will be
hindered when clients resist its intended direction and helped when a
therapist validates and supports client autonomy during such moments
(vs. persisting with misaligned treatment directions). In this sense, MI
can be viewed as both a theory-​specific process for addressing low
change readiness, as well as a nondenominational process for supporting
clients' own agency and direction toward change.

THERAPY RELATIONSHIP In MI + CBT, the quality of the patient--​therapist
relationship facilitates the work of therapy. Our perspective fits
Bordin's (1979) notion of the alliance as a common factor representing
treatment goal and task agreement in the context of an affective bond.
When considered this way, the outcomes for higher alliance clients/​dyads
are better than lower alliance clients/​ dyads (Flückiger, Del Re, &
Horvath, 2018). The patient--​therapist relationship is also an
interpersonal dynamic to be changed in our integrative approach. That
is, resistance may represent an alliance rupture in the form of the
client and therapist no longer agreeing on the goals or tasks of
therapy. Such misalignment can also cause the bond to suffer. To the
extent that therapists try to combat the resistance by doubling their
change efforts, not only may a maladaptive pattern of other dominance--​
patient submission get enacted, but also the core elements of the
alliance may rupture. In this sense, the alliance is truly dyadic in
that it represents two people coming to see the relational universe more
similarly over time, or what has been referred to as dyadic convergence.
In one study of MI + CBT for GAD, early alliance convergence was
associated with subsequent greater reductions in worry and distress
(Coyne et al., 2017). That is, when client and therapist become more
attuned over time, in whatever treatment is being delivered, the client
shows greater improvement. Again, this perspective allows for the
alliance (and convergence on it) to be a facilitative factor for CBT
strategies applied outside of resistance tensions and relational
ruptures, but also a relational change factor in its own right within
MI + CBT. Beyond the alliance, the impact of resistance on the
relational element of empathy is substantive as therapist behavior tends
to become markedly less supportive in times of resistance. For example,
in an experimental study, Francis and colleagues (2005) randomly
assigned practitioners to interview the same actor who was portraying an
individual either high or low in resistance to quitting smoking.
Therapists in the high-​ resistance condition increased their

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

confrontational behavior, offered significantly less praise and
encouragement, and asked fewer open-​ ended questions that sought to
understand the client's perspective. These findings demonstrate that,
during moments of resistance to change, therapists become increasingly
dismissive of the client's position (see Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7,
this volume). Moreover, there is evidence that this behavior impacts the
client's experience of therapist empathy (Hara et al., 2018)---​a key
process variable that has been shown to relate positively to client
improvement (Elliott, Bohart, & Watson, 2018; Moyers & Miller, 2013).
Moreover, Aviram and colleagues (2016) found that being more empathic
precisely at the moment of disagreement was 10 times more positively
impactful on client outcomes than being more empathic generally. Thus,
identifying resistance that adversely impacts empathy may be an
important step toward facilitating sustained positive relational
climates in psychotherapy. METHODS AND TECHNIQUES With Low Ambivalence
and Resistance When motivation to change is present, the MI + CBT
therapist supports clients in the process of planning for, experimenting
with, executing, and supporting their efforts to change. Essentially,
when the client moves from greater to lesser resistance to change (and
complementary lower to higher motivation to change), the therapist's
focus shifts from why change to how to change. In these latter stages of
change readiness, clients tend to welcome and engage readily with CBT as
it provides explicit guidance, direction, and support for worry
reduction. MI is probably unnecessary in this context, and research
supports that clients with high levels of initial motivation fare
equally well, if not better, in reducing their worry with CBT alone
versus MI + CBT (Button et al., 2016). Furthermore, for clients with
less marked problematic unassertiveness or low agency at baseline, CBT
yields comparable worry reduction to MI + CBT (Gomez Penedo et al.,
2017) as

291

these clients may not have required their therapist deferring to them
(by supporting agency and granting autonomy) to help alter their typical
deference to others. It is also noteworthy that the major additive
benefit of possessing MI skills (empathy, MI spirit) lies in deploying
them at the "right time" of client ambivalence and resistance (Aviram et
al., 2016). However, a benefit of maintaining an MI frame at any point
in therapy, even when the client is taking action to change, may be the
therapist's readiness to observe signs of reemerging ambivalence or
resistance (misattunement), which can then precipitate full MI
responsivity to reestablish collaboration (attunement). Learning MI can
change the way a therapist practices "standard" CBT as MI has much to
offer in terms of informing the process of any treatment. Extending the
MI relational stance into the action (CBT) phase of therapy might
preempt some of the pernicious problems of resistance and noncompliance
that more directive approaches can create while also enhancing client
agency. Indeed, in our trial comparing MI + CBT to CBT alone for severe
GAD, MI + CBT therapists demonstrated higher levels of patient-​perceived
empathy and observer-​rated MI spirit compared to CBT-​ alone therapists
(Westra et al., 2016). Next, we outline several specific ways that MI is
generally infused into CBT in our approach, outside of the pointed
moments of ambivalence and resistance. Being Evocative Instead of moving
quickly to supply expertise or problem-​solve, the MI + CBT therapist
continuously searches for opportunities to evoke, develop, and work with
client expertise (e.g., "How do you think this problem could be
handled?"). Letting clients do more of the work can increase the
likelihood that they will implement the planned steps to change, in
large part because they generated them. Perhaps even more significantly,
it represents important opportunities to support clients' previously
unrecognized capabilities for self-​ determination and enduring
self-​efficacy resources that can be tapped long after treatment ends.

292

Specific Disorders and Populations

Another juncture where using MI spirit and evocation can be helpful is
in processing the results of the client's efforts to take action toward
change. Here the MI + CBT therapist brings an attitude of curiosity to
the client's experience, which promotes discovery. For example, when a
client shows willingness to take action, therapists have an opportunity
to explore the effort/​activity as an illustration of the client's
potential for and ability to change. It is important not to (a) assume
that the client will continue with the changes, (b) move in with praise
or reinforcement (e.g., "That's great that you did that"), and, in
general, (c) communicate an attitude of "I told you this would work/​
help." Such responses would likely undercut client self-​discovery,
instead promoting therapist conditions of worth that must be met to
receive approval. Rather, the MI + CBT therapist suspends her own
judgments to make space for the client to discover and process his or
her own sense of worth and learning of the experience (e.g., "What did
you like or not like about what you did?" "What did you learn, if
anything?"). When the therapist supports such autonomy, the client is
much more likely to internalize the change and to articulate the
benefits of the change effort (i.e., change-​t alk).

recognizing that it is the therapist's perspective and not currently the
client's, holding it tentatively for the client to consider if he or she
so chooses and being prepared to back off from a suggestion if the
client resists it. Infused by MI, Socratic questioning and suggesting a
homework assignment are not exercises in persuasion, but rather
communications of the therapist's efforts to brainstorm collaboratively
with the client about possibilities, with the client as the sole arbiter
of whether the possibilities are retained. For example, a therapist
could say, "Your anxiety says that if you worry you can prevent bad
things from happening. Is there a part of you that disagrees with that?
There may not be." With the same idea in mind, the therapist could note,
"I'm not sure about this, and it could be wrong, but I wonder if there
is another way of thinking about this situation? For example, could it
be possible that . . .? Only you can know." It needs to be clear in the
therapist's communications (both verbally and nonverbally) that the
client is free to go his or her own way, even if that means disagreeing
with the therapist. When presented in this manner, the therapist is
explicitly communicating a respect for the client's authority in making
choices.

Integrating Therapist Suggestion and Psychoeducation

Rolling with Homework Noncompliance

A common question of CBT trainees who consider integrating MI into CBT
is: "What about the role of therapists' expertise in treating anxiety
and their knowledge about factors that perpetuate it?" From our
perspective, these inputs are essential but can have unintended
consequences if they are applied in a scripted vacuum. Therapist
suggestions and information can be introduced in ways that enhance the
probability of client engagement. Of particular importance is their
timing to align with client change readiness and the style (spirit) of
explicitly reinforcing client autonomy when introducing these ideas.
Also, explicit monitoring of client receptivity and level of engagement
with such offerings is important (Westra, 2012). Thus, the MI spirit
means

A focus on establishing and achieving compliance can often create a
battleground between client and therapist, which can end in stalemate.
Homework noncompliance need not be cause for alarm and is often just one
way of expressing resistance. And, as we have seen, pushing for change
in the context of client resistance inadvertently creates more
resistance and risks alienating clients and stalling their progress. In
such situations, even if the therapist is "successful" in persuading the
client to do the homework, such acquiescence may be won at the expense
of undermining the client's self-​ determination and may jeopardize the
safety of the therapeutic relationship on which so much depends.
Moreover, taking action in the context of lack of belief in the value of
such steps is typically ineffective.

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

Rolling with and reframing such resistance represent important
opportunities to learn more about the client's concerns about change and
to build motivation. For example, noncompliance could signal high
ambivalence (indicating a need to shift to full-​on MI mode), it could
signal that the client does not accept what the therapist is suggesting
(indicating a need for an open discussion of more effective ways of
working together), or it could mean that there is a problem in the
therapy relationship (indicating a need for empathic listening and
rupture repair). Underscoring this point, GAD clients receiving MI + CBT
in which therapists rolled with homework noncompliance completed just as
much homework (and had better long-​term outcomes) as their counterparts
receiving CBT alone (Westra et al., 2016). DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS The
efficacy of MI + CBT for diverse subgroups has yet to be examined. It is
possible that the entire integrative approach, and/​or the ways in which
MI is integrated into CBT, would need to be adapted for clients with
different multicultural identities. Such applications and adaptations
will require future focus both clinically and empirically. MI alone has
been found to be particularly effective with ethnic minority clients
(Hettema, Steele, & Miller, 2005; Lundahl et al., 2010). MI incorporates
quintessential cultural respect---​ empathic reflection and unconditional
support. Supporting this perspective, meta-​analytic research has
demonstrated a positive correlation among clients' rating of their
therapist's multicultural competence, their therapist's expressed
empathy, their therapist's support or affirmation, and their treatment
outcomes (e.g., Soto et al., 2018). It is possible that a substantive
element of cultural competence may reside in the therapist's ability to
adopt a person-​centered approach emphasizing reflective listening,
empathic reflection, and support for the client's own expertise on self,
even without the therapist being thoroughly schooled in culture-​specific
methods. The use

293

of such person-​ centered approaches may be particularly useful when
ethnic differences between a client and therapist may render the
relationship most vulnerable to poor engagement or resistance. Using MI
to address such vulnerable moments is also consistent with a recent
formulation of multicultural competence that emphasizes (1) therapist
cultural humility, or a stance of openness, curiosity, and a suspension
of cultural preconceptions; and (2) an awareness of and responsivity to
moments that offer avenues for further collaborative exploration of a
client's cultural identities (Owen et al., 2016). The first point is
quite consistent with a therapist using MI spirit in general, as well as
the MI strategy in the face of resistances or relational tensions. The
second point is consistent with the notion that resistance or alliance
rupture can represent an opportunity for change. Although future
research will need to confirm this, it may be that adding MI to CBT is
one way to be culturally competent.

CASE EXAMPLE Meghan is a 24-​year-​old, white, cisgender female who
received individual MI + CBT in one of our research studies for GAD
(Westra et al., 2016). We selected this case because of her high levels
of counter-​change talk in the first session and her inordinately low
outcome expectation (10% expected improvement), perhaps because of
several failed attempts at counseling and medications, including a prior
course of CBT. Meghan was living at home with her parents and younger
siblings, going to school part-​time, and running her own business. She
had a roughly 10-​year history of severe GAD. At the time of intake, she
had severe GAD (78/​80 on self-​reported worry via the Penn State Worry
Questionnaire \[PSWQ\], Meyer et al., 1990). Meghan also met criteria
for several other anxiety disorders, including obsessive compulsive
disorder (OCD) and panic disorder with agoraphobia. Meghan's therapist
was a 29-​year-​old, cisgender female who was trained in MI + CBT and was
serving as a research therapist in the clinical trial.

294

Specific Disorders and Populations

She was supervised by the first author (HW), and session recordings were
reviewed regularly as part of that supervision. Meghan received 15
sessions; the first 4 focused exclusively on MI, followed by 11
integrative MI + CBT sessions. In the first session, she described
multiple sources of fear and anxiety, including her own health and the
health of others, undergoing any medical procedure, being late, being
productive, and procrastination, with her anxiety at school being the
most debilitating. She reported being easily overwhelmed with details
and pressures to perform, noting that having an assignment precipitated
"World War III in my head." She presented as highly driven,
perfectionistic, and obsessed with using time effectively and
productively. She noted having some hyperproductive, "good" days and
then other "waste of time" days when she felt depressed, had no energy,
and was physically unable to get going. She was critical of having these
"bad" days and characterized them as nonsensical, useless, and
irrational. This intolerance was notable throughout Meghan's speech, in
which she would frequently descend into becoming self-​critical and
intolerant of her emotions, her limitations, and her struggles. She
described needing a "tough love" approach to her anxiety, such as the
one her mother used. As one example, Meghan recounted that when helping
her endure getting an injection, her mother would say "Suck it up. A
5-​year-​old can get a needle and you are 24. Just stop whining!" Early in
treatment, when prompted by the therapist, Meghan articulated change
talk, including disliking her avoidance, feeling unwell and unhappy most
of the time, and being constantly preoccupied. Despite these incentives
for change, by listening carefully, the therapist also observed numerous
instances of counter-​change talk in Meghan's initial sessions. These
statements had a quality of defending her high standards and the
necessity of motivating herself through harsh rebukes. For example, when
the therapist pointed out her self-​ critical tendencies, she responded
"Yes. I am my biggest critic, but this is why I am able to excel at
work. I just need to get better at doing it when it comes to school. I
need someone to push me." When asked about her feelings about treatment,
Meghan noted being excited,

but quickly articulated many objections. For example, she recounted a
story about how much work CBT is and concluded "I guess it's not
impossible but. . . ." Given Meghan's high level of ambivalence, the
MI + CBT therapist sought to identify the needs being met by the status
quo and to communicate compassionate understanding, validation of, and
resonance with (siding with or rolling with) the reasons for not
changing. The following excerpts demonstrate these: Therapist: This may
seem like a bit of a strange question but "What's good about having high
standards?" What works about that? Meghan: My whole life is a portfolio.
I want to go into medicine and it's ultra-​competitive. So, I have to
bring the best of the best to the table . . . to be not just good, but
better than everyone else. And that's a good way to think. Therapist:
There's a lot on the line here. Meghan: Absolutely. Therapist: And it
makes a lot of sense to drive yourself so hard because there is so much
at stake . . . you are so invested in it. Having a lot of anxiety about
it really fits almost. It drives you to do better. Meghan: Absolutely.
It's crucial to my success. Therapist: And there is almost a kind of
fear there . . . I'm guessing . . . that if you didn't drive yourself,
things would really go off the rails and there is no way you would be
successful. Meghan: There is no way that is happening . . . I would just
. . . I know myself . . . I would just be lazy and get depressed. If I
let up absolutely nothing will get done. The therapist continued to use
supportive strategies responsively, such as empathy and evocation, to
elaborate more fully Meghan's ambivalence. In doing so, she opened the
dialogue, particularly the motives underlying the patient's strong
defense of the status quo/​ perfectionism. This was done to elaborate
these motives, so that, armed with greater self-​awareness, Meghan could
decide for herself whether to risk changing. The exploration continued
until the therapist heard change-​talk, indicating self-​confrontation,

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety reevaluation, and protest of the status
quo. In Meghan's case (as with many GAD clients), the motives for worry
included a familiar sense of control by worrying; uncertainty about not
worrying; strong fears of relaxing, including fears of failure/​erosion
of ambition; and identity concerns ("Who would I be if I didn't worry?
I've never been that person. Would it be okay?"). These are all critical
areas to explore and excellent questions before proceeding with behavior
change. Later in the dialogue, when exploring her feelings about being
self-​critical, a strategy Meghan used constantly to reach her high
standards, change-​ talk eventually began to emerge. Meghan: My aunt is a
psychologist and she says that you have to talk to yourself like you
were your own mother or something . . . like be nice to yourself. But
that feels so stupid . . . (client becomes very animated) because I'm
not my mother. And the way I feel is a bit harsh yeah, but I don't see
that as a flaw. I feel fine with the way I approach it. (counter-​change
talk) Therapist: So rationally, there could be some downsides, but it's
way (with emphasis) more valuable than hurtful. I'd much rather have it
than not have it. (therapist rolling with resistance . . . continues to
resonate with the wisdom of the status quo). Meghan: (pauses) I mean it
motivates me, but it also kind of makes me anxious because I have to do
everything to a certain standard. (change talk emerges;
self-​confrontation) Therapist: Say more. (elaborating change talk)
Meghan: I have a need to do everything really well, and it can be
exhausting. For example, it takes me 3 hours to get 30 minutes of
productive work because it's 2 and a half hours of me disciplining
myself. With every single assignment, every single task, every single
sentence I read, I tell myself, "Okay, read it, pay attention, what does
it mean. Think!" And I have to look up every word or phrase I don't
know. So, it takes a long time. And I spend so much time preparing to
get into it that I don't get into it. Therapist: That does sound
exhausting . . . and frustrating! Meghan: Incredibly frustrating.

295

Therapist: And so not fun! Meghan: Totally. I hate studying! Like I want
to learn . . . I like the material . . . but I hate it, too. Therapist:
So, it sounds like it almost works against you in a way. Like on the one
hand your high standards drive you to do things really well . . . but on
the other hand, it almost sounds like that drive also gets in the way a
bit, too. Ironically, it almost sounds like sometimes it might make you
less productive rather than more. But I'm guessing. Would that be right?
(developing discrepancy between the positive 'intent' of the behavior
and the actual outcome) Meghan: That's true. I get discouraged, you
know? I feel like other people skim more. Like I do 4 hours of reading
for every normal person's 1 hour. Therapist: You're saying, "What I do
is too much. It's over the top." Is that right? Meghan: Right.
Therapist: And I could be wrong, but you might also be wondering, "Maybe
there's another way?" . . . Like it's possible to not exhaust yourself .
. . other people seem to do it. Meghan: Yeah . . . that's true.
Therapist: What do you think others do? Meghan: Well, they don't go
crazy like I do. They don't obsess about getting it right. Therapist:
So, everything is not "on the line" all the time. Meghan: Right.
Therapist: And only you can know whether this would be true, but maybe
they seem to be okay with not absorbing every single word. They allow
for that. (Socratic questioning/​ suggesting in MI spirit) Meghan: That's
true. As Meghan elaborated the motives and benefits of her status quo, a
process ensued whereby she began to reexamine it and the therapist
sought to help her elaborate this emergent change talk. Given this new
context of reduced ambivalence, the MI + CBT therapist then worked to
introduce change-​oriented (CBT) strategies (presenting them in the
spirit of MI) in order to join Meghan in her

296

Specific Disorders and Populations

growing resolve. The MI + CBT therapist, however, seeks to avoid
coercion and is at the ready for any reemergent ambivalence or
resistance in this process. Therapist: So, one of the ways we can combat
the anxiety is by activating the soothing system. (Client smirks).
"What's your reaction to that?" (Therapist notices client smirk and
probes for possible resistance) Meghan: I have a feeling it's going to
be like, "Find five brown things and listen to this and where are you,
what are you doing, that kind of stuff" (laughs)

Noticing that this interchange has the potential to develop into more
resistance, however, the therapist invites the client to talk about her
reluctance. Therapist: Right. So, what has been your experience with
that . . . helpful or no? Meghan: It just seems so . . . like it
happened one time when I drank like four cups of coffee and had really
bad heart palpitations and I went to the counseling office and some guy
sat me down and said "what do you see, what do you hear . . . ," and it
just seemed really silly. Therapist: That makes sense . . . there is
something silly about being asked such basic questions . . . you know
who you are. . . . (laughing together) So part of this is just trying
different things and deciding what works for you. So, if there are some
things you absolutely hate, then we won't do that. You're the boss. You
are the one to decide if it's going to be beneficial or not to try.
(therapist reinforcing autonomy) And if it's not, then we can move on.
(client nods) So, one of the ways we can soothe is to focus on our
breathing . . . Meghan: (interrupts): I've done that before and found
the opposite. . . . Like on the subway I had an anxiety attack and I
tried to breath in and out . . . and I couldn't feel the air doing
anything for me, and it freaked me out even more. (resistance)
Therapist: Sometimes focusing on your breath can actually contribute to
anxiety. . . . Like there you were attending to your breathing and
thought, "Oh my goodness, my breathing is not automatic

anymore. I am not getting any air." (Therapist rolling with resistance)
Meghan: That's it. Exactly (both laughing). The other thing I had once .
. . you know when you go to your doctor and they tell you to breath in
and out . . . that makes me want to pass out . . . like I can only do it
twice and then "get away from me" . . . so breathing for me . . . I am
scared to focus on it . . . I feel like it's better off automatic.
(ambivalence) Therapist: Okay, so we can definitely not go that route.
There is also something called progressive muscle relaxation. (therapist
explains a bit) That might be helpful for addressing tension and
restlessness. Does that sound like maybe it might be a better fit?
Meghan: Oh, that's good. Yes, much better fit. Note that if they could
not identify a CBT technique the client was ready to engage with, the
therapist would go back to a fuller exploration of the ambivalence; lack
of engagement is a sign that something about change continues to be
threatening. With Meghan, this was not the case, and the therapist and
client moved on to implementing progressive muscle relaxation, thought
records, and behavioral experiments to challenge the worry and try on
new ways of being. The next example again illustrates the benefits of
infusing MI into CBT, even when the client is in the action phase, and
demonstrates the process of supporting autonomy. Therapist: So, we
talked about identifying some action tendencies in anxiety and worry.
Some of the behaviors you see in yourself that you listed are things
like checking and planning. So maybe today we can start to address those
behaviors, and you can decide which ones you want to hold on to and
which ones might be worth trying to let go of a bit. . . . Meghan: Well,
here is the thing, I did try it . . . for our appointment today, I
didn't write down our appointment. I thought I could write it or I could
not. So, I made an effort not to write it down and just kind of see.
Therapist: And what was that like? (open question designed to explore
the experiment with a new behavior)

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

297

Meghan: It was interesting. Like when you rely on something so much you
don't tend to use your head to figure out what do I have to do . . . so
it got me thinking. . . . (pause) And it wasn't bad . . . it's one
thing, it's not like it was a hundred things . . . so it was manageable.

self-​reported worry dropped markedly and was clearly in the normal range
(pre 78/​80, post 18/​80; 1-​year follow-​up 19/​80). In terms of diagnostic
comorbidity, at posttest and follow-​up, she no longer met criteria for
OCD or panic disorder with agoraphobia. And on the Inventory of
Interpersonal Therapist: And does it feel like you want to attempt
Problems (Horowitz et al., 1988) her relational it again? It's up to
you. (supporting autonomy/​ functioning showed the largest improvements
in the areas of self-​sacrificing, nonassertiveness, and choice) being
overly accommodating. Meghan: Yes (quickly). Because it sucks relying on
something, you know. Therapist: And what specifically did you notice
about not writing down the appointment? Meghan: I thought about it more
in an effort to not forget . . . (pause) But I kind of liked not writing
it down, but just knowing . . . like organizing it in my head as opposed
to visually. (change talk)

OUTCOME RESEARCH

The research attesting to the effectiveness of MI alone and CBT alone is
voluminous and compelling. In this section, we summarize the central
findings from our team's RCTs that have Therapist: It sounds like you
were able to trust established the additive efficacy of integrating
yourself a bit. . . . MI into CBT for GAD. Meghan: Right!
(enthusiastically) We have tested MI + CBT's efficacy in two Here the
therapist is fully prepared to address, GAD trials. In the first pilot
trial, clients were and accept, either outcome (experiment worked
randomly assigned to receive either a pretreator it did not). The
exchange has more of a feel of ment of 4 MI sessions followed by 14
hours (8 exploration and is less compliance-​oriented than sessions) of
individual CBT (MI + CBT) or 14 CBT alone might be at times. Notice that
the ther- hours (8 sessions) of CBT with no pretreatment apist did not
step in quickly to praise Meghan as (Westra, Arkowitz, & Dozois, 2009).
MI + CBT this might indicate the therapist's attachment to a clients
demonstrated greater posttreatment preferred outcome and interfere with
the client de- worry reduction than CBT clients, with this ciding for
herself what she thought of the change superior effect being more
pronounced for step. It also prevents resistance that might occur,
severe worriers (d = .97) than for moderate especially early in the
process of experimenting worriers (d = .20). Moreover, the differential
with change when the patient is still unsure about treatment effect was
mediated by lower levels its merits. of rater-​observed resistance early
in MI + CBT Over the course of the 15 sessions of MI + CBT, compared to
CBT (Aviram & Westra, 2011). Meghan's scores on alliance quality and
outcome However, these results warranted some caution, expectancy showed
steady improvement, with given several notable confounds: MI + CBT a
particular jump occurring early. Despite her clients had more sessions,
had two different high ambivalence at the outset, at midtreatment
therapists (one delivering the MI pretreatment, Meghan showed evidence
of resistance in just another the CBT), were inherently aware of 5% of
total session time. Comparatively, the av- being in the experimental
condition, and had erage midtreatment resistance score among the MI
delivered to them sequentially versus fully CBT-​alone patients was three
times higher than responsively. Meghan's (again suggesting Meghan had
high Addressing these limitations, the second trial levels of
collaboration despite her high initial compared the efficacy of 15
sessions of CBT change ambivalence). On posttreatment and 1-​ alone to 4
sessions of MI followed by 11 sesyear follow-​ up diagnostic interviews,
Meghan sions of fully integrated MI + CBT for clients no longer met
criteria for GAD, and she had with high worry severity GAD (Westra et
al., no clinically significant symptoms of GAD. Her 2016). This
integration was accomplished in

298

Specific Disorders and Populations

two ways: (1) by continuously using MI spirit in conducting CBT and (2)
by responsively shifting into primary MI strategies in response to
markers of client ambivalence or resistance. When MI + CBT therapists
judged the resistance to be resolved, they would then shift back into
primary CBT, though still with the MI spirit. Although MI + CBT and CBT
achieved comparable posttreatment outcomes, MI + CBT patients evidenced
greater worry and distress reduction and also had a greater likelihood
of clinically significant change at 12-​month follow-​up. The authors
posited that this delayed or "sleeper" effect might be due to the
long-​term benefits of therapists promoting the client-​as-​expert stance,
especially when they take the risk of asserting their own needs in
session, which could help clients develop trust in their own change
directions and resources that would enable continued improvement even
after treatment ends. In contrast, it is possible that CBT clients
attributed their posttreatment change more to the treatment techniques
or the therapist, potentially leaving them more vulnerable to relapse
after termination. Probing these trial results, a follow-​up study
examined both MI theory-​ relevant (i.e., empathy, resistance) and common
treatment processes (i.e., homework compliance, alliance) as potential
mediators of MI + CBT's superior long-​term effect (Constantino, Westra
et al., 2017). Greater homework compliance and better quality alliances
(the two common processes) correlated with more positive outcomes across
both treatments, but only empathy and resistance significantly mediated
the treatment effect. Specifically, MI + CBT clients exhibited
significantly lower midtreatment resistance and perceived greater
therapist empathy compared to CBT patients, which in turn related to
lower worry levels at 12-​month follow-​up. However, when both empathy and
resistance were included in the same statistical model, only patient
resistance remained significant, accounting for 76% of the comparative
treatment effect. These results support that using MI to address
resistance is the primary mechanism through which integrative MI + CBT
outperforms standalone CBT, at least over

the long term. That is entirely consistent with the origins and
intentions of MI: to reduce patient resistance, to prepare them for an
action-​ oriented treatment, and to help them learn to trust themselves
in bringing about change.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS Regarding practice directions, we suggest that
therapists routinely assess interpersonal problem types, ambivalence,
and resistance, even if informally. Such measurement can guide the use
of MI, especially for those clients who need it the most (e.g., those
with high resistance, low assertiveness, and high exploitability).
Clinicians can also generate practice-​based evidence to test the
immediate and longer term impacts of using MI + CBT with clients
suffering from disorders beyond GAD. Regarding research directions, we
believe it is important to test interpersonal change as an outcome in
GAD clients and clients with other presenting problems, to follow the
corrective interpersonal experiences posited here through to their
natural endpoint. Researchers can also test the reach of MI beyond GAD
clients and beyond integration with individual CBT---​ to other clinical
populations, other psychotherapies, varied treatment formats. As noted,
researchers can also test whether MI + CBT requires adaptations for
clients with different multicultural identities. Finally, future
research can also investigate whether training therapists to use MI in
the face of negative process markers improves therapists' general
efficacy; that is, whether MI training not only improves treatment
efficacy, but also therapist efficacy (Constantino, Boswell et al.,
2017). Another future direction of our approach is to adapt deliberate
practice (Rousmaniere, 2016) to a workshop focused on repeated practice
with numerous video vignettes and recreated material of ambivalence and
resistance (e.g., ambivalent/​ resistant statements trainees have
encountered or fear encountering). Trainees engage with multiple
exercises, from identifying ambivalence/​resistance to responding to
clients with varying presentations of ambivalence and

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety

resistance, as well as anger. They receive feedback on their responses
and also compare their responses to ideal ones to shape skill
development. We are planning to conduct an RCT examining this deliberate
practice format to a traditional MI workshop (i.e., more didactic,
demonstration, discussion, and some practice but little feedback).
Outcomes will include pre-​ and postresponding to video vignettes of
resistance and ambivalence, as well as posttraining interviews of actors
portraying difficult clients. We recently conducted a pilot study to
test the feasibility of a 2-​ day deliberate practice workshop with 21
graduate students in clinical psychology (Singer-​ Nussbaum et al.,
2018). Findings indicated significant improvements, pre-​to post-​
workshop, in MI-​ consistent responses to video vignettes depicting
ambivalent and resistant clients. Moreover, trainees also showed
significant improvement in their "positivity" toward resistant clients
who were hostile and angrily expressing dissatisfaction with therapy.
Given that research has indicated that the positive effects of
traditional didactic workshops typically erode over time (Miller et al.,
2004), it will be important to assess the durability of these gains in
follow-​up assessments and to improved outcomes in clinical settings. If
successful, translating the methods of deliberate practice to an
efficient workshop format may be one step in improving clinical skills,
which tend to remain static or even erode with time and experience
(Goldberg et al., 2016). Moreover, using process research to inform
these efforts is important in ensuring that training is focused on
client markers and therapist actions that have been explicitly linked to
outcomes. This is especially relevant given the lack of evaluated
training methods in our field and the fact that therapist adherence to a
specific psychotherapy model (the focus of most workshops) tends to be
unrelated to client outcomes (Webb, Derubeis, & Barber, 2010). In short,
process-​informed deliberate practice may be particularly promising in
training therapists to navigate specific and contextually bound moments
of client resistance, ambivalence, and even criticism or negative
feedback. Doing so not only has a reasonable chance of improving

299

therapist performance, but also, most importantly, enhancing clinical
outcomes.

References Aviram, A., & Westra, H. A. (2011). The impact of
motivational interviewing on resistance in cognitive behavioral therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy Research, 21, 698--​708.
Aviram, A., Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M. (2016).
Responsive management of early resistance in cognitive-​ behavioral
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 84, 783--​ 794. doi:10.1037/​ccp0000100 Beutler, L.
E., Harwood, T. M., Michelson, A., Song, X., & Holman, J. (2011).
Resistance/​reactance level. In J. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (2nd ed., pp. 261--​278). Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press. Binder, J. L., & Strupp, H. H. (1997). "Negative
process": A recurrently discovered and underestimated facet of
therapeutic process and outcome in the individual psychotherapy of
adults. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 4, 121--​139.
doi:10.1111/​j.1468-​ 2850.1997.tb00105.x Bordin, E. S. (1979). The
generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of the working alliance.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, 16, 252--​260.
doi:10.1037/​h0085885 Borkovec, T. D. (1994). The nature, functions, and
origins of worry. In G. C. L. Davey & F. Tallis (Eds.), Worrying:
Perspectives on theory, assessment, and treatment (pp. 5--​34). New York:
Wiley. Button, M. L., Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M.
(2016). Client ambivalence as a moderator of treatment outcomes in MI
and CBT for generalized anxiety. Paper presented at the 32nd annual
meeting of the Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration,
Dublin, Ireland. Castonguay, L. G., Goldfried, M. R., Wiser, S., Raue,
P. J., & Hayes, A. M. (1996). Predicting outcome in cognitive therapy
for depression: A comparison of unique and common factors. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 64, 497--​504.
doi:10.1037/​0022-​006X.64.3.497 Chamberlain, P., Patterson, G. R., Reid,
J. B., Kavanagh, K., & Forgatch, M. S. (1984).

300

Specific Disorders and Populations

Observation of client resistance. Behavior Therapy, 15, 144--​155.
Constantino, M. J., Bernecker, S. L., Boswell, J. F., & Castonguay, L.
G. (2013). Context-​responsive psychotherapy integration as a framework
for a unified clinical science: Conceptual and empirical considerations.
Journal of Unified Psychotherapy and Clinical Science, 2, 1--​20.
Constantino, M. J., Boswell, J. F., Coyne, A. E., Kraus, D. R., &
Castonguay, L. G. (2017). Who works for whom and why? Integrating
therapist effects analysis into psychotherapy outcome and process
research. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), How and why are some
therapists better than others? Understanding therapist effects
(pp. 309--​ 323). Washington DC: American Psychological Association.
doi:10.1037/​0000034-​004 Constantino, M. J., DeGeorge, J., Dadlani, M.
B., & Overtree, C. E. (2009). Motivational interviewing: A bellwether
for context-​response integration. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In
Session, 65, 1246--​1253. doi:10.1002/​jclp.20637 Constantino, M. J., &
Westra, H. A. (2012). An expectancy-​ based approach to corrective
experiences in psychotherapy. In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.),
Transformation in psychotherapy: Corrective experiences across
cognitive, behavioral, humanistic, and psychodynamic approaches
(pp. 121--​ 139). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Constantino, M. J., Westra, H. A., Antony, M. M., & Coyne, A. E. (2017,
June). Specific and common processes as mediators of the long-​ term
effects of cognitive-​ behavioral therapy integrated with motivational
interviewing for generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy Research.
Advance online publication. doi:10.1080/​10503307.2017.1332794 Coyne, A.
E., Constantino, M. J., Laws, H. B, Westra, H. A., & Antony, M. M.
(2017, March 29). Patient-​therapist convergence in alliance ratings as a
predictor of outcome in psychotherapy for generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychotherapy Research. Advance online publication.
doi:10.1080/​10503307.2017.1303209 Coyne, A. E., Constantino, M. J.,
Westra, H. A., & Antony, M. M. (in press). Competing indirect effects in
a comparative psychotherapy trial for generalized anxiety disorder.
Psychotherapy. Cuijpers, P., Sijbrandij, M., Koole, S., Huibers, M.,
Berking, M., & Andersson, G. (2014). Psychological treatment of
generalized

anxiety disorder: A meta-​ analysis. Clinical Psychology Review, 34,
130--​140. doi:10.1016/​ j.cpr.2014.01.002 Elliott, R., Bohart, A. C., &
Watson, J. C. (2018). Empathy. In J. C. Norcross & M. J. Lambert (Eds.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 1. Evidence-​ based therapist
contributions (3rd ed., pp. 132--​ 152). New York: Oxford University
Press. Flückiger, C., Del Re, A. C., & Horvath, A. O. (2018). Alliance
in individual adult psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. J. Lambert
(Eds.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Vol. 1. Evidence-​ based
therapist contributions (3rd ed., pp. 25--​ 69). New York: Oxford
University Press. Francis, N., Rollnick, S., McCambridge, J., Butler,
C., Lane, C., & Hood, K. (2005). When smokers are resistant to change:
Experimental analysis of the effect of patient resistance on
practitioner behavior. Addiction, 100, 1175--​ 1182. doi:
10.1111/​j.1360-​0443.2005.01124.x Goldberg, S. B, Rousmaniere, T.,
Miller, S. D., Whipple, J., Nielsen, S. L., Hoyt, W. T., & Wampold, B.
E. (2016). Do psychotherapists improve with time and experience? A
longitudinal analysis of outcomes in a clinical setting. Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 63, 1--​11. doi: 10.1037/​cou0000131 Gomez Penedo,
J. M., Constantino, M. J., Coyne, A. E., Westra, H. A., & Antony, M. M.
(2017). Markers for context-​ responsiveness: Patient baseline
interpersonal problems moderate the efficacy of two psychotherapies for
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 85, 1000--​1011. doi:10.1037/​ccp0000233 Hagen Glynn, L., &
Moyers, T. B. (2009). Manual for the motivational interviewing skill
code (MISC), version 1.1: Addendum to MISC 1.0. Retrieved from the
University of New Mexico Center on Alcoholism, Substance Use and
Addictions website: http://​casaa.unm.edu. Hara, K. M., Westra, H. A.,
Aviram, A., Button, M. L., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M. (2015).
Therapist awareness of client resistance in cognitive behavioral therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder. Cognitive Behavior Therapy, 44,
162--​174. Hara, K. M., Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M.
M. (2018). The impact of resistance on empathy in cognitive behavioral
therapy for generalized anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy Research, 28,
606--​616.

Integrative Treatment of Anxiety Hettema, J., Steele, J., & Miller, W.
R. (2005). Motivational interviewing. Annual Review of Clinical
Psychology, 1(1), 91--​111. Horowitz, L. M., Rosenberg, S. E., Baer, B.
A., Ureño, G., & Villaseñor, V. S. (1988). Inventory of interpersonal
problems: Psychometric properties and clinical applications. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 56(6), 885--​892.
doi:http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​ 0022-​006X.56.6.885 Hunter, J. A., Button,
M. L., & Westra, H. A. (2014). Ambivalence and alliance ruptures in
cognitive behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety. Cognitive
Behavioral Therapy, 43, 201--​208. Khattra, J., Angus, L., Westra, H.,
Macaulay, C., Moertl, K., & Constantino, M. J. (2017). Client
perceptions of corrective experiences in cognitive behavioral therapy
and motivational interviewing for generalized anxiety disorder: An
exploratory pilot study. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27,
23--​34. doi:10.1037/​int0000053 Lundahl, B. W., Kunz, C., Brownell, C.
A., Tollefson, D., & Burke, B. L. (2010). A meta-​ analysis of
motivational interviewing: Twenty-​ five years of empirical studies.
Research on Social Work Practice, 20, 137--​160. doi:10.1177/​
1049731509347850 Macaulay, C., Angus, L., Khattra, J., Westra, H., & Ip,
J. (2017). Client retrospective accounts of corrective experiences in
motivational interviewing integrated with cognitive behavioral therapy
for generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In
Session, 73, 168--​181. doi:10.1002/​jclp.22430 Mahoney, M. J. (2003). The
experience of change. In M. J. Mahoney (Ed.), Constructive psychotherapy
(pp. 70--​192). New York: Guilford. Marcus, M., Westra, H. A., Angus, L.,
& Kertes, A. (2011). Client experiences of motivational interviewing for
generalized anxiety disorder, Psychotherapy Research, 21, 447--​461.
Meyer, T. J., Miller, M. L., Metzger, R. L., & Borkovec, T. D. (1990).
Development and validation of the Penn State Worry Questionnaire.
Behaviour Research and Therapy, 28, 487--​495.
doi:10.1016/​0005-​7967(90)90135-​6 Miller, W. R., & Rollnick, S. (2002).
Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for change (2nd ed.). New
York: Guilford. Miller, W. R., Yahne, C. E., Moyers, T. B., Martinex,
J., & Pirritano, M. (2004). A randomized trial of methods to help
clinicians learn motivational interviewing. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 1050--​1062.

301

Morrison, N. R., Constantino, M. J., Westra, H. A., Kertes, A., Goodwin,
B. J., & Antony, M. M. (2017). Using interpersonal process recall to
compare patients' accounts of resistance in two psychotherapies for
generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Clinical Psychology. Advance
online publication. doi:10.1002/​jclp.22527 Moyers, T. B., & Miller, W.
R. (2013). Is low therapist empathy toxic? Psychology of Addictive
Behaviors, 27, 878--​884. doi: 10.1037/​a0030274 Newman, M. G., Llera, S.
J., Erickson, T. M., Przeworski, A., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Worry
and generalized anxiety disorder: A review and theoretical synthesis of
evidence on nature, etiology, mechanisms, and treatment. Annual Review
of Clinical Psychology, 9, 275--​297. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1146/​
annurev-​clinpsy-​050212-​185544 Norcross. J. C., & Lambert, M. (2018).
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​ based responsiveness
(3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Owen, J., Tao, K. W.,
Drinane, J. M., Hook, J., Davis, D. E., & Kune, N. F. (2016). Client
perceptions of therapists' multicultural orientation: Cultural (missed)
opportunities and cultural humility. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 47, 30--​37. doi:10.1037/​pro0000046 Przeworski, A., Newman,
M. G., Pincus, A. L., Kasoff, M. B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L. G.,
& Berlin, K. S. (2011). Interpersonal pathoplasticity in individuals
with generalized anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120,
286--​298. http://​dx.doi.org/​ 10.1037/​a0023334 Rennie, D. (1993).
Clients' deference in psychotherapy. Journal of Counseling Psychology,
41, 427--​ 437. doi:10.1037/​ 0022-​0167.41.4.427 Rousmaniere, T. (2016).
Deliberate practice for psychotherapists. New York: Routledge.
Sanderson, W. C., & Bruce, T. J. (2007). Causes and management of
treatment-​resistant panic disorder and agoraphobia: A survey of expert
therapists. Cognitive and Behavioral Practice, 14, 26--​35. Sijercic, I.,
Button, M. L., Westra, H. A., & Hara, K. M. (2016). The interpersonal
context of client motivational language in cognitive behavioral therapy.
Psychotherapy, 53, 13--​21. Singer-​ Nussbaum, B., Westra, H. A.,
Norouzian, N., Constantino, M. J., Antony, M. M., Poulin, L., & Hara, K.
(2018, June). Using deliberate practice to train therapists to navigate
process

302

Specific Disorders and Populations

markers of ambivalence and resistance: A pilot study. Poster presented
at the annual meeting of the Society for Psychotherapy Research,
Amsterdam. Soto, A., Smoth, T. B., Griner, D., Domenech Rodriguez, M., &
Bernal, G. (2018). Cultural adaptations and therapists multicultural
competence: Two meta-​ analytic reviews. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
74, 1907--​1923. Webb, C. A., Derubeis, R. J., & Barber, J. P. (2010).
Therapist adherence/​competence and treatment outcome: A meta-​ analytic
review. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 200--​211.
Westra, H. A. (2011). Comparing the predictive capacity of observed in-​
session resistance to self-​reported motivation in cognitive behavioral
therapy. Behavior Research and Therapy, 49, 106--​113. Westra, H. A.
(2012). Motivational interviewing in the treatment of anxiety. New York:
Guilford. Westra, H. A., & Arkowitz, H. (2010). Combining motivational
interviewing and cognitive behavioural therapy to increase treatment
efficacy for generalized anxiety disorder. In

D. Sookman & B. Leahy (Eds.), Resolving treatment impasses with
resistant anxiety disorders (pp. 199--​232). New York: Routledge. Westra,
H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A. (2009). Adding a motivational
interviewing pretreatment to cognitive behavioral therapy for
generalized anxiety disorder: A preliminary randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 23, 1106--​1117. NIHMS ID: 132159 Westra,
H. A., Aviram, A., Kertes, A., Ahmed, M., & Connors, L. (2009). Manual
for rating interpersonal resistance. Unpublished manuscript, York
University, Toronto. Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M.
(2016). Integrating motivational interviewing with cognitive-​ behavioral
therapy for severe generalized anxiety disorder: An allegiance-​
controlled randomized clinical trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 84, 768--​ 782. doi:10.1037/​ccp0000098 Westra, H. A., &
Norouzian, N. (2018). Using motivational interviewing to manage process
markers of ambivalence and resistance in cognitive behavioral therapy.
Cognitive Therapy and Research, 42, 193--​203.

14 Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of Psychotherapy for Chronic
Depression JAMES P. MCCULLOUGH, JR. AND ELISABETH SCHRAMM

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH The cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy (CBASP) is an acquisition-​learning behavioral model of
psychotherapy constructed specifically to treat chronic depression, now
diagnosed as persistent depressive disorder, dysthymia (PDD). CBASP is
administered by clinicians who utilize a unique therapist interpersonal
role known as disciplined personal involvement (DPI; McCullough, 2000,
2006; McCullough, Schramm, & Penberthy, 2015). CBASP development (from
1980 to the present) evolved under the guiding aegis of Gordon Paul's
(1967) optimal goal for psychotherapy research: Paul advocated that
psychotherapy research must investigate outcome results where patient
diagnoses are matched with operationalized treatments under particular
therapists.

CBASP patients learn-​ to-​ criterion operat­ ionalized goals of therapy.
In many chronically depressed patients (hereafter referred to as PDD
patients)---​and particularly those whose depression onset occurred
during adolescence---​there are two core internal dilemmas (Wakefield,
1992) that remain unresolved: (1) a pervasive interpersonal fear-​
avoidance reaction toward others and (2) a perceptual disconnection to
interpersonal encounters that make it difficult for them to be informed
by the interpersonal consequences of their behavior. CBASP learning
goals are specifically designed to address both internal mechanism
dilemmas. The first learning goal, dyadic safety, teaches patients to
discriminate the person of the therapist from maltreating significant
others (SOs)---​designed for later generalization to other persons. The
second goal teaches individuals to recognize the
interpersonal-​environmental consequences

303

304

Specific Disorders and Populations

they produce which connect them perceptually to the
person-​by-​environmental (P × E) relationship---​a CBASP learning goal
labeled perceived functionality (McCullough, 2000; McCullough et al.,
2015). The depression follow-​up data we have indicate that patients
frequently relapse (\>50%) following treatment (Klein et al., 2004;
Klein, Shankman, & Rose, 2006; Steinert et al., 2014). These data
suggested two things: (1) patients must learn the "subject matter"
(learning goals) of treatment to self-​ protect them during the
posttreatment period, and (2) PDD is an lifetime illness (McCullough et
al., 2015). Patients may learn to manage PDD effectively but, like
diabetes and high blood pressure, maintaining wellness during
posttreatment is a lifelong task. The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual
of Mental Disorders (DSM-​ 5; American Psychiatric Association \[APA\],
2013) published the first chronic depression category in its
nomenclature by consolidating chronic major depression and dysthymic
disorder. This separation of chronic depression from its "specifier
status" in previous editions of the DSM was the result of chronic
depression research (e.g., Klein, 2008; McCullough et al., 2003;
McCullough et al., 2000). The essential feature of PDD is a depressed
mood that continues for 2 years or longer (1 year for children and
adolescents). CBASP, focusing on the chronic depressive disorders since
the mid-​ 1970s (Doverspike, 1976), has been shown to treat effectively
all subtypes of PDD, types that are more alike than different (Klein,
2008; Klein et al. 2006; McCullough et al. 2000; McCullough et al.,
2003b). One of the novel features of CBASP that distinguishes it from
other psychotherapy models is that clinicians become personally involved
with patients. For more than a century, psychotherapists have been
trained to avoid personal involvement with patients (McCullough, 2006).
The proscription banning therapist personal involvement originated with
Sigmund Freud (1963) early in the twentieth century. A present-​ day
analyst writes (Hoffer, 2006): "The analyst's responsibility is to
enhance the patient's capacity for conscious and

unconscious conflict elucidation while conflict resolution remains both
the prerogative and responsibility of the analysand" (p. 37). Expecting
chronically depressed patients to behave in novel ways, ex nihilo,
without being taught to behave in an alternative fashion, is
unrealistic. Such logic applied to chronic patients poses this question:
How can patients be responsible for modifying their behavior when they
have never been exposed to a loving and caring environment? It is the
assumption of CBASP that patients cannot and will not spontaneously
produce loving and caring behavior without learning to do so in a
relationship with a loving and caring human being. If one has never
experienced positive and facilitative experiences with others, no
positive neural or interpersonal potentialities exist for the
individual. In short, persons cannot do what they've never learned to
do! This realization led us to rethink the entire therapist role with
the chronically depressed patient as well as to review the century-​old
proscription prohibiting personal involvement in psychotherapy.
Disciplined Personal Involvement CBASP is fully cognizant of certain
dangers that countertransference strategies present; that is, using
dyadic treatment to meet one's own personal needs (Spotnitz,
1969)---​always a destructive strategy. Why is the DPI role important in
treatment of chronic depression? Because many early-​onset PDD patients
report that they have never experienced interpersonal trust or felt safe
around others. Without the learning experiences of trust and safety in
the presence of clinicians with whom they trust, patients usually remain
quite resistant to efforts to modify their pervasive fear-​avoidance
lifestyle. DPI is administered from an objective countertransference
perspective (Winnicott, 1949); that is, therapists' DPI reactions
involve the verbal articulation of the restricted feelings, attitudes,
and reactions practitioners experience and that are evoked by patient
behaviors (e.g., "I can't say this or the patient will think I'm
negatively judging him"). DPI

CBASP for Chronic Depression

305

"objective countertransference" reactions also illness and its recovery
played a significant include instances when therapists express role in
the conceptualization of the chronic caring feelings for patients who
need to hear it. disorder and its treatment. For example, JPM Examples
of such statements are ones that explaces high value on the disciplined
personal press acceptance, respect, and concern toward involvement of
the therapist, a salient those individuals who fear being verbally,
sexucharacteristic of his analyst. Learning to trust ally, or physically
abused by the clinician. the analyst was a facilitative experience that
In summary, many chronic patients preresulted in remission of the
disorder. sent for treatment severely traumatized de- 2. Because CBASP
is an operationalized velopmentally, cognitive-​ emotionally, and model,
therapy is structured so that patient behaviorally. CBASP therapists
frequently performance data are obtained session-​ to-​ treat
preoperational and primitive-​functioning session throughout treatment.
The goal adults who, in the beginning, behave like of the "learning
content" seeks to correct "little boys and girls" (McCullough, 2006; two
essential learning problems that we McCullough et al., 2015); however,
these imopine maintain the PDD disorder (see mature individuals have the
capacity to grow McCullough et al., 2015). Thus, we want to and maturate
within a safe dyadic relationship. determine how much learning patients
are DPI facilitates this potential as it gives therapists acquiring
across sessions. The assumption permission to be disciplined and
personally inunderlying this approach is that patients volved. The role,
administered appropriately, who achieve the best learning performance
enables clinicians to behave toward patients should also obtain the best
outcome of as interpersonal partners, where felt safety and treatment
results. We answer two questions interpersonal trust are actualized and
problem-​ with this approach: (a) How much learning solving skills are
learned. content is acquired? And, (b) What relationship does the amount
learned have with the outcome of treatment and follow-​ Historical
Origins up indices (e.g., Beck Depression Index The first author's long-​
standing interest in \[BDI-​II\] score \[Beck, 1996\], Kiesler's Impact
chronic depression and in finding ways to modify Message Inventory
profile, etc.)? the disorder stems from multiple sources. These include
(1) JPM's own struggles with PDD; As noted earlier, CBASP is an
interper(2) the desire to establish CBASP on empirical sonal
psychotherapy based on a person × foundations, operationalize the
techniques, environment causal determinant model of and research its
effectiveness; (3) interest in the behavior (Bandura, 1977; Kiesler,
1996), and contributions of B. F. Skinner, Albert Bandura, therapists
following this model assist patients Donald Kiesler, and Jean Piaget
that have in- in addressing two dysfunctional internal formed our
theoretical views and praxis; and, mechanisms (Wakefield, 1992). The
first is to last, (4) JPM's long-​standing interest in chronic
countercondition the patient's pervasive interdepression. What follows
is a more detailed de- personal fear, replacing the fear with felt
interscription of each of these four influences. personal dyadic safety.
The technique used to do this is labeled the Interpersonal
Discrimination 1. During early adolescence, JPM experienced Exercise
(IDE). This is considered learned by an early-​onset PDD that lasted more
than a patients when they experience felt interperdecade. Today, he
would be diagnosed with sonal safety with the clinician and when they
early-​onset PDD dysthymia with intermittent can successfully
discriminate the psychotheramajor depressive episodes (or "double pist
from maltreating SOs. Over time, patients depression"). During his mid-​
twenties, he learn to make this discrimination without assisunderwent
psychoanalytic treatment. The tance from the clinician. disorder
remitted, and the process of the

306

Specific Disorders and Populations

The second learning goal is achieved when patients' interpersonal
avoidance behaviors are replaced with approach behaviors, allowing them
to interact with others in a more effective manner. To accomplish this
goal, patients are administered and learn to self-​administer a
situational analysis (SA) which teaches assertive behavior and assists
patients in obtaining their situational desired outcomes with others.
Achieving desired outcomes in interpersonal situations also reflects the
acquisition of perceived functionality. Perceived functionality means
that patients are now perceptually connected to others because they can
recognize the consequences their behavior has on others. Over the course
of treatment, patients learn to self-​administer and perform to criterion
the SA task. To date, there is some preliminary evidence that the
outcome of CBASP treatment is dependent on the amount of learning
acquired (Manber et al., 2003). 3. The third historical feature is the
synthesis of theoretical models that have influenced the construction of
CBASP. For example, Skinner's views on the importance of informing
behavioral consequences (Skinner, 1953), his approach to teaching
(Skinner, 1968), and his understanding of the therapist's
(experimenter's) role in choreographing of contingencies during the
session are foundations of CBASP. Also part of CBASP is Bandura's (1977)
conceptualization of reciprocal interaction, which is achieved during
the latter stages of treatment (not in the beginning) when patients
learn to identify the interpersonal impacts they exert on the therapist
and others; Beckian cognitive psychology influences (Beck et al., 1979)
are reflected in the structure of the CBASP model particularly in the SA
exercise. In addition, CBASP incorporates the interpersonal
psychotherapy views of Kiesler (e.g., Anchin & Kiesler, 1982; Kiesler,
1983, 1996). Kieslerian interpersonal theory, as well as his
experimental data, strengthened our assumption that the therapist role
can be used as a major interpersonal change

variable. Finally, Piaget's (1923/​ 1926; 1954/​ 1981) theory of
cognitive-​ emotive development, elegantly described in Intelligence and
Affectivity (1954/​1981), provides the foundations for our etiological
views of preoperational functioning of PDD patients. 4. The last
historical feature that has impacted the method is the evolution of the
mood disorder nomenclature in the various editions of the DSM. In the
1960s and 70s, DSM-​II (APA, 1968) defined chronic affective illness as a
personality disorder; at that time, the mental health field considered
personality disorders to be untreatable. Such views turned out to be
patently erroneous. Robert Spitzer's creative work with the Research
Diagnostic Criteria (RDC; Spitzer, Endicott, & Robins, 1978) moved
mental health in the direction of diagnostic reliability. In 1980, the
first chronic Axis I affective category (viz. dysthymia) appeared in
DSM-​ III (APA, 1980), with Spitzer serving as its chair. In April, 2013,
the American Psychiatric Association published DSM-​5, and, for the first
time, chronic depression was uncoupled from its "specifier status" with
major depression and became an independent diagnostic entity, PDD
(dysthymia). Paralleling these developments, my 45-​year research program
has been divided between constructing an effective treatment program and
developing a valid diagnostic nomenclature for the chronic disorders
(e.g., Keller et al., 1995; Klein, 2008; Klein et al., 2006; McCullough,
1980, 2000; McCullough et al., 2000; McCullough et al., 2003b).
ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION CBASP conceptualizes PDD as an evolutionary-​
social disorder (Wakefield, 1992). The chronic mood disorders illustrate
a multiple risk factor phenomenon (Kendler, 2012). They are as follows:
(1) biological risk factors (molecular genetic and neurological), (2)
person-​interacting-​ with-​ environment risk factors (P × E), and

CBASP for Chronic Depression

(3) social risk factors (peer influences, social norms, and customs,
    laws.). The biological and P × E domains constitute the major risk
    factors for PDD, with the P × E domain having the greatest influence
    (Kendler, 2012). An early paper by Wakefield (1992), one that has
    strongly influenced the present authors' conceptualization of PDD,
    proposed an alternative to DSM-​III-​R's (APA, 1987) definition of
    disorder. Wakefield defined disorder as harmful dysfunction,
    describing "dysfunction" as an evolutionary biological construct
    signifying an internal mechanism that was not working or performing
    as it was intended, in contrast to a normal organismic state of
    affairs that is operating as intended. He further defined an
    internal mechanism including both biological structures (e.g.,
    excessive presynaptic reuptake in the serotonin tracts in depressive
    reactions) as well as mental structures, such as motivational,
    cognitive, affective, behavioral, and perceptual variables. Finally,
    Wakefield hypothesized that dysfunctional internal mechanisms are
    the mediating causes of disorder and lead to the resultant harm
    domain in his definition. Applying Wakefield's definition of
    disorder to PDD, the psychological symptoms of PDD and the reported
    felt harm/​distress represent the results of the dysfunctional
    cognitive, emotional, behavioral, and physiological internal
    mechanisms. They are not performing as biologically intended, and
    the PDD patient experiences a concomitant harmful dysfunctional
    state of psychological functioning. In summary, the risk factors in
    the biological and P × E domains in PDD impact in dysfunctional ways
    on the patient's internal mechanisms, which are hypothesized to
    mediate the harm/​ symptom condition. The internal mechanisms are the
    focus of CBASP treatment and its learning requirements. The two
    learning goals that form the foundation of CBASP are designed to
    correct two dysfunctional internal mechanisms that we hypothesize
    maintain the chronic disorder (McCullough et al., 2015). As stated
    earlier, two corresponding CBASP techniques rectify the patient's
    dysfunctional internal processes. The IDE is designed to correct
    interpersonal

307

fear-​avoidance, and SA is designed to correct the person × environment
perceptual disconnection. These two learning goals are mastered during
treatment and modify the dysfunctional mechanisms: the harm/​symptom
state is replaced with felt interpersonal safety, and the patient's
perceptual disconnection with the interpersonal environment is remedied
with the learned ability to recognize the consequences of his or her
behavior. CBASP prioritizes two treatment goals: Patient performance on
the IDE and the SA. As noted earlier, the first involves determining the
degree to which patients discriminate successfully the person of the
therapist from abusive SOs. The exercise is designed to create dyadic
safety. Criterion performance is attained when the person can
self-​administer the exercise, without assistance, during two subsequent
sessions. The second, SA, enables patients to recognize the
interpersonal consequences of their behavior. As with the first goal,
criterion performance requires correct self-​administration without
assistance for two sessions in a row. The Patient Performance Rating
Form (PPRF), completed by the therapist, rates the patient's performance
in the SA exercise. Early data on the use of this measure were reported
in 14 single-​ case replications (McCullough, 1984, 1991), in which
therapy was terminated when patients performed the problem-​solving
procedure (i.e., SA) to criterion. The acquisition-​ learning of goals
and the relationship of these learning tasks to treatment outcome are
illustrated in Figure 14.1. Specifically, the second curve representing
treatment outcome is determined by the amount of learning. CBASP uses
several measurement indices: pre-​/​postdiagnosis using the DSM-​5
diagnostic nomenclature; the BDI-​ II, and the Impact Message Inventory
(IMI; Kiesler, 1983; Kiesler & Schmidt, 1993). Optimal outcome results
are as follows: patients achieve diagnostic remission, patients report
zero or no BDI-​II depression intensity levels, and patients are rated as
changing their interpersonal impact scores in facilitative directions.
These changes will be discussed in more detail later.

308

Specific Disorders and Populations High Level

Low Level Over Therapy Sessions M Acquisition Learning Curve Values For
Two Treatment Techniques Symptom Intensity Ratings

FIGURE 14.1 Graphic illustration of the acquisition-​learning and the
Symptom Intensity Ratings in the cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy (CBASP) model across sessions involving the average of the
two learning curves (Interpersonal Discrimination Exercise \[IDE\]
Technique Felt Safety; situational analysis \[SA\] Technique Perceived
Functionality) and the Symptom Intensity Ratings across several
measures.

APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE Session One Diagnosis of PD It is
unacceptable today to speak of depression in the "generic" sense
(McCullough, 2003b). Differences between the unipolar chronic and
nonchronic depressions have been shown to be quite profound. Numerous
factors are involved in the different manifestations of depression: the
clinical course of the chronic disorders, modal age of onset, outcome of
treatment, time-​to-​response, recurrence and relapse rates, psychosocial
functioning, concomitant Axis III involvement, family history among
first-​ degree relatives, developmental history and abuse, and the
prevalence rates of Axis II comorbidity have all been well documented as
differentiating variables separating the depressive subtypes (Klein,
2008; Klein et al. 2006). Finally, the chronic depressive disorders are
usually lifetime disorders with low rates of spontaneous remission
(e.g., Klein et al., 2006;

McCullough et al., 2015). This is not the case with acute major
depression, which is usually a time-​ limited disorder frequently
remitting within 9 months even without treatment (Tollefson, 1993). When
CBASP clinicians initially interview a depressed patient in session one,
they must determine whether the disorder is PDD or a case of acute major
depression. We recommend graphing the historical course of chronic
depression to answer whether the patient has presented with an acute or
chronic course (McCullough et al., 1996, 2016). An example of course
graphing is shown in Figure 14.2. Procedure During Session 1 1. The
patient is assessed using the DSM-​5 criteria to established a current
diagnosis. 2. A clinical course graphing procedure (McCullough et al.,
2016) is administered to

CBASP for Chronic Depression

309

Current Diagnosis Normal Mood Baseline \[NMB\]

NMB

Dysthymia \[DYS\]

DYS

Major Depression \[MD\]

\[MD\]

\[MD\]

> 2 years of depression

FIGURE 14.2 Clinical course graph of persistent depressive disorder
(PDD) working back in time from present to the past with intermittent
major depressive (MD) episodes, without current episode of major
depression. Source: McCullough et al., 2016.

differentiate between a case of acute major depression and PDD. 3.
BDI-​II is administered at every session. 4. The Childhood Trauma
Questionnaire; A Retrospective Self-​ Report (Bernstein & Fink, 1998) is
administered if the patient meets PDD criteria. 5. The therapist
describes the Significant Other History (SOH) procedure (McCullough et
al., 2011, 2015) explaining that the exercise will be administered
during the next session. Patients are asked to bring a list of 5--​6 SOs
to the next session. Procedure During Session 2 1. BDI-​II administered.
2. The SOH is administered. Patients provide a list of 5--​6 SOs who have
shaped them to be the kind of person they are. These SOs will be the
patient's major life players and individuals who have left their "stamp
of influence." Patients describe what it was like growing up or being
around these persons. The contributions of the SOs may either be
positive or negative. After a brief period of discussion on each SO,
patients are requested to construct the stamp or

source of influence in one sentence---​ these descriptions are called
causal theory conclusions (CTCs). Examples might be: "From my mother I
learned that I could never trust a man"; "Both parents taught me that I
must always be self-​sufficient, that it is wrong to need anything from
anyone"; "Growing up around my father left me with the feeling that I
always had to be perfect---​I should never make a mistake"; "I can't ever
get mad or feel any anger, even today. This comes from my mother." After
Session 2 ends, the clinician examines the CTC list looking for themes
or motifs that run through the SO material. From the content, one
transference hypothesis (TH) is derived describing the hypothesized core
fear that is likely to influence the behavior of the patient in the
dyadic relationship. These themes will usually be reactions that
patients have made to toxic SOs who have hurt them. For example, core
fear THs might be: "If I have a relationship with Dr. JPM, then he will
reject me and remind me how inadequate I am"; "If I disclose my
innermost thoughts and feelings to Dr. JPM, then he will dismiss what I
say and tell me I'm stupid"; "If I make a mistake around

310

Specific Disorders and Populations

Dr. Schramm (e.g., be late to an appointment, forget an appointment,
mess up my homework), then she will get mad and refuse to see me again."
The TH is used in the session whenever a "hot spot" appears. Hot spots
are dyadic events practitioners and patients encounter that suggest that
the TH subject is present. For example, when patients disclose personal
memories that they have never disclosed before, then the "disclosure" TH
is implicated. When a hot spot arises in the session, the clinician
stops and administers the IDE. 3. The SA procedure (described in detail
later) is explained, and patients are given multiple copies of the
Coping Survey Questionnaire (McCullough, 2000; McCullough et al., 2015)
that is used for the SA exercise. One CSQ is completed prior to every
session. 4. Last, the Patient's Manual for CBASP (McCullough, 2003a) is
distributed and the patient is asked to read the Manual and come to the
next session ready to discuss it. 5. After Session 2 ends, the therapist
completes an IMI (Kiesler & Schmidt, 1993) on the patient. In order to
evaluate modification of the patient's interpersonal style, the IMI is
administered again at the midpoint and at the end of treatment. An
example of successful changes on the IMI is demonstrated when a
patient's peak scores on the hostile side of the Interpersonal Circle
(e.g., Hostile and Hostile-​ Submissive Octants) shift to the friendly
side at treatment endpoint, as the last IMI revealed peak scores on the
Friendly and Friendly-​Dominant Octants. Procedure After Session 2 1.
BDI-​ II administered at the beginning of every session. 2. Patient
begins his or her SA training from Session 3 on. 3. Patient is rated on
his or her SA performance during every session using the PPRF. 4.
Patient is rated on his or her IDE performance during sessions when the
IDE is administered.

5.  Therapist completes one IMI on the patient between sessions 10 and
    15 and at the end of treatment.
6.  Patient is rediagnosed for PDD, by DSM-​5 criteria, at the end of
    treatment. PROCESSES OF CHANGE Although CBASP was developed
    specifically for the treatment of PDD, several comorbid personality
    disorders have also been successfully treated (avoidant, dependent,
    obsessive compulsive, and mild-​moderate borderline personality
    disorders; Keller et al., 2000). CBASP has not been successfully
    administered to severe borderline patients who present with chronic
    suicidality, self-​ mutilation patterns, extreme cognitive splitting,
    and frequent hospitalizations (McCullough, 2002). Seven successive
    failures were reported with these patients (McCullough, 2002). The
    recommended number of acute phase sessions needed to obtain a
    positive treatment response averages 16. Intent-​to-​treat data from a
    recent national study (Keller et al.,

<!-- -->

2000) showed that the average number of sessions was 16 for
      psychotherapy alone and psychotherapy with medication,
      respectively (Keller et al., 2000). Probably a better indicator of
      the typical number of required sessions for a positive outcome was
      seen with those patients who "completed" the 12-​week acute phase
      of treatment. Patients with successful outcome receiving
      psychotherapy in combined treatment received a mean number of 18
      sessions. The optimal number of acute phase sessions needed for a
      therapeutic response seems to be 18--​20 sessions. Two exceptions
      to the optimal number of sessions involve adults who are diagnosed
      with early-​ onset dysthymia and with intermittent major depressive
      episodes, without current episode (double depression). Early-​
      onset pure dysthymic syndrome, although described in DSM-​5 as a
      milder disorder than major depression, is also one of the most
      difficult chronic disorders to treat to remission (McCullough et
      al., 2015). Eighteen to 20

CBASP for Chronic Depression

sessions will probably not be enough. Outcome data on 10 pure dysthymic
disorder patients who completed CBASP averaged 31 sessions (McCullough,
1991). The mean treatment duration was 8 months, with cases seen on a
weekly basis. Patients were followed for 16--​ 96 months after treatment
termination. One hundred percent of the patients responded to treatment,
and all but one remained in remission at the follow-​up visit. Some of
the pathology features of PDD that therapists confront when treating the
chronically depressed patient are described here and will serve as an
important context in understanding the processes of change.

311

et al., 2003; Keller et al., 2000). The abuse had occurred before 15
years of age. In contrast to the early-​onset patient, late-​ onset
patients usually describe a milder developmental history (Horwitz, 2001;
McCullough, 2000). One or more SO relationships have frequently played a
salutary role. Current research shows that 20% of late-​onset adults who
are treated for their first major episode do not fully recover; hence,
they go on to develop a chronic course (Keller & Hanks, 1994; Keller et
al., 1983). The consequences of the unremitting major depression are
realized as the person progressively adopts the attitude: "It really
doesn't matter what I do, I will always be depressed."
Heightened-​chronic emotionality washes away Perceptual-​Interpersonal the
late-​ onset individual's normal cognitive-​ Psychopathology emotive
regulatory functions (Cicchetti et al., Chronic depression denotes
structural--​ 1995; McCullough, 2000; Piaget, 1954/​1981), perceptual
psychopathology whereby patients and the dysfunctional internal
mechanisms fall are unable to generate formal operational into place
(i.e., fear-​avoidance and P × E disconcognitive-​ emotive behavior in the
social--​ nection) producing a return to preoperational interpersonal
sphere (McCullough, 2000; functioning in the social--​interpersonal
domain. Piaget, 1954/​ 1981). Patients enter therapy Over sessions of
treatment and once the functioning interpersonally and socially in
consequences of behavior are consistently a preoperational mode and
thinking in a recognized, both early-​and late-​onset patients prelogical/​
precausal manner. In essential begin to view themselves in a perceived
funcways, their cognitive-​ emotive functioning tional manner; it is then
that they report a sense mimics the behavior of 4-​to 6-​ year-​ old of
gaining control of their lives. It is also at this preoperational
children (Piaget, 1954/​1981). point that several other
perceptual-​intrapersonal Severe early trauma, sexual and physical
changes occur: (1) primitive preoperational abuse, emotional and
physical neglect, and functioning is replaced by formal operational
chronic "psychological insults" (McCullough (abstract) thought, (2)
depressive symptom inet al., 2015) confronting young children are
tensity decreases, (3) the patient learns how to the maltreatment
etiological causes of chronic generate interpersonal empathy, (4)
patients redepression. Cognitive-​ emotional (matura- port emitting
assertive coping skills with others, tional) retardation resulting from
early mal- and last, (5) the PDD diagnostic status is modtreatment is
the catastrophic outcome of a ified in remission directions (note: PDD
diagtoxic developmental history where "surviving nosis requires a 2-​year
duration). the hell of the family," and not growth, has been the major
goal (Cicchetti, Ackerman, & Inability to Generate Authentic Empathy
Izard, 1995; McCullough, 2000; McCullough et al., 2015; Piaget,
1954/​1981; Spitz, 1946). The second pathological feature clinicians face
In a study of chronic depression, one-​third is seen in the patient's
inability to generate auof the sample reported abuse: 34% reported
thentic empathy. Empathy requires one to use parental loss, 44% reported
physical abuse, language in a reciprocal manner in order to un16% said
they had been sexually abused, with derstand another individual as well
as to make 10% reporting they were neglected (Nemeroff oneself
understood. Generating empathy also

312

Specific Disorders and Populations

assumes that one can employ formal operational thought. Extreme
egocentrism, not empathy, is one of the hallmarks of preoperational
functioning. As noted earlier, egocentrism is often symptomatic of the
patient's perceptual disconnection from the environment. CBASP teaches
patients to generate empathy with their therapists and later with
others, This achievement occurs in patients as a perceived functional
mode replaces their preoperational patterns. Gross Interpersonal Skill
Deficits Third, patients present with serious interpersonal skill
deficits, and these deficits involve an inability to emit assertive
behavior with others. For example, many have difficulty telling others
what they need, what they want, and what they don't want. Assertive
training is universally required with this patient. THERAPY RELATIONSHIP
As noted earlier, the therapist DPI role in CBASP is novel in the field
of psychotherapy. The authors know of no other model that requires
therapists to develop and utilize a personal countertransference role
(Winnicott, 1949). DPI means teaching preoperational patients to be
human by interacting with therapists who demonstrate that they can be
interpersonally normal and natural with patients (i.e. "It is okay to be
yourself with patients"). The word "discipline" is the critical
component of DPI. The role must be delivered with the well-​being of the
patient uppermost in mind. Requirements for DPI training are fourfold,
with the majority of supervision time spent in this arena of therapy
administration. First, therapists are trained to be aware of their
emotional reactions moment to moment and at optimal change points in the
session and are trained to disclose their emotions to evoke change.
Second, therapists need to learn to think of themselves as a "comrade"
who walks side by side with patients through technique administration
(i.e., IDE, SA, skill training). Third, therapists learn to administer

interpersonal consequences when inappropriate behavior occurs. The
fourth requirement is learning to walk at the pace of the patient (in
regard to making changes): trainees learn not to "walk ahead" with their
demands for change or to push, preach, or pull. Examples of the DPI role
follow. One patient told of the sexual abuse she received at the hands
of her biological father. After listening, the therapist exclaimed:
"What you told me your father did to you makes me want to puke!" Another
DPI moment is seen when the psychotherapist discloses pride and joy over
what an emotionally deprived-​ neglected patient does: "I'm delighted
about what you told me you did!" One patient who never looked at the
therapist but instead stared at the floor received the followed
reaction: "You make me feel that I do not exist with you." One trainee
exclaimed during a workshop, "In CBASP, patients come to psychotherapy
to learn to relate interpersonally to psychotherapists!" They do. One
caveat, however, must be stated. DPI is not for all those who seek
training in CBASP. Some are not willing to step from behind the "warm
blank slate" wall and interact interpersonally and reciprocally with
patients. These individuals are not effective CBASP training candidates.
METHODS AND TECHNIQUES As we have already noted, SA, the IDE, and social
skill/​ role rehearsal training constitute three techniques used to bring
about change. All techniques are designed to move patients toward formal
operational functioning, to assist them to generate authentic empathy,
and to ensure that they have the necessary assertive social skills to
manage their lives effectively. A fourth interpersonal-​ emotional
exercise, the SOH, is also administered during the second session to
identify the core interpersonal fear of the patient. Situational
Analysis SA is a multistep social problem--​solving exercise designed to
attack the helplessness/​

CBASP for Chronic Depression

313

hopelessness of the chronically depressed pa- between what one produces
(AOs) and what tient by demonstrating repeatedly that one's one wants
(DOs) often noticeably increase felt misery is produced and maintained
by the discomfort. Distress at this point is desirable. patient. The
impact of this message becomes Now, the administration of negative reina
paradoxical word of hope: if you don't like forcement becomes possible
(reducing the what you're producing and the misery you feel, distress by
substituting more appropriate behathen change your behavior! Patients
begin to vior) during the remediation phase, where the assume radical
responsibility for their lives mismanaged situation is "fixed." When
patients when they recognize that their behavior has see what must be
done differently cognitively self-​destructive consequences. What started
out and behaviorally to produce their DOs, they during the first session
as a helpless/​hopeless in- often feel better. The therapist then assists
the dividual protesting that "nothing I do matters" patient to recognize
that the alleviation of disis transformed by SA into a self-​affirming
person comfort is connected to solution strategies. who admits that
"everything I do matters." In this way, patient learning is reinforced
Making behavioral consequences explicit in SA (Skinner, 1968). moves the
patient to this perceptual stance. This Over time, patients begin to
bring in is the reason CBASP therapists are rigorously situations where
the AO matches the DO. trained to arrange in-​session contingencies to
Such successes are cause for celebration, parmodify the patient's
behavior (McCullough, ticularly when they first occur. Successful
sit2000). The two phases of SA, labeled the elic- uational management
will be subjected to itation phase and the remediation phase, are the
same intensive scrutiny as mismanaged described next. situations. SA
also prevents patients from During the elicitation phase of SA,
overlooking consequences resulting from sucpatients address an
interpersonal problem cessful behavior. by pinpointing one situational
event where some difficulty occurred ("Tell me when this Significant
Other History last happened to you"). Once the event is pinpointed, the
person describes it in terms By the end of second session, the therapist
role of a slice of time which entails describing a is defined. The role
definition stems from the beginning point, an exit/​end point, and a
story TH that clinicians generate from the SOH and in between. During
the exercise, patients the interpersonal impact data derived from are
not allowed to move outside the slice of the IMI. time or talk about
other things. Rigid and deThe SOH data result in patients describing
structive patterns of psychosocial functioning, the stamp or legacy in
one or two sentences, the when analyzed carefully in one situation,
CTCs. From those, a TH is derived. often turn out to be a microcosm of
the universe of interpersonal problems. Thus, the Transference
Hypotheses single SA is easily generalized to other areas of the
patient's life. Generalization learning One or two consistent themes
usually characconstitutes the last step of the SA exercise. terize the
causal conclusions, which then genSA highlights specific behavioral
consequ­ erate one hypothesis that sufficiently captures ences (the
exit/​end point of the situation) that the major interpersonal issue
needing to be are labeled the actual outcome (AO). After addressed.
pinpointing it, patients are then asked to conConsider one example where
the therapist struct a desired outcome (DO) for the exit/​ was male and
the patient's mother had taught end point. During the early sessions, DO
her daughter that she shouldn't trust a man; we formulations highlight
the fact that the AO was constructed the following hypothesis: "If I get
not what the person wanted. This is made ex- close to Dr. Samuels, then
he will hurt/​reject plicit during SA when the patient is asked: "Did
me." Notice the functional way the hypothesis you get what you wanted
here?" Discrepancies is stated: if this happens . . . then that will
occur.

314

Specific Disorders and Populations

The hypothesis, when used in the IDE, also states the name of the
therapist to personalize the patient's tacit fear-​ expectancy. The TH,
when used in the IDE, makes explicit what has previously been tacit
knowledge. Whenever the therapist and patient experience moments
implicated by a TH---​for example, during a moment of closeness or
intimacy---​the occasion is labeled a "hot spot" transference area. The
hot spot signals to the clinician that the IDE exercise should be
administered. Interpersonal Discrimination Exercise Preoperational
patients habitually perceive their psychotherapists as "hurtful" SOs.
Patients are, for the most part, unaware of these tendencies; thus,
their misconstruals do not represent explicit knowledge; instead, they
strongly suggest tacit patterns of behavior (Polanyi, 1966). Regardless,
the consequences are the same for the therapist because his or her
motives, behaviors, thoughts, and feelings are frequently
misinterpreted, meaning that the clinician is often expected to reject,
punish, abandon, or abuse. Viewing therapists unrealistically not only
decreases the probability of change, it also decreases the patient's
motivation to change. Left unaddressed, these perceptual distortions
often preclude successful treatment. The IDE is designed to correct
interpersonal distortions and heal early traumatic experiences by adding
a dose of interpersonal reality to the patient's experience. It teaches
patients to make accurate discriminations between the positive qualities
of the therapist and the negative characteristics of SOs. Unless
patients are systematically and repeatedly guided to make their
misperceptions explicit, important distinctions between hurtful SOs and
the clinician are not learned (McCullough, 2000). Said another way,
persons cannot risk a cognitive-​emotional alliance with the therapist
while maintaining potent negative expectancies. They profit from
specific and robust assistance to break these earlier connections; the
IDE provides such assistance. During the IDE exercise, patients first
recall a specific event where a SO reacted to them in

a hurtful way. The content of the event must fall into one of four
content domains and must describe actual encounters with SOs: an
intimacy situation that occurred between the patient and an SO, a time
when the patient personally disclosed highly private material for the
first time, an occasion when the patient made a mistake or broke some
rule, or an encounter where the individual felt or expressed negative
emotions toward an SO (e.g., frustration, anger, fear, guilt, shame,
regret, etc.). Patients are then asked to describe how the SO reacted to
them in one of the domains listed and to recall how the reaction
affected them. As in the SA comparison between the AO and DO, recalling
negative past events often potentiates emotional discomfort.
Highlighting the patient's aversive emotions during recall makes it
possible to create a negative reinforcement condition (e.g., "This is
the way it was then"). The aversive state frequently diminishes when the
patient's attention is directed to the therapist's positive reactions,
which is the third step of the IDE. Thus, the interpersonal bond with
the therapist is strengthened in a dyadic safety zone. The final IDE
step considers the implications for the individual if the therapist
turns out to be different from toxic SOs. Several consequences occur
over repeated IDE exercises. The IDE highlights the positive reality of
the dyadic relationship and makes it explicit knowledge. The IDE
proactively replaces negative emotional attachments with new emotional
dyadic connections. And the IDE strengthens the person's awareness that
the practitioner is qualitatively different from SOs and demonstrates
experientially what a normal interpersonal relationship is like. Impact
Message Inventory The IMI assesses interpersonal impacts on eight
octants, all of which represent subdivisions within the interpersonal
circle (Kiesler, 1983; Kiesler & Schmidt, 1993). Kiesler's interpersonal
circle contains two intersecting axes. Each axis represents an
interpersonal impact dimension characterized by polar opposites. The
Dominant (D) → Submissive (S) vertical

CBASP for Chronic Depression

axis designates a power dimension, whereas the Hostile (H) → Friendly
(F) horizontal axis signifies the affiliation dimension. These two
impacts are present in all interpersonal relationships and exert their
influence on the quality of a relationship as well as on the direction
it takes. Kiesler further divides the quadrants into eight octants.
Chronically depressed patients usually obtain the highest peak scores in
the Submissive and the Hostile-​Submissive octants. This means that they
are typically submissive and compliant and remain detached and anxious
in interpersonal encounters. Patients pull therapists into dominant
("I'll take charge") and hostile-​dominant ("You can't do anything, I'll
have to do it myself") roles. Even when therapists successfully resist
falling into these roles, these particular pulls are omnipresent.
Identifying the stimulus value of patients using the IMI determines the
interpersonal role the clinician optimally assumes if he or she is to
help the patient move to other interpersonal impact domains (McCullough,
2000).

DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS CBASP has been administered in Australia,
Canada, China, Finland, France, Germany, Japan, Sweden, Switzerland, the
United Kingdom, and the United States. We have no process or outcome
research specifically on diversity issues, but CBASP has proved
efficacious for chronic depression across countries and cultures. CBASP
is very often administered under supervision, which places heavy
emphasis on the patient variable and adherence to treatment variables.
The chronically depressed patient presents challenges, regardless of the
cultural differences, that easily pull practitioners off protocol. Thus,
clinical supervision is recommended for all.

CASE EXAMPLE Susan is a 41-​year-​old, divorced, part-​time employee, with
above average intelligence; she

315

is a single parent with an adolescent daughter. She has been depressed
"for as long as I can remember," and, in addition to her early-​ onset
dysthymia, she recalled 4 or 5 major depressive episodes during the past
25 years. The onset of the last major depressive episode began 3 months
prior to the screening interview and followed the breakup with a
boyfriend. Her first husband had been an alcoholic, and her last
relationship ended when she discovered the man was also seeing another
woman. Susan's developmental history and family of origin were
characterized by conflict, abandonment, and ostracism. Her father lived
in the same city, and they saw each other at least once a week. They had
a stormy, conflictual relationship that she always felt had been mostly
her fault. Susan's mother died 8 years previously. The mother abandoned
the family for another man when Susan was 10. She had a brother and
sister, 2 and 5 years younger, respectively; the mother took the sister
when she left home. Susan didn't hear from or see her mother or sister
for 20 years. Her brother committed suicide when Susan was a senior in
high school. She lived with her father until she went to college at age
18. The father severely criticized the patient's mistakes, and his
criticism continued up to the present time. Based on her description of
the confrontations, he still treated her like a child. During
adolescence, he frequently accused her of "being a whore," "a slut," "a
junkie," and many other negative labels. She made As and Bs during high
school and graduated on time, but she did report that she ran with a
"wild crowd" and did anything that would keep her out of the house.
Susan was diagnosed with PDD, an early-​onset case of intermittent major
depression with current episode. At screening, she obtained a BDI-​II
score of 35. On the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire, she reported severe
levels of emotional abuse and emotional neglect, indicating that a toxic
developmental environment characterized her early home life. Her BDI-​II
score at the beginning of session 2 was 34. The SOH was administered.
Six SOs were listed in the following order: mother, father, maternal
grandmother, college professor, first husband, and her brother. The
causal theory conclusions centered around two salient

316

Specific Disorders and Populations

themes: No one will care for me or love me if they really get to know
me; and I'm a screw-​up, and I can't do anything right. From those, one
TH was constructed by JPM: "If I get close to JPM/​ have any kind of
relationship, then he will reject me in disgust." An IMI was completed
post session 2, and Susan's stimulus value style was hostile-​ submissive
(H-​S), friendly (F), and submissive (S). Profiles of this type may be
confusing. Her moderate H-​ S score denotes a detached and anxious
interpersonal impact ("I'm nervous being with you"), but it is
accompanied by a peak score suggesting a friendly sociability style, "I
like being with you." This means that JPM must not be seduced by her
friendliness; rather, he must attend more to her obvious interpersonal
distrust (hostile-​ submissiveness), which was congruent with the TH. The
IMI pattern provides another warning: JPM must avoid the lethal trap of
assuming a strong dominant role. Susan's submissiveness suggests that
JPM must resist enacting a "take-​charge" role but instead encourage
Susan to take the in-​session lead. At the end of session 2, Susan was
given the Patient's Manual for CBASP as well as several Coping Survey
Questionnaires for doing her SA homework. JPM asked the patient to
complete one CSQ for session 3. The patient began taking sertraline
(Zoloft) following session 2 and remained on 150 mg for the next 6
years. The BDI-​II score was 26, and the content of Susan's fifth
in-​session SA is shown here: Situational Description (What happened?) "I
was in the house washing clothes and helping my daughter with her
algebra homework. I had not gone to work because she was sick. The
doorbell rang. I got up, and answered it. It was the air-​conditioning
repairman who had come to replace the filter in our unit. I told him
this was not a good time for him to do the work. I asked if he could
come back. He insisted that he would not be long. Again I protested and
asked that he come back, but I opened the door, and he walked in. He
went to the utility room, replaced the filter, left his bill, and walked
out. I didn't even speak to him when he left."

Situational Interpretations (What did the situation mean to you? or,
What thoughts or feelings did you have during the event?) 1. "I can
never control what happens to me." \[Global interpretation that doesn't
address the problem at hand.\] 2. "Big corporations are unfair to
homeowners." \[Global interpretation.\] 3. "My life is out of control."
\[Global interpretation.\] Situational Behavior (What did you do in the
situation?) "I answered the doorbell and asked the repair man to come
back at a better time. I asked him twice. Oh, I almost forgot, I held
the door open for him. I didn't speak to him when he left." Actual
Outcome (How did the situation come out for you?) "The repair man
replaced the filter and left." Desired Outcome (How did you want the
situation to come out for you?) "I wanted the repair man to come back at
a more convenient time." AO versus DO Comparison (Did you get what you
wanted here?) "No!" (Susan begins to cry while saying what a failure and
screw-​up she is.) Why Didn't You Get What You Wanted Here? "Because I'm
stupid! I can't do anything right!" (more crying) Revising the
Situational Interpretations All three of her interpretations had to be
revised. They did not accurately describe what was going on; in fact, no
interpretation dealt specifically with the problem at hand. Because they
were irrelevant (not anchored to the event) and inaccurate (did not
correctly describe what was going on), the interpretations were modified
to meet the relevance and accuracy criteria.

CBASP for Chronic Depression With considerable assistance, Susan revised
her interpretations in such a way that the probability of obtaining the
DO was increased. The revisions were as follows: 1. "I don't want the
filter replaced at this time" \[accurate and relevant introspective
interpretation\]. 2. "I've got to request another appointment time with
the repairman" \[Action Interpretation that leads to assertive
behavior\]. Repairing the Situational Behavior JPM: "Had you interpreted
the situation in this new way, how would your behavior have changed?"
Susan: "I would have been more assertive and definite with the
repairman. And, i certainly would not have held the door open for him!"
JPM: "Had you managed the situation this way, do you think you would
have gotten your desired outcome? That is, for him to reschedule and
come back?" Susan: "I would have had a better chance of getting what I
wanted than I did the first time through." (Her crying stopped, and
Susan is showing more signs of energy and conviction about what would
have happened.) Space limitations do not permit us to discuss the final
two steps of SA (Wrap-​up/​Summary and Transfer of Learning Steps). But
before leaving the SA, note how Susan's global cognitive interpretations
precluded problem resolution and how her cognitive errors inhibited her
lack of assertive behavior. Coping the old way frequently resulted in
situational failure and frustration. Her life really was really out of
control, and, without realizing it, Susan had inadvertently produced the
failure she described. JPM administered the IDE following the SA
exercise because the situation implicated a hot spot that was suggested
by the transference hypothesis ("If I get close to Dr. McCullough, then
he will reject me in disgust"). The IDE exercise was administered in the
following way: JPM: "Susan, let me ask you a question. Had you told your
dad about the way you first handled this situation, how would he have
reacted?"

317

Susan: "He would have laughed out loud at me and made me feel like a
stupid idiot. He would have gone on and on about how I can't do
anything, how I'm always screwing up." (Susan is beginning to tear up.)
JPM: "How would your first husband have reacted had you told him about
your experience with the repairman?" Susan: "He would have poured
himself a drink and told me I had driven him to drink. He was just like
daddy. He would have called me stupid, dumb, an imbecile, and the
biggest loser he had ever known. (Susan is crying softly now.) JPM:
"Now, I want you to describe for me what my reaction was to the way you
dealt with the repairman?" Susan: "It was okay, I guess." JPM: "Think
back, what did I do, how did I look throughout, what did I say? I want
you to think carefully about how I behaved with you a few moments ago."
Susan: "You certainly didn't make me feel stupid. You helped me see what
I could have done better, you encouraged me, and then you were pleased
when I said that the second way would have probably gotten me what I
wanted." JPM: "Now, I want you to compare and contrast my reactions to
you with those of your father and ex-​husband. Tell me how they were
similar and how they differed." The IDE exercise attacks proactively the
negative reactions of SOs by focusing the patient's attention on the
contrasting salubrious behavior of the therapist. The stable reality of
this new interpersonal relationship must be nurtured and strengthened
over time so that it will acquire the capacity to compete with and
finally overthrow the old interpersonal realities and the hold they have
had on Susan's life. Susan ended weekly treatment after 21 sessions. The
patient learned to self-​administer SA to criterion (using the PPRF as
the rating scale) without assistance from JPM by the end of session 20.
At session 21, she obtained a BDI-​II score of 9. She continued to see
JPM biweekly during the next 12 months. Six months after the weekly
sessions ended, Susan was rediagnosed and achieved remission from
dysthymia.

318

Specific Disorders and Populations

OUTCOME RESEARCH Meta-​Analytic Reviews A meta-​analysis (Kriston et al.,
2014) on acute treatments for PDD included 60 trials. The findings
showed that several evidence-​ based acute pharmacological,
psychotherapeutic, and combined treatments for PDD are available with
significant differences between some of them. For CBASP compared to
medication, no significant differences were found. For the treatment of
chronic major depression, CBASP plus medication was recommended, with
weak to moderate strength due to conflicting findings. The meta-​
analysis authors recommended CBASP over interpersonal psychotherapy
(Klerman et al., 1984). A recent meta-​analysis (Negt et al., 2016) was
conducted on six studies of CBASP for chronic depression. CBASP was
moderately more effective than treatment as usual (TAU) and
interpersonal psychotherapy and was of comparable effectiveness to
antidepressant medication. Despite the small number of studies, the
evidence to date supports CBASP's effectiveness for chronic depression.
This meta-​ analysis included the large multicenter study of Keller et
al. (2000) that followed a total of 681 outpatients with chronic forms
of major depressive disorder at 12 sites across the United States. The
trial compared the effectiveness of nefazodone, CBASP, and the
combination of both therapies. The results at the end of the 12-​week
acute phase favored the combination approach. The rates of response in
the intent to treat sample were 73% for the combined treatment, 48% for
nefazodone alone, and 48% for CBASP alone. A secondary analysis of the
temporal sequence of symptom change showed that the overall advantage of
the combined group was attributable to sharing both the earlier onset of
benefit seen in the nefazodone-​alone condition and the later-​emerging
benefit seen in the CBASP-​alone condition. The Keller et al. trial also
implemented a crossover phase for nonresponders to monotherapies (61
patients in CBASP; 79 patients in nefazodone). Patients in both arms
showed clinical benefits by switching so that,

at 24 weeks, their outcomes matched those of the combined group at 12
weeks (Schatzberg et al., 2005). Recent Individual Studies A more recent
two-​ center study (Schramm et al., 2015), not included in the
meta-​analyses, used a newer antidepressant, escitalopram, in a smaller
sample of 60 outpatients with PDD and compared it with the effects of 12
CBASP sessions over the acute treatment phase. In cases of
nonimprovement (\<20% reduction in depression score), the other
treatment condition was added for the subsequent 20 weeks of extended
treatment. The intent to treat analysis revealed that depression scores
decreased significantly after 8 and 28 weeks in both conditions with no
significant differences between the approaches. An 8-​week randomized
controlled trial by Michalak et al. (2015) examined the effects of group
mindfulness-​based cognitive therapy (MBCT), group CBASP, and TAU in 106
outpatients with PDD. CBASP proved to be significantly more effective
than TAU in reducing depressed symptoms, whereas MBCT was not more
effective than TAU. Despite the fact that CBASP was adapted to the group
format of MBCT (8 group sessions of 2.5 hours) in this study, the
results showed clear benefits for this population. In the most recently
published multicenter trial of CBASP, 268 unmedicated patients with
early-​onset PDD (Schramm et al., 2017) were also treated with supportive
therapy (SP). Each treatment comprised 24 sessions in the acute
treatment phase followed by 8 sessions of extended treatment over 28
weeks. CBASP was found to be more effective and acceptable at treating
chronic depressive symptoms and quality of life than SP. Rates of
remission after 48 weeks of CBASP (36.7%) were similar to the rate of
remission reported by Keller et al. (2000) for CBASP or medication
(32.1%) after only 12 weeks of therapy. This study highlights the
potential use of psychotherapy without medication even though
combination treatment may remain the most efficient and most applied
treatment option.

CBASP for Chronic Depression

Summary So far, CBASP has proved to be of equivalent or superior
effectiveness to antidepressant medication, TAU, or other psychological
treatments for chronic depression. CBASP is an evidenced-​ based
preferred treatment for PDD, particularly for those with childhood
maltreatment (Klein et al., 2018). The European Psychiatric Association
Guidance Group on Psychotherapy in PDD (Jobst et al., 2016) and other
guidelines consider CBASP and, to a lesser degree, interpersonal
therapy, to be effective in persistent forms of depression. CBASP is
recommended there as a first-​line treatment for PDD, and interpersonal
therapy as a second-​line treatment.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS The most immediate need for the future is that CBASP
must be compared to another disorder-​ specific approach such as
cognitive-​behavioral therapy. As well, we advocated for a series of
dismantling studies to identify the effectiveness of SA (when used
alone) and the IDE (when used alone) and when both CBASP components are
administered in combination. An area that has not been explored is
augmentation strategies for the nonresponders in randomized clinical
trials. Clinically, a future direction is to intervene early in
high-​risk groups (e.g., depressed children, adolescents, young adults
with childhood maltreatment, etc.) to prevent a chronic course of
depression. In this context, therapists for children and adolescents
will need to be trained. That will probably entail the application of
CBASP to related disorders, including the aforementioned personality
disorders.

References American Psychiatric Association. (1968). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (2nd ed.). Washington, DC:
Author. American Psychiatric Association. (1980). Diagnostic and
statistical manual of mental disorders (3rd ed.). Washington, DC:
Author.

319

American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (3rd ed., revised). Washington, DC: Author.
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and statistical
manual of mental disorders (5th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. Anchin, J.
C., & Kiesler, D. J. (1982). Handbook of Interpersonal Psychotherapy.
Elmsford, NY: Pergamon Press. Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning
theory. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-​Hall. Beck, A. T. (1996). Beck
Depression Inventory-​II (BDI-​ II). San Antonio: The Psychological
Corporation, Harcourt Brace & Company. Beck, A. T., Rush, A. J., Shaw,
B. F., & Emery, G. (1979). Cognitive therapy of depression. New York:
Guilford. Bernstein, D. P., & Fink, L. (1991). Childhood trauma
questionnaire: A retrospective self-​report. Bloomington, MN: NCS
Pearson. Cicchetti, D., Ackerman, B. P., & Izard, C. E. (1995). Emotions
and emotional regulation in developmental psychopathology. Development
and Psychopathology, 7, 1--​10. Doverspike, W. F. (1976). An evaluation
of the cognitive-​ behavioral analysis system in the treatment of
depression: A series of single case studies. Unpublished manuscript,
Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond. Freud, S. (1963). Character
and culture. New York: Collier. Hoffer, A. (2006). Neutrality and the
therapeutic alliance: What does the analyst want? In S. T. Levy (Ed.),
The therapeutic alliance (p. 6). Madison, WI: International Universities
Press. Horwitz, J. A. (2001). Early-​onset versus late-​onset chronic
depressive disorders: Comparison of retrospective reports of coping with
adversity in the childhood home environment. Unpublished manuscript,
Virginia Commonwealth University Richmond. Jobst, A., Brakemeier, E. L.,
Buchheim, A., Caspar, F., Cuijpers, P., Ebmeier, K. P., . . . Padberg,
F. (2016). European Psychiatric Association guidance on psychotherapy in
chronic depression across Europe. European Psychiatry, 33, 18--​36.
Keller, M. B., & Hanks, D. L. (1994). The natural history and
heterogeneity of depressive disorders. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry,
56, 22--​29. Keller, M. B., Klein, D. N., Hirschfeld, R. M. A., Kocsis,
J. H., McCullough, J. P., Miller, I., et al. (1995). Results of the
DSM-​IV Mood Disorders Field Trial. American Journal of Psychiatry, 152,
843--​849.

320

Specific Disorders and Populations

Keller, M. B., Lavori, P. W., Endicott, J., Coryell, W., & Klerman, G.
(1983). Double depression: A two year follow-​ up. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 140, 680--​694. Keller, M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D.
N., Arnow, B. A., Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., et al. (2000). A
comparison of nefazodone, the Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of
Psychotherapy, and their combination for the treatment of chronic
depression. New England Journal of Medicine, 342, 1462--​1470. Kendler,
K. S. (2012). Levels of explanation in psychiatric substance use
disorders: Implications for the development of an etiologically based
nosology. Molecular Psychiatry, 17, 11--​21. Kiesler, D. J. (1983). The
1982 Interpersonal Circle: A taxonomy for complementarity in human
transactions. Psychological Review, 90, 185--​214. Kiesler, D. J. (1996).
Contemporary interpersonal theory and research: Personality,
psychopathology, and psychotherapy. New York: John Wiley. Kiesler, D.
J., & Schmidt, J. A. (1993). The impact message inventory: Form IIA
octant scale version. Redwood City, CA: Mind Garden. Klein, D. N.
(2008). Classification of depressive disorders in the DSM-​V: Proposal
for a two-​ dimensional system. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 117,
552--​560. Klein, D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Arnow, B. A.,
Blalock, J. A., Dunner, D. L., et al. (2004). Cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment for chronic
depression. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 72, 681--​688.
Klein, D. N., Shankman, S. A., & Rose, S. (2006). Ten-​ year prospective
follow-​ up study of the naturalistic course of dysthymic disorder and
double depression. American Journal of Psychiatry, 163, 872--​880. Klein,
J. P., Erkens, N., Schweiger, U., Kriston, L., Bausch, P., Zobel, I., .
. . Schramm, E. (2018). Does childhood maltreatment moderate the effect
of the Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of Psychotherapy (CBASP)
versus supportive psychotherapy in chronic depression? Psychotherapy and
Psychosomatics, 87(1), 46--​48. Klerman, G. L., Weissman, M. M.,
Rounsaville, B. J., & Chevron, E. S. (1984). Interpersonal psychotherapy
of depression. New York: Basic. Kriston, L., von Wolff, A., Westphal,
A., Hölzel, L. P., & Härter, M. (2014). Efficacy and acceptability of
acute treatments for persistent depressive

disorder: A network meta-​analysis. Depression and Anxiety, 31(8),
621--​630. Manber, R., Arnow, B. A., Blasey, C., Vivian, D., McCullough,
J. P., Jr., Blalock, J. A., Klein, D. N., et al. (2003). Patient's
therapeutic skill acquisition and response to psychotherapy, alone or in
combination with medication. Psychological Medicine, 33, 693--​702.
McCullough, J. P. (1980). Helping depressed patients regain control over
their lives. Behavioral Medicine, 7, 33--​34. McCullough, J. P. (1984).
Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy: An interactional
treatment approach for dysthymic disorder. Psychiatry, 47, 234--​250.
McCullough, J. P. (1991). Psychotherapy for dysthymia: Naturalistic
study of ten cases. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 179,
734--​740. McCullough, J. P. (2002). What questions are we trying to
answer with our psychotherapy research? Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 9, 447--​452. McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. N., Keller, M. B.,
Holzer, C. E., Davis, S. M., Kornstein, S. G., et al. (2000). Comparison
of DSM-​ III-​ R chronic major depression and major depression
superimposed on dysthymia (double depression): Validity of the
distinction. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 109, 419--​427. McCullough,
J. P., Kornstein, S. G., McCullough, J. P., Belyea-​Caldwell, S., Kaye,
A. L., Roberts, W. C., et al. (1996). Differential diagnosis of chronic
depressive disorders. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 19, 55--​71.
McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2000). Treatment for chronic depression:
Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy. New York:
Guilford. McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2003a). Patient's manual for CBASP.
New York: Guilford. McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2003b). Treatment for
chronic depression using cognitive behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In Session, 59, 833--​846.
McCullough, J. P., Jr. (2006). Treating chronic depression with
disciplined personal involvement. New York: Springer. McCullough, J. P.,
Jr., Clark, S. W., Klein, D. N., & First, M. B. (2016). Introducing a
clinical course-​ graphing scale for DSM-​5 mood disorders. American
Journal of Psychotherapy, 70, 383--​392. McCullough, J. P., Jr., Klein,
D. N., Borian, F. E., Howland, R. H., Riso, L. P., Keller, M. B.,

CBASP for Chronic Depression

321

et al. (2003). Group comparisons of DSM-​ Polanyi, M. (1966). The tacit
dimension. Garden IV subtypes of chronic depression: Validity of City,
NY: Doubleday. the distinctions. Part 2. Journal of Abnormal Schatzberg,
A. F., Rush, A. J., Arnow, B. A., Banks, Psychology, 112, 614--​622. P.
L., Blalock, J. A., Borian, F. E., et al. (2005). McCullough, Jr., J.
P., Lord, B. D., Martin, A. M., Chronic depression: Medication
(nefazodone) Conley, K. A., Schramm, E., & Klein, D. or psychotherapy
(CBASP) is effective when N. (2011). The significant other history: An
the other is not Arch Gen Psychiatry, 62, interpersonal-​ emotional
history procedure 513--​520. used with the early-​onset chronically
depressed Schramm, E., Kriston, L., Zobel, I., Bailer, J., patient.
American Journal of Psychotherapy, 65, Wambach, K., Backenstrass, M. et
al. (2017). 225--​248. Effect of disorder-​ specific versus non-​ specific
McCullough, J. P., Jr., Schramm, E., & Penberthy, J. psychotherapy for
chronic depression: A K. (2015). CBASP as a distinctive treatment for
randomized clinical trial. JAMA Psychiatry. persistent depressant
disorder. Distinctive feature doi: 10.1001/​jamapsychiatry.2016.3880
series. London: Routledge. Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P., Kech,
S., Michalak J., Schultze M., Heidenreich T., & Brakemeier, E. L., Külz,
A., et al. (2011). Schramm E. (2015). A randomized controlled Cognitive
behavioral analysis system trial on the efficacy of mindfulness-​ based
of psychotherapy versus interpersonal cognitive therapy and a group
version of cognitive psychotherapy for early-​ onset chronic behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy depression: A randomized pilot study.
Journal for chronically depressed patients. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 129,109--​116. Consulting and Clinical Psychology. http://​
Skinner, B. F. (1953). Science and human behavior.
dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​ccp0000042 New York: Macmillan. Negt, P., Brakemeier,
E. L., Michalak, J., Winter, L., Skinner, B. F. (1968). The technology
of teaching. Bleich, S., & Kahl, K. G. (2016). The treatment New York:
Apple-​Century-​Crofts. of chronic depression with cognitive behavioral
Spitz, R. (1946). Hospitalism: A follow-​ up report analysis system of
psychotherapy: A systematic on investigation described in Volume I.
1945. review and meta-​ analysis of randomized---​ Psychoanalysitc Study
of a Child, 2, 113--​117. controlled clinical trials. Brain and Behavior.
Spitzer, R. L., Endicott, J., & Robins, E. (1978). Advance online
publication. doi: 10.1002/​ Research diagnostic criteria: Rationale and
brb3.486. reliability. American Journal of Psychiatry, 35, Nemeroff, C.
B., Heim, C. M., Thase, M. E., Rush, 773--​782. A. J., Schatzberg, A. F.,
Ninan, P. T., et al. Spotnitz, H. (1969). Modern psychoanalysis of the
(2003). Psychotherapy is the preferred treatment schizophrenic patient.
New York: Grune & for patients with chronic forms of major Stratton.
depression and childhood trauma. Proceedings Steinert, C., Hormann, M.,
Kruse, J., & Leichsenring, of the National Academy of Sciences, 100, F.
(2014). Relapse rates after psychotherapy for 14293--​14296.
depression---​stable long-​term effects? A meta-​ Paul, G. L. (1967).
Strategy of outcome research analysis. Journal of Affective Disorders,
168, in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and 107--​118. Clinical
Psychology, 31(2), 109--​118. Tollefson, G. D. (1993). Major depression.
In D. L. Piaget, J. (1923/​1926). The language and thought of Dunner
(Ed.), Current psychiatric therapy (pp. the child. New York: Harcourt,
Brace. 196--​204). Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders. Piaget, J. (1967/​ 1964).
Six psychological studies. Wakefield, J. C. (1992). The concept of
mental (D. Elkind, Ed.). New York: Random House. disorder: On the
boundary between biological (Original work published 1964) facts and
social values. American Psychologist, Piaget, J. (1954/​1981).
Intelligence and affectivity: 47, 373--​388. Their relationship during
child development. Winnicott, D. W. (1949). Hate in the counter­ Palo
Alto, CA: Annual Reviews. (Original work transference. International
Journal of Psycho-​ published 1954). Analysis, 30, 69--​75.

B. Specific Populations and Modalities

15 Integrative Psychotherapy with Culturally Diverse Clients JEFF E.
HARRIS, NATASHA SHUKLA, AND ALLEN E. IVEY

THE INTEGRATIVE APPROACH The guiding assumption of this chapter is that
culture is a broad social context that has a pervasive influence on
psychological functioning and treatment. "All individuals exist in
social, political, historical, and economic contexts, and psychologists
are increasingly called upon to understand the influence of these
contexts on individuals' behavior" (American Psychological Association,
2002, p. 1). This sociocultural environment is internalized into beliefs
and values that impact behavioral processes. Using this inclusive
definition of culture, all clients are recognized as culturally unique,
which might suggest an alternative title for this chapter: "Integrating
Culture into All Psychotherapy." Understanding diversity and the impact
of culture on human development has been a major emphasis in
psychotherapy over the past

several decades. The multicultural movement can be described as
developing across three historic phases (Harris, 2012). First, starting
in the late 1970s and throughout the 1980s, there was an emphasis on
educating psychotherapists about racial and ethnic differences. The
multicultural movement began as an effort to help psychotherapists, a
majority of whom were European Americans, to work more effectively with
clients from different racial and ethnic backgrounds (e.g., Atkinson,
Morten, & Sue, 1979; Sue, 1981). Starting in the 1990s, during the
second stage in the multicultural movement, culture began to be defined
more broadly. Instead of focusing solely on race and ethnicity, the
definition of culture was expanded to include other personal variables,
including sex and gender, sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status,
religion, and disability status (Pederson, 1990). Third, in the new
century, culture is being addressed within the

325

326

Specific Disorders and Populations

context of evidence-​based practice (American Psychological Association,
2005). This stage of the movement involves more widespread recognition
that client variables, including cultural background and identity,
should influence the way psychotherapists select and implement
treatments. The field has increasingly articulated a sophisticated
understanding about how identity and self-​ definition interact and are
shaped by social and physical environments as well as by experiences of
power, privilege, and oppression (American Psychological Association,
2017). One of the first descriptions of integrative multicultural
psychotherapy was written by Franklin, Carter, and Grace (1993), who
proposed a multisystem/​racial identity perspective for working with
blacks/​African Americans. This approach took into account the role of
intrapersonal dynamics, family systems, sociocultural influences,
economic resources, and community. These authors concluded that both a
client's and a therapist's racial identity development has a crucial
impact on their therapeutic interaction. This idea has been updated with
a recognition that multicultural practice is shaped by whether a
privileged or marginalized clinician is working with a privileged or
marginalized client (Ratts et al., 2015). This chapter will embrace and
further explore these themes of culture, identity, and integration.
Although many integrative psychotherapies have been proposed, most have
not made culture a major emphasis. One exception is multitheoretical
psychotherapy (MTP; Brooks-​ Harris, 2008), which is based on a
multidimensional model of human functioning, depicted in Figure 15.1.
MTP encourages psychotherapists to think about clients in a holistic
manner, focusing on both immediate psychological functioning (thoughts,
feelings, and actions) and external influences (interpersonal, systemic,
and cultural contexts). When working with culturally diverse clients,
this model reminds us that culture surrounds us and shapes the human
experience in an ongoing manner. MTP acknowledges that different
theories of psychotherapy focus on different dimensions of functioning
depicted in Figure

Cultural Contexts Social Systems Interpersonal Patterns Thoughts

Feelings

Actions

FIGURE 15.1 Multidimensional model of human functioning. Source:
Reprinted with permission from Brooks-​Harris, J. E. (2008). Integrative
Multitheoretical Psychotherapy.

15.1. In the same way that cognitive therapies focus on thoughts and
experiential therapies focus on feelings, multicultural psychotherapy
focuses on cultural contexts and the way culture is internalized in the
form of worldview and identity. Psychotherapists should identify focal
dimensions that are most relevant for each client. Culture will prove
more important to explore with some clients than with others. When
culture becomes salient, then it will be important to implement
multicultural interventions. Methods and techniques that directly
examine culture will be discussed later in this chapter. Cultural
competency requires therapists to develop three interrelated areas of
practice: attitudes, knowledge, and skills (Sue, Arredondo, & McDavis,
1992; Ratts et al., 2015). First, therapists become aware of their own
assumptions, values, and biases. The development of awareness is an
ongoing process that involves training, supervision, and active self-​
reflection. Second, cultural competence involves understanding and
accepting clients' worldviews without judgment. Knowing about the
cultures that shape clients' experiences is a prerequisite for empathy
and understanding. Third, psychotherapy will be more effective when it
involves goals and interventions that

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

are consistent with clients' cultural values (Sue & Sue, 2016). Of
course, developing and maintaining cultural competence is an ongoing
process. For example, if a therapist begins working with a Syrian
refugee for the first time, he or she may become aware of personal
biases about Muslims that were previously outside of awareness. It will
be useful for the therapist to learn more about the cultural and
historical forces that have shaped this client's life. As a result of
this knowledge, clinical skills may be adapted in a way that fits the
clients' worldview and cultural preferences. ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION
To integrate culture into psychotherapy, practitioners assess and
understand the cultural variables that shape their clients' lives. Hays
(2008) suggested 10 different dimensions of culture that influence the
way people function. Together these cultural influences spell the word
ADDRESSING: Age and generational influences, Developmental disabilities,
Disabilities acquired later in life, Religion and spiritual orientation,
Ethnic and racial identity, Socioeconomic status, Sexual orientation,
Indigenous heritage, National origin, and Gender. To understand a
client's cultural experience, it will be necessary to explore the
personal meaning that these identities possess. Each of these 10
cultural influences might impact a client's thoughts, feelings, actions,
or all three. It is usually helpful to explore the salience of different
aspects to assess which features are most impactful. For example, when
working with an Asian female who reports symptoms of social anxiety, it
may prove useful to look at the impact of both ethnic identity and
gender socialization. This client may report that her identity as an
Asian woman impacts her thoughts ("I should not assert myself
directly"), her feelings (apprehension in social situations with
strangers), and her actions (avoiding eye contact and remaining quiet).
With a transgender man who is facing job discrimination,

327

the clinician can focus on the way gender identity impacts functioning.
Assessing culture with this client may reveal a pattern of thoughts
("They are treating me unfairly because I am different"), feelings
(anger about being passed over for a promotion), and actions (becoming
more confrontational with colleagues at work) that are creating distress
and interpersonal conflict. Psychotherapy with culturally diverse
clients may or may not include formal psychological assessment and
diagnosis. If psychometric instruments are used, or if a diagnosis is
made, cultural implications must be considered (Suzuki, Lee, & Short,
2017). Cultural barriers during the clinical interview may include
communication, language, mistrust, racism, bias, and socioeconomic
status. Behavioral observation can be difficult because the meaning of
eye contact, facial and bodily expressions, and the use of language and
speech differ so much between cultures. The same problems exist with
diagnosis because the same behavior may have a different meaning in a
different social context. Therapists should also be cautious about using
psychometric instruments that have not been normed on diverse samples
(Suzuki et al., 2017). Identity Development Identify development is
frequently used in case formulation when working with culturally diverse
clients. Many people of color move through stages of development that
involve responses to their own ethnic or racial group membership as well
as to the dominant culture. Specific models have been proposed to
describe the experience of African Americans (e.g., Cross, 1971, 1995),
Asian Americans (e.g., Sue & Sue, 1971; Kim, 2012), and Latino/​Hispanic
Americans (e.g., Ruiz, 1990). Many of the cross-​group themes have been
combined in the Racial/​Cultural Identity Development model (Atkinson,
Morten, & Sue, 1998; Sue & Sue, 2016), which describes five stages: 1.
Conformity: People of color in the United States are often raised within
a cultural

328

Specific Disorders and Populations

environment that values white European American culture and devalues
other racial and ethnic groups. People of color often internalize these
values, resulting in a depreciation of their own group and their own
racial or ethnic identity. 2. Dissonance: People of color often have an
encounter with racism or another experience that is inconsistent with
their cultural beliefs and values that moves them into a stage of
dissonance. During this stage, there is often internal conflict about
whether to value one's own group or the dominant culture. 3. Resistance
and Immersion: Some people of color will enter a stage of resistance
when they immerse themselves in their own culture and experience anger
about the oppression they have experienced. During this stage, people of
color may embrace an attitude of pride that includes culture-​centric
values that may devalue other groups. 4. Introspection: Some people of
color will move from resistance, focused on group identity, toward a
more individualized stage of reflection that embraces individual
autonomy as well as group membership. Individuals in this stage
typically reflect on their basis for judging others and begin to view
other groups with more balance. 5. Integrative Awareness: This final
stage of development allows people of color to appreciate their own
group as well as members of other groups. They may develop an internal
sense of security that allows them to appreciate unique aspects of their
own racial or ethnic culture as well as aspects of the dominant US
culture (Sue & Sue, 2016).

awareness, it frequently proves useful to focus on systemic action that
values both pride and autonomy (Sue & Sue, 2016). Identity development
models have also been identified for a variety of other cultural groups
beyond race and ethnicity. Six stages of identity development for
lesbians and gay men include identity confusion, comparison, tolerance,
acceptance, pride, and synthesis (Cass, 1979). Since then, many
psychotherapists have written about how to modify psychotherapy for LGBT
clients (e.g., Bieschke, Perez, & DeBord, 2007; Pachankis & Goldfried,
2004). Psychotherapy with LGBT clients often involves providing support
as clients negotiate the coming-​ out process and deal with prejudice,
discrimination, and misconceptions (Sue & Sue, 2016). The sociopolitical
climate may discourage self-​ disclosure among LGBT clients until they
decide if psychotherapy feels safe. Similar stages of identity
development have been identified for people with disabilities: passive
awareness, realization, and acceptance (Gibson, 2006). Recommendations
for psychotherapy for people with disabilities have been made by a
variety of psychotherapists (e.g., Cordes et al., 2017; Gibson, 2009).
Communities of people with disabilities often create their own cultures,
such as deaf culture or blind culture, of which psychotherapists should
become aware. Working with clients with disabilities often involves
assessing the impact of discrimination and exploring whether clients
view their disability as a moral lapse, a physical limitation, or an
individual difference that society may fail to accommodate (Sue & Sue,
2016).

Psychotherapy can facilitate this process of racial identity
development, using strategies matched to the person's stage. If clients
are in the conformity stage, for example, then it can prove helpful to
encourage them to explore their own identity, and psychotherapy may
involve a process of reeducation. During resistance and immersion
stages, for another example, the therapist supports clients' feelings of
anger and helps channel these strong feelings into actions related to
social justice. When working with clients in the final stage of
integrative

APPLICABILITY AND STRUCTURE When should therapists focus on culture? On
one hand, because culture influences all aspects of psychological
functioning and treatment, therapists should always be mindful of the
way culture shapes cognitions, emotions, and behavior. On the other
hand, there are some clinical situations in which a more overt emphasis
on culture is warranted. This chapter highlights three conditions that
call for a direct focus on culture. First, when

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

there are salient cultural differences between the psychotherapist and
client, practitioners must monitor the impact of these differences on
the therapeutic relationship. Second, when clients present with strong
preferences for cultural content or request a practitioner of a similar
cultural background, then culture should be addressed. The third
situation in which an overt focus on culture is crucial is when
psychological problems are related to stressful cultural encounters
(Harris, 2012). Racism and discrimination are stressful events that can
have a serious impact on mental health and put people of color at
greater risk for depression and anxiety (US Department of Health and
Human Services, 2001). Stressful cultural encounters might include
moving to another culture (e.g., immigration, international studies);
discrimination, oppression, and prejudice (e.g., racism, sexism, sexual
harassment); moving between cultural contexts (e.g., being closeted with
family but out with friends, working in the city but visiting family on
the reservation); cultural stressors (e.g., poverty, refugee experience,
undocumented immigration); cultural violence (e.g., hate crimes, sexual
assault, terrorism); and changes in status or privilege (e.g., moving
from majority to minority, loss of income) (Harris, 2012). These
stressful cultural encounters may result in cultural adjustment
disorders involving culture shock, adjustment disorders, posttraumatic
stress, depression, or anxiety. Since gender, gender identity, and
sexual orientation are crucial parts of cultural identity, feminist
therapy and gay-​and transgender-​ affirming therapy are also seen as
cultural-​ sensitive methods of treatment. Feminist therapy entails four
essential principles: exploring women's multidimensional identities,
assisting clients with awareness of systemic influences that impact
their lives (e.g., institutional racism), fostering an egalitarian
relationship between the therapist and the client by minimizing power
differentials, and focusing on processes and language that value
clients' strengths, emotional expression, and independence (Worell &
Remer, 2002). Gender-​ aware therapy is a way to address cultural

329

conceptions of gender when working with either male or female clients
(Good, Gilbert, & Scher, 1990). When working with transgender and gender
nonconforming clients, therapists should treat gender as a nonbinary
construct, recognizing that people experience a variety of gender
identities that may not correspond to sex assigned at birth (American
Psychological Association, 2015). Multicultural psychotherapy does not
prescribe a particular structure or require a specific theoretical
orientation. Instead, therapy is flexibly tailored to the unique,
culturally situated client. Thus, integrative psychotherapy with
culturally diverse clients will necessarily take many forms. Most
culturally sensitive therapists embrace theoretical integration or
technical eclecticism (e.g., Corey, 1996; Franklin et al., 1993;
Pederson, 1990). The only prescription is an ongoing attempt to see how
culture impacts clients and how it can inform and enhance psychotherapy.
PROCESSES OF CHANGE Prochaska and Norcross (2018) concluded that
multicultural therapy often taps into four processes of change:
consciousness-​ raising, catharsis, choosing, and social liberation (a
form of advocacy and social justice). First, consciousness-​raising can
highlight oppression and its personal impact on clients.
Consciousness-​raising is particularly important during early stages of
identity development (conformity and dissonance). For example, with a
client who has experienced racism and discrimination, it will be helpful
to ask questions that highlight the external barriers that have been
faced. Psychotherapy can address the liberation of consciousness, which
speaks to helping clients understand how oppression operates in their
lives. Liberation of consciousness goes beyond traditional therapeutic
goals related to self-​actualization, insight into the past, or behavior
change (Sue, Ivey, & Pederson, 1996). Second, therapy can support the
expression of anger and other emotional responses that clients may feel
about stressful cultural

330

Specific Disorders and Populations

experiences like discrimination or sexual harassment (Prochaska &
Norcross, 2018). This type of catharsis may be particularly important
during the resistance and immersion stages of identity development. If a
client is angry and confused about the way he or she has been treated,
practitioners can serve as a witness for their pain by validating their
experience. Culturally diverse clients are also likely to experience
feelings of fear, sadness, and shame that may need to be explored and
resolved in psychotherapy. For example, in working with undocumented
immigrants, therapists will help them deal with realistic fears related
to employment and deportation. Third, multicultural psychotherapy often
involves facilitating active choices about how to respond to cultural
encounters and how to express cultural identity. Making active choices
and participating in social action are particularly important during the
middle stage of resistance and immersion as well as in the final stage
of integrative awareness. After exploring clients' thoughts and feelings
about their cultural experiences, it may prove helpful to consider
choices and actions that will empower them in their broader communities.
Immigrant clients face choices regarding how to incorporate cultural
traditions and roles within the norms of their new country. Clients
choose how much they want to acculturate into their new society and, if
desired, determine how they can blend aspects of both cultures without
losing important aspects of each. This, of course, is easier said than
done. A fourth process of change is social liberation or social justice.
Awareness alone rarely promotes concrete change; active work is required
to secure freedom from oppression. Therapists can advocate for their
clients and actively intervene to transform society. Freire's (1972)
liberation psychology argues that our interventions should be aimed at
changing the world (Ivey, 1995). Mental health professionals conduct
social justice work through varied forms and paths as activists,
educators, therapists, and community members (Toporek, Sapigao, &
Rojas-​Arauz, 2017). For instance, a therapist who works with community
agencies to provide

low-​cost mental health services to clients who cannot afford health
insurance participates in a form of social action. THERAPY RELATIONSHIP
The quality of the therapeutic relationship is a positive predictor of
the outcome of psychotherapy (Norcross, 2011), and this is particularly
true with culturally diverse clients (Liu & Pope-​ Davis, 2005). When
working cross-​ culturally, psychotherapists can enhance the therapeutic
relationship by acknowledging and addressing cultural differences
between the client and the therapist, understanding how microaggressions
can impact the relationship, and addressing ruptures in the therapeutic
alliance when they occur. Discussing cultural differences with clients
frequently proves challenging or uncomfortable, and it may be difficult
to initiate these discussions. Part of building rapport is openly
acknowledging differences rather than dismissing them. By ignoring these
conversations, practitioners may be telling clients indirectly that
their lived experiences are not valid or important enough to be
discussed and that the therapist is not culturally competent. For
instance, suppose a client with a physical disability arrives to see an
able-​ bodied therapist. The client begins to discuss how she feels
discriminated against by able-​bodied individuals when applying for jobs
and feels helpless in her situation. If the therapist does not
explicitly acknowledge the differences between herself and the client,
then there is a significant missed opportunity to fully understand the
client's worldview. In this instance, the therapist might make a
relational intervention such as, "I am wondering what it is like for you
as an individual with a physical disability to discuss your experiences
with a therapist who is able-​ bodied." This proactive exploration
usually facilitates a deeper exploration into the client's experiences
as well as how her identity has been shaped by her cultural context. The
term "microaggression" refers to subtle, indirect messages (either
intentional or

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

unintentional) that are perceived as derogatory or demeaning to a target
group or individual (Sue & Sue, 2016). One research study found that
more than half of racially and ethnically diverse clients in a
university counseling setting had experienced a microaggression by their
psychotherapist (Owen et al., 2014). Microaggressions tend to fall into
three categories: microassaults, microinsults, and microinvalidations.
Microassaults are similar to overt discrimination as they are a direct
attack on an individual or a group intended to be discriminatory in
nature. Microinsults are considered insensitive insults, such as when a
career counselor asks a black female client if she wants to change her
major since she failed a math course. This therapist's microinsult
assigns intelligence to a person based on her race and gender. A
therapist who does not value the importance of a client's racial or
ethnic identity may be guilty of microinvalidation by stating, "I don't
believe you and me are very different. We are all humans and we should
be treated equally." While the therapist's intention may be to help the
client feel a sense of belonging, the opposite message may be
communicated. Ruptures in the therapeutic alliance are inevitable
(Eubanks, Safran, & Muran, in press). When working with diverse clients,
therapists can communicate directly when they may have ruptured a
relationship through a microaggression. How should a therapist repair a
ruptured alliance? First, be honest and transparent in discussing the
topic with the client, openly acknowledging that an assumption or
mistake has been made. Second, explore with the client what it was like
for the therapist to make a microaggression in session and discuss other
contexts in which microaggressions have occurred. This type of
exploration can facilitate a deeper discussion of the client's feelings
and thoughts related to her experiences of being part of a marginalized
group as well as the cumulative cultural messages she has received about
her identity. Third, offer a sincere apology. Fourth, contract for how
to address any future alliance ruptures in the relationship. Research
demonstrates that rupture repairs often enhance the therapeutic
relationship, decrease

331

premature terminations, and improve patient outcomes (Eubanks et al., in
press). METHODS AND TECHNIQUES We highlight four approaches to cultural
methods and techniques below: group specific recommendations, cultural
adaptations of evidence-​ based treatments, exploring culture using an
ideographic approach, and examining interactions between culture and
other dimensions of functioning. The first two types of multicultural
skills (group-​ specific skills and multicultural adaptations) represent
nomothetic approaches because they emphasize "the prominent
characteristics of the group to which an individual belongs" (Ridley,
2005, p. 86). This nomothetic focus on group membership represents both
a strength and a weakness. A central theme of the multicultural movement
has been that knowledge about cultural group membership should guide our
work as psychotherapists. At the same time, there is a risk in assuming
that by knowing a client's racial or ethnic identity, we have captured
their essence. The recognition that people within the same group differ
greatly in levels of acculturation and stages of identity development
creates another challenge in applying nomothetic models of culture.
Nomothetic models are most helpful when ethnocultural identity is
central to psychotherapy goals and when the client identifies clearly
with a single group (Harris, 2012). The alternative or complement to a
nomothetic approach to culture is an ideographic perspective, which
provides a method to "understand the personal meaning that the client
holds as a particular person" (Ridley, 2005, p. 86). In practice, the
distinction between a nomothetic and an ideographic perspective is a
delicate balance. As noted earlier, culturally competent therapists
learn about the cultural heritage and identity of clients and then
explore the personal meaning of these influences to avoid inaccurate
stereotyping. The last two types of skills presented in this chapter
(exploring culture and examining cultural

332

Specific Disorders and Populations

interactions) are more ideographic, which typically proves most helpful
when a client does not clearly identify with a single group, or when
race or ethnicity intersects with other aspects of identity in
influential ways (Harris, 2012). Group-​Specific Recommendations The
multicultural movement has frequently made specific recommendations for
counseling clients from different cultural groups. The first edition of
D. W. Sue's (1981) Counseling the Culturally Different had chapters with
recommendations for counseling Asian Americans, blacks, Hispanics, and
American Indians. The seventh edition (Sue & Sue, 2016) has additional
chapters about counseling multiracial individuals, Arab and Muslim
Americans, immigrants and refugees, Jewish Americans, individuals with
disabilities, LGBT individuals, older adults, individuals living in
poverty, and women. Some recommendations about working with specific
groups include recognizing that self-​ disclosure is not a natural part
of Asian, Latino, or Native American cultures and that many minority
clients prefer active and directive treatments. Another approach begins
with knowledge about a specific culture and is then applied to
psychotherapy, resulting in specific methods across six stages of
treatment: connecting with clients, assessing, facilitating awareness,
setting goals, instigating change, and feedback and accountability
(Gallardo et al., 2012). For example, for American Indians and Alaska
Natives, reality is defined spiritually, giving to family and community
is the highest value, the spiritual world is seen as parallel to the
material universe, learning from experience is the best way to know
something, and action is defined by how it supports the tribe. Based on
this understanding of native culture, Trimble (2012) made
recommendations for working with American Indians across the six stages
of treatment. First, connecting with American Indian clients will
include accepting long periods of silence and discussing trust and
trustworthiness. Second, assessment should include a discussion of
tribal and personal history

and recognition that clients may be mistrustful of formal testing.
Third, awareness will typically include a discussion of values and
beliefs as well as a deep openness to truth. Fourth, goal-​ setting
should consider gender and the context of extended family and the
possibility that personal goals may be supported by traditional healing
ceremonies. Fifth, change may involve social networks, including family,
friends, and coworkers. Sixth, feedback may include storytelling as well
as behavioral records of client change. Cultural Adaptations of
Evidence-​Based Treatments A second approach to cultural methods involves
cultural adaptations of evidence-​ based treatments. Cultural adaption
procedures are defined as "systemic modifications of an evidence-​based
treatment (EBT) or intervention protocol to consider language, culture,
and context in such a way that it is compatible with the client's
cultural patterns, meanings, and values" (Bernal, Jimenez-​Chafey, &
Rodriguez, 2009, p. 362). The motivation to create cultural adaptations
is based on research that indicates that EBTs may not be as effective
for diverse cultural groups (Benish, Quintana, & Wampold, 2011).
Multiple meta-​ analyses demonstrate that cultural adaptations of EBTs
work as well, and usually better, than the non-​adapted EBTs (Griner &
Smith, 2006). In culturally adapting treatments, clinicians start by
inquiring about the intervention's acceptability, usefulness, and
effectiveness with the target population, including discussions with
other practitioners who are knowledgeable about the target population.
Based on a literature review to document barriers to treatment, a pilot
study of the adapted treatment can be used to determine if it is
acceptable and valid. Finally, delivery modes that impact how the
intervention will be conducted and in what format can be considered
(Bernal & Rodriguez, 2012). Research indicates that therapists often
struggle with adapting interventions to meet their clients' needs
(Griner & Smith, 2006).

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

For instance, a client who identifies as an Asian male may find the
assertiveness training proposed by his therapist to be understood as
aggressive due to his cultural background. Many models of adaptation
utilize Bronfenbrenner's (1979) ecological systems theory addressing
multiple cultural elements when working with diverse ethnocultural
groups: language, person, metaphors, content, concepts, goals, methods,
and context (Bernal, Bonilla, & Bellido, 1995). Researchers have
utilized this framework to successfully create culturally adapted
therapies for specific ethnic groups. Many frameworks also consider how
acculturative stress, discrimination, nationality status, spirituality,
customs, and values impact treatment outcomes and client engagement
(Bernal & Rodriguez, 2012). Cultural adaptions are more effective than
interventions that are not culturally sensitive, but their effectiveness
is probably impacted by patient age and acculturation level (Griner &
Smith, 2006). For instance, older Hispanic participants are more likely
to be receptive and in need of culturally adapted interventions compared
to younger Hispanic participants. This may be due to older participants
being less acculturated and thus preferring clinicians who are matched
based on language and culturally sensitive to their clients' worldviews.
Exploring Culture Using an Ideographic Approach The third approach to
cultural methods involves specific skills that can explore culture with
any client using an ideographic approach. Instead of choosing methods
based on group membership (nomothetic), these skills focus on exploring
the individual experience of culture and its personal meaning (Ridley,
2005). These skills can be divided into clusters: becoming aware of your
own worldview, creating a culturally sensitive therapeutic relationship,
understanding the client's worldview, facilitating cultural identity
development, responding to societal structures and values, and utilizing
complementary roles beyond psychotherapy (Altschul et al., 2004, Harris,
2012). Each of

333

these six clusters has been operationalized with practical skills that
can be learned, practiced, and implemented. Becoming Aware of Your Own
Worldview These skills involve reflecting on one's own cultural
influences and how they may impact diverse clients. Ideally, a
foundational sense of awareness begins before working with clients, but
there is recognition that each new client may require a different type
of awareness. For example, therapists can reflect on the societal
messages about diversity variables that have been internalized. The
first time a therapist works with an elderly client, he or she may
become aware of biases about the value of youth. In work with
transgender clients, therapists can examine how their worldview defines
sex and gender. Creating a Culturally Sensitive Therapeutic Relationship
It is essential to engage in discussions with clients about how the
client's and therapist's worldviews influence the relationship. The need
to tailor the relationship to the individual needs of clients has long
been recognized within the psychotherapy integration movement. Norcross
and Wampold (2011) recommended that psychotherapists responsively adapt
the therapeutic relationship to the client's preferences, reactance
level, stages of change, religion/​spirituality, race/​ethnicity,
functional impairment, and other transdiagnostic factors that have been
supported by the research evidence. Understanding the Client's Worldview
As we have emphasized throughout the chapter, a central theme in
culturally competent therapy is knowing a client's history, worldview,
and personal experiences. Virtually all cultural experts suggest that it
is not clients' responsibility to educate practitioners about the
history of the groups to which they belong. Understanding a client's
worldview may involve education and consultation when a therapist
encounters new nuances of diversity. Although background

334

Specific Disorders and Populations

knowledge is necessary, it is not sufficient. Therapists must view
clients as individuals and explore the personal meaning of various
identities (Hays, 2008). Facilitating Cultural Identity Development
These skills encompass acknowledging differ­ ences in cultural
worldviews, processing encounters with oppression or difference,
embracing culture, cultivating pride, internalizing culture, and valuing
others. An encounter with racism and discrimination may leave clients
feeling angry and confused. Therapists can help clients process these
strong emotions and understand them using a cultural lens. Therapists
may then encourage clients to embrace social support from others in the
community. Clients may need help identifying ways to channel their
strong emotions into adaptive personal and social action. Responding to
Societal Structures and Values These skills highlight ways that
psychotherapy can help clients decide how to respond to societal
structures and values. This includes examining social oppression,
considering systems of privilege, facilitating movement toward social
action, and supporting informed choices. These skills help clients look
at the cultural messages they have been taught and to make a conscious
decision about which values to continue to embrace and which messages to
discard or modify. For example, in working with a married Latina woman
who has been taught that she should value her husband's career over her
own, a therapist can encourage her to reflect on these cultural
messages. The goal will be to help this client make informed choices
about whether to pursue a more challenging career or to stay at home and
support her husband's career. Utilizing Complementary Roles Beyond
Psychotherapy Sharing personal information with a therapist is not a
natural activity for people from many

cultural groups. As a result, therapists can embrace different roles
that do not heavily rely on immediate personal disclosure. Skills that
may complement traditional psychotherapy interventions include
integrating spiritual awareness, facilitating indigenous healing, and
seeking consultation with cultural experts. For example, if an
unemployed client is finding it hard to afford healthy food, it may
prove more helpful to consult about how to apply for food stamps than to
explore thoughts and feelings about being unemployed. Psychotherapy is
not the only way that people seek growth and stability; speaking to
clients about other sources of wisdom and healing will enhance treatment
outcome for many clients. Examining Interactions Between Culture and
Other Dimensions of Functioning These skills examine the way culture
interacts with other dimensions of human functioning. Examining cultural
interactions provides a method for taking traditional therapies---​
cognitive, experiential, behavioral, interpersonal, and systemic---​and
adjusting them to be more responsive to clients' cultures (Brooks-​
Harris et al., 2004; Harris, 2012). Practically speaking, interventions
from any theoretical orientation can by modified by adopting a cultural
lens. Within cognitive therapy, for example, therapists can understand
cognitions in their cultural context, identify culturally sensitive
alternative cognitions, explore cultural schemas, and facilitate
cultural and cognitive flexibility. Drawing from experiential therapy,
practitioners can attend to feelings within the cultural context,
clarify self-​in-​relation, and examine freedom and responsibility with
cultural sensitivity. Behavioral interventions can be modified to
recognize the way a different culture reinforces certain behaviors and
the way clients can be exposed to new experiences as a part of cultural
adjustment. Culture shapes the way relationships are expressed and
experienced. Modifying interpersonal interventions to be more culturally
responsive includes honoring resistance that may be culturally
appropriate, exploring cultural

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

transference, and understanding past interpersonal conflicts within the
context of culture. As a final example, systemic interventions can be
modified by identifying culturally influenced family expectations,
illuminating cultural values transmitted through the family, and
encouraging systemic change that fits the cultural context.

CASE EXAMPLE Joan is a 35-​ year-​ old, single, heterosexual, African
American female. She was a graduate student majoring in Theology and
Religious Studies at a Christian university when she sought
psychotherapy. Joan identified as being raised Christian-​ Baptist,
noting that her religion was very important to her. Her physician
referred her to psychotherapy because she had been feeling depressed and
anxious about graduation. Joan participated in a total of 26 sessions of
individual therapy at the university counseling center where she was
attending graduate school. Joan's therapist was Natasha (second author
of this chapter), a 30-​ year-​ old, married, heterosexual, Asian
American, female who was completing her doctorate in counseling
psychology and participating in practicum training at the counseling
center. Joan indicated that her anxiety had been heightened as she
neared graduation. Joan believed that she had been experiencing an
"identity crisis" as she began to question her spirituality and her
future career plans. At the time of intake, Joan met the criteria listed
in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-​5) for
an adjustment disorder with mixed anxiety and depressed mood. No formal
assessment was used to assess the severity of her symptoms. When asked
about her therapy goals, Joan hoped to decrease her anxiety related to
graduation as well as understand her spirituality more clearly. A
multicultural assessment determined that religion was Joan's most
salient cultural identity. Over time, Natasha also explored how Joan's
ethnic and racial identity and her gender interacted with her religion
to impact her depression and anxiety. Natasha developed a warm and
collaborative

335

relationship with her client, and Joan expressed appreciation for having
a safe and nonjudgmental setting in which to discuss these sensitive
matters. Joan described how she had been taught by her family to value
and honor God by attending church on a weekly basis. She had recently
started attending church less frequently as she did not feel connected
to the people there or the topics discussed. Each Sunday, Joan would
make up an excuse for why she did not attend church, isolating herself
from her community. She expressed to the therapist that she felt ashamed
for not desiring to attend church as it no longer provided her the
desired support or encouragement. Natasha reflected on the cultural
messages Joan received from her family as well as within her church
community since a young age. Joan believed that she was no longer a
"good Christian" and that she would be "damned to hell," messages she
received from her family of origin about people who did not attend
church. Natasha gradually formulated a cultural conceptualization to
understand Joan, one that involved integrating spiritual awareness into
the sessions and assessing how Joan's identity had been impacted by
family and social expectations. Joan reported that her graduate courses
were impacting her thoughts and feelings regarding her religion and
spirituality. The cultural messages and values that she received from
her family members were being challenged within the classroom by her
peers and professors, which created recurring thoughts of "I don't know
what to believe in anymore" and "I must be a bad person." These critical
self-​judgments resulted in feelings of loneliness, confusion, and
anxiety. These thoughts and feelings resulted in avoidance and social
isolation. Natasha utilized cognitive methods to explore and challenge
Joan's core belief that she was a bad person through thought diaries and
examining evidence. Specifically, Natasha challenged Joan's conclusion
that not going to church or interpreting the Bible differently than her
family made her a bad person. Using an experiential intervention,
Natasha facilitated a two-​chair dialogue between these two cultural
parts of Joan. One part of Joan believed that "I'm a bad person," and
the other part believed that "Having different

336

Specific Disorders and Populations

views from others does not make me bad." By examining her cultural
values using both cognitive and experiential methods, Joan experienced
less distress related to changes in her cultural identity as a
Christian. Since Natasha did not identify as a Christian, she consulted
with religious leaders within the community to better understand Joan's
religious beliefs. This consultation helped Natasha integrate spiritual
awareness into treatment by fostering knowledge and awareness regarding
a specific religious context. As a result of this consultation, Natasha
inquired further into Bible verses that Joan found emotionally confusing
as well as the cultural meaning of sin for Joan. As an African American
woman raised in a conservative Christian household, Joan had always
perceived church as an integral part of her community and a source of
social support. However, Joan now found herself withdrawing from church
activities as she began to disagree with other churchgoer's views on
Christianity. She believed she no longer fit in with the community that
had felt like a safe haven for so long. Natasha and Joan discussed the
role church played within Joan's family and within the African American
community. Natasha encouraged Joan to find a social context in which she
would feel comfortable sharing her thoughts about religion with others.
Joan began to seek support from classmates who had experienced similar
cultural messages. Joan's classmates introduced her to other places of
worship more consistent with her new beliefs. This social support
facilitated changes in Joan's identity development and increased her
connectedness in the community. Joan began to recognize that she could
reach out to individuals at her school for support and assistance
instead of depending solely on members of her home church. These new
sources of social support facilitated Joan's cultural and religious
awareness and validated her new beliefs. As Joan learned more about her
religious identity, she felt more confident about letting her family
know that she was not attending church weekly. Joan discovered a
congruent outlet for her religious identity and had fewer negative
thoughts about her self being a "bad person" or being

"sinful" for not being a devout Christian. Joan experienced reduced
symptoms of anxiety and distress. At termination, Joan no longer met the
DSM-​5 criteria for an adjustment disorder. During the termination
process, Joan wrote a letter to Natasha thanking her and letting her
know that she felt proud of both her racial and religious identities.
After completing treatment, Joan sustained the social connections she
made with her classmates and peers at the university. In summary,
Natasha seamlessly employed several of the cultural approaches
highlighted earlier in this chapter: using cultural adaptations of
evidence-​ based treatments (cognitive therapy, emotion-​ focused
therapy), exploring culture using an ideographic approach, and examining
interactions between Joan's race/​ethnicity and religious orientation. In
addition, Natasha pursued several general multicultural skills, such as
pursuing consultation with experienced practitioners, increasing her
knowledge of religious sources, and cultivating social support for the
client from those of similar cultural identity. Because changes in
Joan's cultural identity were so closely related to her anxiety and
depression, it was essential to make culture a central part of her
treatment.

OUTCOME RESEARCH Of the four cultural psychotherapy methods reviewed in
this chapter, only the two nomothetic approaches have been subjected to
systematic outcome research. The effectiveness of cultural group-​
specific psychotherapies has been examined in a handful of studies
(e.g., Trimble, 2012), but cultural adaptations have been extensively
studied. This section thus focuses on the effectiveness of those
adaptations of evidence-​based psychotherapies. Meta-​analytic research
has been used to investigate the effectiveness of multicultural
competence and cultural adaptations. Soto and colleagues (in press)
conducted a meta-​analysis of 27 studies that examined multicultural
competence as a therapist factor. Results indicated that therapists'
multicultural competence improved clients' participation in treatment

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse

and client outcomes. That is, cultural competence improves patient
success in a modest way. Their meta-​analysis also revealed that clients'
ratings of therapists' cultural competence had a significant impact on
treatment, but therapists' self-​reported cultural competence did not
have a significant effect. Therapists' estimates of their own cultural
competence are probably unreliable, whereas clients' ratings predict
clients' positive outcomes in psychotherapy (Soto et al., in press).
Several meta-​ analyses have examined the effectiveness of cultural
adaptations in psychotherapy. The most recent (Soto et al., in press)
analyzed 99 studies that tested cultural adaptations and found an
overall effect size of d = 0.50, a medium strong effect. That is,
cultural adaptations work better than nonadapted treatment for clients
of color. Adaptations that focused on the client's preferred language
had the greatest impact on treatment outcome.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS

337

competence, more research is needed. In addition to outcome research
comparing different treatments, process research will look at subtle
nuances within therapy sessions. Research will be used to explore the
ways that intersecting identities impact psychotherapy and how
therapists can avoid microaggressions and repair therapeutic ruptures.
Psychotherapy will increasingly view culture as an essential part of
understanding each unique client. As a result of these advances in
theory, practice, and research, culture will be integrated into all
psychotherapy. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Deborah Altschul,
Larisa Buhin, Winter Hamada, Andrea Nacapoy, and Shelley Savage for
developing the descriptions of skills to explore culture in this
chapter, as well as Cristina Castagnini, George Hanawahine, Dorje
Jennette, Jill Oliveira, and Kimberly Wagner for developing the
descriptions of skills to examine interactions between culture and other
dimensions of functioning.

As our world becomes more culturally diverse, the field of psychotherapy
will continue to increase its understanding of the many ways that
sociocultural contexts and intersecting References identities impact
psychological functioning (American Psychological Association, 2017).
Altschul, D., Brooks-​Harris, J., Buhin, L., Hamada, W., Nacapoy, A., &
Savage, S. (2004, July). We will continue to explore the impact of
Multicultural skills training: Operationalizing experiences of privilege
and marginalization on a treatment, training, and research model. the
therapeutic relationship and other aspects Symposium conducted at the
meeting of of treatment (Ratts et al., 2015). Psychotherapy the American
Psychological Association, theories will increasingly recognize the
imHonolulu, HI. portance of cultural variables, and integrative American
Psychological Association. (2002). theories will articulate the role of
culture and Guidelines on multicultural education, training, research,
practice, and organizational change identity. for psychologists.
Retrieved from http://​www. In practice, therapists will increase their
apa.org/​about/​policy/​multicultural-​guidelines-​ ability to work with
clients who differ from archived.pdf themselves on a wide variety of
demographic American Psychological Association. (2005). variables and
learn to address these differences Policy statement on evidence-​based
practice in openly. Therapists will continue to find new psychology.
Retrieved from http://​www.apa.org/​ ways to translate multicultural
values into pracpractice/​resources/​evidence/​evidence-​based-​ tical
interventions, especially with evidence-​ statement.pdf based cultural
adaptations. American Psychological Association. (2015). Although
research has tested the effecGuidelines for psychological practice with
tiveness of cultural adaptations and cultural transgender and gender
nonconforming people.

338

Specific Disorders and Populations

Retrieved from https://​www.apa.org/​practice/​ guidelines/​transgender.pdf
American Psychological Association. (2017). Multicultural guidelines: An
ecological approach to context, identity, and intersectionality.
Retrieved from http://​www.apa.org/​about/​
policy/​multicultural-​guidelines.pdf Atkinson, D., Morten, G., & Sue, D.
W. (1979). Counseling American minorities. Dubuque, IA: Brown. Atkinson,
D. R., Morten, G., & Sue, D. W. (1998). Counseling American minorities
(5th ed.). Boston: McGraw-​Hill. Benish, S. G., Quintana, S., & Wampold,
B. E. (2011). Culturally adapted psychotherapy and the legitimacy of
myth: A direct-​comparison meta-​ analysis. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 58(3), 279--​289. https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​a0023626 Bernal,
G., Bonilla, J., & Bellido, C. (1995). Ecological validity and cultural
sensitivity for outcome research: Issues for the cultural adaptation and
development of psychosocial treatments with Hispanics. Journal of
Abnormal Child Psychology, 23(1), 67--​82. https://​doi.org/​
10.1007/​bf01447045 Bernal, G., Jiménez-​Chafey, M. I., & Rodríguez, M. D.
(2009). Cultural adaptation of treatments: A resource for considering
culture in evidence-​ based practice. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 40(4), 361--​ 368. https://​doi.org/​10.1037/​a0016401 Bernal,
G. E., & Rodríguez, M. D. (2012). Cultural adaptations: Tools for
evidence-​based practice with diverse populations. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. Bieschke, K. J., Perez, R. M., &
DeBord, K. A. (Eds.). (2007). Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy
with lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender clients. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The
ecology of human development: Experiments by nature and design.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. Brooks-​ Harris, J. E.,
Jennette, D., Wagner, K., Olieveira-​ Berry, J., Hanawahine, G., &
Castagnini, C. (2004, July). Culture-​centered psychotherapy
interventions: Adapting strategies from five theoretical approaches.
Symposium conducted at the meeting of the American Psychological
Association, Honolulu, HI. Brooks-​Harris, J. E. (2008). Integrative
multitheoretical psychotherapy. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Cass, V. C. (1979). Homosexuality identity formation: Testing a
theoretical model. Journal of Homosexuality, 4(3), 219--​235.
doi:10.1300/​ j082v04n03\_​01 Cordes, C. C., Cameron, R. P., Mona, L. R.,
Syme, M. L., & Coble-​Temple, A. (2017). Perspectives on disability
within integrated health care. In J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, C. M.
Alexander, & M. A. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural counseling
(pp. 259--​ 270). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Corey, G. (1996). Theoretical
implications of MCT theory. In D. W. Sue, A. E. Ivey, & P. B. Pederson
(Eds.), A theory of multicultural counseling and therapy (pp. 99--​ 111).
Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/​Cole. Cross, W. (1971). The Negro to Black
conversion experience. Black World, 20, 13--​25. Cross, W. E. (1995). The
psychology of nigrescence: Revising the cross model. In J. G.
Ponterotto, J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, & C. M. Alexander (Eds.),
Handbook of multicultural counseling (pp. 93--​122). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage. Eubanks-​Carter, C., Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (in press).
Repairing alliance ruptures. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Franklin, A. J., Carter, R. T., & Grace, C. (1993). An integrative
approach to psychotherapy with Black/​African Americans: The relevance of
race and culture. In G. Stricker & J. R. Gold (Eds.), Comprehensive
handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 465--​482). New York: Plenum.
Freire, P. (1972). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Herder & Herder.
Gallardo, M. E., Yeh, C. J., Trimble, J. E., & Parham, T. A. (Eds.).
(2012). Culturally adaptive counseling skills: Demonstrations of
evidence-​ based practices. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Gibson, J. (2006).
Disability and clinical competency: An introduction. California
Psychologist, 39, 6--​10. Gibson, J. (2009). Clinical competency and
culturally diverse clients with disabilities: The case of Linda. In M.
E. Gallardo & B. McNeill (Eds.), Intersection of multiple identities: A
casebook of evidence-​ based practices with diverse populations
(pp. 277--​ 308). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbauam. Good, G. E., Gilbert, L.
A., & Scher, M. (1990). Gender aware therapy: A synthesis of feminist

Integrative Psychotherapy with Cultural Diverse therapy and knowledge
about gender. Journal of Counseling & Development, 68, 376--​380.
doi:10.1002/​j.1556-​6676.1990.tb02514.x Griner, D., & Smith, T. B.
(2006). Culturally adapted mental health intervention: A meta-​ analytic
review. Psychotherapy, 43(4), 531--​548. Harris, J. E. (2012).
Multicultural counseling in a multitheoretical context: New applications
for practice. In M. E. Gallardo, C. J. Yeh, J. E. Trimble, & T. A.
Parham (Eds.), Culturally adaptive counseling skills demonstrations of
evidence-​ based practices (pp. 287--​ 312). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hays, P. (2008). Addressing cultural complexities in practice:
Assessment, diagnosis, and therapy (2nd ed.). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Ivey, A. (1995). Psychotherapy as liberation.
In J. Ponterotto, M. Casas, L. Suzuki, & C. Alexander (Eds.), Handbook
of multicultural counseling (pp. 53--​ 72). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Kim,
J. (2012). Asian American racial identity development theory. In C. L.
Wijeyesinghe & B. W. Jackson (Eds.), New perspectives on racial identity
development: Integrating emerging frameworks (pp. 138--​160). New York:
New York University Press. Liu, W. M., & Pope-​Davis, D. B. (2005). The
working alliance, therapy ruptures and impasses, and counseling
competence: Implications for counselor training and education. Handbook
of racial-​ cultural psychology and counseling: Training and practice, 2,
148--​167. Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011). Psychotherapy relationships
that work (2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C.,
& Wampold, B. E. (2011). Research conclusions and clinical practices. In
J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (2nd ed.,
pp. 423--​430). New York: Oxford University Press. Owen, J., Tao, K. W.,
Imel, Z. E., Wampold, B. E., & Rodolfa, E. (2014). Addressing racial and
ethnic microaggressions in therapy. Professional Psychology: Research
and Practice, 45(4), 283. Pachankis, J. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (2004).
Clinical issues in working with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients.
Psychotherapy, 41(3), 227. Pederson, P. (1990). The multicultural
perspective as a fourth force in counseling. Journal of Mental Health
Counseling, 12, 93--​95.

339

Prochaska, J., & Norcross, J. (2018). Systems of psychotherapy: A
transtheoretical analysis (9th ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.
Ratts, M. J., Singh, A. A., Nassar-​ McMillan, S., Butler, S. K.,
McCullough, J. R., & Hipolito-​ Delgado, C. (2015). Multicultural and
social justice counseling competencies. AMCD: Alexandria, VA. Ridley, C.
R. (2005). Overcoming unintentional racism in counseling and therapy
(2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Ruiz, A. S. (1990). Ethnic identity:
Crisis and resolution. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and
Development, 18(1), 29--​40. Soto, A., Smith, T. B., Griner, D.
Rodríguez, M. D., & Bernal, G. (in press). Cultural adaptations and
multicultural competence. In J. C. Norcross & B. E. Wampold (Eds.),
Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Sue, D. W. (1981). Counseling the culturally
different: Theory and practice. New York: John Wiley & Sons. Sue, D. W.,
Arredondo, P., & McDavis, R. J. (1992). Multicultural counseling
competencies and standards: A call to the profession. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 70, 477--​483. Sue, D. W., Ivey, A. E., &
Pederson, P. B. (1996). A theory of multicultural counseling and
therapy. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/​Cole. Sue, D. W., & Sue, D. (2016).
Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons. Sue, S., & Sue, D. W. (1971). Chinese-​American
personality and mental health. Amerasia Journal, 1(2), 36--​49. Suzuki,
L. A., Lee, E., & Short, E. L. (2017). Psychological assessment: A brief
examination of procedures, frequently used tests, and culturally based
measures. In J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, C. M. Alexander, & M. A. Jackson
(Eds.), Handbook of multicultural counseling (pp. 259--​270). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage. Toporek, R. L., Sapigao, W., & Rojas-​Arauz, B. O.
(2017). Fostering the development of a social justice perspective and
action: Finding a social justice voice. In J. M. Casas, L. A. Suzuki, C.
M. Alexander, & M. A. Jackson (Eds.), Handbook of multicultural
counseling (pp. 259--​ 270). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Trimble, J. E.
(2012). Working with North American Indian and Alaska native clients:
Understanding

340

Specific Disorders and Populations

the deep culture within. In M. E. Gallardo, C. J. Yeh, J. E. Trimble, &
T. A. Parham (Eds.), Culturally adaptive counseling skills:
Demonstrations of evidence-​based practice (pp. 181--​200). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage. US Department of Health and Human Services. (2001). Mental
health: Culture, race, and

ethnicity-​ a supplement to mental health: A report of the Surgeon
General. Retrieved from http://​www.mentalhealth.samhsa.gov/​media/​
ken/​pdf/​SMA-​01-​3613/​sma-​01-​3613.pdf Worell, J., & Remer, P. (2002).
Feminist perspectives in therapy: Empowering diverse women (2nd ed.).
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.

16 Integrative Psychotherapy with Children ATHENA A. DREWES AND JOHN W.
SEYMOUR

Childhood psychopathology continues at a high and constant rate. Between
17% and 22% of youth (under the age of 18) have experienced a
diagnosable emotional, behavioral, or developmental problem (Kazdin &
Johnson, 1994). This translates to more than 14 million youth in the
United States suffering significant impairments (Prout & Fedewa, 2015).
Children are a critically underserved population despite ample
recognition of the growing rates of at-​ risk, suicidal, and antisocial
behaviors, and substance abuse (Prout & Fedewa, 2015). To complicate
matters further, treatment dropout rates for children and youth have
been found to be as high as 40--​60% (Prout & Fedewa, 2015), and there
are conflicting viewpoints on whether child psychotherapy is effective
(Weisz et al., 2017). For example, a large meta-​ analysis covering 447
studies (30,431 youths) and synthesizing 50 years of research findings
found that youth in the treatment condition

fare better than those in the control condition (63% posttreatment
probability, ES = 0.46). The strongest treatment effect was for anxiety
(0.61), weakest for depression (0.29), and nonsignificant for
multiproblem treatments (0.15). The findings underscored the benefits of
psychological treatments, as well as the need for improved therapies and
more representative, informative research (Weisz et al., 2017). Although
psychotherapy studies of children and youth show efficacy when compared
with no treatment (Lebow, 2008), effectiveness drops when conducted in
real-​world settings. Complicating child psychotherapy is the issue of
development, which is shifting and changing, making stable measurements
difficult (Lebow, 2008). The child therapist must be familiar with human
development because much of what is viewed as problematic in children,
with the exception of severe psychopathology or extreme behaviors, might
be normal

341

342

Specific Disorders and Populations

developmental deviation. In addition, many of the symptomatic
manifestations in normal children and in child development, such as
temper tantrums, enuresis, specific fears and anxieties and sleep
disturbance tend to disappear as a function of development and
maturation. Another factor that contributes to the differences between
child and adult therapy is that the child's personality is less likely
to be set than the adult's. The child's defenses are not as well
established, are more pliable, and respond better to therapeutic
intervention once a therapeutic relationship and cooperation is
established. On the other hand, because of the rapid changes, child
clients may be labile, with a wider range of normal emotional and
behavioral responses and inconsistency in responding to therapy.
Compounding the difficulty of treatment with children still further is a
different motivation than adults have. While adults have some awareness
that a personal problem exists, children may not recognize or agree that
there is a problem, nor voluntarily initiate therapy. Other adults will
make this determination for treatment, resulting in varying degrees of
acceptance, compliance, and resistance from the child. In addition, the
child usually has little understanding of the therapeutic process and
treatment objectives and may even have a distorted view of and
misinformation regarding therapy. Another major difference between child
and adult therapy is that the child has limited verbal and linguistic
development, which in turn relates to limitations in cognition and
abstract thinking. Children may not think in abstract terms, may lack
skills to articulate their thoughts and emotions, and may not have a
sufficient receptive vocabulary to fully understand what is being asked
in an interview or session. Thus, talk therapy with children often fails
unless play or play-​based interventions are used as a medium of
treatment (Drewes, 2009). These and additional complexities in child
psychotherapy virtually require integrative psychotherapies. Child
clinicians trained in one theoretical orientation or a single treatment
quickly find that one size cannot fit

all of the presenting problems and complex circumstances. Since children
are not simply little adults, their treatment cannot be scaled-​ down
adult treatment. Developmental stages, systemic environments, referral
reasons, and a multitude of additional factors require a flexible,
integrative approach to therapy. In addition, an integrative approach
with youth will frequently involve other systems in the child's life,
such as parents, family members, and school personnel, and require
blending individual, parent, family, and community formats as well. THE
INTEGRATIVE APPROACH Foundational Concepts "Psychotherapy integration is
central to child treatment, although at times it is not clearly
identified or developed both in the research literature and practice"
(Krueger & Glass, 2013, p. 331). The more interventions and systems that
can be combined, the more modalities involved in the treatment, the more
likely the overall therapeutic goals are realized (Prout & Fedewa,
2015). The treatment focus necessitates looking at "which set of
procedures is effective when applied to what kinds of patients with
which set of problems and practiced by which sort of therapists"
(Barrett, Hampe, & Miller, 1978, p. 428). Because child psychotherapy
demonstrates high levels of symptom severity and comorbidity, along with
parent and family stressors, a multidimensional approach is necessary
(Kazdin, 1996, Kelley, Bickman, & Norwood, 2010). In addition, an
integrative approach to child psychotherapy facilitates broadening the
therapist's theoretical conceptualization of the child's presenting
problems and helps to implement a variety of interventions (Krueger &
Glass, 2013). In contrast to linear models of psychopathology (Gold,
1992; Pine, 1985), integrative theories of psychopathology conceptualize
it from the viewpoint of multicausation. Equal weight is given to
various aspects of personal functioning, such as motives, affects,
thoughts, images, and behaviors. These are

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children

examined through "psychic structures, developmental needs, biological
and maturational processes, intrapsychic motives and conflicts,
cognitive and perceptual processes and contents, emotions, and overt
actions" (Gold, 1992, p. 56). Each of these components are "influencing,
modifying, reinforcing, inhibiting, and perhaps even creating each
other" (Gold, 1992, p. 56), and they are seen in a blended and unified
whole. Such blending implies a circularity as well as the containment of
multiple relationships that are seen between the cognitive, dynamic,
interpersonal, and behavioral aspects of the person (Coonerty, 1993).
Because cognitive styles are in the process of formation in children,
interventions must be tailored to match them, as well as determining
what is developmentally appropriate for the client and for their
extended systems of family and school. An integrative approach allows
for the addressing of interpersonal challenges as well as external
realities of the child client (Krueger & Glass, 2013). Rather than
jumping from one treatment to another, the child therapist develops a
prescriptive, integrative approach that broadens the therapist's
concept. Of course, the selection of treatments should not be ruled by a
therapist's preferences or the staying within a comfort zone, but rather
through research evidence and clinical expertise (Schaefer, 2003). The
prospect of change in one sphere of functioning frequently leads to
broad reverberations and changes throughout multiple aspects of the
client's maladaptive functioning (Coonerty, 1993). In addition, the
child's family and macroenvironment (e.g., poverty, poor housing,
disintegrated family structure, alienation, and disenfranchisement) add
influential components to the child's cognitive, dynamic, and behavioral
responses (Gold, 1992). This multiple causation model helps move the
clinician from narrow theoretical constraints to address the many
factors that may be causing or maintaining pathology and inhibiting a
young person's ability to learn and function in a healthy manner.
Integrative treatments are not new to child therapy. Surveys indicate
that child clinicians

343

utilize techniques and procedures from a variety of theoretical sources
in clinical work with children (Koocher & Pedulla, 1977; Shirk, 1999;
Tuma & Pratt, 1982). More than half of surveyed child and play
therapists blend techniques (Fonagy et al., 2002; Phillips & Landreth,
1998). The extensive research conducted on child sexual abuse and trauma
also push for an integrative approach. For example, a three-​prong
integrated trauma treatment (Stein & Kendall, 2004) addressed
problematic behaviors and skill development through cognitive-​behavior
therapy (CBT) interventions; integrated traumatic memories, emotions,
and buried parts of the self through psychodynamic interventions; and
attended to the actions and reactions in the family system that maintain
dysfunctional family interactions. In addition, because trauma memories
are imbedded in the right hemisphere of the brain (Gil, 2006; van der
Kolk, 2005), the integrative use of nonverbal treatments and strategies
utilizing symbolic language, pretend play, and creativity will help
access and activate this portion of the child's brain. Thus, the use
expressive arts, play, and pleasurable activities within therapy has
been found to be helpful in allowing traumatized and abused children to
create their trauma narratives (e.g., Drewes & Cavett, 2012; Gil, 2006;
van der Kolk, 2005). Defining Integrative Child Therapies In both the
child and adult literatures, psychotherapy integration typically refers
to the synthesis of diverse schools and methods of psychotherapy. As
well, integration refers to combining two or more therapy
modalities/​formats, such as family, group, and individual therapy
(Feldman, 1988; Reeves & Bruno, 2009). Involving the child's parent into
the treatment process, even if only for psychoeducation, is also
considered integrative (Krueger & Glass, 2013). Still others refer to
traditional talk therapy plus play therapy as integrative. Finally, but
not exhaustively, working across systems of care (such as a school
setting along with the home environment) is sometimes called integrative

344

Specific Disorders and Populations

(Cook, 2007). In this chapter, we embrace all four types of integration
in child work.

and family systems orientations in treating adolescents (Grehan &
Freeman, 2009; Krueger & Glass, 2013; Stricker & Gold, 1996). There are
several avenues toward develExemplars of Integrative Child Therapies
oping an integrative treatment with children. Child therapy calls for
the therapist to wear In what follows, we consider several exemplary
many hats and be skillful in changing from integrative child therapies
according to the four one therapeutic stance to another in order to
routes: technical eclecticism, theoretical intemeet the needs of the
child and of others in the gration, assimilative integration, and common
child's life (Coonerty, 1993; Drewes, 2011a). factors (Norcross &
Alexander, Chapter 1, this At one moment, the therapist may find herself
volume). intensely involved in a deeply evocative and Technical
eclecticism is prescriptive in that often intense therapeutic
relationship with the it selects the best treatment for the client and
child client in which the therapist deals with the problem. It has been
described as more the child's internal struggles, sets limits, and
practical than theoretical (Norcross, 2005), acts as an educator or
mediator with the child. with the emphasis on predicting for whom Then,
in the next moment, the therapist needs particular interventions work
well, rather to engage with a parent or school psychologist than why
they work well. Exemplars here apor classroom teacher. These often
conflicting plied to children include multimodal therapy and rapidly
changing roles lead many child (Lazarus, 2006) and systematic treatment
selectherapists to adopt an eclectic prescriptive style tion (Beutler,
Consoli & Lane, 2005; Consoli in which therapeutic interventions are
chosen & Buetler, Chapter 7, this volume). and then changed according to
the most Technical eclecticism, utilizing prescrippressing external
demand (Coonerty, 1993; tive play therapy for child treatment, is seen
Drewes, 2011b). in the case study of an 11-​year-​old autistic girl
Initially, child treatment consisted of taking with behavioral
difficulties (Kenny & Winick, adult models and extending them downward
2000). Using a sequential approach, treatment to children (Krueger &
Glass, 2013). In partic- methods were chosen that built on one anular,
cognitive and behavioral approaches were other over time, rather than
blending them toutilized to address behavioral management gether within
one session. In this case study, the problems through use of behavior
modifica- rapport-​ building component of nondirective tion techniques,
along with addressing parent--​ play therapy was used with directive
techniques child relationship issues. Examples include in targeting
maladaptive behavior and providing modifications of the adult
psychodynamic to- parent education. The rationale for using a flexgether
with behavior therapy to treat child be- ible integrative approach was
due to the mulhavior problems, using behavior modification tidimensional
aspects of the child's behaviors techniques along with parent--​child
relational along with her developmental delays. Different dynamics
(Feather & Rhoads, 1972; West & treatment approaches were combined into
a coCarlin, 1980), and the development of a psy- herent intervention
sequence (Shirk, 1999). chodynamic understanding of the meaning of
Treatment for trauma has several effective the child's behavior (Krueger
& Glass, 2013). integrative approaches for children. Trauma-​ One of the
first integrative attempts was de- focused integrative play therapy
(Gil, 2009) is velopmentally based psychotherapy (Greenspan, a promising
manualized, technically eclectic 1997), which merged an understanding of
devel- treatment for children who have experienced opmental abilities
with self-​regulatory abilities complex trauma (Krueger & Glass, 2013).
into a primarily psychodynamic approach. Evidence-​based trauma-​focused
cognitive behaLikewise, assimilative psychodynamic psycho- vior therapy
(Cavett & Drewes, 2012; Cohen, therapy maintains a strong psychodynamic
Mannarino, & Deblinger, 2006, 2012; Drewes base while integrating
cognitive-​ behavioral & Cavett, 2012) is integrated with expressive

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children

techniques, directive and nondirective play, and mindfulness
interventions. Theoretical integration takes the best elements of two or
more approaches to therapy and blends them with the expectation that the
result will be more than the sum of the separate therapies. The emphasis
is on integrating the underlying theories along with an integration of
therapy techniques. Exemplars are Ellen Wachtel's (2014)
psychoanalytic-​behavioral-​ relational integration and the
transtheoretical model, which matches principles or processes of change
to the child's stage of change (DiClemente & Prochaska, Chapter 8, this
volume). The latter has been subject to hundreds of outcome studies,
including with children and their families. One of the earliest
theoretically integrative treatments for children was cognitive
behavioral play therapy (Knell, 1993). It blends cognitive and
behavioral interventions into play therapy, with the child's development
informing treatment (Drewes, 2009; Knell, 1993). Problematic behaviors
are seen as stemming from maladaptive thoughts which impact the child's
feelings and subsequently behaviors. These maladaptive thoughts can be
modified by using play-​ based tasks and applications in therapy while
incorporating evidence-​ supported techniques from cognitive and
behavioral orientations (Krueger & Glass, 2013). An example of
theoretical integration is ecosystemic play therapy, developed by
O'Connor (2001). The clinician considers the child, his or her problems,
and the therapy process within the framework of the child's ecosystem.
It incorporates key elements of the analytic, child-​centered, and
cognitive-​behavioral models of play therapy, as well as elements of
Theraplay (Jernberg, 1979; Jernberg & Booth, 1999). Another exemplar of
theory integration is flexibly sequential play therapy for traumatized
children (Goodyear-​Brown, 2010). A variety of treatment techniques give
the child the space in which to disclose and adjust to the sharing of
the trauma content (continuum of disclosure), as well as to restore the
child's lost sense

345

of empowerment that occurs due to abuse (experiential mastery plan). The
therapist flexibly integrates directive and nondirective approaches.
Because of all the various teaching components, knowledge of cognitive
behavioral therapy, somatic therapies and mindfulness, and family
systems and attachment theories are required. The therapist is not
required to be expert in every model, but a working knowledge of how to
conduct dyadic interventions and psychoeducational components in working
with the parent is needed. Both parent--​ child interaction therapy
(Eyberg, 1988; Krueger & Glass, 2013) and child parent relationship
therapy (Bratton et al., 2006) are evidence-​ based, parent training
programs that exemplify theoretical integration for young children
presenting with behavioral, emotional, and family problems. Children's
problem behaviors are addressed by modifying contributing negative
parent--​child interaction patterns (Bell & Eyberg, 2002). Nondirective
play and behavioral contingencies are central to treatment, and concepts
such as attachment and social learning theories inform the treatment
approach (Krueger & Glass, 2013). Assimilative integration has also
taken root in child therapy, whereby psychotherapists work primarily
from their favorite theoretical orientation and then selectively
incorporate methods from other models. Therapists maintain a home theory
and incorporate techniques from other theoretical orientations, often
reinterpreting the meaning of the technique through the lens of the home
theory. This integrative path is frequently favored by those child
clinicians trained in a single approach. Rather than discard their
theoretical foundation as they discover its limitations, clinicians
gradually incorporate parts and methods from other approaches and mold
these into a new form. Assimilative integration is common within child
treatment but can be difficult to identify when the integration is not
explicitly acknowledged. Many unacknowledged integrations occur in
treatments that have strong evidence base that identifies them solely as
CBT but that employ play techniques (Krueger & Glass, 2013).

346

Specific Disorders and Populations

Coming largely from a systemic orientation, the use of an integrative
model that utilizes play Ellen Wachtel (2004) integrates family systems,
therapy within family work with adoptive chilbehavioral, and
psychodynamic approaches for dren. The commonalities across each of
these the treatment of children and their families. treatments are the
use of play therapy princiShe conceptualizes the child's difficulties
ples, which are utilized within sessions and at as embedded in and
reinforced by family home with the parent and child, along with
interactions, although the treatment focuses psychoeducational
principles of parenting. mainly on the child as the identified patient
Of course, these four pathways to integrative rather than the family
system. Similarly, an ad- treatment are not mutually exclusive. Consider
olescent case study illustrated this integrative the work of Goldenthal
(2005) who created a model to guide child work by adapting it to the
model that integrated psychodynamic, behavclient's developmental age
(Clement, 2011). ioral, and contextual theories. At first blush it The
therapy draws from cognitive-​behavioral, appears a classic example of
theoretical integraperson-​ centered, and positive psychology tion;
however, the psychotherapy was prescriporientations. tive in
recommending the right intervention to A good example of assimilative
integration is the right child in the tradition of technical ecseen in a
play therapy case study within a school lecticism. Furthermore, the
treatment focuses setting which blended three theories into a co- on the
therapeutic relationship---​the quinteshesive treatment driven by the
child's and/​ sential common factor---​as the central change or family's
needs (Fall, 2001). Child-​centered agent (Krueger & Glass, 2013). play
therapy (the home theory) was buttressed All told, the multiple routes
to integration with evidence-​based Adlerian play therapy and in child
psychotherapy offer clinicians several cognitive-​behavioral methods
along with cor- ways through which they can conceptualize responding
techniques (Fall, 2001), and this patient concerns, address both
interpersonal iswas shown to be effective. Research has shown sues and
environmental factors, and select from that play therapy interventions
prove useful in a rich array of efficacious clinical methods. meeting
the treatment needs of children and Consequently, the clinician can
select families (Landreth et al., 1996). interventions and use them in a
coordinated Common factors is an approach to integra- and efficient
manner (Krueger & Glass, 2013). tion that identifies clinical principles
or change processes shared by several psychotherapies in the hope that
these robust commonalities will ASSESSMENT AND FORMULATION form the
foundation of successful treatment. In a review of more than 50
publications, it was The basic task of assessment in child intefound
that 41% of the proposed commonalities grative psychotherapy is similar
to any other had to do with change processes, while only model of
working with children: a compre6% were attributed to client
characteristics. hensive assessment through multiple sources The
strongest consensus across therapies was and methods that collects data
on the child's the development of a therapeutic alliance, op-
development (including in utero and birth hisportunity for catharsis,
acquisition and prac- tory), presenting problems and circumstances tice
of new behaviors, and the client's positive underlying them, strengths
and weaknesses of expectancies (Grencavage & Norcross, 1990). the child
and family as a whole, spiritual and Practice Wise is a web-​based
program that helps community resources, cultural components, identify
common factors across evidence-​based and the family system (Coonerty,
1993; Drewes child treatments and then matches them to the & Schaefer,
2015). A crucial component in inclients' needs (Chorpita, Becker, &
Daleiden, tegrative assessment is that the child therapist 2007;
Chorpita et al., 2011). involves both the parents/​ caregiver and the The
attachment-​ focused developmental child as active collaborators in
treatment and psychotherapy of Hughes (1997) encourages treatment
planning. The child therapist needs

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children

to be attuned to important connections and systemic interplay, working
like a skilled detective to piece together a coherent picture that is
multilayered and multiconnected. Indeed, each puzzle piece represents
only a single dimension (Coonerty, 1993). Thus, careful assessment, be
it conducted through formal measures or informal observations, is
critical to make the optimal selection of interventions and to
coordinate communication among those providing services. Treatment
planning is based on developmental awareness of the child in order to
provide direction throughout all stages of therapy, monitor progress,
and know when termination can occur. Having a developmental framework
prevents establishing unreachable goals and permits the selection of
appropriate content and the level of therapeutic interaction that is
best suited to the child. Furthermore, as suggested earlier, the child
therapist also needs to be sensitive to developmental delays in
children, particularly in cognition and language, that impact treatment
planning and differentiate them from behavioral or emotional disorders.
Psychological testing is not necessarily a prerequisite for treatment
but frequently proves useful and, of course, is demonstrably more
reliable and valid than informal assessment. Verbal treatment is
ineffective with young children because of their limited abstract
thinking and development; consequently, use of non-​verbal play therapy
is critical for effective treatment (Coonerty, 1993). Verbal treatment
is ineffective in early childhood (4--​7) because there is a primitive
level of development, egocentric thinking, a present-​ time orientation,
along with the child struggling to develop a constant sense of self and
other. The child uses internal fantasy without a clear fantasy/​reality
boundary. In middle childhood (8--​13), while children may become more
verbal, there is a fascination with rules and complexities of the real
world along with the emergence of formal operations; abstract reasoning;
and problem solving that needs to be developed and utilized through
play-​based activities (Drewes & Schaefer, 2015). Assessment instruments
and the integrative process with children must be consistent with

347

the purpose of the assessment, acknowledging the vital contexts and
attuning to cultures of the family system. Child therapists can utilize
numerous assessment approaches including standardized tests, rating
scales, interviews, observations, projective techniques, and informal
assessment in order to develop a complete picture from multiple angles
and informants, There are numerous formal norm-​ referenced, standardized
psychological assessment tools for use with children. Popular normative
assessments include the Behavior Assessment System for Children, Third
Edition, which offers a structured developmental history for ages 2--​21
(Kamphaus et al., 2014), Connors Comprehensive Rating Scales for ages
6--​18 (Kollins, Epstein, & Connors, 2014), the Achenbach System of
Empirically Based Assessment for ages 6--​18 (Achenbach & Resorla, 2014);
Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS, 1999), and the Devereaux
Behavior Rating Scale for ages 5--​18 (Naglieri & Pfeiffer, 2014). These
assessments can be done during an intake with the parent/​ caregiver.
Observations within the initial sessions with the child can obtain data
and frequency counts, as well as provide information for informal
hypotheses generation and in vivo identification of strengths and
weaknesses. Play-​ based assessments allow the child therapist to look at
the quality of the child's play and to identify consistent or clinically
significant themes. The child's perceptions of her parents/​family,
events, and environmental/​ systemic settings (including school) are
examined. In addition, the quality of the expression of affect, ability
to regulate affective range, and intensity and level of enjoyment, as
well as the ability to soothe, sustain, focus, shift and inhibit
attention, and levels of impulsivity and frustration are observed. The
child's maintenance of physical boundaries, as well as the richness or
paucity of play content, level of dependent versus independent
interactions, and whether the age level and developmental level are
congruent with the play and child's physical abilities are all assessed.
Informal assessment tools include

348

Specific Disorders and Populations

projective drawings, puppet interviews, and sentence completions. The
formulation begins with the comprehensive assessment of the symptoms and
determinants (internal and external) of the child's presenting problems.
An individualized case formulation describes and explains the child
client's most important disorders and probable causal or contributor
variables, along with treatment plans and predicted obstacles as a means
for evaluating progress. The child therapist then looks to prescribe
interventions to alleviate the client's problems, thereby formulating
defined treatment goals and detailed "nuts-​ and-​ bolts" strategies for
achieving these goals. Because the integrative child therapist is not
confined by single-​school theories, the combination of theories and
techniques can strengthen a treatment plan. Individual, group, and
family strategies may be integrated, as well as multiple systems of
care. A multicomponent, multimodal intervention can thereby address the
complex and multidimensional psychological disorders experienced by
children. PROCESSES OF CHANGE Shirk and Russell (1996) proposed 11
change processes as the basis for an integrative model of child therapy.
They fall under three broad processes. Cognitive: Schema transformation,
symbolic exchange, insight, and skill development Affective: Abreaction,
emotional experiencing, affective education, and emotional regulation
Interpersonal: Support, corrective relationship, and supportive
scaffolding (O'Connor, 2001) Kazdin and Knock (2003) studied the
mechanisms underlying therapeutic change related to symptom improvement
in child therapy. They proposed that evidence-​ based practices can be
improved with regard to

clinical applicability in real-​world settings by studying the discrete
mechanisms of therapeutic change. Understanding how change processes
work within best practices is the critical link in moving evidence-​based
practices from research to the service settings of usual care. As noted
earlier, play has a long history in child psychotherapy as it is the
natural language and mode of expression for children (Drewes, 2005).
Four broad functions of play in child work (Russ & Niec, 2011) are
providing a means of expression, communication, and relationship
building; insight and working through; practicing new forms of
expression and relating; and problem-​solving. Depending on which methods
are utilized in the integrative approach, the change mechanisms probably
differ. Aside from those noted earlier, any number of the following
factors may constitute change processes. Cognitive processes:
Direct/​indirect teaching, schema transformation, symbolic exchange,
interpretation-​ insight, skill development, competence and self-​control,
accelerated development, creative problem solving, fantasy compensation,
and reality testing Emotional processes: Self-​expression and emotional
experiencing, access to the unconscious, abreaction release and
sublimation, affective education, emotional regulation, stress
inoculation, counterconditioning of negative affect Interpersonal
processes: Validation and support, supportive scaffolding, corrective
relationship and attachment and relationship enhancement, power/​
control, moral judgment and empathy (Schaefer & Drewes, 2013)
Differential therapeutics recognizes that some interventions are more
effective than others for certain disorders and particular clients. A
client who does poorly with one type of child therapy may do well with
another. The greater our understanding of the change mechanisms, the
more effective the child therapist can be in

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children

applying them to meet the particular needs of his or her clients
(Schaefer, 1999). THERAPY RELATIONSHIP The therapeutic relationship
remains integral to the effectiveness of child work. Indeed, the most
robust research (and clinical) finding in the child psychotherapy
literature is the strong association between the therapeutic alliance
and treatment outcome. A recent meta-​analysis of 42 studies of child and
adolescent therapy (3,427 clients and parents) revealed an effect size
of (d) of 0.39 for the both therapist--​child and
therapist--​parent/​caregiver relationship (Karver et al., 2005). The
association and prediction of treatment success did not differ by the
type of treatment; that is, the alliance "works" in all forms of child
therapy. That relationship can be enhanced by soliciting feedback from
the child/​family client and by routinely monitoring outcome. This
process is the core ingredient to patient progress regardless of the
therapeutic approach taken (Duncan, 2013), as is therapist empathy,
collaboration, positive regard, and genuineness (Norcross, 2005).
Children are clearly aware that they have been brought to therapy by
others who can also force them to attend sessions. The usual adult
approach of asking questions, probing into personal feelings, or
explaining behaviors usually results in uncooperativeness or strong
emotional responses. The therapist needs to explain what the treatment
process will be like, not only verbally but also through the use of
play-​like techniques to communicate the expectation that the
relationship is playful, creative, and not always based in
verbalizations. Offering factual transparency about the treatment
process, collaborative creation of treatment planning, and a
nonjudgmental approach toward engagement will help the child to see how
this therapeutic relationship will differ from those with peers,
teachers, parents, and others (Prout & Fedewa, 2015). As is most
certainly the case in working with adults, creating a safe therapeutic
relationship is

349

critical when working with children. The child therapist's behavior in
the session, as well as his or her attitude toward the client, are
keenly perceived and reacted to by children. The relationship needs to
be fostered and built through transparency, honesty in sharing
information, nonintrusiveness, reliability, attunement, and curiosity
about the client's internal experience, coupled with the use of play and
humor within sessions. Critical, especially with trauma work, is the
sensitive timing and depth of therapeutic interventions. The therapist's
role will vary depending on the particular approach taken and its
application. Thus, the therapist may need to be directive and structured
when implementing a behavioral approach or nondirective when creating
rapport and a therapeutic relationship or utilizing a more
child-​centered approach. That is precisely the value of psychotherapy
integration. METHODS AND TECHNIQUES Integrative treatments offer
systematized methods, with the majority designed for specific child
disorders. Treatment for trauma has by far been the best developed,
followed by treatments for behavioral disorders (Krueger & Glass, 2013).
The therapeutic menu of methods in integrative therapies canvass the
entire spectrum of interventions. In the evidence-​based tradition, we
advocate that selection of particular methods be based on all three
evidentiary sources: best available research, clinical expertise, and
patient characteristics, preferences, and cultures. Research on the
efficacy of methods aids clinical decision-​making but does not dictate
it; much depends on the skill of the therapist (Schaefer, 2003). As we
have indicated throughout this chapter, working with young children
includes play-​based interventions that are developmentally sensitive and
geared to their abilities. Play as therapy (child-​centered,
nondirective) and play in therapy (directive), includes expressive arts,
use of miniatures to create a scene or story in a sand tray, puppet
play, drama role play,

350

Specific Disorders and Populations

music, art, therapeutic storytelling, dance, and movement (Drewes,
2009). DIVERSITY CONSIDERATIONS Clearly, a child is a product of his or
her nuclear family, extended family, neighborhood, cultural and racial
heritage, school, town/​city, socioeconomic status, and political
situation. These systemic components result in multiple causality and
feedback loops that significantly impact treatment choices when working
with children. Poverty, poor housing, alienation, disenfranchisement,
and cultural and gender identities critically influence the child's
cognitive, dynamic, and behavioral repertoire (Gold, 1992). Thus, child
therapy attends deeply to diversity considerations and seeks key
opportunities to provide effective social intervention beyond just
changing a child's internal chemistry or cognition (Lebow, 2008). The
child clinician needs to account for the individual differences within
each client, creating a case formulation and treatment plan unique to
each child's needs. Play is a universal expression of children, and it
can transcend differences in ethnicity, language, and other aspects of
diversity. It is important for clinicians to be aware of cultural
differences that may exist. A study of play therapists found that they
rated themselves as not being knowledgeable about racial identity and
feeling competent in using this knowledge clinically (Drewes, 2005).
This may also prove the case for many other child therapists. All child
clinicians need to be sensitive regarding diversity in the assessments
used and interventions chosen (especially with regard to what population
it was normed on), as well as inclusive in the techniques and materials
used in treatment. Having culturally, racially, and ethnically diverse
therapeutic toys and materials is crucial (Drewes, 2005).

CASE EXAMPLE The following case illustrates integrative child
psychotherapy in that it simultaneously blended

several theoretical approaches, treatment formats, and systems of care.
Sammy is an 8-​ year-​ old Hispanic boy, in foster care, who presented
with behavioral difficulties in school due to mood dysregulation,
generalized anxiety, and depression. He struggled with his father's
death 3 years before, along with his mother's current wish to surrender
parental rights so he could be adopted due to the reemergence of her
cancer. Assessment consisted of the caregiver's completion of the Child
Behavior Checklist and Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS)
and the child's completion of projective drawings and an observation of
strengths and themes during play therapy sessions. Results of the CBCL
and CANS showed clinical indicators of externalizing and internalizing
behaviors (depression, aggression), with drawings and thematic play
themes reflecting concerns about death, feelings of anger, and lack of
emotional connection in his family environment. Over the first four
sessions, I (AAD) obtained a good sense of Sammy's developmental level
and emotional conflicts, as well as built rapport and facilitated the
creation of a therapeutic relationship. Our treatment goals were to help
Sammy (1) to build rapport and a therapeutic alliance, along with
offering control in selection of materials and tasks and a release from
traumatic material; (2) to reduce his anxiety, anger, depression, become
aware of emotional triggers, and develop alternative coping skills; and
(3) to deal with unresolved grief and loss over his father and the
pending loss of his mother. The treatment plan was to use child-​led
psychodynamic play therapy to accomplish the first cluster of therapy
goals, CBT methods for the second cluster, and bereavement or trauma
work for the third. Parent--​child dyadic therapy in the systemic
tradition was also utilized to help Sammy and his mother talk about the
events of his father's death and to better understand his mother's
wishes to have him adopted. In addition, the therapist maintained
contact with Sammy's school setting and foster home parents for
information regarding his progress and to coordinate follow-​through on
treatment recommendations. Sammy was seen in individual weekly therapy
over the course of 2 years for 75 sessions. The

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children 45-​to 55-​ minute sessions were
structured and divided into components which allowed for the integrative
use of several treatment approaches. In the initial session, the
therapist was transparent in sharing with Sammy what was learned of his
history and why he was being seen, as well as what the therapy time
would be like. Using a balloon to blow in all his anxious and angry
feelings, Sammy saw how the big balloon was like his head and heart
containing so many upset feelings that he felt like he would "pop." By
letting out the air a little at a time, safely and slowly, and seeing
how much smaller the balloon was getting, Sammy better understood that
this was like the therapy time together, where he could let out his
angry feelings in a safe, slow, and manageable way with the therapist's
help. Next, we assessed what he felt he needed to work on, and a
treatment plan was jointly created. Using strips of paper to write on,
the therapist and Sammy worked together on selecting three problems each
about home, school, and his family for a total of nine items we would
take on in therapy. One blank piece was left which would allow Sammy to
spontaneously address something not covered. Sammy wrote on each strip
of paper the goal selected and decorated an envelope in which the paper
strips would be kept. Each session when he entered, the envelope would
be put out, and Sammy would get to pick one of the pieces of paper for
us to focus on. He could put back the paper and select a different one
only once before we had to work on it. Then, after we talked about the
issue or used a directive technique, he would strip off a small piece of
the paper and put it back. This way he saw that we were making progress
on the goal, but were still not yet finished with it. Prior to having
Sammy enter the treatment room, the therapist would meet for 5--​10
minutes with the foster parent(s) regarding how Sammy was doing in their
home, at school, and on visits with his mother. We would also discuss
treatment strategies and interventions. Then, after the foster parent(s)
left, Sammy came into the session. The next 5 minutes were "check in"
time to talk about the week, share any information received from his
foster parents that needed to be conveyed, and follow-​ up on any CBT
homework assignments.

351

The next 10--​15 minutes allowed for work on directive CBT-​based
techniques to address treatment goals. The next 20--​ 25 minutes were
child-​ led, which allowed Sammy to select what he wished to play with
and how and what emotional material he wished to convey. The last 5--​10
minutes were for clean-​up and a closing ritual of bubble blowing or deep
breathing techniques for affect regulation and transitioning from the
session. In this first session, Sammy used his child-​ led, nondirective
time to create in the sand tray, utilizing miniatures of all aspects of
life (people, houses, trees, vehicles, etc.) to create a scene showing
me what his world was like. During other sessions, Sammy often used
toys, puppets, art materials, and clay to express his feelings, often
nonverbally. But he frequently preferred to use the sand tray when there
were deep conflicts around his father's death and worries about his
mother that he did not want to talk about, but rather wanted to show.
Over the course of treatment, Sammy delved more deeply into his feelings
and memories regarding his father and his death when he was 4½ years
old. There were missing details to the narrative of his father's death,
as well as information lacking as to what happens when someone dies and
even where his father was buried. Once monthly, his mother joined Sammy
for family therapy. His mother discussed with him where his father was
buried and details surrounding his illness and death. The foster parents
were willing to take Sammy to the grave, where he had a closing ceremony
and left a letter to his father (that we worked on in therapy) telling
him his feelings and that he missed him. Sessions with Sammy's mother
allowed for discussion about why she wanted him adopted, how she had
only one relative available who was not a viable resource, and that she
wanted to know he was in a good home. This was her second bout with
cancer, and she was unsure that, even if she went into remission again,
she would ultimately not die from the disease in the near future and
leave her son an orphan with no place to go. His mother also
spontaneously shared the unknown fact that she had been in foster care
as a child and was adopted as well. This was a good experience for her,
and she wanted to place Sammy in a loving

352

Specific Disorders and Populations

home. We worked out an "open" adoption in which Sammy and his mother
maintained contact around holidays and birthdays with the consent of the
adoptive parents. Through the healing powers of play and integrative
treatment, Sammy learned and applied better coping strategies, accessed
his previously unexplored conflicts around his father's death,
experienced catharsis in getting out his anger and rage over feeling
abandoned, gained power and control over his anxieties, and developed
competence, self-​control, and a greater sense of himself. Through CBT
techniques, he performed creative problem-​solving, behavioral rehearsal,
and counterconditioning of negative affect. By the end of treatment, an
adoptive family was found, and we worked toward his successful adoption.
Sammy still remains with his adoptive family and has periodic contact
with his biological mother. Just prior to termination, the CBCL and CANS
were completed by the foster parents. Results showed Sammy's behavioral
functioning within the average or normal range. Furthermore, his acting
out behaviors in school significantly diminished, going from daily
aggressive and physical outbursts to minimal verbal outbursts on a
quarterly basis, and he reduced his sadness and anxiety as seen in his
frequent smiling, involvement in sports, and positive-​themed drawings.

OUTCOME RESEARCH In spite of the growth of psychotherapy integration,
there is little outcome research on explicitly integrative child
therapies (Schottenbauer, Glass, & Arnkoff, 2005; Seymour, 2011), with
few systematic reviews of integrative treatment for children (Krueger &
Glass, 2013). That's the bad news. The good news is that by using, in
part or in whole, evidence-​ based child therapies, integrative
clinicians can harvest the fruits of that vast outcome research. While
there is moderate but clear support for the general effectiveness of
child therapies, there continues to be a need to take a cautious and
thoughtful approach to child treatment (Prout & Fedewa, 2015).

Child behavioral therapy and outcome research have begun to incorporate
a more integrative approach, with assimilative integration becoming more
commonplace within CBT (Krueger & Glass, 2013). In general, a trend has
emerged of CBT integrating aspects of other treatments, while
integrative treatments frequently utilize CBT methods. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Integration is clearly gaining hold in child psychotherapy, but much
work remains to be done. More outcome research is needed, especially
research identifying change mechanisms of successful child
psychotherapy, as well as the prescriptive matching of those change
mechanisms to varying clinical circumstances. Further research is needed
to illuminate which specific uses of play are most effective with
specific presenting problems and within the blending of treatment
approaches. Based on our clinical observations and those of our
colleagues, we expect that future research looking into these complex
processes will wind up providing empirical support for integrative
treatments. Clinically, many cognitive-​ behavioral treatments for young
children would benefit from the incorporation of other approaches,
especially less directive techniques. Treatment and research would also
be better informed if the play-​ based techniques included the anchoring
theories behind their application. Perhaps the most severe obstacle to
integration comes from territoriality of the purists who hold their
single theory to be the best. We advocate for work toward common
definitions and language in psychotherapy to decrease the inconsistency
of terminology. In that way, a commonly understood experience can be
implemented in practice and measured in research (Seymour, 2011). There
still is inadequate training in integrative child therapy in university
and internship settings. Consequently, student clinicians are not fluid
in thinking about using several different approaches and do not feel

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children

well-​ grounded in responding to the realistic clinical complexities of
working with children. Training in academic settings needs to furnish
ample and diverse experiences imparting technical and interpersonal
skills that then lead to establishing competence (Norcross & Halgin,
2005; Seymour, 2011). In spite of these and other hurdles, in recent
years, the clinical practice of child integrative psychotherapy has
grown considerably. It is important that these clinical observations
inform research process and outcome research to further enhance the
synergy between practice and research. Such convergence between research
and practice will not only allow the therapist to borrow flexibly from
multiple theoretical positions to tailor treatment to a particular
child, but also will result in cost-​effective interventions.

353

Cavett, A., & Drewes, A. A. (2012). Play applications of TF-​ CBT skills
components for young children. In J. Cohen, A. Mannarino, & E. Deblinger
(Eds.), Trauma focused-​ CBT for children and adolescents: Treatment
applications (pp. 124--​148). New York: Guilford. Child and Adolescent
Needs and Strengths (CANS). (1999). Praed Foundation. https://​
praedfoundation.org/ ​ t ools/ ​ t he- ​ c hild- ​ a nd-​
adolescent-​needs-​and-​strengths-​cans. Chorpita, B. F., Becker, K. D., &
Daleiden, E. L. (2007). Understanding the common elements of evidence-​
based practice: Misconceptions and clinical examples. Journal of
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 46, 647--​652.
Chorpita, B. F., Daleiden, E. L., Ebesutani, C., Young, J., Becker, K.
D., Nakamura, B. J., . . . Starace, N. (2011). Evidence-​ based
treatments for children and adolescents: An updated review of indicators
of efficacy and effectiveness. Clinical and Psychology Science and
Practice, 18(2), 154--​172. Clement, P. W. (2011). A strengths-​ based,
skill References building, integrative approach to treating conduct
problems in a 12-​year old boy: Rafael's Achenbach, T. M., & Resorla, L.
A. (2014). The story. Pragmatic Cases in Psychotherapy, 7, Achenbach
system of empirically based 351--​395. assessment (ASEBA) for ages 1.5 to
18 years. In Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Deblinger, E. M. E.
Maruish (Ed.), The use of psychological (2006). Treating trauma and
traumatic grief in testing for treatment planning and outcomes children
and adolescents. New York: Guilford. assessment (3rd ed., vol. 2,
pp. 179--​ 214). Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Deblinger, E. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. (Eds.). (2012). Trauma focused cognitive behavior
Barrett, C. L., Hampe, I. E., & Miller, L. (1978). therapy for children
and adolescents: Treatment Research on psychotherapy with children. In
S. applications. New York: Guilford Press L. Garfield & A. D. Bergin
(Eds.), Handbook Cook, J. R. (2007). Systems of care and the of
psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 411--​ integrative clinician: A
look into the future 435). New York: Wiley. of psychotherapy. Journal of
Psychotherapy Bell, S. K., & Eyberg, S. M. (2002). Parent-​child
Integration, 17, 139--​158. interaction therapy. In L. VandeCreek, S.
Knapp, & T. L. Jackson (Eds.), Innovations in Coonerty, S. (1993).
Integrative child therapy. In G. Stricker & J. R. Gold (Eds.),
Comprehensive clinical practice: A source book (Vol. 20, pp. 57--​
handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 74). Sarasota, FL:
Professional Resource Press. 413--​425). New York: Plenum. Beutler, L.
E., Consoli, A. J., & Lane, G. (2005). Drewes, A. A. (2005). Suggestions
and research on Systematic treatment selection and prescriptive
multicultural play therapy. In E. Gil & A. A. psychotherapy: An
integrative eclectic Drewes (Eds.), Cultural issues in play therapy
approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (pp. 72--​95). New York:
Guilford. (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 121--​ 143). New York: Oxford Drewes, A. A. (2009). Blending play
therapy with cognitive behavioral therapy: Evidence-​ based University
Press. and other effective treatments and techniques. Bratton, S. C.,
Landreth, G. L., Kellam, T., & Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. Blackard, S.
(2006). Child Parent Relationship Drewes, A. A. (2011a). Integrating
play therapy Therapy (CPRT) treatment manual: A 10-​ theories into
practice. In A. A. Drewes, session filial therapy model for training
parents. S. C. Bratton, & C. E. Schaefer (Eds.), New York: Routledge.

354

Specific Disorders and Populations

Integrative play therapy (pp. 21--​ 35). New York: John Wiley. Drewes, A.
A. (2011b). Integrative play therapy. In C. E. Schaefer (Ed.),
Foundations of play therapy (pp. 349--​364). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Drewes, A. A., & Cavett, A. (2012). Play applications and skills
components. In J. Cohen, A. Mannarino, & E. Deblinger (Eds.), Trauma
focused CBT for children and adolescents: Treatment applications
(pp. 105--​ 124). New York: Guilford. Drewes, A. A., & Schaefer, C. E.
(2015). Play therapy for children in middle childhood (6--​12 years).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Drewes, A. A., &
Schaefer, C. E. (2016). The therapeutic powers of play. In K. J.
O'Connor, C. E. Schaefer, & L. D. Braverman (Eds.), Handbook of play
therapy (2nd ed., pp. 35--​60). New York: John Wiley & Sons. Duncan, B.
(2013). What makes a master therapist? Psychotherapy in Australia, 20,
58--​66. Eyberg, S. M. (1988). Parent-​ child interaction therapy:
Integration of traditional and behavioral concerns. Child & Family
Behavior Therapy, 10, 22--​46. Fall, M. (2001). An integrative play
therapy approach to working with children. In A. A. Drewes, L. J. Carey,
& C. E. Schaefer (Eds.), School-​based play therapy (pp. 315--​328). New
York: Wiley & Sons. Feather, B. W., & Rhoads, J. M. (1972). Psycho­
dynamic behavior therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 26, 496--​511.
Feldman, L. (1988). Integrating individual and family therapy in the
treatment of symptomatic children and adolescents. American Journal of
Psychotherapy, 42, 272--​280. Fonagy, P., Target, M., Cottrell, D.,
Phillips, J., & Kurtz, Z. (2002). What works for whom? A critical review
of treatments for children and adolescents. New York: Guilford. Gil, E.
(2006). Helping abused and traumatized children: Integrating directive
and non-​directive approaches. New York: Guilford. Gil, E. (2009).
Trauma-​ focused integrative play therapy manual. Fairfax, VA: Childhelp
Children's Center of Virginia. Gold, J. R. (1992). An
integrative-​systemic treatment approach to severe psychopathology of
children and adolescents. Journal of Integrative and Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 11, 55--​70. Goldenthal, P. (2005). Helping children and
families: A new treatment model integrating

psychodynamic, behavioral, and contextual approaches. Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley. Goodyear-​ Brown, P. (2010). Play therapy with traumatized
children. A prescriptive approach. New York: Wiley & Sons. Greenspan, S.
I. (1997). Developmentally based psychotherapy. Madison, CT:
International Universities Press. Grehan, P. M., & Freeman, A. (2009).
Neither child nor adult: Applying integrative therapy to adolescents.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 19, 269--​290. Grencavage, L. M., &
Norcross, J. C. (1990). What are the commonalities among the therapeutic
common factors? Professional Psychology Research and Practice, 21,
372--​378. Hughes, D. (1997). Facilitating developmental attachment: The
road to emotional recovery and behavioral change in foster and adopted
children. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. Jernberg, A. (1979). Theraplay.
San Francisco: Jossey-​Bass. Jernberg, A., & Booth, P. (1999). Theraplay:
Helping parents and children build better relationships through
attachment based play (2nd ed.). San Francisco: Josey-​Bass. Kamphaus, R.
W., & Reynolds, C. R., Hatcher, N. M., & Kim, S. (2014). Treatment
planning and evaluations with the Behavior Assessment System for
Children (BASC). In M. E. Maruish (Ed.), The use of psychological
testing for treatment planning and outcomes assessment (3rd ed., vol. 2,
pp. 331--​354). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Karver, M., Handelsman, J.,
Fields, S., & Bickman, L. (2005). A theoretical model of common process
factors in youth and family therapy. Mental Health Services Research, 7,
35--​51. Kazdin, A. E. (1996). Combined and multimodal treatments in
child and adolescent psychotherapy: Issues, challenges, and research
directions. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 3, 69--​100.
Kazdin, A. E., & Johnson, B. (1994). Advances in psychotherapy for
children and adolescents: Interrelations of adjustment, development, and
intervention. Journal of School Psychology, 32, 217--​246. Kazdin, A. E.,
& Knock, M. K. (2003). Delineating mechanisms of change in child and
adolescent therapy: Methodological issues and research recommendations.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 44, 1116--​1129.

Integrative Psychotherapy with Children Kelley, S. D., Bickman, L., &
Norwood, E. (2010). Evidence-​based treatments and common factors in
youth psychotherapy. In B. L. Duncan, S. D. Miller, B. E. Wampold, & M.
A. Hubble (Eds.), The heart and soul of change: Delivering what works in
therapy (2nd ed., pp. 325--​356). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Kenny, M. C., & Winick, C. B. (2000). An integrative
approach to play therapy with an autistic girl. International Journal of
Play Therapy, 9, 11--​33. Knell, S. M. (1993). Cognitive behavioral play
therapy. Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson. Kollins, S. C., Epstein, J. N., &
Connors, C. K. (2014). Connors rating scales-​revised. In M. E. Maruish
(Ed.), The use of psychological testing for treatment planning and
outcomes assessment (3rd ed., vol. 2, pp. 215--​ 234). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum. Koocher, G. P., & Pedulla, B. M. (1977). Current
practices in child psychotherapy. Professional Psychology, 8, 275--​287.
Krueger, S. J., & Glass, C. R. (2013). Integrative psychotherapy for
children and adolescents: A practice-​ oriented literature review.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 23, 331--​344. Landreth, G.,
Homeyer, L., Glover, G., & Sweeney, D. (1996). Play therapy
interventions with children's problems. Northvale, NJ: Aronson. Lazarus,
A. A. (2006). Multimodal therapy: A seven-​ point integration. In G.
Stricker & J. R. Gold (Eds.), The casebook of psychotherapy integration
(pp. 17--​ 28). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Lebow, J. L. (Ed.). (2008). Twenty-​first century psychotherapies:
Contemporary approaches to theory and practice. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley.
Naglieri, J. A., & Pfeiffer, S. L. (2014). Use of the Devereux scales of
mental disorders for diagnosis, treatment planning and outcome
assessment. In M. E. Maruish (Ed.), The use of psychological testing for
treatment planning and outcomes assessment (3rd ed., vol. 2, pp. 305--​
350). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Norcross, J. C. (2005). A primer on
psychotherapy integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.),
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 3--​ 23). New York:
Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., & Halgin, R. P. (2005).
Training in psychotherapy integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 439--​ 458). New York: Oxford University Press.

355

O'Connor, K. (2001). Ecosystemic play therapy. International Journal of
Play Therapy, 10(2), 33--​44. Phillips, R. D., & Landreth, G. (1998).
Play therapists on play therapy: II. Clinical issues in play therapy.
International Journal of Play Therapy, 7(1), 1--​20. Pine, F. (1985).
Developmental theory and clinical process. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press. Prout, H. T., & Fedewa, A. L. (2015). Counseling and
psychotherapy with children and adolescents: Theory and practice for
school and clinical settings (5th ed.). New York: John Wiley. Reeves,
G., & Bruno, A. (2009). Multimodal treatments versus pharmacotherapy
alone in children with psychiatric disorders: Implications of access,
effectiveness, and contextual treatment. Pediatric Drugs, 11, 165--​169.
Russ, S. W., & Niec, L. N. (2011). Play in clinical practice: Evidence-​
based approaches. New York: Guilford Press. Schaefer, C. E. (1999).
Curative factors in play therapy. Journal for the Professional
`\Counselor`{=tex}, 14(1), 7--​16. Schaefer, C. E. (2003). Prescriptive
play therapy. In C. E. Schaefer (Ed.), Foundations of play therapy
(pp. 306--​ 320). New York: Wiley & Sons. Schaefer, C. E., & Drewes, A.
A. (Eds.). (2013). The therapeutic powers of play: 20 Core agents of
change (2nd ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. Schottenbauer, M. A., Glass, C.
R., & Arnkoff, D. B. (2005). Outcome research on psychotherapy
integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 459--​ 493). New York: Oxford
University Press. Seymour, J. W. (2011). History of psychotherapy
integration and related research. In A. A. Drewes, S. C. Bratton, & C.
E. Schaefer (Eds.), Integrative play therapy (pp. 3--​ 19). New York:
John Wiley. Shirk, S. R. (1999). Integrated child psychotherapy:
Treatment ingredients in search of a recipe. In S. W. Russ & T. H.
Ollendick (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapies with children and families
(pp. 369--​ 384). New York: Kluwer Academic/​Plenum. Shirk, S. R., &
Russell, R. L. (1996). Change processes in child psychotherapy:
Revitalizing treatment and research. New York: Guilford. Stein, P. T., &
Kendall, J. (2004). Psychological trauma and the developing brain:
Neurologically

356

Specific Disorders and Populations

based interventions for troubled children. New York: Haworth. Stricker,
G., & Gold, J. (2008). Integrative therapy. In J. L. Lebow (Ed.),
Twenty-​first century psycho­ therapies: Contemporary approaches to theory
and practice (pp. 389--​ 423). Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley. Tuma, J., &
Pratt, J. (1982). Clinical child psychology practice and training: A
survey. Journal of Clinical Child Psychology, 11, 27--​34. van der Kolk,
B. A. (2005). Developmental trauma disorder: Towards a rational
diagnosis for children with complex trauma histories. Psychiatric
Annals, 35(5), 401--​408. Wachtel, E. F. (2004). Treating troubled
children and their families. New York: Guilford.

Wachtel, P. L. (2014). Cyclical psychodynamic and the contextual self:
The inner world, the intimate world and the world of culture and
society. New York: Routledge. Weisz, J. R., Kuppens, S., Ng, M. Y.,
Eckshtain, D., Ugueto, A. M., Vaughn-​ Coaxum, R., . . . Fordwood, S. R.
(2017). What five decades of research tells us about the effects of
youth psychosocial therapy: A multilevel meta-​ analysis and implications
for science and practice. American Psychologist, 72(92), 79--​117. West,
M., & Carlin, M. (1980). Psychodynamic behavior therapy in child
psychiatry: An integrative strategy. Psychiatric Journal of the
University of Ottawa, 5, 12--​16.

17 Integrating Self-​H elp and Psychotherapy AMANDA EDWARDS-​STEWART AND
JOHN C. NORCROSS

Psychotherapy is an incontestably effective pathway to personal growth
and behavior change (Wampold & Imel, 2015). However, it is not the only
effective way. Individuals change through many methods, but the
principal way is self-​change or self-​help. Approximately 75% of those
modifying mental and addictive disorders do so without professional help
(Klingemann et al., 2001; Swindle et al., 2000). Self-​help is also the
least restrictive, intrusive, and costly option compared to
psychotherapy. The term psychotherapy integration typically refers to
the synthesis of diverse schools of psychotherapy and also the
integration of research and practice. This chapter expands that
definition of integration to consider the synthesis of psychotherapy
itself with self-​help materials. According to research, practitioners
already routinely use self-​ help materials in practice, but they are
frequently encumbered

by a lack of knowledge to do so systematically and effectively. In this
chapter, we review the prevalence of self-​ help with and without
psychotherapy and consider its surprisingly high effectiveness. We then
address in-​ depth, clinician-​ tested, and research-​informed methods of
integrating self-​ help seamlessly into psychotherapy. The chapter
concludes with a few future directions and, in the end, a plea for
increased integration of these two premier paths to human improvement.
PREVALENCE OF SELF-​H ELP Current statistics on the rates of untreated
mental disorders are staggering. Around 89% of American adults with
mental and substance disorders will not receive mental health

357

358

Specific Disorders and Populations

treatment in a given year (Bijl et al., 2003). Seventy percent will
never receive mental health care (Kessler et al., 1997). The percentage
of those suffering from mental illness in developing countries and
receiving professional treatment is even lower and more alarming (Kazdin
& Rabbitt, 2013). While most individuals suffering from psychopathology
do not seek professional treatment, many regularly use self-​help.
Self-​help refers to materials or events occurring outside of formal
treatment or psychotherapy that can be used toward education, support,
monitoring, or the elimination of mental health symptoms. Self-​ help
resources are generally stand-​ alone and include such categories as
bibliotherapy (books), films, self-​help groups, websites, mobile
applications, and computer programs. Self-​help, not psychotherapy, is
the de facto mental health system. About 5--​7% of American adults
attended a self-​help group in the past year (Eisenberg et al., 1998;
Kessler et al., 1997), with up to 18% having done so in their lifetime
(Kessler et al., 1999). Seventy-​two percent of internet users, and
approximately half of smartphone owners looked up health-​related
information in the past year. Searches generally explore specific
diseases or conditions followed by treatments (Pew Research Internet
Project, 2014). Nineteen percent of smartphone owners reported having at
least one health app (Pew Research Internet Project, 2012), while the
app market is saturated with tens of thousands of health-​or
medical-​related applications (Google Play Store, 2017). Furthermore,
self-​ help books are published at a rate of 5,000 per year (Bogart,
2011). When self-​help is guided by a mental health professional, it is
typically known as guided self-​ help or self-​help with minimal therapist
contact. In either case, psychotherapists help clients help themselves
(Bernecker, 2014). The self-​ help resources may prove a minor complement
to the ongoing course of weekly psychotherapy or many constitute the
principal intervention with infrequent or brief consultations with a
clinician. Recommending self-​ help resources to patients is something
many mental health

clinicians do. Nearly 70% of Canadian mental health clinicians suggest
clients use self-​help books (Adams & Pitre, 2000). More than 90% of
Norwegian clinical psychologists recommend self-​ help materials, and
approximately half (55%) receive requests for such materials from
clients (Nordgreen & Havik, 2011). This trend is also seen among US
school psychologists, where 36% employ self-​help materials with 20--​ 50%
of their clients (O'Conner & Kratochwill, 1999). When recommending and
using mobile technology with clients, 41% of military clinicians
reported using self-​help apps in clinical care (Armstrong et al., 2017).
Table 17.1 displays the percentages of US psychologists recommending
self-​ help resources to clients in 2002 and 2011 (Norcross, Campbell et
al., 2013). In both 2002 and 2011, 85% recommended self-​help books, and
recommendations for the use of autobiographies, films, Internet sites,
and online programs have increased. Only recommendations for self-​help
support groups have decreased between the two time points. The increase
in the number of psychologists recommending Internet sites and online
self-​help likely reflects the increased use and awareness of web-​based
resources and the creation of such sites over time. Despite the many
clinicians who recommend such resources, the percentage of clients being
"prescribed" self-​help tools is small (see Table 17.2). These small
numbers are likely owing to multiple factors, including a lack of
training. Most clinicians receive only on-​the-​job TABLE 17.1
Psychologists recommending self-​help resources to their patients in the
past 12 months % Recommending Year

2002

2011

82 85 24 46 34 --​

79 85 28 54 78 23

Self-​help/​support group Self-​help book Autobiography Film Internet site
Online program N = 1,229 in 2002; N = 1,306 in 2011.

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

359

and no-​ treatment controls (e.g., Cuijpers et al., 2011; Den Boer,
Wiersma, & Van Den Bosch, 2004; Menchola, Arkowitz, & Burke, %
"prescribed" self-​help 2007; Mains & Scogin, 2003; Reger & Gahm,
Self-​help/​support group 15.9 2009; Richards & Richardson, 2012). Typical
Self-​help book 27.6 mean effect sizes (d) of self-​help versus
conAutobiography 3.6 trol conditions are .70 to .80 at post-​treatment
Film 10.5 and .50 to .70 at follow-​up (Den Boer et al., Internet site
22.8 Online program 3.8 2004). It should be cautioned, however, that
effect sizes for self-​help versus formal, therapist-​ N = 1,306 in 2011.
assisted interventions in the same studies are not as high. The
effectiveness of self-​ help resources training in the use of self-​help
resources. Two extends to bibliotherapy (i.e., self-​ help books).
studies (Adams & Pitre, 2000; Norcross et al., Meta-​ a nalyses for
depression and anxiety show 2000) found that clinicians with more years
the superiority of bibliotherapy to no treatment of experience were more
likely to use bibliotherapy with clients than were less experienced and
that bibliotherapy is slightly less effective administered treatments
(e.g., ones. This difference suggests a deficiency in than therapist-​
Den Boer et al., 2004; Menchola et al., 2007). graduate training, few
continuing education For example, a meta-​analysis of 29 outcome
opportunities on this topic, and growth in self-​ studies of cognitive
bibliotherapy for depression help knowledge and skill over years of
practice. reported an effect size of .77 (Gregory et al., In one
article, when clinicians received contin2004). Another meta-​ analysis
demonstrated a uing education in the use of mobile self-​help mean effect
size of .68 for 12 controlled studies applications, 93.5% of clinicians
stated they inof bibliotherapy for sexual dysfunctions when tended to
use apps with their clients following compared to a no-​ t reatment
control group (van training (Armstrong et al., 2017). Clinicians'
Lankveld, 1998). In a Cochrane database syshigh reported intent-​to-​use
suggests that those tematic review of bibliotherapy for smoking training
to use self-​help tools might be more cessation, mixed evidence was
found, but willing to use them in practice. findings were strongest
among trials in which In this chapter, we offer suggestions on the
tailored materials (tailored for characteristics integration of such
tools into psychotherapy. Such recommendations are derived from both of
individual smokers or matched according the research literature and
clinical experi- to motivational stage) were compared to no ence.
Literature and experience demonstrate intervention or standard materials
(Hartmann-​ that clinician's behavior can significantly en- Boyce,
Lancaster, & Stead, 2014). Last, a meta-​ hance the effectiveness of
self-​ help, with or analysis evaluating 22 studies of bibliotherapy
without professional treatment (Kelly, 2003). for alcohol problems found
modest support risk and harmful drinking Caveats and cautions are also
offered against for decreasing at-​ (Apodaca & Miller, 2003). In general,
findings the wholesale incorporation of self-​help into provide support
for the cost-​ effective use of psychotherapy. bibliotherapy with many
clients (Ritzert et al., 2016; Watkins & Clum, 2008). EFFECTIVENESS OF
SELF-​H ELP Self-​ help groups show similar research support. Meta-​
analyses have found that parEmpirical research and meta-​ analyses have
ticipation in Alcoholics Anonymous (AA) is demonstrated the
effectiveness of self-​ help related to reductions in drinking (Kownacki
& programs for mental health concerns. Meta-​ Shadish, 1999; Tonigan,
Toscoova, & Miller, analyses consistently show that client im- 1995).
Three controlled evaluations of 12-​step provement using self-​ help
exceeds wait-​ list programs for addictive disorders found such TABLE
17.2 Patients "prescribed" self-​help resources in the past 12 months

360

Specific Disorders and Populations

groups as effective as professional treatment these meta-​analyses.
Furthermore, defining and (Morgenstern et al., 1997; Ouimette, Finney,
controlling the self-​help independent variable & Moos, 1997; Project
MATCH Research in research is fairly complex. It proves difficult Group,
1997). Other research shows that self-​ distinguishing unguided from
therapist-​guided help groups are generally beneficial (Kyrouz,
treatments and those from formal psychoHumphreys, & Loomis, 2002). Also,
self-​help therapy with self-​help recommendations. group attendees
frequently evaluate groups as Our point is not that self-​help is as or
more just as helpful as psychotherapy (Seligman, effective than
psychotherapy. Rather, we offered 1995). Thus, clinicians can be sure
that a brief review of the literature on the efficacy clients will
derive at least some benefit from and effectiveness of self-​help with
the goal of participation. helping clinicians embrace it. Clients are
freResearch on the effectiveness of online sup- quently more likely to
engage with self-​help port groups is more recent and, to date, not as
than talk-​therapy, and self-​help can invariably methodologically
rigorous as the preceding re- be integrated with psychotherapy.
Therapists search. One study evaluating the effectiveness holding a
favorable view of self-​help have been of an online support group among
university found to be associated with increased goal atstudents for
depression did not find evidence tainment for clients (Hodges & Segal,
2002; of symptom reduction from use. However, the Kelly, 2003). authors
did gather qualitative data that might be useful for future research and
technology development in this area (Horgan, McCarthy, & INTEGRATING
SELF-​H ELP Sweeney, 2013). INTO PSYCHOTHERAPY Meta-​ analyses evaluating
the effectiveness of multiple forms of self-​help---​namely, bibli- As
noted earlier, healthcare professionals often otherapy, computer
programs, web-​based, and recommend self-​ help tools to their clients.
mobile interventions---​ found small to mod- Questions arise, however, as
to the best ways erate effect sizes when comparing the self-​help of
practically using such resources as part of, intervention to control
conditions (Cuijpers in conjunction with, and in addition to formal et
al., 2011; Cavanagh et al., 2014). Reviews psychotherapy. Here, we offer
suggestions on evaluating web-​based and mobile interventions such
integrations. show mixed but promising results. In one systematic review
of web-​based interventions for Recognize the Helpfulness of Self-​Help
smoking cessation, moderate evidence was found for adults using
web-​based interventions Because clinicians rarely encounter those who
compared to no treatment. Evidence was insuf- recover without
professional help (Klingemann ficient to say if such interventions were
more et al., 2001), it is easy to think that psychoeffective than
face-​to-​face counseling (Hutton therapy is the only effective way to
change. et al., 2011). Several controlled trials found There are even
clinicians who act as though equivalent positive outcomes for therapist-​
their self-​ esteem and economic survival deguided versus unguided use of
web-​ based pend on our unique and exclusive ability to interventions
(e.g., Ivanova et al., 2016; Rozental help people change (Norcross,
2000). The evet al., 2015). Another randomized controlled idence
supporting the efficacy of self-​change trial evaluating a web-​ based
problem-​ solving can be threatening (Prochaska, Norcross, & intervention
for depression found both the web- DiClemente, 1995). Some mental health
site and the self-​help book equally effective in clinicians are
ambivalent or even hostile to the reducing depression (Kenter et al.,
2016). idea of using self-​help in practice. Yet self-​help Meta-​analyses
can only aggregate the results tools remain quite popular and
surprisingly of existing studies. Unfortunately, the vast ma- effective.
jority of self-​help materials have not been emThe first step toward
integration is to cease pirically evaluated and thus are not included in
demonizing self-​help as "trivial" or "futile" and

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

to be aware of a tendency toward professional-​ centrism---​the belief
that psychological expertise and practice are the primary mechanisms of
mental healthcare for the public (Salzer, Rappaport, & Segre, 2001).
Reducing such biases can increase the frequency of clinicians
recommending or referring clients to self-​help resources. Embrace Both
Therapy and Self-​Help The integration of psychotherapy and self-​help
that we address is "both/​and," not "either/​or." Clinicians can frame
self-​ help participation as exploring alternative and additional change
mechanisms so that clients can find the best combination for themselves.
Combining self-​ help with psychotherapy could generate more active
patient participation instead of attempting to pressure them into
receiving help from only one resource or group (Klaw & Humphreys, 2005).
In many respects, this is similar to how clinicians incorporate conjoint
sessions or pharmacotherapy into ongoing treatment; self-​help can
integrate just as naturally. Broaden the Definition of Self-​Help Mental
health professionals typically think of books or support groups as the
primary type of self-​help, but self-​help is much more. When
incorporating self-​ help into treatment, the options are broad,
consisting of eight major types of self-​help: Self-​help books
Autobiographies Structured workbooks Commercial films Expressive writing
and journaling Support groups Websites Mobile applications The
integration of self-​ help books, autobiographies, commercial films,
support groups, and websites has been extensively discussed in other
publications (e.g., Norcross et al., 2013; Watkins & Clum, 2008; Wedding

361

& Niemiec, 2014). Expressive writing and structured workbooks emphasize
a person's communicative and interactive output (Harwood & L'Abate,
2010). These have been subjected to considerable research, which has
been reviewed and compiled in a series of books (e.g., L'Abate, 2000,
2004, 2010). Mental health professionals have recently begun to identify
the best behavioral health apps (Simmons et al., 2016) or, in the
vernacular, "evidence-​based apps" (Lui, Marcus, & Barry, 2017). With the
creation of the iPhone in 2007 and the opening of the Apple app store
the following year, self-​help mobile applications have become popular
mental health supports. Mobile apps are akin to websites; many products
have both a website and a mobile app, but others exist on only one
platform. Mobile apps are typically simple, condensed psychoeducation or
a single intervention. For example, PTSD Coach is a psychoeducation
mobile app that offers information about what posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) is, symptom assessment, and treatment options typical
for the disorder (Kuhn et al., 2017). Virtual Hope Box is a mobile app
intervention meant to help with emotion regulation and coping through
the creation of a digital hope box (Bush et al., 2017). A hope box is a
therapeutic technique that involves the creation of a collection of
personal reminders of reasons for living or items that help ground the
client in the present (e.g., photos of loved ones, a scent they enjoy,
photos of places they still want to travel to). This app allows for the
creation of a digital hope box instead of a physical one. Another
example is OurRelationship, which provides evidence-​based integrated
behavioral couples therapy online (Doss et al., 2016). Although we have
been reviewing the successful use of self-​ help, a Cochrane
Collaboration review (Murray et al., 2004) has provided a warning that
indiscriminate use of health-​ related Internet materials can prove
harmful in some cases. The review of 28 studies and 4,042 people with
chronic medical disorders found that those who used the Internet to
locate information on their disorders reported feelings of social
support and greater knowledge about

362

Specific Disorders and Populations

their disorders and treatments. However, those same users had worse
health outcomes. Worse outcomes were due, in part, to browsing the
Internet looking for alternatives, making their own health-​related
decisions and often ignoring professional advice. Such studies remind us
of the need to meld self-​help with professional guidance and to review
self-​help resources before we use them. Capitalize on Multiple Self-​Help
Benefits Self-​ help is not restricted to behavior change. The most
frequent reasons given by clinicians who recommend self-​ help are for
psychoeducation, encouragement, empowerment, fostering a sense of
universality, reinforcement of specific points or strategies worked on
in session, provide support and knowledge for family members, and social
support (Campbell & Smith, 2003). Thus, there are a variety of reasons
therapists recommend self-​help in conjunction with psychotherapy.
Consider the case of Army CPT Myers, a 35-​ year-​ old married African
American man seen in therapy by the first author, suffering from
posttraumatic stress and major depression precipitated by several
deployment-​related traumas. On his own, he had purchased and read the
highly rated self-​help book Trauma and Recovery (Herman, 1997), which he
found "helpful" in providing information and understanding his
experience of trauma. In the session, we discussed how his experience
might differ from the text in his lack of desire to reconstruct the
traumatic story or connect with others. I (AES) recommended the mobile
app PTSD Coach so he could better contextualize his symptoms as they
relate to military operations. In his following sessions, he talked
about joining a support group for veterans suffering from PTSD and
bringing his wife with him. He followed through on this, and we
discussed how this group helped him reconnect with others and gave him a
place where he was not afraid to share his trauma since "they could
relate to it." All these resources supported his continuation of
antidepressant medication and therapy sessions work using prolonged
exposure.

Become Familiar with Self-​Help Options There are some ways that
psychotherapists can familiarize themselves with self-​help resources.
Familiarization could include attending a self-​ help meeting, reading a
self-​ help book, downloading mental health apps, reading an
autobiography of a mental health client, and browsing online for a
particular mental health topic. Familiarity will facilitate
knowledgeable referrals and seamless integration with in-​ session work.
We, the authors, encourage our colleagues and students to attend a
meeting of a self-​help group, especially if recommending such groups to
clients and to read self-​ help books with mental health content. We have
found that when students attend an open AA or Narcotics Anonymous
meeting, they are generally enthusiastic in their reactions. Any initial
skepticism and devaluation of self-​help groups quickly change to
impressions of solidarity, support, and sincerity. Comparably, when
students rated the value of various autobiographies in an abnormal
psychology course, their responses were favorable: across three
evaluations, more than 95% rated the assignment positively (Norcross,
Sommer, & Clifford, 2001). It can also prove helpful for therapists to
download and experiment with mobile apps, rate them, and determine if an
app's content is based on sound psychological research. Being familiar
with the self-​help materials that clients may use, or that you may
recommend, can decrease the chances of inappropriate advice. More than
most other self-​help categories, films require certain warnings and
preparation. Viewers are asked to suspend belief and enter a fantasy
world; they should not overidentify or overgeneralize from a single
cinematic episode. People suffering from debilitating psychological
disorders should be warned of possible negative consequences, and those
who recently suffered from traumas should be careful not to be
retraumatized by various films. The rate at which self-​help books and
mobile apps appear outpaces research on them. Familiarity with them will
allow therapists to gauge the evidence base and the psychological

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

theory, if any, on which the self-​ help tool is based.

363

Help with Problematic Self-​Help Programs

Many clients enter treatment after "failures" with self-​ help materials.
One research requarters It takes only a moment, early in therapy, to as-
view found that more than three-​ sess a patient's self-​help experiences.
Seasoned of laypersons could not successfully self-​ clinicians already
thoughtfully assess clients' administer a toilet training protocol, a
sexual previous experiences, positive and negative, in dysfunction
treatment, or a desensitization propsychotherapy. Clinicians should also
assess cedure (Rosen, Glasgow, & Moore, 2003). Just self-​ help exposure.
Clinicians want to avoid because it is labeled self-​help does not mean
recommending what clients have already tried clients can understand or
perform the methods and found wanting and build on what was pre- on
their own; many clients need assistance with their self-​help (Andersson,
Carlbring, & viously successful. Therapists are likely to be surprised
by the Grimlund, 2008). Results from several studies support prevalence
and variety of clients' self-​help attempts in the past. One fairly
representa- individualizing self-​help recommendations and tive client
the second author saw in an af- ministrations. One controlled study
(Haefferl, ternoon tried Anthony Robbins's audiotapes, 2010)
investigated whether those who ruminate over-​the-​counter supplements, a
self-​help might get worse using self-​help programs for group, three
self-​help books, and sexual en- depression. Might such programs foster
rumirichment videotapes (Norcross, 2000). This nation by having the user
focus on his or her negexample is from a client who was himself a ative
or unrealistic thoughts? They do. Students mental health professional;
imagine what prone to rumination became worse after reless-​ informed
clients have used and not cording their realistic and unrealistic
thoughts in workbooks. Another study (Febbraro et al., shared with you!
In a survey of 262 psychotherapy clients, 1999) cast doubt on the
effectiveness of biblionly 34% reported discussing their use of al-
otherapy and self-​monitoring for panic attacks ternative therapies with
their therapist (Elkins when used with a professional. This research et
al., 2005). When alternative therapies were highlights the need to avoid
certain types of discussed in session, the topic was brought up
self-​help tools that might be countertherapeutic by the client about
half of the time. Clients' to a client's symptom presentation.
Ineffective self-​help poses many problems. information about their self-​
help histories will assist in case formulation and treatment Not only
can it leave clients feeling frustrated, selection. For example, some
clients with de- deflated, and incapable, but it could even be pression
might say they have a good grasp of harmful. It may be innocuous in and
of ithelp could deprive psychoeducation and their current symptoms self,
but ineffective self-​ but need help complying with daily positive
individuals of time and resources, diminish activities and keeping in
touch with friends. public credibility in the mental health profesOther
clients might say they tried cognitive-​ sion, and reduce the scientific
foundation of our behavioral methods that helped but think the
profession (Lilienfeld, Lynn, & Lohr, 2003). Clinicians can offer
assistance with diffiissue goes back to an early childhood trauma that
they need to process. Still, other clients cult self-​help programs.
After psychotherapists say that they have received all they can from
have determined that the self-​help resource is, peer support but need
concrete and specific di- generally, appropriate and for a specific
client, rection on how to best approach their current they can assist in
implementing the program problems. Assessing these self-​help experiences
and then later assist with its maintenance. and client preferences
enrich case formulation Clinicians can also reassure clients that it is
not their fault if the self-​help materials are difficult and treatment
selection. Assess Clients' Self-​Help Experiences

364

Specific Disorders and Populations

to apply or not effective (Rosen et al., 2003). It is often useful to
remind clients that there is no legal or professional regulation of
self-​help claims. Because a self-​help resource claims it is "clinically
tested," "proven effective," and effective "in a single day" does not
necessarily mean that it is. Offer Tangible Support Specific steps by a
therapist can increase client immersion in self-​help activities that
supplement the work of treatment. These include: Hold favorable views
toward self-​help involvement. Favorable views are associated with
increased goal attainment (e.g., Hodges & Segal, 2002). ◆ Provide
specific recommendations to local chapters of self-​help and support
groups (a valuable national clearinghouse can be found at
www.mhselfhelp.org/​). Connect with the specific self-​help group during a
session and arrange for someone to accompany the client to a meeting
(100% of clients in one study attended at least one self-​help meeting
when these two steps were accomplished vs. virtually 0% attendance when
a self-​help meeting was just suggested; Sisson & Mallams, 1981). ◆ If a
client is open to attending a 12-​step group, encourage attendance,
secure a sponsor, and engage in other 12-​step--​related behaviors during
and after treatment (Mankowski, Humphreys, & Moos, 2001). ◆ Distribute
copies of self-​help books and autobiographies you frequently recommend
during a session or make them available in the waiting room (expect most
will never reappear in your office). ◆ Give specific website URLs and
titles of movies/​books, and have clients download apps in-​session as
opposed to making a general suggestion. ◆

All these recommendations support the idea that a clinicians' behavior
in session translates concretely into client involvement in self-​help.

Recommend Research-​Supported Self-​Help Many self-​ help books and
technology-​ based treatments have proved effective in controlled studies
as stand-​ alone self-​ help. These include the technology-​ based tools
mentioned throughout this chapter and a growing number of self-​help
books. Among the latter are Alberti and Emmon's Your Perfect Right,
Burns's Feeling Good (1999), Clum's Coping with Panic (1990), Craske and
Barlow's Mastery of Your Anxiety and Panic (2000), Fairburn's Overcoming
Binge Eating (1995), Gordon's Parent Effectiveness Training (1975),
Heiman and LoPiccolo's Becoming Orgasmic (1988), Lewinsohn, Munoz,
Youngren, and Zeiss's Control Your Depression, Linehan's Skills Training
Manual for Treating Borderline Personality Disorder (2015), Pennebaker's
Opening Up by Writing It Down, multiple forms of parent management
training (Elger & McGrath, 2003), and sleep stimulus control
instructions. Several published compilations offer a critical review of
which self-​help resources are evidence-​based (e.g., Harwood & L'Abate,
2010; Norcross et al., 2013; Watkins & Clum, 2008) for multiple
disorders and life challenges. Of course, hundreds of self-​ help books
and apps are based on effective face-​ to-​ face psychotherapies; however,
research has not identified if we can reliably know whether they can be
practically and effectively implemented with no therapist contact.
According to Rosen and colleagues (2003): The only way to know the
effectiveness of well-​ intentioned instructional materials, when they
are entirely self-​administered, is to test those specific materials in
the specific context of their intended usage. Psychologists who write
self-​help materials based on methods they find effective in office
settings have no assurance that the public can successfully apply these
procedures on their own. (p. 410, emphasis in original)

Thousands of such resources are vying for notice and sales. Clients
obtaining trustworthy information from a basic Internet search is like
taking a 2-​year-​old on a walk: they pick up a

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

365

few pretty rocks but also lots of garbage and dirt (Norcross, 2006).
Clinicians may know when to dismiss something as irrelevant or
inaccurate, but the average client rarely does. The take-​home message
is, whenever possible, leverage scientific research and advance
self-​help materials that are empirically supported as a stand-​alone
intervention.

clinical expertise of the nearly 5,000 mental health professionals is
contained in this text and can help guide clinicians' recommendations to
clients. Clinician consensus is no guarantee to the accuracy or safety
of a self-​help tool and is inferior to controlled research, but it is,
without question, superior to consumer choice, random selection,
best-​seller lists, or app store ratings.

Rely on Professional Consensus

Tailor Recommendations to Clients Not Only Disorders

The quantity of self-​ help tools far exceeds controlled trials on their
efficacy. We estimate that less than 5% of commercial self-​help books
and 1% of web and mobile tools possess any research evidence on their
effectiveness or safety. Where does this leave psychotherapists? We need
to be empirically informed, but very few self-​help tools have been
subjected to scrutiny as self-​ administered treatments. We also cannot
read 5,000 self-​ help books per year, surf the more than 25,000 websites
devoted to mental health, or download the thousands of mental
health-​related apps. It is clear that more research needs to be done,
but, in its absence, therapists can proceed in the tradition of
evidence-​based practice by integrating the best available research with
clinical expertise in the context of client characteristics, culture,
and preferences (APA Task Force on Evidence-​ Based Practice, 2006).
Professional consensus is the majority opinion, not unanimity. Case in
point is The Courage to Heal (Bass & Davis, 2008). This is a
best-​selling self-​help book rated highly by psychologists for its
sensitive portrayal of adults who were sexually abused as children. The
book is not without criticism or complaint, however. It contains
research-​ unsubstantiated signs of sexual abuse and inadvertently
encourages erroneous memories or false accusations of sexual abuse.
Supporters of the book point out that it fosters an acceptance of and
trust in women whose abuse was denied by others. There are few self-​help
tools with universal approval. Knowing, both clinician ratings of
self-​help materials and the research base is ideal. In Self-​ Help That
Works (Norcross et al., 2013), both clinician rating and research base
are listed. The

The typical way of recommending self-​ help tools is by focusing on the
client's diagnosis being addressed in treatment: depression, addiction,
relationship distress, anxiety, and the like. The more sophisticated
self-​help referral is to recommend based on the disorder and the person.
That is, try to tailor the self-​help recommendation to the qualities of
the client; their gender, age, culture, religion, sexual orientation,
occupation, and so on. As Sir William Osler (John, 2013), father of
modern medicine, said: "It is much more important to know what sort of a
patient has a disease than what sort of disease a patient has." An
example of this can be seen in a 28-​year-​ old, married man with four
children who had recently relocated. He came into psychotherapy due to
increased relationship stress around this move. In his previous job, his
wife's family lived close by and the children had many friends. He
presented with minor symptoms of depression and feelings of guilt. He
reported feeling that he had less energy and little interest in helping
his wife identify fun things for the kids to do in their new location.
Psychotherapy paired behavioral activation and a self-​ help mobile app,
Positive Activity Jackpot (Edwards-​Stewart, 2012), in which he
identified family-​friendly and pleasant local activities. Both treatment
and self-​help alleviated his depression and helped familiarize his
family with their new town. It can prove difficult at times to locate
self-​ help for clients from marginalized populations, such as immigrants
and gay, lesbian, bisexual, and transgender patients. Specialized
support groups may not be available in the local community if they
cannot be found online, and

366

Specific Disorders and Populations

self-​help books may not be available for specific Workbook by Fanning
and O'Neil (1997), or the cultural populations. Moreover, web-​ based web
tool mentioned earlier. programs and mobile apps rarely customize
Clinicians would be wise to avoid the outaround client characteristics.
We recently dated medical model that identifies clients by searched in
vain for a culture-​specific resource pathology alone. By adapting
self-​help to the for a Vietnamese immigrant family struggling
individuality of the client, both applicability with bipolar disorder.
More culture-​specific re- and efficacy are typically enhanced (Norcross
sources are needed. & Wampold, 2018). When tailoring the self-​help
recommendation to clients' characteristics and their unique Recommend
Self-​Help for Life Transitions contexts, it is also helpful to consider
three treatment adaptation methods that have received Patients come into
treatment for more than their research support: patient preferences,
stage of disorders. Many of their concerns are associated change, and
theory of cause/​cure (Norcross & with life transitions. While addressing
the most Wampold, 2018). Some clients struggle with salient disorders in
sessions, clients can concurreading, some do not have wi-​fi at home,
some rently use self-​help for life challenges. Leading will not watch
movies or television, and still the list are financial planning,
marriages, pregrearing, career changes, grief, others (particularly
adolescents) refuse to con- nancy, child ​ sult anything not found
online. Match such retirement, aging, and death. There are also
expreferences and utilize patient strengths in cellent self-​help
resources for personal growth which can include skills like
assertiveness, recommending self-​help. Regarding stage of change, some
self-​ communication, self-​management, relaxation, help materials are
appropriate for the and spirituality. The idea is that self-​help can
precontemplation and contemplation stages, address both the central
issues being treated in whereas others are better for the action
sessions as well as those not in the treatment stage. Many self-​ help
resources are geared plan. Self-​help for transitions can help clients
toward active change but can backfire for feel heard in all aspects of
their life, even if pethose in earlier stages. For substance abuse,
riphery transitions are not directly addressed the web-​based Drinker's
Check-​Up is partic- every session. ularly suited for an early stage of
change as it utilizes motivational enhancement that Employ Self-​Help
During Waiting Periods includes personalized feedback (Hester, and
Maintenance Delaney, & Campbell, 2012). A meta-​analysis Self-​help in all
its forms can prove a powerful of 87 prospective, stage-​ matched
computer intervention for clients on a wait-​ list. Such interventions
found a 39% increase in effec- tools can enable natural recovery for
some tiveness (OR = 1.39) over the nonmatched individuals and increase
motivation for those interventions or minimal care conditions in need of
professional treatment. Self-​ help (Krebs, Prochaska, & Rossi, 2010).
can also support clients who have already Self-​help resources can also
be matched to made changes and are trying to maintain such clients' (or
clinicians') theories of cause and changes after professional services
have ended cure. Following with the substance use ex- (Klaw & Humphreys,
2005). In this sense, self-​ ample, clients (and clinicians) who favor a
di- help should not only be considered a part of sease model and
abstinence-​only will be more active treatment but also as pre-​ therapy
and disposed toward the AA Big Book and Twelve maintenance
interventions. Steps and Twelve Tradition. Those inclined to ideas of
moderation will respond better to Address Common Concerns books like
Controlling Your Drinking by Miller and Munoz (2013), When AA Doesn't
Work for Many clients and clinicians pose legitimate You by Ellis and
Velton (1992), The Addiction reservations about certain aspects of
self-​help. In

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

practice with clients and while interacting with colleagues, we have
repeatedly encountered concerns about incorporating self-​ help into
treatment. Below we address these concerns with research findings and
clinical experiences. Self-​help discourages treatment and medication. It
is true that some self-​help books, websites, and many 12-​step programs
direct clients away from professional treatment and medications. In
years past, many clients who were also AA members would report that
fellow members accused them of not being sober or abstinent while taking
psychotropic medications. The number of such reports, however, is
decreasing, and the empirical evidence for this cited barrier is scarce
(Kelly, 2003). In fact, in a survey of AA members, the vast majority
believe that the use of psychotropic medications intended to reduce
relapse risk is a "good idea" and deny being pressured to discontinue
their medications (Rychtarik et al., 2000). Most self-​help resources
tell users to seek professional treatment, and many now invite
professionals to serve on their advisory boards. In short, this concern
seems to be dated and fading. ◆ Incompatibility with treatment
philosophy. This reservation often relates to rival theoretical
orientations or 12-​step theistic groups. Patients receiving
psychotherapy from a particular orientation can be confused by self-​help
information or treatment guidance from another theoretical orientation.
This is not a pressing concern among integrative therapists, but it may
prove frustrating to those professionals seeking to maintain theoretical
consistency or who prize one approach over another. In practice, we have
found that many clients can profit from 12-​step, AA-​modeled groups by
either accepting the teachings or reinterpreting the language into
spiritual concepts more compatible with their own beliefs. In a study of
3,018 substance abusers, both theists and nontheists were equally likely
to follow through on and benefit from referrals ◆

367

to AA (Winzelberg & Humphreys, 1999). Clients high in religious
involvement have not been found to attend 12-​step groups more frequently
(Brown et al., 2001) or to respond better to them (Connors, Tonigan, &
Miller, 2001) than those who are not religious. Consider referring both
religious and nonreligious clients to 12-​step groups and materials. For
the few clients opposed to AA philosophy, or who have had negative
experiences with such groups, refer to non--​ 12-​step groups. There are
alternatives for every addictive disorder. ◆ Possibility of harm.
Another reservation is that self-​help may harm clients. Meta-​analyses of
research show a low deterioration effect. Scogin and colleagues (1996)
found a low rate of negative outcomes for self-​help across five
self-​help studies; the low negative outcomes were similar to or lower
than those associated with professional treatment. In a meta-​ analysis
of 29 clinical trials of Internet-​based cognitive-​behavior therapy
(CBT), only 6% of participants experienced deterioration, compared to
17% in control conditions (Rozental et al., 2017). Selection bias is,
however, possible in the self-​help materials chosen for research, and we
do not know the magnitude of this bias. It is probable that highly
implausible self-​help would be less likely to be submitted to a
randomized trial than a more conventional self-​help resource. As for the
self-​help materials that have been scientifically researched, we can
confidently say that the possibility of harm is quite low and probably
lower than receiving no care at all. Negative outcomes are more of a
concern with purely client self-​administered treatments than with
self-​help integrated into psychotherapy (Schueller et al., 2017; Scogin,
2003); put differently, self-​help technologies are more effective with
human support and professional guidance. ◆ Web/​mobile self-​help privacy
and security concerns. Many clinicians harbor concerns around the
privacy and security of using web-​based and mobile self-​help. Recent,

368

Specific Disorders and Populations

large-​scale breaches in credit cards and financial organizations
accentuate these concerns, which are not to be taken lightly or
dismissed. In our experience, these concerns are attributable to a lack
of familiarity and comfort with self-​help technology, which has had
minimal privacy breaches (to our knowledge). Clinicians can learn such
skills and expand their knowledge as technology use increases with time.
In recent years, several articles have outlined the privacy/​security
considerations of technology in clinical practice (e.g., Jones &
Moffitt, 2016; Karcher & Presser, 2016; Prentice & Dobson, 2014), and
one offers ethical advice and legal guidance on recommending self-​help
mobile apps in clinical practice (Edwards-​Stewart et al., 2017).

of theory, practice, and research. The streams of self-​ change and
psychotherapy rarely intersected, let alone were they integrated. When
they did intersect, it was frequently to pit one against the other
rather than to serve as complementary paths of behavior change. In the
future, we foresee a mounting rapprochement and mutual synergy. In an
era of briefer treatment and declining mental health reimbursement,
psychotherapists will necessarily need to do more with less.
Psychotherapists will naturally seek additional change mechanisms to
complement and continue the positive effects of their treatments. To
reduce the burdens of suffering and to reach the untreated, new,
integrative models are required (Kazdin & Rabbitt, 2013). Stepped care
will attempt to maximize the effectiveness and efficiency of resource
allocations. Many health organizations are already beginning treatment
of mental health Monitor Progress with Self-​Help disorders with the
least costly assistance of It is not enough to recommend self-​help and
self-​help, such as a support group and bibliothen leave the client to
read the book, visit therapy. If these do not suffice, then care steps
the website, or join a support group. Research up to a more intensive
treatment; for example, suggests that self-​help works best when
directed, a interactive multimedia program delivered reinforced, or, at
least, occasionally reviewed by over the Internet. If more help is
needed, group psychotherapists. Regular monitoring of self-​ therapy
could be added. Face-​to-​face psychohelp use, such as progress in a group
or a mo- therapy will be increasingly reserved, we fear, bile app,
provides the opportunity for clients for the affluent and the severe
cases. We hope, to ask questions, clarify concerns, and correct and
advocate for, a thoughtful hybrid of psychomisunderstandings. It can
also help end a therapy and self-​help. client's use of an unhelpful
resource earlier on In that future, self-​ help, with or without before
harm can be done; for example, a support psychotherapy, will remain the
country's de group that is causing the client damage and not facto
treatment for most behavioral disorders. reinforcing positive change.
When the self-​help A Delphi poll of 73 experts predicted that
psymaterial is useful, monitoring can reinforce chotherapy in the future
would be characterized the benefits and remind clients that their clini-
by escalating computer technology (e.g., mocian is interested in
progress in all areas of their bile apps, social networking
interventions) and lives. Last, if clients need assistance in finding
increased reliance on client self-​change, such another self-​help tool,
therapists familiar with as self-​help and bibliotherapy (Norcross,
Pfund, their clients' self-​help history and clinical needs & Prochaska,
2013). The economics of healthwill be well equipped to do so. care along
with the affordability, privacy, and effectiveness of (tested) self-​help
propels its integration with psychotherapy. FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Psychotherapists are inexorably responding to these changes. As we
better understand the Historically, self-​ help and psychotherapy de-
role that technology can play (and not play) in veloped independently,
with separate sources face-​to-​face care (Schueller, Munoz, & Mohr,

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

369

2013), clinicians will utilize it more. Prominent suffering individuals
as possible. Self-​ help researchers and clinicians are turning their
technologies provide one way to do so. treatments into web-​ based,
patient-​ led applications. A web-​ based prolonged exposure for PTSD is
currently being tested within CONCLUDING COMMENTS a military population
(McLean et al., 2018). Participants "attend" 10 online sessions of ap-
The rise of self-​help is part and parcel of the proximately 60 minutes
in length. Participants transformation of healthcare toward patient-​led
complete assessment batteries on several care. More companies and
insurers are turning occasions and have contact with a clinician for to
consumer-​ directed health plans that give brief, 15-​ minute phone
conversations before more control (and responsibility) to the patient.
session 1, after session 3, and then again after Professional guidance
on the selection and use the last session. Integrative behavioral
couples of self-​help increase the probability of positive therapy (IBCT;
Christensen et al., 2010), as an- outcome (Schueller et al., 2016;
Scogin, 2003). other example, has been adapted into a web-​ Effective
self-​help is best embedded within a based intervention called
OurRelationship and therapeutic relationship. As clinicians, we can has
been found to be effective in improving re- select, direct, and tailor
preferred self-​help to lationship satisfaction, also with minimum cli-
lead clients toward effective resources and prenician contact (Doss et
al., 2016). vent the utilization of ineffective ones. The challenge for
future research is how Two American Psychological Association to
reliably predict which patients will ben- task forces on self-​help
praised its enormous efit from self-​help alone as compared to self-​
potential for public mental health but warned help with therapist
contact or psychotherapy that untested programs pose risks to consumers
alone (Baillie & Rapee, 2004). Higher formal (Rosen, 2004). Giving
psychology away is the education seems to predict self-​help improve-
goal, both in disseminating evidence-​ based ment (Warmerdam et al.,
2013). Clinical se- methods and in countering what has not been verity
and functional impairment (Castonguy, tested or supported (Norcross,
2000). Popular Constantino, & Beutler, 2019) are research-​ mental health
need not be unscientific mental supported markers for more intensive and
health (Lilienfeld, 1998). This entails sharing lengthier intervention,
but even here self-​help the scientific process and its outcomes with the
and online social support play a curative role. general population in
ways that can be easily Massive open online interventions (MOOIs) and
affordably consumed. have the potential to increase the reach and afThe
integration of self-​ help and psychofordability of psychological
interventions (Munoz therapy expands the traditional boundaries et al.,
2016). These have proved largely acceptable of psychotherapy integration
and promises to populations in multiple countries for several be- a
broader, responsive synthesis of effective havioral and health
disorders. We anticipate a day change methods. There is no need to
choose when therapists can routinely recommend these only one pathway to
patient self-​growth and interventions, augment their moderate effective-
behavior change; to paraphrase Freud, all that ness, and provide the
in-​person care and experi- work are good. ence that computers cannot
approach. Technology will never replace face-​to-​face psychotherapy. In
the preceding examples, web-​ based interventions were created to ad-
References dress barriers to care (e.g., affordability, pri- Adams, S.
J., & Pitre, N. (2000). Who uses vacy, availability). The future of
self-​help plus bibliotherapy and why? A survey from an psychotherapy
embodies the ethical mandate underserviced area. Canadian Journal to
give away our knowledge, make it available of Psychiatry, 45, 645--​ 649.
doi: 10.1177/​ on a population-​wide scale, and treat as many
070674370004500707

370

Specific Disorders and Populations

Andersson, G., Carlbring, P., & Grimlund, A. (2008). Campbell, L. F., &
Smith, T. P. (2003). Integrating Predicting treatment outcome in
internet self-​help books into psychotherapy. Journal of versus face to
face treatment of panic disorder. Clinical Psychology: In Session, 59,
177--​186. Computers in Human Behavior, 24, 1790--​1801. doi:
10.1002/​jclp.10140 doi: 10.1016/​j.chb.2008.02.003 Castonguay, L. G.,
Contantino, M. J., & Beulter, APA (American Psychological Association)
Task L. E. (Eds.). (2019). Treatment principles that Force on Evidence-​
Based Practice. (2006). work. New York: Oxford University Press.
Evidence-​ based practice in psychology. Cavanagh, K., Strauss, C.,
Forder, L., & Jones, F. American Psychologist, 61, 271--​285. (2014). Can
mindfulness and acceptance be doi: 0.1037/​0003-​066X.61.4.271 learnt by
self-​ help: A systematic review and Apodaca, T. R., & Miller, W. R.
(2003). A meta-​ meta-​analysis of mindfulness and acceptance-​ analysis of
the effectiveness of bibliotherapy based self-​ help interventions.
Clinical for alcohol problems. Journal of Clinical Psychology Review,
34, 118--​129. doi: 10.1016/​ Psychology, 59, 289--​ 304. doi: 10.1002/​
j.cpr.2014.01.001 jclp.10130 Christensen, A., Atkins, D. C., Baucom, B.,
& Yi, J. Armstrong, C. M., Ciulla, R. P., Edwards-​Stewart, (2010).
Marital status and satisfaction five years A., Hoyt, T., & Bush, N.
(2018). Best following a randomized clinical trial comparing practices
of mobile health in clinical care: the traditional versus integrative
behavioral couple development and evaluation of a competency-​ therapy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical based provider training program.
Professional Psychology, 78, 225--​235. doi:10.1037/​a0018132 Psychology:
Research and Practice, 49(5-​6), Clum, G. A. (1990). Coping with panic.
Pacific 355-​363. Grove, CA: Brooks/​Cole. Baillie, A. J., & Rapee, R. M.
(2004). Predicting Connors, G. J., Tonigan, S., & Miller, W. R. (2001).
who benefits from psychoeducation and self Religiosity and
responsiveness to alcoholism help for panic attacks. Behaviour Research
treatments. Bethesda, MD: Department of & Therapy, 42, 513--​ 527. doi:
10.1016/​ Health and Human Services. S0005-​7967(03)00157-​8 Craske, M. G.,
& Barlow, D. H. (2000). Mastery Bass, E., & Davis, L. (2008). The
courage to heal: A of your anxiety and panic III. Albany, NY: guide for
women survivors of child sexual abuse Graywind. (4th ed.). New York:
HarperCollins Perennial. Cuijpers, P., Donker, T., Johansson, R., Mohr,
D. C., Bernecker, S. L. (2014). Helping clients help van Straten, A., &
Andersson, G. (2011). Self-​ themselves: Managing ethical concerns guided
psychological treatment for depressive when offering guided self-​ help
interventions symptoms: A meta-​analysis. PLoS, 6, e21274. in
psychotherapy practice. Professional
doi.org/​10.1371/​journal.pone.0021274 Psychology: Research and Practice,
45, 111--​119. Den Boer, P. C., Wiersma, D., & Van Den Bosch, Bijl, R.
V., de Graaf, R., Hiripi, E., Kessler, R. C., R. J. (2004). Why is self-​
help neglected Kohn, R., Offord, D. R., . . . Wittchen, H. U. in the
treatment of emotional disorders? (2003). The prevalence of treated and
untreated A meta-​analysis. Psychological Medicine, 34, mental disorders
in five countries. Health 959--​971. Affairs, 22, 122--​133. Doss, B. D.,
Cicila, L. N., Georgia, E. J., Roddy, M. K., Bogart, D. (2011). Library
and book trade almanac. Nowlan, K. M., Benson, L. A., & Christensen,
Medford, NJ: Information Today. A. (2016). A randomized controlled trial
of the Brown, B. S., O'Grady, K. E., Farrell, E. V., Flechner, web-​
based OurRelationship program: Effects I. S., & Nurco, D. N. (2001).
Factors associated on relationship and individual functioning. with
frequency of 12-​step attendance by drug Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, abuse clients. American Journal of Drug and 84,
285--​296. doi: 10.1037/​ccp0000063 Alcohol Abuse, 27, 147--​160. Edwards-​
Stewart, A. (2012). Using technology to Bush, N. E., Smolenski, D.,
Denneson, L. M., enhance empirically supported psychological Williams,
H. B., Thomas, E., & Dobscha, treatments: Positive activity jackpot.
Archives of S. K. (2017). A virtual hope box smartphone Medical
Psychology, 3(2), 60--​66. app for emotional regulation and coping
Edwards-​ Stewart, A., Alexander, C., Armstrong, with distress: A
randomized controlled trial. C. M., Hoyt, T., & O'Donohue, W. (2018).
Psychiatric Services, 68, 330--​336. doi:10.1176/​ Mobile applications for
client use: Ethical and appi.ps.201600283 legal considerations.
Psychological Services.

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy Advance online publication.
http://​dx.doi.org/​ 10.1037/​ser0000321 Eisenberg, D. M., Davis, R. B.,
Ettner, S. L., Appel, S., Wilkey, S., Rompay, M. V., & Kessler, R. C.
(1998). Trends in alternative medicine use in the United States,
1990--​1997. Journal of the American Medical Association, 280,
1575--​1589. Elger, F. J., & McGrath, P. J. (2003). Self-​administered
psychosocial treatments for children and families. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 59, 321--​339. doi: 10.1002/​jclp.10132 Elkins, G., Marcus,
J., Rajab, M. H., & Durgam, S. (2005). Complementary and alternative
therapy use by psychotherapy clients. Psychotherapy, 42, 232--​235. doi:
10.1037/​0033-​3204.42.2.232 Ellis, A., & Velton, E. (1992). When AA
doesn't work for you: Rational steps to quitting alcohol. Fort Lee, NJ:
Barricade. Fairburn, C. G. (1995). Overcoming binge eating. New York:
Guilford. Fanning, P., & O'Neill, J. (1997). The addiction workbook: A
step-​ by-​ step guide to quitting alcohol and drugs. New York: Fine.
Febbraro, G. A. R., Clum, G. A., Roodman, A. A., & Wright, J. H. (1999).
The limits of bibliotherapy: A study of the differential effectiveness
of self-​administered interventions in individuals with panic attacks.
Behavior Therapy, 30, 209--​222. Google Play Store. (2017).
http://​www.play.google. com/​. Accessed September 15, 2017. Gordon, T.
(1975). Parent effectiveness training. New York: Random House. Gregory,
R. J., Canning, S. S., Lee, T. W., & Wise, J. C. (2004). Cognitive
bibiliotherapy for depression: A meta-​ analysis. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 275--​280. Haefferl, G. J. (2010).
When self-​ help is no help: Traditional cognitive skills training does
not prevent depressive symptoms in people who ruminate. Behaviour
Research and Therapy, 48, 152--​157. doi: 10.1016/​j.brat.2009.09.016
Hartmann-​ Boyce, J., Lancaster, T., & Stead, L. F. (2014). Print-​ based
self-​ help interventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database
Systematic Review, 6, CD001118. doi: 10.1002/​ 14651858.CD001118.pub3
Harwood, T. M., & L'Abate, L. (2010). Self-​help in mental health. New
York: Springer. Heiman, J., & LoPiccolo, J. (1988). Becoming orgasmic: A
sexual growth program for women (rev.ed.). New York: Prentice-​Hall.
Herman, J. (1997). Trauma and recovery: The aftermath of violence---​from
domestic abuse to political terror. New York: Perseus.

371

Hester, R. K., Delaney, H. D., & Campbell, W. (2012). The college
Drinter's Check-​ up: Outcomes of two randomized clinial trials of a
computer-​delivered intervention. Psychology of Addictive Behavior, 26,
1--​12. doi: 10.1037/​ a0024753 Hodges, J. Q., & Segal, S. P. (2002). Goal
advancement among mental health self-​ help agency members. Psychiatric
Rehabilitation Journal, 26, 78--​85. Horgan, A., McCarthy, G., & Sweeney,
J. (2013). An evaluation of an online peer support forum for university
students with depressive symptoms. Archives of Psychiatric Nursing, 27,
84--​89. doi: 10.1016/​j.apnu.2012.12.005 Hutton, H. E., Wilson, L. M.,
Apelberg, B. J., Tang, E. A., Odelola, O., Bass, E. B., & Chander, G.
(2011). A systematic review of randomized controlled trials: Web-​ based
interventions for smoking cessation among adolescents, college students,
and adults. Nicotine & Tobacco Research, 13, 227--​238. doi:
10.1093/​ntr/​ntq252 Ivanova, E., Lindner, P., Ly, K. H., Dahlin, M.,
Vernmark, K., Andersson, G., & Carlbring, P. (2016). Guided and unguided
acceptance and commitment therapy for social anxiety disorder and/​or
panic disorder provided via the internet and a smartphone application: A
randomized controlled trial. Journal of Anxiety Disorders, 44, 27--​35.
John, M. (2013). From Osler to the cone technique. HSR Proceedings in
Intensive Care & Cardiovascular Anesthesia, 5(1), 57--​58. Jones, N., &
Moffitt, M. (2016). Ethical guidelines for mobile app development within
health and mental health fields. Professional Psychology: Research and
Practice, 47(2), 155--​ 162. doi:10.1037/​pro0000069 Karcher, N. R., &
Presser, N. R. (2016). Ethical and legal issues addressing the use of
mobile health (mHealth) as an adjunct to psychotherapy. Ethics &
Behavior, 00, 1--​ 22. doi:10.1080/​ 10508422.2016.1229187 Kazdin, A. E.,
& Rabbitt, S. M. (2013). Novel models for delivering mental health
services and reducing the burdens of mental illness. Clinical
Psychological Science, 1, 170--​191. doi: 10.1177/​2167702612463566 Kelly,
J. F. (2003). Self-​ help for substance abuse disorders: History,
effectiveness, knowledge gaps, and research opportunities. Clinical
Psychology Review, 23, 639--​663. Kenter, R. M., Cuijpers, P., Beekman,
A., & van Straten, A. (2016). Effectiveness of a web-​based guided self-​
help intervention for outpatients

372

Specific Disorders and Populations

with a depressive disorders: Short-​ term results from a randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 31, e80. doi:
10.2196/​jmir.4861 Kessler, R. C., Mickelson, K. D., & Zhao, S. (1997).
Patterns and correlates of self-​ help group membership in the United
States. Social Policy, 27, 27--​46. Kessler, R. C., Zhao, S., Katz, S.
J., Kouzis, A. C., Frank, R. G., Edlund, M. & Leaf, P. (1999). Past-​
year use of outpatient services for psychiatric problems in the National
Comorbidity Survey. American Journal of Psychiatry, 156, 115--​123. doi:
10.1176/​ajp.156.1.115 Klaw, E., & Humphreys, K. (2005). Facilitating
client involvement in self-​help groups. In G. P. Koocher, J. C.
Norcross, & S. S. Hill (Eds.), Psychologists' desk reference (2nd ed.,
pp. 502--​ 506). New York: Oxford University Press. Klingemann, H.,
Sobell, L., Barker, J., Blomqvist, J., Cloud, W., Ellinstad, T., . . .
Tucker, J. (2001). Promoting self-​change from problem substance abuse.
Boston: Kluwer. Kownacki, R. J., & Shadish, W. R. (1999). Does
Alcoholics Anonymous work? The results from a meta-​ analysis of
controlled experiments. Substance Use and Misuse, 34, 1897--​1916. Krebs,
P., Prochaska, J. O., & Rossi, J. S. (2010). A meta-​ analysis of
computer-​ t ailored interventions for health behavior change. Preventive
Medicine, 51(3-​4), 214--​221. doi:10.1016/​j.ypmed.2010.06.004 Kuhn, E.,
Kanuri, N., Hoffman, J. E., Garvert, D. W., Ruzek, J. I., & Taylor, C.
B. (2017). A randomized controlled trial of a smartphone app for
posttraumatic stress disorder symptoms. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 85, 267--​273. doi: 10.1037/​ccp0000163 Kyrouz, E.
M., Humphreys, K., & Loomis, C. (2002). A review of research on the
effectiveness of self-​ help mutual aid groups. In B. J. White & E. J.
Madara, The self-​help sourcebook: Your guide to community and online
support groups (6th ed., pp. 71--​85). Cedar Knolls, NJ: American Self-​
Help Clearinghouse. L'Abate, L. (Ed.). (2000). Distance writing and
computer-​assisted interventions in psychiatry and mental health.
Westport, CT: Praeger. L'Abate, L. (Ed.). (2004). Using workbooks in
mental health. New York: Routledge. L'Abate, L. (2010). Low-​cost
approaches to promote physical and mental health: Theory, research, and
practice. New York: Springer.

Lilienfeld, S. O. (1998). Pseudoscience in contemporary clinical
psychology: What it is and what we can do about it. The Clinical
Psychologist, 51(4), 3--​9. Lilienfeld, S. O., Lynn, S. J., & Lohr, J. M.
(Eds.). (2003). Science and pseudoscience in clinical psychology. New
York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M. (2015). DBT skills training manual (2nd
ed.). New York: Guilford. Lui, J. L., Marcus, D. K., & Barry, C. T.
(2017). Evidence-​ based apps? A review of mental health mobile
applications in a psychotherapy context. Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 48, 199--​210. Mains, J. A., & Scogin, F. R.
(2003). The effectiveness of self-​ administered treatments: A practice-​
friendly review of the research. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 59,
237--​246. doi: 10.1002/​ jclp.10145 Mankowski, E. S., Humphreys, K., &
Moos, R. H. (2001). Individual and contextual predictors of involvement
in twelve-​step self-​help groups after substance abuse treatment.
American Journal of Community Psychology, 29, 537--​563. McLean, C. P.,
Rauch, S. A. M., Foa, E. B., Sripada, R. K., Tannahill, H. S., Mintz,
J., . . . Peterson, A. L. (2018). Design of a randomized controlled
trial examining the efficacy and biological mechanisms of web-​ prolonged
exposure and present-​ centered therapy for PTSD among active-​ duty
military personnel and veterans. Contemporary Clinical Trials, 64,
41--​48. doi:10.1016/​j.cct.2017.11.008 Menchola, M., Arkowitz, H. S., &
Burke, B. L. (2007). Efficacy of self-​administered treatments for
depression and anxiety. Professional Psychology, 38, 421--​429. Miller,
W. R., & Munoz, R. F. (2013). Controlling your drinking: Tools to make
moderation work for you (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Morgenstern, J.,
Labouvie, E., McCrady, B. S., Kahler, C. W., & Frey, R. M. (1997).
Affiliation with Alcoholics Anonymous after treatment: A study of its
therapeutic effects and mechanisms of action. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 65, 768--​777. Munoz, R. F., Bunge, E. L., Chen, K.,
Schueller, S. M., Bravin, J. I., Shaughnessy, E. A., & Perez-​Stable, E.
J. (2016). Massive open online interventions: A novel method for
delivering behavioral-​health services worldwide. Clinical Psychological
Science, 4, 194--​205. doi: 10.1177/​ 2167702615583840

Integrating Self-Help and Psychotherapy

373

Murray, E., Burns, J., See Tai, S., Lai, R., & Nazareth,
pewinternet.org/​files/​old-​media//​Files/​Reports/​ I. (2004). Interactive
health communication 2012/​PIP\_​MobileHealth2012\_​FINAL.pdf applications
for people with chronic disease. Pew Research Internet Project. (2014).
Health fact The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, sheet.
Retrieved from http://​www.pewinternet. 4, CD004274. doi: 10.1002/​
14651858. org/​fact-​sheets/​health-​fact-​sheet/​ CD004274.pub2 Prentice, J.
L., & Dobson, K. S. (2014). A review of the Norcross, J. C. (2000). Here
comes the self-​ help risks and benefits associated with mobile phone
revolution in mental health. Psychotherapy, 37, applications for
psychological interventions. 370--​377. doi: 10.1037/​0033-​3204.37.4.370
Canadian Psychology/​Psychologie Canadienne, Norcross, J. C. (2006).
Integrating self-​help into 55, 282--​290. doi:10.1037/​a0038113
psychotherapy: 16 practical suggestions. Prochaska, J. O., Norcross, J.
C., & DiClemente, Professional Psychology Research and C. C. (1995).
Changing for good. Practice, 37, 683-​ 693. doi:10.1037/​ New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. 0735-​7028.37.6.683 Project MATCH Research
Group. (1997). Norcross, J. C., Campbell, L. F., Grohol, J. M., Matching
alcoholism treatments to client Santrock, J. W., Selagea, F., & Sommer,
R. heterogeneity: Project MATCH post treatment (2013). Self-​help that
works: Resources to improve drinking outcomes. Journal of Studies on
emotional health and strengthen relationships Alcohol, 58, 7--​29. (4th
ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Reger, M. A., & Gahm, G. A.
(2009). A meta-​analysis Norcross, J. C., Pfund, R. A., & Prochaska, J.
O. of the effects of internet-​and computer-​based (2013). Psychotherapy
in 2022: A Delphi poll cognitive-​ behavioral treatments for anxiety. on
its future. Professional Psychology: Research Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 65, 53--​75. & Practice, 44, 363--​370. doi:
10.1002/​jclp.20536 Norcross, J. C., Santrock, J. W., Campbell, L. F.,
Richards, D., & Richardson, T. (2012). Computer-​ Smith, T. P., Sommer,
R., & Zuckerman, E. L. based psychological treatments for depression: A
(2000). Authoritative guide to self-​help resources systematic review and
meta-​analysis. Clinical in mental health. New York: Guilford. Psychology
Review, 32, 329--​342. doi: 10.1016/​ Norcross, J. C., Sommer, R., &
Clifford, J. S. (2001). j.cpr.2012.02.004 Incorporating published
autobiographies into Ritzert, T., Forsyth, J. P., Berghoff, C. R.,
Boswell, the abnormal psychology course. Teaching J., & Eifert, G. H.
(2016). Evaluating the of Psychology, 28, 125--​ 128. doi: 10.1207/​
effectiveness of ACT for anxiety disorders in a S15328023TOP2802\_​13
self-​help context: Outcomes from a randomized Norcross, J. C., &
Wampold, B. E. (2018). wait-​list controlled trial. Behavior Therapy, 47,
Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​ 431--​572.
doi:10.1016/​j.beth.2016.03.001 based responsiveness (3rd ed.). New York:
Oxford Rosen, G. M. (2004). Remembering the 1978 and University Press.
1990 task forces on self-​help therapies. Journal of Nordgreen, T., &
Havik, O. E. (2011). Use of self-​ Clinical Psychology, 60, 111--​113.
doi: 10.1002/​ help materials for anxiety and depression jclp.10230 in
mental health services: A national survey Rosen, G. M., Glasgow, R. E.,
& Moore, T. E. (2003). of psychologists in Norway. Professional
Self-​help therapy: The science and business of Psychology, 42, 185--​191.
doi: 10.1037/​a0022729 giving psychology away. In S. O. Lilienfeld,
O'Conner, E. P., & Kratochwill, T. R. (1999). S. J. Lynn, & J. M. Lohr
(Eds.), Science and Self-​ help interventions: The reported pseudoscience
in clinical psychology (pp. 399--​ practices of school psychologists.
Professional 424). New York: Guilford. Psychology: Research and
Practice, 30, 147--​153. Rozental, A., Forsell, E., Svensson, A.,
Andersson, doi: 10.1037/​0735-​7028.30.2.147 G., & Carlbring, P. (2015).
Internet-​ Ouimette, P. C., Finney, J. W., & Moos, R. H. (1997). based
cognitive-​ behavior therapy for Twelve-​step and cognitive-​behavioral
treatment procrastination: A randomized controlled trial. for substance
abuse: A comparison of treatment Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, effectiveness. Journal of Consulting and 83, 808--​824. doi:
10.1037/​ccp0000023 Clinical Psychology, 65, 230--​240. doi: 10.1037/​
Rozental, A., Magnusson, K., Boettcher, J., 0022-​006X.65.2.230
Andersson, G., & Carlbring, P. (2017). Pew Research Internet Project.
(2012). Mobile For better or worse: An individual patient health 2012.
Retrieved from http://​www. data meta-​ analysis of deterioration among

374

Specific Disorders and Populations

participants receiving internet-​based cognitive behavior therapy.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 85, 160--​177. doi:
10.1037/​ ccp0000158 Rychtarik, R. G., Connors, G. J., Dermen, K. H., &
Stasiewicz, P. R. (2000). Alcoholics Anonymous and the use of
medications to prevent relapse: An anonymous survey of member attitudes.
Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 61, 134--​ 138. doi:
10.15288/​jsa.2000.61.134 Salzer, M. S., Rappaport, J., & Segre, L.
(2001). Mental health professionals' support of self-​help groups.
Journal of Community and Applied Social Psychology, 11, 1--​10. doi:
10.1002/​casp.606 Schueller, S. M., Munoz, R. F., & Mohr, D. C. (2013).
Realizing the potential and behavioral intervention technologies.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 478--​483. Schueller, S.
M., Washburn, J. J., & Price, M. (2016). Exploring Mental Health
Providers' Interest in Using Web and Mobile-​Based Tools in their
Practices. Internet interventions, 4(2), 145-​151. Schueller, S. M.,
Tomasino, K. N., & Mohr, D. C. (2017). Integrating human support into
behavioral intervention technologies: The efficiency model of support.
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 24, 27--​45. doi:
10.1111/​cpsp.12173 Scogin, F., Floyd, M., Jamison, C., Ackerson, J.,
Landreville, P., & Bissonnete, L. (1996). Negative outcomes: What is the
evidence on self-​ administered treatments? Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 64, 1086--​ 1089. doi: 10.1037/​0022-​006X.64.5.1086
Scogin, F. R. (Ed.). (2003). Special section: The status of
self-​administered treatments. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 59,
247--​349. Seligman, M. E. P. (1995). The effectiveness of psychotherapy:
The Consumer Report study. American Psychologist, 50, 965--​974. doi:
10.1037/​0003-​066X.50.12.965 Simmons, K., Garcia, E., Howell, M. K., &
Leong, S. (2016). Personalizing, delivering and monitoring behavioral
health interventions: An annotated bibliography of the best available
apps. The Register Report, 47--​54. https://
www.findapsychologist.org/personalizing-

delivering-and-monitoring-behavioral-healthinterventions-an-annotated-bibliography-ofthe-best-available-apps-by-kanesha-simmonseleyna-garcia-mary-katherine-howell-ms-an/
Sisson, R. W., & Mallams, J. H. (1981). The use of systematic
encouragement and community access procedures to increase attendance at
Alcoholics Anonymous and Al-​Anon meetings. American Journal of Drug and
Alcohol Abuse, 8, 371--​376. doi: 10.3109/​00952998109009560 Swindle, R.,
Heller, K., Pescosolido, B., & Kikuzawa, S. (2000). Responses to nervous
breakdowns in America over a 40-​ year period. American Psychologist, 55,
740--​ 749. doi: 10.1037/​ 0003-​066X.55.7.740 Tonigan, J. S., Toscoova,
R., & Miller, W. R. (1995). Meta-​ analysis of the literature on
Alcoholics Anonymous: Sample and study characteristics moderate
findings. Journal of Studies on Alcohol, 57, 65--​72. doi:
10.15288/​jsa.1996.57.65 van Lankveld, J. J. D. M. (1998). Bibliotherapy
in the treatment of sexual dysfunctions: A meta-​ analysis. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 66, 702--​ 708. doi: 10.1037/​
0022-​006X.66.4.702 Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. (2015). The great
psychotherapy debate (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Warmerdam,
L., Van Straten, A., Twisk, J., & Cuijpers, P. (2013). Predicting
outcome of Internet-​ based treatment for depressive symptoms.
Psychotherapy Research, 23, 559--​ 567. doi: 10.1080/​10503307.2013.807377
Watkins, P. L., & Clum, G. A. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of self-​ help
therapies. New York: Routledge. Wedding, D., & Niemiec, R. M. (2014).
Movies & mental illness: Using films to understand psychopathology (4th
ed.). Gottingen, Germany: Hogrefe. Winzelberg, A., & Humphreys, K.
(1999). Should patients' religious beliefs and practices influence
clinicians' referral to 12-​step self-​help groups? Evidence from a study
of 3,018 male substance abuse patients. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, 67, 790--​794.

PART IV

Training, Research, International, and Future Directions

18 Training and Supervision in Psychotherapy Integration JOHN C.
NORCROSS AND MARCELLA FINNERTY

Once upon a time, psychotherapists were trained exclusively in a single
theoretical orientation and in the individual therapy tradition. The
ideological singularity of training did not always result in clinical
competence but did reduce clinical complexity and theoretical confusion
(Schultz-​ Ross, 1995). But, over time, psychotherapists began to
recognize that their orientations were theoretically incomplete and
clinically inadequate for the variety of patients, contexts, and
problems they confronted in practice. They began receiving training in
several theoretical orientations---​or at least were exposed to multiple
theories---​and in diverse therapy formats, such as individual, couple,
family, and group. The gradual evolution of psychotherapy training
toward integration has proven a mixed blessing. On the one hand, the
movement

addresses the daily needs of clinical practice, satisfies the
intellectual quest for an informed pluralism, and responds to the
growing research evidence that different patients prosper from different
treatments, formats, and relationships. On the other hand, integrative
training increases the student press to obtain clinical competence in
multiple methods and formats and, in addition, challenges the faculty to
create a coordinated training enterprise. Not only must the conventional
difficulties in producing competent clinicians be resolved, but
integrative training must also assist its students in acquiring mastery
of multiple treatments and then in tailoring their therapeutic approach
to fit individual patients. In this chapter, we begin by introducing
what is, in our view, an ideal training sequence for psychotherapy
integration. We then consider

377

378

Future Directions

training in light of the four principal routes of
integration---​technical eclecticism, theoretical integration, common
factors, and assimilative integration---​as their training objectives and
sequence will vary somewhat. Next, we address questions regarding the
centrality of personal therapy and the necessity of research training in
the preparation of integrative therapists. We review integrative
supervision, specifically seven of its distinctive practices. We
conclude with a discussion of organizational strategies for promoting
psychotherapy integration and offer future directions for integrative
training. A FEW WORDS ON WORDS Before proceeding to the chapter proper,
a few words on our terminology. The term "training" can denote a
mechanistic and impersonal pursuit, such as training seals to clap their
flippers or training rats to run a maze (Bugental, 1987; Rønnestad &
Skovholt, 2012). We would prefer to retitle psychotherapy training
something along the lines of "cultivating psychotherapists" or
"developing psychotherapists." But precedent is against us; when we talk
about the development of a psychotherapist, many of our colleagues and
students look at us quizzically. Thus, we will concede to linguistic
preference and precedent in using the conventional "training" throughout
this chapter, but we implore readers to interpret the term in a broader
and more human meaning. We try to prepare graduates who are both
competent psychotherapists and better functioning people. A second bit
of linguistic ambiguity concerns the term "integrative training" (and
"integrative supervision"). Our use deliberatively denotes two meanings:
training/​supervision itself that integrates methods, modalities, and
mechanisms associated with diverse theoretical orientations, and
psychotherapy training/​supervision conducted from an integrative
approach. At times, this ambiguity proves confusing, but we believe it
serves the higher purpose of underscoring the inherent parallel
processes of integrative education. The integrative teacher remains
theoretically flexible in systematically

tailoring the education to the individual trainee, just as that trainee
simultaneously adapts psychotherapy to the individual client and
singular context. In this respect, the educational medium becomes much
of the message (Norcross & Popple, 2017). INTEGRATIVE TRAINING
Psychotherapy students and practitioners are confronted with a blizzard
of theories and a fragmented training system. With so many therapy
systems claiming success, which theories should be studied, taught, or
integrated (Prochaska & Norcross, 2018)? More specifically,
psychotherapy trainers are immediately confronted with a crucial
decision regarding their training objectives. The major choice is
whether the program's objective will be to train students to competence
in a single psychotherapy system and subsequent referral of other
clients to more specialized treatments, or whether its declared mission
will be for their students to accommodate most of these patients
themselves by virtue of the students' competence in an integrative
approach to psychotherapy. In this section, we present consensual
training models for teaching both differential referral and
psychotherapy integration. The introduction and implementation of these
models into any program will require substantive content revisions, as
well as a clinical sensitivity to the process of successful
organizational change, as described later in this chapter. Along the
way, we review several debates on the best practices in integrative
training. Differential Referrals Each of the single-​school orientations
repre­ sents a feasible structure for practice, and essential work is
being conducted under the patronage of "purist" approaches. Many
practitioners find meaning and success, over their professional careers,
with their chosen orientation (McLeod, 2017). A single theory offers
valuable assistance in case conceptualization and treatment planning
(Boswell et al., , 2009).

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

379

Psychotherapists can indeed function ef- were trained, this information
cannot readily fectively within a single theoretical system, generalize
from the training location. Instead of although they are rarely the best
judge of teaching specific resources, therefore, training their own
performance (Walfish et al., 2012). programs are well advised to ensure
that students Providing they have the ethics and ability to dis- know
how to locate resources in any commucriminate which patients can benefit
from their nity (Norcross, Beutler, & Clarkin, 1990). preferred system
and which cannot, referral of Programs can provide several experiences
the latter patients can then systematically be to ensure students'
ability to develop treatment made to clinicians competent to offer the
indi- and community knowledge. First, specific incated treatment.
struction and course work can emphasize In the words of Howard and
colleagues the value of community services, self-​help re(1987, p. 415):
"Without a therapist's will- sources, and networks of private
practitioners. ingness and ability to engage in a range of Second,
students routinely can be provided behaviors and to employ a range of
therapeutic with names and web addresses of national modalities, the
therapist, by intent or default, directories and referral services.
Third, visits will have to limit his or her practice to clients to
community mental health centers, family who fit the specific range of
behaviors he or counseling agencies, child protective services, she has
to offer." The primary problem is not and substance abuse programs,
among others, from narrow-​gauge therapists per se, but from can give a
sampling of the resources available. therapists who impose that
narrowness on their Fourth, trainees can be assigned the task of
patients (Miller et al., 2013; Stricker, 1988). locating treatment
resources and preparing an The two essential tasks in differential
referral integrated treatment plan for an actual patient are to train
students to recognize the respec- presented in either case conference or
a class tive contraindications of their single psycho- vignette.
Examples can be organized around therapy system and to educate them in
making the client's disorder, treatment goals, stage informed referral
decisions. Many evidence-​ of change, therapy preferences, and the like.
based studies are now available by which to rec- Finally, trainees
should obtain extensive expeognize the indications and contraindications
of rience in evaluating a range of patients under particular therapies
and formats (e.g., Aponte close supervision in differential referral and
& Kissil, 2014; Beutler & Harwood, 2000; treatment assignment. These
experiences are Fernandez-​ Alvarez et al., 2016; Halvorsen most easily
obtained in large health centers that et al., 2016; Prochaska &
Norcross, 2018; Roth offer a variety of treatment programs and spe&
Fonagy, 1996), and the failure to make use of cialty clinics. In such a
setting, too, the integrasuch information can no longer be construed
tion of research and practice can be facilitated primarily as lacunae in
the psychotherapy out- and reinforced (Castonguay et al., Chapter 20,
come literature. On the contrary, difficulties in this volume; Dyason et
al., 2018; Jarmon & appreciating the limitations of one's treasured
Halgin, 1987; Miller et al., 2013). proficiencies now prove largely
emotional Many colleagues in the United States comand organizational,
not intellectual. Helping plain that training in differential referral
is single-​system advocates to relinquish patients dated, that we have
progressed well beyond refor whom another approach is better suited will
ferral. We agree that indeed proves the case for entail attention to
both the prescriptions of the most doctoral programs in the United
States, research evidence and the limitations of their but it does not
address the reality of smaller theoretical commitments. programs and
other countries where psychoIn order to make differential referrals,
therapy integration is not yet firmly established. clinicians will need
knowledge of available Some training programs may be too brief, or
community and treatment resources. Because students too inexperienced,
or faculty too dimany students may ultimately practice in ge- vided to
tackle the integrative challenge. We ographic locations different from
where they hope that, in the next volume of this book, the

380

Future Directions

section on training in differential referral can be jettisoned
permanently. Integrative Psychotherapy Once the program faculty decide
to implement training in integrative psychotherapy, they confront a
series of choices or debates on how best to approach such
education---​what theories or principles should be taught and when
integration should be introduced to the student. Some educators believe
that students should be trained integratively from the outset (e.g.,
Eubanks-​Carter et al., 2005) as integrative pedagogy can promote the
critical skills for effective practice: flexibility, open-​ mindedness,
creativity, awareness of limitations, and resourcefulness to cope with
future challenges. Such training would enable students to avoid the
difficulties of trying to unlearn years of work and practice within one
orientation (Norcross, 2011). In addition, when therapists commit early
to one theory, numerous institutions and organizations reinforce
maintaining a purist approach, which reaffirms a single-​school mindset
(Wachtel, 1977). An early commitment to a single theory can impede the
consideration of other therapeutic possibilities. Other educators (e.g.,
Castonguay, 2006) contend that we can only integrate what we know well,
so trainees should master one approach before they begin to practice
integration. Inexperienced students may become anxious and confused by
the daunting integrative goal; a single system can serve as a secure
base, at least initially (Norcross & Goldfried, 2005). Neophyte
therapists' needs for closure and resolution of conflict frequently mean
that they cannot value the complexities and ambiguities of tensions
between theories (Orlinsky & Rønnestad, 2005; Rønnestad & Skovholt,
2012). Surveys indicate that training directors are committed to
psychotherapy integration but disagree on the routes toward it.
Approximately 80--​90% of directors of counseling psychology programs and
internship programs agree that knowing one therapeutic model is not
sufficient for the treatment of a diversity of problems

and populations; instead, training in a variety of models is needed.
However, their views of the optimal integrative training process differ:
about one-​ third believe that students should be trained first to be
proficient in one therapeutic model, about half believe that students
should be trained minimally competent in a variety of models, and the
remainder believe that students should be trained in a specific
integrative model from the outset (Lampropoulos & Dixon, 2007). Still
other educators---​such as the authors of this chapter---​ combine both
positions by introducing integration at the outset but postponing
intense integrative training until later in the training sequence. We
believe cumulative experience supports this practice, but we freely
admit that there is insufficient research on integrative training to
render any definitive judgment (Hill & Knox, 2013). What content to
teach in an integrative program is yet another choice point for
professional debate. We will cover this matter in more detail in the
next section, but for now, we note that some educators prefer to teach
singular models of therapy (e.g., psychodynamic, cognitive-​ behavioral,
experiential), some prefer to teach particular methods or techniques
independent of their theoretical heritage, and still others prefer to
teach overarching common factors or change principles. The theories and
their associated techniques comprise the basic building blocks of
integrative psychotherapy, but there is no consensus on which
combination of these foundational elements should be taught. As
illustrated in the contents of this Handbook, integrative therapies
still retain distinctive favorites in which theories are represented and
which are largely ignored. The recognition that, at this point, there is
no single best way to teach integration brings both liberation and
apprehension, which is precisely the conflict that our students and
colleagues face every day. It also means that educators are continually
attempting to balance the tensions between different training approaches
and disparate theoretical orientations. This entails dealing with a
tremendous volume of literature and bringing educators to the core in
the

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

ongoing debates (Gilbert & Orlans, 2011). Does instruction and practice
in several theoretical approaches from the beginning create greater
fluency in integration? Or is it better to start with one or two
approaches, which ultimately leaves the demanding task of integration to
the individual student? At what point should students be exposed to
change principles or processes common to all therapies? The
responsibility for integration is an ongoing test faced by all
practitioners, no matter what their training. Ultimately, mental health
professionals need to be competent and comfortable with a variety of
methods to face the challenges and privileges that their profession
bestows. AN IDEAL TRAINING SEQUENCE Here we advance an integrative
training sequence encompassing an interlocking sequence of experiences
that are predicated on the crucial therapist-​ mediated determinants of
psychotherapy outcome. This five-​step sequence draws heavily from the
consensus of several journal sections on training integrative
psychotherapists (Beutler et al., 1987; Castonguay, 2000a; Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, June 2017; Norcross & Goldfried, 2005;
Norcross et al., 1986; The Integrative Therapist, October 2017). The
first step entails training in fundamental relationship and
communication skills, such as active listening, nonverbal communication,
empathy, collaboration, positive regard, feedback, and respect for
patient problems. The relationship elements that are associated with and
predictive of psychotherapy success are increasingly clear (Hill, 2014;
Norcross & Lambert, 2019). Acquisition of these generic interpersonal
skills can follow one of the systematic models that have demonstrated
significant training effects compared to controls or less specific
models (see Hill & Knox, 2013, for reviews). In general, the most
efficient way of maximizing learning of facilitative psychotherapy
skills is to structure their acquisition involving instruction,
demonstration

381

(modeling), practice, evaluation (feedback), and more practice. These
interpersonal skills are crucial to the establishment, repair, and
maintenance of the therapeutic alliance. Students would be retained in
this foundation course until a predefined level of competence is
achieved in these skills. Criterion-​referenced situational tests, expert
ratings, and demonstration experiments can be used to confirm such
competence. The point is that students should not be automatically moved
forward in the curriculum simply because they have completed a course on
the psychotherapy relationship; they should be advanced because they
have demonstrated minimal competence in facilitative interpersonal
skills (Anderson et al., 2016). The second interlocking step consists of
an exploration of various systems of psychotherapy. At a minimum, the
courses would examine psychoanalytic, humanistic-​ existential,
cognitive-​behavioral, interpersonal-​systems, constructivist, and
multicultural theories. Students would be exposed to all approaches with
minimal judgment being made as to their relative contributions to truth.
At the outset, multiple systems of psychotherapy would be presented
critically, but within a paradigm of comparison and integration.
Psychotherapy systems would be introduced as tentative and explanatory
notions, varying in goals and methodology. It is possible to synthesize
training in a specific theoretical model while also cultivating an
integrative mindset (Sotskova & Dossett, 2017). Integrative frameworks
and informed pluralism would thus be introduced at the beginning of
training (Halgin, 1985b), but a formal course on integration would occur
later in the sequence. In our experience, courses and textbooks that
only present "one theory a week" are inadequate for this purpose.
Rather, the psychotherapy systems need to be presented and, at the end
of the course, compared and integrated in a clinically meaningful manner
(Prochaska & Norcross, 2018). At this point, students would be
encouraged to tentatively adopt a theoretical orientation or two that
proves most harmonious with their personal values and clinical
preferences.

382

Future Directions

The third step in the training sequence entails a series of practica,
accompanied by clinical supervision and sometimes coursework. Neophyte
psychotherapists would be expected to become competent in the use of at
least two psychotherapy systems that vary in treatment objectives and
change processes. In each case, completion of the practicum would depend
on specific criteria to ensure acquisition of the skills associated with
a given system. Relevant psychotherapy handbooks, treatment manuals, and
videotapes can outline criteria for implementing interventions.
Following satisfactory completion of these competency-​based experiences,
the fourth step involves the integration of disparate models and
methods. Many educators believe that the sophisticated adoption of an
integrative perspective occurs after learning specific therapy systems
and techniques. The formal course on psychotherapy integration would
provide a decisional model for selecting the methods, formats, and
relationships from various therapeutic orientations to be applied in
given circumstances and with given clients. Several textbooks and sample
syllabi for such integrative courses are now available for psychology,
psychiatry, counseling, and social work programs (e.g.,
www.sepiweb.org/​page/​teach\_​train). This course bears the program's
responsibility for providing "a system of analysis or a framework by
which a multiplicity of theories and methods could be organized into an
integrated understanding" (Reisman, 1975, p. 191). Finally, and
concomitantly, an intensive practicum experience, such as an internship
or residency, with a wide variety of patients would allow early-​career
therapists to practice integration and to evaluate their clinical
skills. Theoretical knowledge of integration is sorely incomplete
without supervised experience in applying it to the real world of
patients. In fact, the principal complaint of psychotherapists following
graduation is inadequate clinical experience (Bhola & Raguram, 2016;
Robertson, 1995). Throughout these clinical experiences, students will
be trained in deliberate practice and reflective practice. The former
derives from

the science of expertise and involves repeatedly practicing specific
skills with expert feedback (similar to methods used in other
performance activities, such as a musician, surgeon, or pilot). It shows
some early promise of improving client outcomes and enhancing therapist
performance (Chow et al., 2015; Rousmaniere et al., 2017). The latter
refers to the examination of one's own covert and overt experiences to
enhance learning and professional development (Stedmon & Dallos, 2009).
A fundamental assumption to both forms of practice is that experience
alone is insufficient to facilitate improvement; rather, focused
contemplation and supervised practice prove necessary. That's what
ideally transpires in supervision. These training experiences are but
the beginning steps in the development of competent integrative
psychotherapists; genuine education continues far after the internship
or residency. Students would be encouraged---​nay, expected---​ to go
forth to receive additional training in specialized methods and
preferred populations. "Deep structure" integration will take
considerable time and probably come about only after years of clinical
experience (Messer, 1992). Expert psychotherapists represent their
domain on a semantically and conceptually deeper level than novices.
Conceptual learning about psychotherapy integration is probably
necessary to achieve deep structure integration, but it is not
sufficient. For therapists to integrate at a deeper level requires that
they first understand and integrate within each individual therapy and,
only then, across therapies. Additional psychotherapy experience and
disciplined reflection on that experience is needed to attain a mature
and abiding synthesis. Psychotherapy integration, in other words, may
take two broad forms that are differentially accessible to novice versus
expert therapists (Schacht, 1991). The first form, accessible to
neophytes, emphasizes conceptual products that enter the educational
arena as content additions to the curriculum. The second form of
integration, largely limited to expert therapists, emphasizes a special
mode of thinking. This form enters the educational

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

arena only indirectly through accumulated clinical experiences that
promote fluent performance and creative metacognitive skills. SPECIFIC
TRAINING MODELS Since the second edition of this Handbook (Norcross &
Goldfried, 2005), we have secured considerably more experience and a bit
more research to inform the ingredients of integrative training. In
particular, we and others have learned that the training sequence and
objectives are heavily influenced by the specific type of, or path
toward, psychotherapy integration. Proponents of technical eclecticism,
theoretical integration, assimilative integration, and common factors
(see Chapter 1 of this volume for more detailed definitions) all have
definite preferences in how and when the ideal training occurs. Four
Paths Technical eclectics seek to improve our ability to select the best
treatment for the person and the problem through use of multiple
techniques. Eclecticism focuses on predicting for whom particular
methods will work: the foundation is actuarial rather than theoretical.
As such, the eclectics rely on accumulating research evidence and the
needs of individual patients to make systematic treatment selections.
The training emphasis is placed squarely on acquiring competence in
multiple methods and formats, as opposed to pledging allegiance to
theories, and pragmatically blending these methods and formats to suit
the given situation. Technical eclectics are disinclined toward grand
unifying theories and more interested in a pragmatic blending of
methods. They generally endorse teaching psychotherapy integration from
the very beginning of training. Gradually building toward integration in
mid-​ career is considered too tentative and theoretical. And, for some
therapists, learning integration after working for years in a specific
orientation may prove too difficult. Instead, the eclectic mandate is to
teach multiple therapy methods and

383

treatment selection heuristics early on so that clients receive the
optimal match of treatment, format, and relationship. Eclectics readily
acknowledge the limitations associated with faculty composition and
disposition. Graduate programs will range from those in which the
faculty embrace disparate theories and goals to programs in which there
is coordination of the training process and faculty consensus about an
integrative model (Norcross & Beutler, 2000). It will take considerable
time for many senior faculty to unlearn their own allegiance to a
single, pure-​ form system of conducting (and teaching) psychotherapy.
Yet, many new clinical faculty have been trained in, or at least
favorably exposed to, an integrative perspective. Theoretical
integrationists blend two or more therapies in the hope that the result
will be better than the constituent therapies alone. As the name
implies, there is an emphasis on integrating the underlying theories of
psychotherapy along with the integration of techniques from each. Some
proponents highlight the need for an emergent meta-​theory, more than the
sum of its parts, which will bring elements from many theories into a
coherent and comprehensive approach to psychotherapy. As such, the
training focuses on the theoretical systems and building bridges between
the chasms that separate them. Theoretical integration proves the most
ambitious and probably the most controversial. No theory, integrative or
otherwise, can seamlessly combine all potential approaches, so most
theoretical integrations attempt to blend or bridge two or three
theories, such as psychoanalytic and cognitive. Although theoretical
integration brings together certain ideas, it simultaneously rejects
others, arriving at different endpoints and potentially fragments the
field further (McLeod, 2013). As a result, theoretical integration is
arguably the most difficult of the paths to master, with technical
eclecticism considered a more pragmatic and flexible route to
integration. Assimilative integrationists similarly embrace synthesis,
but in a more tentative manner. The approach entails a firm grounding in
one system of psychotherapy

384

Future Directions

with a willingness to selectively incorporate (assimilate) practices and
views from other systems (Messer, 2012). The imported practice is
influenced by the context into which it is absorbed. As such, the
training is primarily in a single system of psychotherapy with an
understanding that the clinicians will gradually incorporate techniques
from other systems. The assimilative integrationists frequently argue
that, in early training, students need a single theoretical system for
structure, support, and direction. Trainees internalize the theory and
the contributions of their supervisors. To be sure, educators may
introduce the eventual goal of integration, but neophyte
psychotherapists focus on a manageable amount of clinical skills and
delimit their range of experiences. Otherwise, they risk being
overwhelmed by the morass of choices and the hundreds of therapeutic
methods. Later, students are expected to move in an integrative fashion,
but from a position of single-​system comfort and strength. Such
assimilation is probably an inevitable part of the development of
psychotherapists. New ideas and methods are picked up, tried, and
occasionally incorporated into the repertoire of any clinician. But a
technique cannot stand alone and separate from the therapy within which
it is practised (Messer, 2012). This approach falls within a
"pluralistic tradition, which holds that one theory or model can never
pre-​empt or preclude an alternate organisation of the evidence"
(Norcross & Goldfried, 2005, p. 2). Those who advocate common factors or
processes seek to determine the core ingredients that different
therapies share in common, with the eventual goal of creating more
parsimonious and efficacious treatments based on those commonalities.
Psychotherapies share important similarities, notably in the curative
therapeutic relationship, responsible for therapeutic outcomes (Duncan
et al., 2010). These potent commonalities include establishing a
positive alliance, creating positive patient expectations, mobilizing
client's resources, and helping patients acquire new skills (Wampold &
Imel, 2015).

As such, the training focuses on the acquisition of pan-​theoretical
skills that research has found to account for much of psychotherapy
success. Castonguay (2000b), for example, outlines a psychotherapy
training driven by a common factors strategy. He recommends training
students in "pure-​form" therapies and, using general principles of
change, expecting them to integrate contributions of the different
orientations in their clinical work. Other educators prefer to educate
students in common change processes or principles. Eubanks and Goldfried
(Chapter 4, this volume), for example, teach students five change
principles that are common across orientations and are supported by
outcome research: fostering the patient's hope, positive expectations
and motivation, facilitating the therapeutic alliance, increasing the
patient's awareness and insight, encouraging corrective experiences, and
emphasizing ongoing reality testing. Focusing on these principles, their
students have the flexibility to select a variety of techniques
responsive to the client's individual needs and preferences Prochaska
and DiClemente (Chapter 8, this volume), for another example, train
students in 10 processes that they believe capture the essence of
patient change in psychotherapy. Hybrid Paths Of course, psychotherapy
training is not restricted to any single path or type of integration,
and most programs appear to embrace several of them concurrently.
Systematic treatment selection (STS; Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this
volume), to take one prominent example, combines training in change
principles of psychotherapy (common factors) with training in a menu of
particular techniques (technical eclecticism) to implement those
principles. To our knowledge, STS is the only integrative training to
show in a quasi-​ randomized trial that its training and supervision
leads to better patient outcomes among its trainees than supervision as
usual (Holt, Beutler, Kimpara, et al., 2015; Stein et al., 2017).

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

Following training in core relationship skills and courses in
psychotherapy systems, STS training covers eight change principles over
a 10-​week period when a student begins supervised psychotherapy.
Training in each pan-​ theoretical principle begins with a lecture and
video demonstration, and then the student is introduced to a cloud-​based
assessment procedure on that principle. As an example, patients high in
reactance (resistant to being told what to do) benefit more from less
directive psychotherapies, and patients low in reactance benefit more
from more directive methods. Again, with video demonstrations and
lectures, the student is taught the difference between high-​and
low-​directive treatments. In the eclectic tradition, students can select
which particular methods to use as long as they remain consistent with
the underlying evidence-​ based change principle. These methods and
treatments are practiced with one or more patients in the student's
caseload, while the student is supervised and given feedback to let him
or her know his or her proficiency with each type of treatment. The
supervisor sets goals to help each student to improve. When the student
is deemed proficient by the supervisor, the student performs an intake
on a new case and uses the assessment and treatment procedures for
implementing that change principle. Pluralistic training, to take
another prominent exception, blends the technical eclectic (use the
method that works), theoretical integrative (use a combination of
theories), and common factors (use powerful pan-​theoretical principles)
pathways. Adopting a pluralistic approach enables students and
supervisors to use a variety of theories without the need to reconcile
differences (O'Hara & Schofield, 2008). Training pluralistically
emphasizes the collaborative clinician--​client relationship and
privileges the client as an expert on his or her own life. It is
postmodernist insofar as truth is seen as constructed more so than
discovered: "any substantial question admits of a variety of plausible
but mutually conflicting responses" (Cooper & McLeod, 2011, p. 137).
Much of graduate training, especially in Europe, seems to follow the
pluralistic route. Integration is considered

385

an evolving, processual activity, as well as an implementation of
specific integrative models (Oddli & McLeod, 2017). An Irish Example
IICP College in Dublin, Ireland, operates a suite of integrative
psychotherapy programs spanning 6 years that incorporates threads from
theoretical integration, technical eclecticism, common factors, and
assimilative integrative approaches within a pluralistic framework. The
programs hold both academic validation (from the Statutory Agency,
Quality and Qualifications Ireland) and professional accreditation from
the Irish Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy. At the end of
year 4, students are awarded an honors undergraduate degree in
psychotherapy. The degree, together with a further 450 hours of
supervised clinical practice, is a pathway for professional
accreditation in Ireland. Trainees develop a critical awareness of a
variety of therapeutic approaches within the three pillars of education:
theory, skills, and personal development. Students gain considerable
knowledge and competencies through teaching and assessment strategies
such as essay writing, faculty modeling, and reflecting (under
supervision) on their own audio-​and videotaped practice as novice
therapists. Students are encouraged to be critically reflective
practitioners and to evaluate the theories and clinical cases presented
to and by them. Pluralism runs throughout the suite of programs with a
more in-​depth focus during the 2-​year master's program. At the
postgraduate stage, there is a central focus on advanced research
methods, which helps students appreciate the philosophical foundations
for clinical and research practice. It affords students a practical
hands-​on introduction to psychotherapy research and an opportunity to
develop the core clinical, theoretical, and research competencies.
Students learn and reflect on many psychotherapy models as opposed to
one "true" model. In the research methods modules, students encounter
and engage with different

386

Future Directions

approaches to psychotherapy research. In contrast to a monist approach,
the contemporary perspectives module introduces students a multiplicity
of models for working with clients, such as mindfulness therapies,
neuroscience, and trauma work. The inputs from psychology, sociology,
neuroscience, mindfulness, philosophy, research, and psychotherapy
itself speak to the overall pluralistic nature of the training. As in
many integrative programs, IICP students learn all four routes to
psychotherapy integration within a pluralistic frame. In reality, the
four paths all prove variations on the integrative theme. They overlap
considerably in how they educate students, with the central differences
being in the timing and level of integration. Moderating Expectations
The excitement engendered by integrative training can give rise at times
to grandiose plans and overly optimistic predictions. We ourselves have
been guilty of such unfettered optimism at times, and we hasten to
correct any illusion that competency-​ based training in psychotherapy
integration will be easily or instantly attained. At the risk of
fostering the opposite reaction---​pessimism or apathy---​we will consider
several reasons to moderate expectations regarding integrative prospects
in training. These considerations, it should be emphasized, apply with
equal cogency to conventional psychotherapy training and not uniquely to
integrative training. To begin with, explicit training in psychotherapy
has a relatively brief history, and research on training for
psychotherapy has a briefer history still. In early critiques of
training studies (e.g., Alberts & Edelstein, 1990; Ford, 1979),
reviewers discovered that the interventions were poorly described, the
dependent variables were not well-​validated, typical client samples were
composed of undergraduates, and the skills imparted were simple and
discrete. Although progress is certainly afoot (Hill & Knox, 2013), most
studies on psychotherapy training have progressed little in
methodological sophistication or clinical relevance. The unhappy

truth is that professional reputations are rarely made in clinical
training and supervision; prestige and funding are accorded to
developing psychotherapies, not teaching them. If current training
programs do relatively little to ensure competence in a single
psychotherapy, how can competency be ensured if we attempt to teach
practitioners several psychotherapies or an integrative model? Then
there is the challenge of novelty---​ integrative training is
unprecedented in the history of psychotherapy. During the 1980s and
1990s, when the integrative movement was emerging, educators faced the
challenge of trying to formulate integrative training curricula without
the benefit of learning such approaches in a formal context themselves.
As Robertson (1986, p. 416) put it: "Quite frankly, many of us who are
trainers teach students pretty much the way we were trained, and most of
us were not trained to be eclectic therapists." In recent years, the
situation has improved as graduate and postgraduate programs have
instituted more formalized integrative coursework and practica. However,
most of those who teach and supervise psychotherapy integration did not
have such experiences themselves. As with psychotherapy itself, it is
increasingly difficult to speak of psychotherapy training without
reference to its demonstrated effectiveness. Although many descriptions
of integrative training programs have appeared in the literature,
empirical evaluations have not (for exceptions, see Lecompte et al.,
1993; Stein et al., 2017). The same can be said for virtually all
programs adhering to a single theoretical tradition, but this similarity
is hardly redeeming. The competence of our graduates and, indeed, the
adequacy of our clinical training are typically assumed rather than
verified (Stevenson & Norcross, 1987). Given questions about the
feasibility of training graduate students to competencies in multiple
systems of psychotherapy in just a few years, the need for rigorous
evaluation of training in psychotherapy integration is particularly
urgent. An indisputable disadvantage of multiple competences is that
they necessitate longer and more comprehensive

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

training than a single competency. Integrative psychotherapists, similar
to bilingual children and switch hitters in baseball, may be delayed
initially in the acquisition of skills or in the attainment of several
proficiencies. Even if an integrative training program is carefully
implemented and thoroughly evaluated, the effects of the training would
probably be complex and idiosyncratic. The findings of the Vanderbilt II
project, one of the most carefully designed psychotherapy training
ventures, bear this out (Henry & Strupp, 1991). This project was
designed to investigate the manner in which specialized training might
improve the therapeutic process and outcome of time-​ limited dynamic
psychotherapy. The effects of training were mixed, involving potentially
positive and negative effects. No linear relationship was found between
technical adherence and psychotherapy outcome, although the training was
successful in imparting adherence to a manualized form of therapy. The
training altered some specific and general operations associated with
improving the quality of dynamic therapy, but there was evidence that
some elements not directly related to the imparted techniques were also
improved after training. The criteria for effective training are
multitudinous and individualized, no less so than possible indications
of effective psychotherapy. The introduction of an integrative
perspective does nothing to reduce the subtle and complex effects of
training and probably enlarges the task of ensuring competence and
measuring training outcome. We are aficionados of integrative training
but realistic about the probable challenges. PERSONAL THERAPY AND
RESEARCH TRAINING Contributors to earlier editions of this Handbook
addressed questions concerning the centrality of personal therapy and
the necessity of research training in the preparation of integrative
therapists. In this section, we summarize their responses on these
contentious matters and add

387

our own views on the basis of 60-​plus collective years of psychotherapy
training. With respect to personal therapy, the contributors agreed that
its importance as a prerequisite for clinical work depends on the
student's level of psychological functioning and the trainer's own
experience with personal therapy. If a student's personal problems
interfere with the successful implementation of psychotherapy, then all
contributors concurred that it is necessary to remedy the situation,
probably including personal therapy. In the United Kingdom, a certain
number of hours of personal psychotherapy or personal development
activities is required for professional certification. This is rarely
the case for graduate mental health programs in the United States
outside of psychoanalytic institutes. We also sensed a marked hesitancy
to endorse mandatory personal psychotherapy for all students, arising in
part from two cardinal integrative principles. First, the research
evidence is inconclusive on the ability of personal therapy to enhance
clinical effectiveness (Geller, Norcross, & Orlinsky, 2005), and
committed integrative clinicians are reluctant to oblige students to an
activity with unproven efficacy. Second, the integrative maxim of
matching the treatment to the unique needs of the student/​client would
be violated by insisting on a single modality for diverse students.
Instead, a variety of individually tailored personal development and
other life-​enhancing activities are endorsed. In both this Handbook and
in research studies, the valence accorded to personal therapy varies as
a function of whether or not the psychotherapist has undergone personal
treatment him-​or herself. In one representative study (Bike, Norcross, &
Schatz, 2009), only 5% of mental health professionals who received
personal therapy thought it was unimportant as a prerequisite for
clinical practice compared to 57% of those who had not received it.
Since approximately 85% have received personal treatment on at least one
occasion (Geller et al., 2005), the vast majority of psychotherapists
whole heartedly endorse it for both training purposes and continuing
development.

388

Future Directions

What might be the benefits of personal treatment for the typical
psychotherapist in general and the integrative therapist in particular?
The literature contains at least six recurring commonalities on how the
therapist's therapy may improve his or her clinical work:

To Yalom (2002), personal psychotherapy is, by far, the most important
part of psychotherapy training. He reviews his own odyssey of personal
therapy during a 45-​year career, emphasizing the diversity of
theoretical orientations he sought. He concludes (pp. 41--​42):

By improving the emotional and mental functioning of the
psychotherapist: It makes the clinician's life less neurotic and more
gratifying in a profession where one's health is an indispensable
foundation. ◆ By providing therapist-​patients with a more complete
understanding of themselves: The therapists will thereby conduct
treatment with clearer perceptions and fewer contaminated reactions. ◆
By alleviating the emotional stresses and burdens inherent in this
"impossible profession": It enables practitioners to deal more
successfully with the special problems imposed by the craft. ◆ By
serving as a profound socialization experience: Personal therapy can
help establish a sense of conviction about the validity of
psychotherapy, demonstrating its transformational power in our own lives
and facilitating the internalization of the healer role. ◆ By placing
therapists in the role of the client: It thus sensitizes us to the
interpersonal reactions and needs of our own clients and increases
respect for our patients' struggles. ◆ By providing a first-​hand,
intensive opportunity to observe clinical methods: The therapist's
therapist models interpersonal and technical skills.

It is important for the young therapist to avoid sectarianism and to
gain an appreciation of the strengths of all the varying therapeutic
approaches. Though students may have to sacrifice the certainty that
accompanies orthodoxy, they obtain something quite precious---​a greater
appreciation of the complexity and uncertainty underlying the
therapeutic enterprise.

◆

In particular, clinicians with integrative leanings will take away
several profound lessons about their future discipline. To wit: they
will probably discern that psychotherapy is rarely "pure-​form" in
practice or outcome, that good practitioners routinely incorporate a
variety of methods traditionally associated with diverse systems, and
that the therapeutic relationship accounts for as much of treatment
outcome as specific techniques (Geller et al., 2005).

Yalom is hardly alone in his experience. Across studies and across
countries, psychotherapists rate their personal therapy or analysis as
the second most important influence on their professional development---​
behind only clinical experience (Orlinsky, Botermans, & Rønnestad,
2001). Given this and the overwhelmingly positive self-​ reported
outcomes of therapists' personal therapy (Orlinsky & Norcross, 2005), we
enthusiastically recommend (but not require) personal treatment for our
trainees. A "good-​ enough" therapist (or multiple therapists) is
necessary for the undertaking, of course. Personal therapy is one
component of ongoing development and continuing education. With respect
to research training, the consensus is that it is a desirable, but not
necessary, ingredient for an effective integrative therapist. None of
the contributors to the earlier edition of this Handbook insisted on its
inclusion in clinical curricula, but several advocated a critical and
searching perspective to the psychotherapy enterprise. A respect for
research assists one to perceive relations between therapeutic
strategies and subsequent changes and to be a thinking therapist.
Lazarus (1992) placed paramount importance on the multimodal therapist
being trained to understand the workings of science, to appreciate the
value of inquiry, and thus to become a critical consumer of research---​
not necessarily a producer of research. We concur wholeheartedly.

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

A scientific orientation, not to be equated with laboratory research,
conveys a mode of thought that transcends the particular brand of
therapy being conducted. It teaches how to be inquisitive and skeptical,
how to gather data rather than opinion, how to analyze those data and
draw inferences from them. These are skills that help organize clinical
knowledge and help students select among the morass of competing therapy
claims (Meltzoff, 1984). Many integrative therapists credit their
research training for fostering the thinking skills and methodological
pluralism that enabled them to proceed toward integration (Goldfried,
2001). Good practice, like good research, depends on systematic
decision-​ making, reasoning from sufficient data, tolerance for
ambiguity, and avoidance of premature assumptions (Faust, 1986; Giller &
Strauss, 1984). Whether or not clinicians ever elect to produce original
research, they must learn to respect the process of knowledge
acquisition, to acquire a way of thinking about therapeutic phenomena,
and to critically read the relevant literature. In short, research
training prepares us to question and evaluate the way psychotherapy (and
psychotherapy training) is conducted. INTEGRATIVE SUPERVISION As
beginners, many psychotherapists seek out a single theory by which they
can define their approach, manage their anxiety, and solidify their
identity. Beginners can feel a naïve security in adhering to the methods
of a single, pure-​form orientation; however, such reassurance is usually
short-​lived as they come to realize the clinical limitations of any
singular approach. In recent years, the lure of evidence-​based
treatments has led many beginners down a path of simplistic hope that
manualized treatments supported by randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
would have all the answers. In time, of course, those who jumped on the
evidence-​based bandwagon quickly realized the limitations of manualized
therapies developed within laboratory settings using research
volunteers. Decades of psychotherapy research have clearly documented
that

389

patient factors and the therapeutic relationship prove most important to
psychotherapy success (Norcross & Lambert, 2019; Wampold & Imel, 2015).
If we manualize anything, it should be flexibility and effectiveness
(Beutler, 1999). Integrative supervisors find ways to help their
supervisees feel comfortable foregoing the pursuit of proficiency in a
single, pure-​form system and instead working toward the development of a
comprehensive, multifaceted system. The following sections cover seven
principles of supervising integrative psychotherapy, culled from both
the research literature and our collective experience. These principles
are probably distinctive of, but certainly not unique to, integrative
supervision (Norcross & Popple, 2017). Understand Trainees' Biases and
Anxieties The word has spread to educators who have not been involved in
the integration movement about the wisdom and the pragmatics of
integrative training. Experienced faculty increasingly appreciate
integrative training, but they may be surprised to encounter some
resistance in their students about such prospects. Even in the earliest
stages of graduate training, students often come with theoretical biases
that limit their openness to integration. This situation may be
compounded by the understandable anxiety experienced by novices who are
overwhelmed by the complexity of psychotherapy and who, therefore, yearn
for a simple, albeit narrow, theoretical model. It can be both
surprising and disconcerting for a supervisor to encounter the
supervisee who professes adherence to a single-​ system model and is
resistant to becoming more broadly trained. In these situations, it may
not be a matter of the trainee holding on to a base of security, but
rather a case of a refusal to consider alternative methods. Some
trainees apparently feel no need to become informed about other models
and methods; they evidence complacency with their treasured singular
psychotherapy. In an early study, Heide and Rosenbaum (1988) surveyed 14
psychotherapists regarding

390

Future Directions

their experiences in using single versus combined theoretical models in
psychotherapy; their results nicely anticipate our trainee's frequent
concerns. When using a single orientation, psychotherapists reported
being significantly more self-​ controlled, conventional, precise, and
reserved. When using an integrative model, they said they were more
imaginative, adventuresome, spontaneous, and changeable. That's also our
take on integrative supervision: more imaginative, adventuresome, and
changeable---​and more effective. But if the clash of theoretical
persuasions rings of adventure, it is also the sound of occasional
disequilibrium. We will phrase five of these sources of disequilibrium
in the way we often hear them: as anxious threats to therapeutic
identity and competence (Norcross, 1990): "But which of these many paths
shall I take at any one point?" Should the student promote action or
explore mental content, challenge or understand irrational cognitions,
work on actual or projected relationships, empathize or redirect during
a session? ◆ "It is just too damn hard!" Students and supervisors alike
complain of additional work and of increased mental effort. ◆ "Oh, I
don't like doing this type of psychotherapy!" Therapists are not as
personally attached or psychologically comfortable with some therapies
as with other therapies, even controlling for competence in them. ◆ "I
am becoming a jack of all trades, master of none." This concerns the
inherent conflict between depth and breadth. ◆ "I am opening myself up
here to chaos! Who knows what can happen?" The ambiguity and uncertainty
of integrative practice can be emotionally taxing even as it is exciting
and spontaneous. ◆

Integrative practice requires a cost-​benefit analysis---​ the
intellectual challenge versus the internal conflicts, the gratifying
openness versus the anxious ambiguity. That's also the reasoning behind
our insistence that integrative

supervision be reserved for trainees already exposed to a range of
theories and techniques, with at least 2 years of clinical experience,
and nascent competence in at least one system of therapy. The
integrative journey is arduous; it is unrealistic to expect beginners to
competently plunge into integrative work early in their development. As
is the case with therapists and their patients, supervisors will find it
easier to reach beginning trainees when they approach their work with an
understanding of the stages of therapist development (Halgin, 1988). In
one widely accepted stage theory (McNeil & Stoltenberg, 2016),
supervisees progress through several stages: stagnation, confusion, and
integration. During the stagnation stage, the beginner is deceived by
the illusion of simplicity in clinical work. The confusion stage
follows, during which the trainee realizes that something is amiss and
solutions seem elusive. It is only later in training that the supervisee
attains a sense of integration during which flexibility, security, and
understanding emerge. Thus, the supervisor who impatiently expects the
trainee to have attained integration early in training is likely to
engender dismay, frustration, and diminished self-​esteem in the trainee.
Research suggests that supervisory styles are differentially effective
for trainees at varying levels of experience. In the initial level,
beginning students are highly motivated and highly dependent on their
supervisors, while in the latter stage, advanced students seek more
sophisticated formulations and are more attuned to individual
differences among clients. One can immediately grasp that integrative
supervision is oriented toward, and indicated for, more advanced
graduate students, as we have previously noted. In this regard,
supervisors can often lose touch with the challenging nature of learning
integration. Some students, when first introduced to multitheoretical
approaches, are frequently puzzled by the mechanics of technique shifts
and are dismayed that their own attempts might prove to be awkward and
disruptive (Wachtel, 1991). Beginners are typically overwhelmed by the
array of possibilities. For example, a novice

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

may be perplexed by whether an interpretation or a directive
intervention is advisable at a given point in a session; confronted with
such an imposing choice, paralysis may set in. When apprised of such a
moment in the therapy, an insensitive supervisor may make a difficult
situation even worse for the trainee who is already feeling miserably
insecure. A comment that reflects impatience or surprise about the
trainee's handling of the therapy is likely to intensify the student's
anxiety instead of fostering some risk-​ taking, which is an
indispensable part of the learning process. Experience provides
clinicians with a special sense of what should be done next in the
therapy; this reflects a complex, recursive decision-​making process that
is informed by dozens, perhaps hundreds, of bits of data related to
client, therapist, and context considerations. Integrate Supervision
Methods Aligned with Multiple Theories Integrative supervision is
necessarily eclectic in therapeutic content and pedagogical method. The
supervisor's work is determined both by the needs of the clients being
discussed and the needs of the trainee, all of whom will call for
different strokes. Thus, one supervision session might entail a
directive/​educative approach in which the trainee learns specific
techniques for the treatment of a focused clinical problem, whereas
another session with the same trainee might involve a predominantly
exploratory approach, due either to the historical roots of the
patient's conflicts or because of the therapist's countertransference
struggles (Halgin & Murphy, 1995). We adhere to the integrative maxim:
It depends. Methodologically, integrative supervision entails a wide
variety of techniques and stances associated with diverse psychotherapy
systems. Structure follows function, but is not limited to it. As the
situation dictates, supervision might involve didactic presentations,
reading assignments, open-​ended discussions, personal modeling,
experiential activities, video review, case examples, and mini-​ case
conferences. Nothing is a priori off the table (except unethical
practices).

391

Importantly, we have moved away from reliance on supervisee's self-​
reports and "reconstructed tales of therapy" (Norcross, 1988) to the use
of videotape and live observation through one-​way mirrors. This
progression has substantially increased the accuracy and completeness of
information about what has ensued in therapy and thereby has enhanced
supervision. Despite its intrusive nature, videotaping provides the best
compromise and has achieved a consensus as the best method for
conducting supervision. The empirical research tends to support review
of videotaped therapy sessions, supervision guidelines encourage it, and
several jurisdictions now mandate a minimum number of observations
(videotaped or live) of supervisee's performance. Supervisees'
evaluations (Allen, Szollos, & Williams, 1986; Nelson, 1978) and
empirical research (e.g., Ellis, 2010) indicate that direct observation
and videotapes are the preferred supervisory methods. Tailor Supervision
to the Individual Supervisee One of the most appealing (and effective)
features of integrative psychotherapy is that an individualized
treatment plan can be tailored to each client. A similar principle holds
true for integrative supervision: an individualized supervision plan can
be formulated for each trainee on the basis of his or her style, stage,
preferences, experience, complexity, and other considerations. Just as
we ask our students to behave integratively and prescriptively in their
clinical work, so, too, should we match our supervision to their unique
needs and clinical strategies. Integrative supervision will obviously
take into account a number of trainee variables. Supervisors will assess
personality characteristics, such as introversion versus extroversion or
need for challenge versus need for support, and develop supervisory
strategies that take these characteristics into account (Lampropoulos,
2002) to help the supervisee develop and discover her own voice.
Although we cannot specify a priori all the possible supervisee

392

Future Directions

variables and permutations of those variables, our supervision
experience and the research literature (e.g., Holloway & Wampold, 1986;
McNeill & Stoltenberg, 2016; Norcross & Halgin, 1997) suggest that we
can improve supervision outcomes by tailoring it to several trainee
characteristics: supervisee preferences, developmental stage, therapy
approach, cognitive style/​reactance level, cultural identities, and
clinical setting. We briefly consider three of these here. Regarding
preferences, we try to elicit supervisees' expressed desires and genuine
needs. And as with patients, we seriously consider supervisees'
expressed desires but are not bound to them. They form the initial basis
for our discussions and eventual supervision contract. Tactful
questioning and sensitive inquiry can shed light on favored cognitive
and interpersonal styles. How do you best tolerate feedback from others?
What was your worst supervision experience like? How do you learn most
effectively about psychotherapy? What sort of supervisory relationship
works well for you? What do you hope to accomplish from our supervision
sessions? Regarding reactance level, supervisees will vary in their
tendency to respond oppositionally to external direction and perceived
authority. Like the high-​reactant client who is resistant to therapist
directiveness, the high-​ reactant supervisee is likely to resist a
directive supervisor. This student is likely to do best with a
reflective and evocative supervisor who focuses on the student's
experience and is less direct in recommending technical procedures
(Tracey, Ellickson, & Sherry, 1989). This student is contrasted to the
low-​reactant student who is likely to respond well to supervisor
directives. How directive should a supervisor be? It depends. It depends
on the supervisee's preferences, cognitive style, reactance level, and
cultural identity. Regarding cultural identities, much in the way that
research has demonstrated that psychological services are enhanced by
fitting them to the client's culture (Bernal & Rodriguez, 2012),
supervision is improved by adapting it to the supervisee's cultures. We

respectfully ask supervisees which of their cultural identities---​and
the intersection of those multiple identities---​are instrumental to
their sense of self and their work in supervision (Inman & Kreider,
2013). By culture, we refer to all salient dimensions of identity, such
as chronological age, disability status, race and ethnicity, sexual
orientation, gender, religion, and indigenous heritage. We agree that
"all supervision is multicultural" (Chopra, 2013) and try to explicitly
adapt integrative supervision to those cultural identities nominated as
salient by the trainee. Supervisees who feel their supervisors are
culturally responsive experience a more productive supervision (Burkard
et al., 2006). Responsively attending to these and other supervisee
characteristics enables integrative supervisors to systematically and
effectively personalize the supervision. The trick is to know which of
these supervisee features are relevant in any given moment and which
others are not of immediate import. The second consideration is not to
artificially force supervisees into any of these cookie cutter molds;
ongoing needs assessments and candid discussions will point to those
that will fit the unique supervisee--​supervisor dyad. Fit Psychotherapy
to the Individual Patient In parallel fashion to their own supervision
experience, supervisees are asked to fit psychotherapy to their
individual patient and unique context. How they do so largely depends on
the integrative therapy being conducted and supervised, but, for the
sake of concrete illustration, here we discuss adapting or fitting to
the patient's transdiagnostic characteristics from the perspective of
systematic treatment selection (Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this
volume) and transtheoretical model (Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8,
this volume). In this tradition, integrative supervisors assist their
trainees in assessing diagnostic and especially transdiagnostic patient
characteristics at the onset of psychotherapy. It is, according to Sir
William Osler (1906; the father of modern

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

medicine), "much more important to know what sort of a patient has a
disease than what sort of disease a patient has." At least seven robust
patient features suggest a particular treatment and relational tack as
judged by meta-​analyses (Norcross & Wampold, 2019): primary diagnosis,
treatment goal, reactance level, stage of change, coping style, culture,
and preferences. In our experience, a 1-​year (50-​session) course of
individual supervision usually manages to cover three or four of these
and assists supervisees' in acquiring comfort and competence in
assessing them in routine practice. The supervisor's task, then, is to
instruct, coach, and practice efficient means to accurately assess these
patient dimensions most relevant to the case at hand and then adapt them
in session. All told, these responsive matches or treatment adaptations
prove far more powerful than the match of Treatment Method A to Disorder
Z. The typical effect sizes for customizing to these transdiagnostic
features are in the .20 to .80 range (Norcross & Wampold, 2019), whereas
the differential effects of a particular treatment method to a
particular disorder fall between 0 (the equivalent outcomes of the Dodo
bird) and at best .20 (Wampold & Imel, 2015). That research evidence is
strong and compelling, but what has not been empirically known was
whether integrative psychotherapy can be learned through integrative
supervision and, thereby, produce increased benefits for patients. A
recent study addressed this issue question directly for one form of
integrative supervision: STS. The controlled study used a matched
clinical trial design with quasi-​random assignment of doctoral-​level
students to supervisors (Holt et al., 2015; Stein et al., 2017). The
student therapists received supervision as usual (SAU) or supervision by
STS-​ trained supervisors (SAS). The matching principles were those that
had earned strong outcome effect sizes in meta-​ analytic reviews
(Norcross & Wampold, 2019; Castonguay, Constantino, & Beutler, 2019), as
reviewed earlier in these pages, such as adapting therapy to patient
reactance level, coping style, preferences, and stages of change. The
patients

393

suffered from depressive, anxiety, and personality disorders, averaging
within the moderate range of severity. Socioeconomic characteristics of
the patients tended toward low income and marginal employment. Student
therapists who received the integrative STS supervision produced
enhanced outcomes over those achieved by students receiving supervision
as usual. At the end of treatment, the pretest/​posttest effect size (d)
of patients seeing SAU trainees was a respectable .72. However, the
effect size achieved by the SAS group was a substantially larger (d)
1.37, with 81% of the patients in this group returning to "normal"
functioning based on final outcome. Thus, STS supervision produced
increased patient benefit over typical supervision. These impressive
results from a single setting require replication, of course. At the
same time, these results parallel the increased psychotherapy benefits
found for fitting therapy to the patient, as reviewed earlier. To our
knowledge, this is one of the first controlled studies to show
differential patient improvement for trainees receiving a particular
form of supervision---​ integrative supervision. Collect Formal Feedback
from Supervisees and their Patients In integrative supervision, we
strongly urge---​ some would say "require"---​trainees to monitor the
progress and evaluate the outcome of the therapy they render. This
process occurs formatively (during therapy) and summatively
(posttherapy). In the former, we frequently use one of the dozen or so
feedback monitoring systems (December 2015 issue of Psychotherapy). We
typically use one of three feedback systems: The free Session Rating
Scale (Miller, Duncan, et al., 2003)containing four items evaluating the
quality of the relationship, goals and topics, approach/​method, and
overall satisfaction; Lambert's (2015, www.oqmeasures. com/​)
computerized Outcome Questionnaire containing 30 or 45 items; or the
InnerLife STS (Systematic Treatment Selection), a 100+ item, cloud-​
based assessment of patient problem areas, patient transdiagnostic
characteristics,

394

Future Directions

and treatment recommendations. There are many measures for collecting
routine feedback from patients, but we favor those that assess both goal
attainment and relationship satisfaction. Sometimes supervisees elect to
experiment with one of the other feedback methods. If more aligned with
the therapy itself or supervisee preferences, the supervisee will hold
an explicit discussion with the client about the quality of their
relationship, goal attainment, the approach, what is working, and what
can be improved. The important point is to explicitly collect and
process client feedback in session. Meta-​ analyses show that doing so
leads to modest increases in outcome for all patients and large effects
for patients at risk for dropout or deterioration (Lambert, Whipple, &
Kleinstäuber, 2019). Therapists who specifically and respectfully
inquire about their client's perceptions of therapy and the relationship
frequently enhance the alliance and prevent premature termination. In a
parallel process, we systematically collect formal feedback from our
supervisees about the utility and fit of integrative supervision. Many
of our colleagues express surprise that we ask formally, but the process
is not so different from collecting feedback from our patients in
session, from our students in class, and from our peers in scholarship
and academia. This is particularly useful when supervisees are
collecting feedback from their clients and when students have
experienced negative experiences with clinical supervision. Most
practitioners report at least one unsatisfactory supervision---​ one in
which the theory, the technique, or the style of supervision was
discordant with their needs (Ellis, 2006; Gray et al., 2001; Nelson &
Friedlander, 2001). We are convinced that such discordant supervision
relationships suffer from (1) inadequate explication of supervision
expectations and goals at the outset and (2) insufficient evaluation of
the supervision throughout. A variety of supervision and alliance
measures are available for this purpose. To focus the process for
supervisees and to reduce their anxiety, we favor structured ratings and
written

forms. Two of our favorites are the Supervisory Alliance Inventory
(SWAI) and the Leeds Alliance in Supervision Scale (Wainwright, 2010).
Having specific content and behavioral anchors helps launch as candid as
possible discussions of students' feelings about the supervision. In
reality, the supervisor's powerful position makes it difficult for
supervisees to share candid feedback with the supervisor, but, with time
and genuine commitment that the "data are always friendly," frank
evaluations do transpire. The numerical rankings are followed by open
conversation about what's working, what's not, and what can be improved
in supervision. Model the Pragmatic Flexibility of Integration Although
modeling has been shown to be an effective procedure for teaching
complex behaviors, it is used surprisingly little in supervising
psychotherapy. When one reflects on it, this is a rather remarkable
situation: Can one imagine surgeons, musicians, or teachers not
observing the very skills they are expected to acquire? Most educators
use consultant techniques to pass on knowledge about the methods of
psychotherapy; the methods rely more on declarative knowledge than
procedural knowledge. Supervisors can reliably model the intellectual
curiosity, pragmatic flexibility, informed pluralism, and their own
mistakes central to psychotherapy success as well as to psychotherapy
integration itself. Trainees fruitfully observe the work of clinical
supervisors and watch videotaped segments of expert clinicians. Trainees
frequently benefit by reading about how seasoned therapists themselves
have struggled in their early attempts to develop an integrated approach
to therapy (Goldfried, 2001). Supervisors can insure that therapists-​in-​
training spend many hours behind the one-​way mirror and the
videotape/​DVD screen, not just in passively watching, but also in
interactive coding, responding, and anticipating the next move
(Vaillant, 1997). Sharing our clinical work with our students initiates
a magnificent dialogue in which the

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

supervisor becomes vulnerable. Such vulnerability tends to beget a more
trusting, mutual, and open relationship. Supervision can focus on the
difficulties encountered by the therapist/​supervisor, and the student
can develop a greater appreciation of what transpires within the
integrative therapy session. Rather than discuss the mistakes they have
committed, most supervisors in our experience are inclined to report the
successes they have achieved, thus communicating an inflated sense of
competence and self-​assurance. By contrast, we prefer to disclose the
anxieties and mistakes with which we contend in clinical work. Sometimes
we speak openly of the "dumb-​ass" comment or missed reflection that
characterized a recent session. We all struggle. In integrative
supervision, then, the importance of modeling informed pluralism and
synthetic thinking cannot be overemphasized. Not unlike our children,
our students learn to emulate what we do more closely than what we say
(Beutler et al., 1987). But, too often, supervisors teach integration in
the form of value statements instead of value actions. Resist the
universal temptation to primarily critique others' behavior rather than
risking exposure and vulnerability oneself. Provide a Systematic Model
of Treatment Selection A systematic model determines in large part
whether integrative supervision is experienced as intelligible or
bewildering. Supervision within a coherent framework is associated with
a higher quality experience (Allen et al., 2000); conversely, less
valued integrative supervisors fail to ground their clinical
interventions within larger conceptual perspectives. These unsystematic
integrative supervisors may lack the "big picture"---​ an encompassing
integrative structure that organizes the case formulation and
prioritizes clinical intervention. That is, be integrative, not
syncretic. The task of integrating the diverse systems of psychotherapy
cannot be left entirely to the trainee (Hollanders, 1999). Many programs
and supervisors advertise themselves as integrative,

395

offering a nonpartisan approach that appeals to students. But what it
frequently means is that the students are taught by faculty of different
orientations, leaving students to try to integrate the systems on their
own, or, the students are supervised by faculty who respect all systems
but have no systematic way of synthesizing, sequencing, or selecting
among them for a given case (Hinshelwood, 1985). In the midst of
conducting psychotherapy, many supervisees will desire immediate and
concrete guidance on the "right" treatment for their patients. In the
midst of conducting supervision, a supervisor will want to address the
student's immediate need but also provide a more general treatment
selection heuristic for future patients. The most frequent integrative
models used in this regard appear to be multimodal therapy, the common
factors approach, the transtheoretical (stages of change) model,
cognitive-​interpersonal therapy, and STS, according to directors of
graduate programs (Lampropoulos & Dixon, 2007). The inescapable
take-​home is that supervisors need to offer systematic and
evidence-​based models. These integrative models specify the basis for
treatment selection and guide the supervisor in enabling supervisees to
determine the treatments and relationships of choice. Decisional models
are provided for selecting the technical procedures and relationship
stances from various therapeutic orientations to be applied in given
circumstances and with given clients. All told, integrative models
provide the coherence and guidance by which a multiplicity of theories
and methods can be organized into an integrated understanding. The
integrative frame embraces both/​ and instead of either/​or. The culture
wars of psychotherapy have pitted the therapy relationship against the
treatment method or the idiographic against the nomothetic. It is easy
for trainees to choose sides, ignore disconfirming research, and lose
sight of the superordinate commitment to patient benefit. The
incontrovertible but oft-​neglected truth about psychotherapy is that it
is, at once, a relationship and a method. Integrative supervision
fruitfully crafts the best of each for the supervisee so that the
supervisee

396

Future Directions

may craft the best relationship stance and technical methods for each
client. Similarly, we aim to blend the idiographic and the nomothetic,
the particular and the general. Many specious dualities, thankfully,
fade away in integrative supervision. The clinical phenomena become
fuller, richer, more verdant---​and more consequential for those
receiving our services. Additional Considerations Clinical supervision
is generally rated the second most important contribution to one's
professional development, immediately behind direct experience working
with patients (e.g., Henry, Sims, & Spray, 1971; Orlinsky & Rønnestad,
2005). Far more than courses and books and theories, hands-​on
supervision of actual clients constitutes the learning foundation.
Despite decades of investigating (and debating) the effectiveness of
clinical supervision, there is no controlled research to identify
precisely what supervisor behaviors substantially improve the treatment
outcomes of the supervisee. The extant research has largely addressed
the effects of supervision not on patient benefit but on satisfaction
with supervision, the supervisory alliance, and supervisee self-​ratings
(Freitas, 2002; Milne et al., 2008). In attempting to bridge the science
and practice of clinical supervision across 28 years of research, Ellis
(2010, p. 110) concedes that "it is a bridge under construction."
Instead, what we have from the large body of less than methodologically
rigorous research is a finite list of best educational practices or
principles on conducting supervision. The hundreds of research reports,
as distilled by numerous reviewers (e.g., American Psychological
Association, 2015; Bernard & Goodyear, 2014; Ellis, 2010; Milne et al.,
2008), boil down to the following (Norcross & Popple, 2017): cultivating
a warm, trusting supervisory alliance ◆ attending to alliance ruptures
and managing countertransference ◆ using informed consent and a written
contract (goal setting) ◆

observing what supervisees actually do in session ◆ focusing on
supervisee competencies and attaining minimal levels of those
competencies ◆ providing plentiful formative feedback and occasional
summative feedback ◆ modeling or demonstrating skills to be learned ◆
teaching technical, relational, and conceptual skills to supervisees ◆
monitoring the progress of supervisees' patients ◆ maintaining proper
boundaries and modeling ethical conduct ◆ documenting what transpires in
supervision (and any deficits in supervisees) ◆ attending to the
cultural identities of all participants in the supervisory triad ◆
individualizing supervision to the singular supervisee and particular
context. ◆

Of particular import: none of these research-​ supported practices or
principles hails from a single theoretical tradition. All can be
employed by supervisors of all theoretical models. These are robust
pantheoretical or common factors (Watkins, 2017). Perhaps we are biased,
but we characterize the cumulative results of the research as
unequivocally supporting integrative supervision! THE ORGANIZATIONAL
CONTEXT OF INTEGRATIVE TRAINING The curricular and supervision models
portrayed so far represent a growing consensus on the outlines of
effective integrative training. In our judgment, the training need at
the present time is not so much for further conceptual refinement as for
progress in institutions adopting such integrative training. In other
words, the more pressing need is less curricular than systemic. This
conclusion has led us (Andrews, Norcross, & Halgin, 1992) and others to
contemplate the necessary systemic change processes---​ how innovations
are adopted in

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

organizations of higher education. How can so-​called disruptive
innovations (Christensen et al., 2000) advance integrative training?
This approach represents a different stream of thinking, one that
complements the conceptual models described herein. Our objective in
this section is to outline several principles of organizational change
that must occur to implement an integrative program. In much of the
literature on psychotherapy integration, nonintegrative programs are
portrayed as showing rigidity in the curriculum, in those who administer
it (faculty), and in those who consume it (students). Programs that
teach either one orientation exclusively or a multiplicity of competing
orientations are criticized as forcing students into premature closure
at the risk of otherwise seeming to be a "wishy-​washy" eclectic. It is
argued that such programs enforce indoctrination and do not teach
optimal client--​therapy matching. One difficulty with this account is
that it has a judgmental flavor, as evidenced by the use of words like
rigid to characterize the opponents of integration. When translated into
interpersonal messages, such characterizations are likely to produce an
antagonistic, win--​lose struggle, in which the integrative "good guys"
try to take over from the separatist "bad guys." This is hardly likely
to promote a welcoming attitude toward integration on the part of the
"opposition!" Moreover, one of the first principles of organizational
change is to listen to one's opponents respectfully and seriously; they
probably have some truth on their side, and important considerations may
emerge from a dialogue among those with contrasting views. Even when the
obstacles to integration consist largely of rigidity on the part of
current faculty and students, we must work with them; we are not likely,
except in unusual circumstances, to select a body of faculty de novo. It
is, of course, possible to select students or interns according to
explicitly integrative criteria (see Lane et al., 1989, for an example),
but this is only likely to happen once the faculty themselves adopt
integrative principles. Those who study social change in higher
education emphasize the decentralization of

397

power in a variety of overlapping sites. Rather than a simple "line" or
hierarchical authority structure, power and decision-​ making are
localized in many settings: the formal administrative structures
involving deans and presidents, the faculty senate and its curriculum
approval committees, the department chair, and the individual faculty
members who, within certain limits, decide on what is to be taught in
their courses. These factors make it even more imperative that we draw
on a variety of change strategies in promulgating integrative training.
In his classic monograph entitled Strategies for Change, Lindquist
(1978) reported the results of case studies involving curricular and
institutional change on various college and university campuses. He
distilled four models of influence processes that, he concludes, help to
delineate the channels through which an innovation becomes accepted and
stabilized. Innovation---​integrative training, in the current case---​is
best introduced through a combination of the four change processes. The
(1) rational idea is effectively stated, (2) spread by means of informal
social networks, (3) linked to solutions by means of the problem-​solving
model, and (4) finally ratified by the political process. All four
models hold, in varying degrees, depending on the situation and people
involved. Therefore, an effective change agent will orchestrate all four
of the change processes in a flexible way if he or she is to be fully
effective. Often at conferences dealing with psychotherapy integration,
complaints are voiced of resistance at one's home institution to the
introduction of integrative ideas; indeed, in some settings, the member
of Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI) may
be the only proponent of such ideas. One reason for this frustration may
be that we tend to take the rational model or one of the three other
models as our sole view of change processes, thereby missing the
opportunity to exert influence within a combination of models.
Integrative ideas are best shared and implemented by a sage synthesis of
rational information, social network, problem-​solving, and politics.

398

Future Directions

FUTURE DIRECTIONS In the future, formal training of mental health
professionals will assuredly continue using brand-​name systems of
psychotherapy but increasingly within a comparative and integrative
frame. Students will still learn the major theories of psychotherapy but
with knowledge of their respective limitations, with respect for the
research evidence, and with appreciation for integration. We also expect
increased training in integrative psychotherapies, including those
featured in this Handbook, many of which prove the most popular for
training purposes (Lampropoulos & Dixon, 2007). Theoretical pluralism
and psychotherapy integration are here to stay in training mental health
professionals. Although the particular objectives and sequences will
invariably differ across programs, the vast majority of training
programs profess a pro-​ integration position. Training directors
indicate that they are committed to providing their students with
significant exposure to several different treatment approaches. And, in
80--​90% of programs, the attitudes of professors and students alike are
positive toward integration (Goldner-​ deBeer, 1999; Lampropoulos &
Dixon, 2007). In tech speak, most integrative training to date has been
in the "sandbox"---​ untested practices, outright experimentation, and
learning from our trials and errors. The bar has now been raised to
mainstream development, certification, and competence. In the future,
the field expects production of competent practitioners and
research-​supported training. Psychotherapy integration is both a product
and a process. As a product, integration will be increasingly
disseminated through books, videotapes, courses, seminars, curricula,
workshops, conferences, supervision, postdoctoral programs, and
institutional changes. Our hope is that educators will develop and
deliver integrative products that are more pluralistic and effective
than traditional, single-​ theory treatments. Our more fervent hope is
that, as a process, psychotherapy integration will be disseminated in
training methods and models consistent with

the openness of integration itself (Cooper & McLeod, 2011; Norcross,
2011). Integration, by its very nature, will be a continuing process
rather than a final destination. The intention of integrative training
is not necessarily to produce card-​ carrying, flag-​ waving "integrative"
or "eclectic" psychotherapists. This scenario would replace enforced
conversion to a single orientation with enforced conversion to an
integrative orientation, a change that may be more pluralistic and
liberating in content but certainly not in process. Instead, our goal is
to educate therapists to think and, perhaps, to behave integratively---​
openly, synthetically, but critically---​in their clinical pursuits. Our
aim is to prepare students to develop, if they possess the motivation
and ability, into knowledgeable integrative therapists. We join legions
of others in predicting that psychotherapy training will broaden beyond
classic mental disorders in specific disciplines to health behaviors in
an interdisciplinary or interprofessonal healthcare. The more
comprehensive repertoire and flexible style of integrative therapists
prepare them to lead in treating behavioral components of chronic
diseases, such as smoking, alcohol abuse, unhealthy eating, and
inadequate exercise that account for half of all deaths (Mokdad et al.,
2004). Behavioral health services are emerging as part of the overall
healthcare system, not apart from it. And integrative therapists can be
right in the middle of it, if training keeps apace. Psychotherapy
training, we predict, will become more specific and modular, as
contrasted with grand theories. A module in education is a unit of
knowledge or skill that is virtually self-​ contained; a modular approach
builds skills and knowledge in discrete, largely independent units.
Psychotherapy students will be increasingly trained in responding to
specific, transdiagnostic patient challenges, such as responding
therapeutically to an alliance rupture, an oppositional patient, someone
in a particular stage of change, and the like. The responsive
decision-​making may be expressed in a series of "when . . . then"
statements (Norcross & Wampold, 2019; Westra & Constatino, Chapter 13):
When the client presents with this

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

(feature), then consider doing this; when there is a rupture in the
alliance, then consider doing these things. Balancing effectiveness with
responsiveness, the modular approach to integrative training has shown
promising results across theoretical boundaries, including with child
clients (Chorpita et al., 2015) and for personality disorders (Livesley
et al., 2015). In all of training, competency has emerged as a central
thrust. In two recent Delphi polls on the future of psychotherapy
(Norcross et al., 2013; Taylor et al., 2018), attention to professional
competence emerged as the single highest rated item on training. That
future stands in marked contrast to a past where competence was
occasionally defined, but rarely verified. The educational system has
assumed for generations that bright-​enough graduate students will make
eager, competent practitioners. And that competent practitioners will
make competent educators and supervisors. Folie à deux! Competency
benchmarks will be controversially incorporated into the trainee's
learning goals and into the criteria for the supervisor's evaluation of
the trainee's performance. The same will probably occur for trainers'
competencies as well. Integrative training and supervision will be
expected to identity, assess, and verify competencies for all parties
involved. Competency can be nurtured through constant reflective and
deliberate practice. When not working with clients, therapists can
repeatedly devote time to improving their work, such as thinking about
difficult cases, securing consultation on specific skills, preparing and
reflecting on sessions, critiquing videotapes of previous sessions, and
attending training workshops (Castonguay & Hill, 2017; Wampold, 2017).
That sustained practice will assuredly focus on facilitative
relationship skills that account for the lion's share of outcome
variance (Norcross & Lambert, 2019)---​second only to the patient's
contribution---​ and that serve as the quintessential common factor in
psychotherapy. The therapeutic alliance, alliance rupture repairs,
collaboration, empathy, support, gathering client feedback,
responsiveness, and other interpersonal skills can be taught and learned
(e.g., Crits-​Christoph et al., 2006; Harris et al.,

399

2016; Smith-​ Hansen, 2016). Technological advancements allow
psychotherapists, neophyte and seasoned alike, to study their in-​session
relational behavior and improve on it. That's the relentless and
enthusiastic lifelong learning that we ideally inculcate in our
students; that's the adaptiveness and openness to challenges that
distinguishes the passionately committed psychotherapist from the
run-​of-​the-​mill therapist (Dlugos & Friedlander, 2001). As yet, there is
little controlled research on integrative training and supervision. We
do not know, in an empirical sense, which training process works best
for which situation. We expect and welcome the generation of reciprocal
linkages among practitioners, trainers, and researchers on the use of
integrative approaches in mental health interventions (Cooper, 2008;
Fernández-​Álvarez et al., 2016). That will enlighten our understanding
of which training process works best for which situation. The Magna
Charta Universitatum is a document signed by 388 rectors and heads of
universities from all over Europe and beyond in 1988, the 900th
anniversary of the University of Bologna. Its second principle reads:
"Teaching and research in universities must be inseparable if their
tuition is not to lag behind changing needs, the demands of society, and
advances in scientific knowledge" (www.magna-​charta.org/​
magna-​charta-​universitatum). That principle encapsulates our hopes for
integrative training in the future---​inseparable from the grand
adventure of research. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors gratefully
acknowledge Drs. Richard P. Halgin and John D. W. Andrews for
co-​authoring this chapter in previous editions of this Handbook.

References Alberts, G., & Edelstein, B. (1990). Therapist training: A
critical review of skill training studies. Clinical Psychology Review,
10, 497--​511.

400

Future Directions

Allen, D. M., Kennedy, C. L., Veeser, W. R., & Grosso, T. (2000).
Teaching the integration of psychotherapy paradigms in a psychiatric
residency seminar. Academic Psychiatry, 24, 6--​13. Allen, G. J.,
Szollos, S. J., & Williams, B. E. (1986). Doctoral students' comparative
evaluations of best and worst psychotherapy supervision. Professional
Psychology: Research and Practice, 17, 91--​99. American Psychological
Association. (2015). Guidelines for clinical supervision in health
service psychology. American Psychologist, 70, 33--​46. Anderson, T.,
McClintock, A. S., Himawan, L., Song, X., & Patterson, C. L. (2016). A
prospective study of therapist facilitative interpersonal skills as a
predictor of treatment outcome. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 84, 57. Andrews, J. D. W., Norcross, J. C., & Halgin, R. P.
(1992). Training in psychotherapy integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 563--​592).
New York: Basic. Aponte, H. J., & Kissil, K. (2014). "If I can grapple
with this I can truly be of use in the therapy room": Using the
therapist's own emotional struggles to facilitate effective therapy.
Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 40, 152--​164. Bernal, G., &
Rodriguez, M. M. D. (Eds.). (2012). Cultural adaptations: Tools for
evidence-​based practice with diverse populations. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. Bernard, J. M., & Goodyear, R. K.
(2014). Fundamentals of clinical supervision (5th ed.). New York:
Pearson. Beutler, L. E. (1999). Manualizing flexibility: The training of
eclectic therapists. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 55, 399--​404.
Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2000). Prescriptive psychotherapy: A
practical guide to systematic treatment selection. New York: Oxford
University Press. Beutler, L. E., Mahoney, M. J., Norcross, J. C.,
Prochaska, J. O., Sollod, R. M., & Robertson, M. (1987). Training
integrative/​ eclectic psychotherapists II. Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 6, 296--​332. Bhola, P., & Raguram, A. (Eds.).
(2016). Counselling and psychotherapy practice: Walking the line.
Singapore: Springer. Bike, D. H., Norcross, J. C., & Schatz, D. M.
(2009). Process and outcomes of psychotherapists' personal therapy:
Replication and extension

20 years later. Psychotherapy Theory, Research, Practice, Training, 49,
19--​31. Boswell, J. F., Castonguay, L. G., & Pincus, A. L. (2009).
Trainee theoretical orientation: Profiles and potential predictors.
Journal of Psychotherapy, 19, 291--​312. Bugental, J. F. T. (1987). The
art of the psychotherapist. New York: Norton. Burkard, A. W., Johnson,
A. J., Madson, M. B., Pruitt, N. T., Contreras-​ Tadyc, D. A., Kozlowski,
J. M., . . . Knox, S. (2006). Supervisor cultural responsiveness and
unresponsiveness in cross-​ cultural supervision. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 53, 288--​301. Castonguay, L. G. (2000a). Training in
psychotherapy integration: Introduction to current efforts and future
visions. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 229--​232. Castonguay,
L. G. (2000b). A common factors approach to psychotherapy training.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 263--​282. Castonguay, L. G.
(2006). Personal pathways in psychotherapy integration. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration. 16, 36--​58. Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E.
(Eds.). (2017). How and why are some therapists better than others?:
Understanding therapist effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Castonguay, L. G., Cobstanino, M. J., & Beulter, L. E.
(Eds.) (2019). Treatment principles that work. New York: Oxford
University Press. Chopra, T. (2013). All supervision is multicultural: A
review of literature on the need for multicultural supervision in
counseling. Psychological Studies, 58, 335--​338. Chorpita, B. F., Park,
A., Tsai, K., Korathu-​Larson, P., Higa-​ McMillan, C. K., Nakamura, B.
J., . . . Krull, J. (2015). Balancing effectiveness with responsiveness:
Therapist satisfaction across different treatment designs in the Child
STEPS randomized effectiveness trial. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 83, 709--​718. Chow, D. L., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J. A.,
Kane, R. T., Thornton, J. A., & Andrews, W. P. (2015). The role of
deliberate practice in the development of highly effective
psychotherapists. Psychotherapy, 52, 337--​345. Christensen, C. M.,
Bohmer, R., & Kenagy, J. (2000). Will disruptive innovations cure health
care? Harvard Business Review, 78(5), 102--​112. Cooper, M. (2008).
Essential research findings in counselling and psychotherapy: The facts
are friendly. London: Sage.

Training in Psychotherapy Integration

401

Cooper, M., & McLeod, J. (2011). Pluralistic Giller, E., & Strauss, J.
(1984). Clinical research: A counselling and psychotherapy. London:
Sage. key to clinical training. American Journal of Crits-​ Christoph,
P., Gibbons, M. B. C., Crits-​ Psychiatry, 141, 1075--​1077. Christoph,
K., Narduci, J., Schamberger, M., & Goldfried, M. R. (Ed.). (2001). How
therapists Gallop, R. (2006). Can therapists be trained to change:
Personal and professional reflections. improve their alliances? A
preliminary study of Washington, DC: American Psychological
alliance-​fostering psychotherapy. Psychotherapy Association. Research,
16, 268--​281. Goldner-​ deBeer, L. (1999). Psychotherapy Dlugos, R. F., &
Friedlander, M. L. (2001). integration in doctoral training programs:
Are Passionately committed psychotherapists: A students prepared for the
future? Unpublished qualitative study of their experiences. Professional
doctoral dissertation, University of Denver. Psychology: Research and
Practice, 32, 298. Gray, L. A., Ladany, N., Walker, J. A., & Ancis, J.
Duncan, B. L., Miller, S. D., Wampold, B. E., & R. (2001). Psychotherapy
trainees' experience Hubble, M. A. (Eds.). (2010). The heart & soul of
counterproductive events in supervision. of change: Delivering what
works in therapy (2nd Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48, 371--​383.
ed.). Washington, DC: American Psychological Halgin, R. P. (1985).
Teaching integration of Association. psychotherapy models to beginning
therapists. Dyason, K. M., Shanely, D. C., Hwakins, E., Psychotherapy,
22, 555--​563. Morrissey, S. A., & Lambert, M. J. (2018). A Halgin, R. P.
(Ed.). (1988). Special section: Issues systematic review of research in
psychology in the supervision of integrative psychotherapy. training
clinics: How far have we come? Training Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, and Education in Professional Psychology. 7,
152--​180. Eubanks-​Carter, C., Burckell, L. A., & Goldfried, M. Halgin,
R. P., & Murphy, R. A. (1995). Issues in the R. (2005). Enhancing
therapeutic effectiveness training of psychotherapists. In B. M. Bongar
& with lesbian, gay, and bisexual clients. Clinical L. E. Beutler
(Eds.), Comprehensive textbook of Psychology: Science and Practice, 12,
1--​18. psychotherapy (pp. 434--​455). New York: Oxford Ellis, M. V.
(2006). Critical incidents in clinical University Press. supervision and
in supervisor supervision: Halvorsen, M. S., Benum, K., Haavind, H., &
Assessing supervisory issues. Training and McLeod, J. (2016). A
life-​saving therapy: The Education in Professional Psychology, S,
122--​132. theory-​building case of "Cora." Pragmatic Case Ellis, M. V.
(2010). Bridging the science and practice Studies in Psychotherapy, 12,
158--​193. of clinical supervision: Some discoveries, some Harris, J. E.,
Maddoux, J. A., & Stretcher, A. L. misconceptions. The Clinical
Supervisor, 29, (2016). Testing the impact of Key Strategies 95--​116.
Training for Individual Psychotherapy on Faust, D. (1986). Research on
human judgment and understanding, confidence, and intention to its
application to clinical practice. Professional use skills in practice.
Journal of Psychotherapy Psychology, 17, 420--​430. Integration, 26,
318--​325. Fernández-​Álvarez, H., Consoli, A. J., & Gómez, B. Heide, F.
J., & Rosenbaum, R. (1988). Therapist's (2016). Integration in
psychotherapy: Reasons experiences of using single versus combined and
challenges. American Psychologist, 71, 820--​ theoretical models in
psychotherapy. Journal of 830. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​amp0000100
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 41--​46. Ford, J. D. (1979).
Research on training counselors Henry, W. E., Sims, J. H., & Spray, S.
L. (1971). The and clinicians. Review of Educational Research, fifth
profession: Becoming a psychotherapist. 69, 87--​130. San Francisco:
Jossey-​Bass. Freitas, G. J. (2002). The impact of psychotherapy Henry,
W. P., & Strupp, H. H. (1991). The supervision on client outcome: A
critical Vanderbilt Center for Psychotherapy examination of 2 decades of
research. Research. In L. E. Beutler & M. Crago (Eds.), Psychotherapy,
39, 354--​367. Psychotherapy research: An international Geller, J. D.,
Norcross, J. C., & Orlinsky, D. E. (Eds.). review of programmatic
studies. Washington, (2005). The psychotherapist's own personal DC:
American Psychological Association. therapy. New York: Oxford University
Press. Hill, C. E. (2014). Helping skills: Facilitating Gilbert, M., &
Orlans, V. (2011). Integrative exploration, insights, and action (4th
ed.). therapy: 100 key points and techniques. Washington, DC: American
Psychological London: Routledge. Association.

402

Future Directions

Hill, C. E., & Knox, S. (2013). Training and Lazarus, A. A. (1992).
Multimodal therapy: Technical supervision in psychotherapy. In M. J.
Lambert eclecticism with minimal integration. In J. C. (Ed.), Bergin and
Garfield's handbook of Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook
psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 775--​ of psychotherapy
integration (pp. 231--​ 263). 811). New York: Wiley. New York: Basic.
Hinshelwood, R. D. (1985). Questions of training. Lecompte, C.,
Castonguay, L. G., Cyr, M., & Free Associations, 2, 7--​18. Sabourin, S.
(1993). Supervision and instruction Hollanders, H. (1999). Eclecticism
and integration in doctoral psychotherapy integration. In G. in
counseling: Implications for training. Stricker & J. R. Gold (Eds.),
Comprehensive British Journal of Guidance & Counseling, 27, handbook of
psychotherapy integration (pp. 483--​499. 483--​498). New York: Plenum.
Holloway, E. L., & Wampold, B. E. (1986). Relation Lindquist, J. (1978).
Strategies for change. Carlsbalds, between conceptual level and
counseling-​ CA: Pacific Soundings. related tasks: A meta-​ analysis.
Journal of Livesley, W. J., Dimaggio, G., & Clarkin, J. Counseling
Psychology, 33, 310--​319. F. (Eds.). (2015). Integrated treatment for
Holt, H., Beutler, L. E., Kimpara, S., Macias, S., personality disorder:
A modular approach. Haug, N. A., Shiloff, N., . . . Stein, M. (2015).
New York: Guilford. Evidence-​based supervision: Tracking outcome McLeod,
J. (2013). An introduction to counselling (5th and teaching principles
of change in clinical ed.). Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
supervision to bring science to integrative McLeod, J. (2017).
Pluralistic therapy: Distinctive practice. Psychotherapy, 52, 185--​189.
features. London: Routledge. Howard, G. S., Nance, D. W., & Myers, P.
McNeill, B. W., & Stoltenberg, C. D. (2016). (1987). Adaptive counseling
and therapy. San Supervision essentials for the integrative Francisco:
Jossey-​Bass. developmental model. American Psychological Inman, A. G., &
Kreider, D. E. (2013). Multicultural Association. competence:
Psychotherapy practice and Meltzoff, J. (1984). Research training for
clinical supervision. Psychotherapy, 50, 346--​350. psychologists:
Point---​counterpoint. Professional Jarmon, H., & Halgin, R. P. (1987).
The role Psychology: Research and Practice, 15, 203--​209. of the
psychology department clinic in Messer, S. B. (1992). A critical
examination of training scientist-​practitioners. Professional belief
structures in integrative and eclectic Psychology: Research and
Practice, 18, 509--​514. psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Lambert, M. J. (2015). Progress feedback and Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook
of psychotherapy the OQ-​ system: The past and the future. integration
(pp. 130--​168). New York: Basic. Psychotherapy, 52, 381. Messer, S. B.
(2012). Assimilative and theoretical Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., &
Kleinstäuber, M. integration in the treatment of a trauma survivor.
(2019). Collecting and delivering feedback. Pragmatic Case Studies in
Psychotherapy, 8, In J. C. Norcross & M. J. Lambert (Eds.), 113--​117.
Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd ed.). Miller, S. D., Hubble,
M. A., Chow, D. L., New York: Oxford University Press. & Seidel, J. A.
(2013). The outcome of Lampropoulos, G. K. (2002). A common factors view
psychotherapy: Yesterday, today and tomorrow. of counseling supervision
process. The Clinical Psychotherapy, 50, 88--​97. Supervisor, 21, 77--​95.
Milne, D., Aylott, H., Fitzpatrick, H., & Ellis, M. Lampropoulos, G. K.,
& Dixon, D. N. (2007). V. (2008). How does clinical supervision work?
Psychotherapy integration in internships and Using a "best evidence
synthesis" approach to counselling psychology doctoral programs.
construct a basic model of supervision. The Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 17, Clinical Supervisor, 27(2), 170--​190. 185--​208. Mokdad,
A. H., Marks, J. S., Stroup, D. F., & Lane, R., Andrews, J., Gabriel,
T., Holt, P., & Gerberding, J. L. (2004). Actual causes of Schick, M.
(1989, May). Integrative internship death in the United States, 2000.
Journal training from the perspectives of supervisors and of the
American Medical Association, 291, supervisees. Symposium presented at
the annual 1238--​1245. conference of the Society for the Exploration of
Nelson, G. (1978). Psychotherapy supervision Psychotherapy Integration,
Berkeley, CA. from the trainee's point of view: A survey

Training in Psychotherapy Integration of preferences. Professional
Psychology, 9, 539--​550. Nelson, M. L., & Friedlander, M. L. (2001). A
close look at conflictual supervisory relationships: The trainee's
perspective. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 48, 384--​395. Norcross,
J. C. (1988). Supervision of integrative psychotherapy. Journal of
Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 157--​166. Norcross, J. C.
(1990, August). Countertransference confessions of a prescriptive
eclectic. Paper presented at the annual conference of the Society for
the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration, Philadelphia, PA.
Norcross, J. C. (Ed.). (2011). Psychotherapy relation­ ships that work
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., &
Beutler, L. E. (2000). A prescriptive eclectic approach to psychotherapy
training. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 10, 247--​261. Norcross,
J. C., Beutler, L. E., & Clarkin, J. F. (1990). Training in differential
treatment selection. In Systematic treatment selection: Toward targeted
therapeutic interventions (pp. 289--​ 307). New York: Brunner/​Mazel.
Norcross, J. C., Beutler, L. E., Clarkin, J. F., DiClemente, C. C.,
Halgin, R. P., Frances, A., et al. (1986). Training integrative/​eclectic
psychotherapists. International Journal of Eclectic Psychotherapy, 5,
71--​94. Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of
psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York: Basic. Norcross, J. C., &
Halgin, R. P. (1997). Integrative approaches to psychotherapy
supervision. In C. E. Watkins (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy
supervision (pp. 203--​222). New York: Wiley. Norcross, J. C., & Lambert,
M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., Pfund, R. A., &
Prochaska, J. O. (2013). Psychotherapy in 2022: A Delphi poll on its
future. Professional Psychology: Research & Practice, 44, 363--​370.
Norcross, J. C., & Popple, L. M. (2017). Supervision essentials for
integrative psychotherapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2019).
Psychotherapy relationships that work. Volume 2. (3rd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press. Oddli, H. W., & McLeod, J. (2017). Knowing-​in-​
relation: How experienced therapists integrate

403

different sources of knowledge in actual clinical practice. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 27, 107--​119. O'Hara, D., & Schofield, M. J.
(2008). Personal approaches to psychotherapy integration. Counselling
and Psychotherapy Research, 8, 53--​62. Orlinsky, D. E., Botermans, J., &
Rønnestad, M. H. (2001). Towards an empirically grounded model of
psychotherapy training: Four thousand therapists rate influences on
their development. Australian Psychologist, 36, 139--​148. Orlinsky, D.
E., & Norcross, J. C. (2005). Outcomes and impacts of the
psychotherapists' personal therapy: A research review. In J. D. Geller,
J. C. Norcross, & D. E. Orlinsky (Eds.), The psychotherapist's own
psychotherapy. New York: Oxford University Press. Orlinsky D. E., &
Rønnestad, M. H. (2005). How psychotherapists develop: A study of
therapeutic work and professional growth. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Osler, W. (1906). Aequanimatas. New York:
McGraw-​Hill. Prochaska J. O., & Norcross J. C. (2018). Systems of
psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (9th ed.). New York: Oxford
University Press. Reisman, J. M. (1975). Trends for training in
treatment. Professional Psychology, 6, 187--​192. Robertson, M. H.
(1986). Training eclectic psychotherapists. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.),
Handbook of eclectic psychotherapy (pp. 416--​ 435). New York:
Brunner/​Mazel. Robertson, M. H. (1995). Psychotherapy education and
training: An integrative perspective. International Universities Press,
Inc. Rønnestad, M. H., & Skovolt, T. M. (2012). The developing
practitioner: Growth and stagnation of therapists and counselors.
London: Routledge. Roth, A., & Fonagy, P. (1996). What works for whom? A
critical review of psychotherapy research. New York: Guilford.
Rousmaniere, T., Goodyear, R. K., Miller, S. D., & Wampold, B. E.
(Eds.). (2017). The cycle of excellence: Using deliberate practice to
improve supervision and training. New York: Wiley. Schacht, T. E.
(1991). Can psychotherapy education advance psychotherapy integration?
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 305--​320. Schultz-​Ross, R. A.
(1995). Ideological singularity as a defense against clinical
complexity. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 49, 540--​547. Smith-​
Hansen, L. (2016). The therapeutic alliance: From correlational studies
to training

404

Future Directions

models. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 26, 217--​229. Sotskova,
A., & Dossett, K. (2017). Teaching integrative existential
psychotherapy: Student and supervisor reflections on using an
integrative approach early in clinical training. The Humanistic
Psychologist, 45, 122--​133. Stedmon, J., & Dallos, R. (2009). Reflective
practice in psychotherapy and counselling. London: McGraw-​Hill. Stein,
M., Beutler, L. E., Kimpara, S., Haug, N. A., Brunet, H., Someah, K., .
. . Macias, S. (2017). The impact of cross-​interventions and principle-​
based supervision on trainee effectiveness. Manuscript submitted for
publication. Stevenson, J. F., & Norcross, J. C. (1987). Current status
of training evaluation in clinical psychology. In B. Edelstein & E.
Berler (Eds.), Evaluation and accountability in clinical training
(pp. 77--​115). New York: Plenum. Stricker, G. (1988). Supervision of
integrative psychotherapy: Discussion. Journal of Integrative and
Eclectic Psychotherapy, 7, 176--​180. Taylor, J. M., Kolaski, A. Z.,
Wright, H. Hashtpari, H., & Neimeyer, G. J. (2018). Predicting the
evolution of counseling psychology in the United States: Results from a
Delphi poll of academic training directors. Counselling Psychology
Quarterly, 31, 1--​17. Tracey, T. J., Ellickson, J. L., & Sherry, P.
(1989). Reactance in relation to different supervisory

environments and counselor development. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 36, 336--​344. Vaillant, L. M. (1997). Changing character.
New York: Basic. Wachtel, P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior
therapy. New York: Basic. Wachtel, P. L. (1991). From eclecticism to
synthesis: Toward a more seamless psychotherapeutic integration. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 1, 43--​54. Wainwright, N. A. (2010). The
development of the Leeds Alliance in Supervision Scale (LASS): A brief
sessional measure of the supervisory alliance. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Leeds. Walfish, S., McAlister, B.,
O'Donnell, P., & Lambert, M. J. (2012). An investigation of
self-​assessment bias in mental health providers. Psychological Reports,
110, 1--​6. Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. (2015). The great psychotherapy
debate (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. Watkins, C. E. Jr. (2017).
Convergence in psycho­ therapy supervision: A common factors, common
processes, common practices perspective. Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration, 27, 140--​152. Yalom, I. (2002). The gift of therapy: An
open letter to a new generation of therapists and their patients. New
York: HarperCollins.

19 Outcome Research on Psychotherapy Integration JAMES F. BOSWELL,
MICHELLE G. NEWMAN, AND LATA K. MCGINN

Recent surveys demonstrate that approximately one-​third of American
mental health professionals identify themselves as "integrative" (and,
occasionally, "eclectic") in theoretical orientation (Norcross &
Karpiak, 2012; Norcross & Rogan, 2013). Attempts to integrate ostensibly
distinct models of psychotherapy can be dated back to the 1930s (Dollard
& Miller, 1950; French, 1933; Rosenzweig, 1936), yet many decades would
pass before there was outcome research conducted on psychotherapy
integration. A number of factors have motivated the development,
testing, and implementation of integrative therapies (Norcross, 2005;
Norcross & Alexander, Chapter 1, this volume). For example, many
patients do not respond to frontline treatments, and extant outcome
research on "pure form" psychotherapies points to

considerable room for improvement (Lambert, 2013). In addition, some
patients decline and/​ or drop out of treatment with "pure-​ form"
psychotherapies, suggesting that adaptations may be necessary to make
these treatments more palatable. Clinicians and researchers recognize
the limits of a particular theoretical model and its associated
techniques when applied to particular types of patients and contexts
(Goldfried et al., 2014). In addition, since many therapists adopt an
integrative approach, progress in the field is dependent on identifying
and operationalizing their integrative process, subjecting it to
rigorous empirical scrutiny, and disseminating this information to
stakeholders. The second edition of the Handbook of Psychotherapy
Integration (Norcross & Goldfried, 2005) provided a review of the
outcome research on 29 integrative psychotherapies (Schottenbauer,

405

406

Future Directions

Glass, & Arnkoff, 2005). Here, we provide an conflation of distinct
treatments also creates updated review of the outcome literature on psy-
difficulties when drawing conclusions from chotherapy integration, with
particular attention existing systematic reviews and meta-​analyses. to
studies conducted between 2004 and 2017, as Consequently, we summarized
reviews and well as recent trends in psychotherapy integration.
syntheses where conclusions regarding integraWe will summarize
conclusions made in the prior tive treatments of interest could be drawn
with review yet direct readers to the previous volume relative
confidence. for a more thorough review (Schottenbauer et al., A second
challenge is the multiple and di2005). In addition, we discuss the
difficulties in- verse pathways through which psychotherapists herent in
conducting this research and suggest integrate. Similar to previous work
that has future directions for outcome research on psycho- attempted to
categorize different pathways or therapy integration. routes (Boswell &
Goldfried, 2010; Norcross, In updating this chapter, we largely adopted
2005), we distinguish among four types of psythe criteria and structure
established in the pre- chotherapy integration. The first is
assimilative vious edition. Specifically, we do not include integration,
which is defined as: "the incorpointegration of psychopharmacology and
psycho- ration of attitudes, perspectives, or techniques therapy, nor do
we include integration of treat- from an auxiliary therapy into a
therapist's priment formats/​modalities. We primarily focus on mary,
grounding approach" (Messer, 2001, individual psychotherapy for adults,
with a brief p. 1). A second type is theoretical integration, review of
family, couples, and group modalities. in which a clear theory drives
the choice of Less empirical research exists on bona fide in-
techniques. Unlike assimilative integration, the tegrative therapies for
children. As noted in the theory is not necessarily derived primarily
from prior review (Schottenbauer et al., 2005), al- a single type of
mainstream psychotherapy; it though much of the treatment for children
may may be developed from an amalgam of two or be integrative for
pragmatic reasons, it is rarely more theories, developed anew, or
imported identified formally as integrative (Chorpita et al., from a
relevant field (e.g., social-​ ecological 2002). In addition, this review
is largely restricted theory). The choice of techniques is guided to
studies published in the English language. by the theory and may include
techniques Several challenges emerge when reviewing from one or more
systems of psychotherapy. outcome research on psychotherapy inte- The
third type of psychotherapy integration gration. First, it is difficult
to define what discussed in this chapter is technical eclecticism,
constitutes integrative psychotherapy. We re- which has been defined as
the use of psychostricted our review to therapies that explicitly
therapy techniques without regard to their theodescribed themselves as
eclectic or integrative. retical origins (Norcross, 2005). A fourth type
or For example, some therapies may acknowl- path toward integration is
the common factors or edge an eclectic heritage, yet primarily retain
processes approach. However, by its very nature, a pure-​ form identity
(e.g., feminist therapy); common factor therapies are rarely researched
such therapies were not included in this review. as distinctive
treatments in outcome studies. A related challenge occurs when therapies
Hence, they are not considered here; more inare described inconsistently
across studies, formation on common factors can be found in making it
difficult to ascertain if the same set the chapters by other authors in
this volume of procedures have been implemented (e.g., (Eubanks &
Goldfried, Chapter 4, this volume; emotion-​ focused therapy (EFT)
vs. person-​ Wampold & Ulvenes, Chapter 3, this volume). centered
experiential therapy). We focused on Within each type of integration, we
distinintegrative treatments with some standardized guish between
therapies designed for multiple "core." This did not require the use of
a treat- disorders and those created to address a specific ment manual
per se; rather, an established doc- disorder(s). A list of integrative
psychotherapies umentation of theory, guiding principles, and/​ covered
in the chapter, along with their deor procedures facilitated (or could
facilitate) gree of empirical support to date, is presented valid
replication. Inconsistent use of terms and in Table 19.1. The three
levels of empirical

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

407

TABLE 19.1 Level of research support for integrative psychotherapies
Substantial empirical support (4 or more randomized controlled studies)

Some empirical support (1 to 3 Randomized randomized Preliminary
controlled controlled empirical studies since studies) support 2004

Reviewed in previous edition

Name of therapy

Reference

Dialectical behavior therapy Cognitive analytic therapy Multisystemic
therapy

Linehan (1993) Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Ryle & Kerr (2002) Henggeler et al. (1998) Prochaska, DiClemente, &
Norcross (1992) Beutler & Harwood (2000) Elliott et al. (2004) Greenberg
& Johnson (1988) McCullough (2002)

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Miller et al. (2005) Gersons et al. (2000) Robin et al. (1999) Diamond
(2014) Young (1990) Newman et al. (2004)

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

-​-​ -​-​

Yes Yes

-​-​ -​-​

Yes Yes

No Yes

Safran et al. (2000) Westra et al. (2009) Shear et al. (2005) Castonguay
et al. (2004)

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

Yes

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

No

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

No

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

Yes

Jacobson & Christensen (1996) Lazarus (2005)

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

Yes

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

No

Yes

Transtheoretical psychotherapy

Systematic treatment selection Emotion-​focused therapy Emotion-​focused
couple therapy Cognitive behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy
Outcome-​informed psychotherapy Brief eclectic psychotherapy for PTSD
Behavioral family systems therapy Attachment based family therapy Schema
therapy CBT + interpersonal /​emotional processing therapy for GAD Brief
relational therapy MI + CBT for GAD Complicated grief therapy
Integrative cognitive therapy for depression Integrative behavioral
couple therapy Multimodal therapy

(continued )

408

Future Directions

Table 19.1 Continued Substantial empirical support (4 or more randomized
controlled studies)

Some empirical support (1 to 3 Randomized randomized Preliminary
controlled controlled empirical studies since studies) support 2004

Reviewed in previous edition

Name of therapy

Reference

Integrative cognitive-​ affective therapy for bulimia nervosa Integrative
treatment for agoraphobia Systemic behavioral family therapy

Wonderlich et al. (2010)

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

No

Chambless et al. (1986) Alexander & Parsons (1982) Duignan & Mitzman
(1994) Cooper & McLeod (2011) Calderon (2003)

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

No

Yes

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

Yes

-​-​

Yes

-​-​

Yes

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

No

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

Yes

Ivey (2000)

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

Yes

Nielsen et al. (1987) Morgan et al. (1999)

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

Yes

-​-​

-​-​

Yes

No

Yes

Cognitive analytic group therapy Pluralistic therapy

Integrative psychotherapy for personality disorders Developmental
counseling and therapy Bergen project (fiat model) Integrative group
treatment

Notes: MI, motivational interviewing; CBT, cognitive-​behavioral therapy;
GAD, generalized anxiety disorder. PTSD, posttraumatic stress disorder.

support are substantial empirical support (four or more randomized
controlled studies \[RCTs\]), some empirical support (one to three
randomized controlled studies), and preliminary empirical support
(studies with no control group or a nonrandomized control group). As
some of the treatments reviewed here have dedicated chapters in this
Handbook, more detailed information about treatment development and
outcome research can be found there.

Examples include emotion-​focused (or process-​ experiential) therapy,
integrative cognitive therapy (ICT), integrative cognitive-​ affective
therapy (ICAT) for bulimia nervosa, cognitive-​ behavioral therapy (CBT)
plus interpersonal-​ emotional processing (I/​ EP), motivational
interviewing (MI) plus CBT, and complicated grief treatment (CGT). In
this section, we will summarize the state of the outcome research for
these respective treatments.

ASSIMILATIVE INTEGRATION

Therapies Originally Designed for Multiple Disorders

As we have noted earlier, assimilative integration consists of a home
theoretical orientation explicitly augmented by specific techniques from
one or more exogenous systems.

To our knowledge, EFT is the only assimilative treatment with controlled
research that was not originally designed to treat a specific disorder.
Although most of the controlled research has

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

been done in depression, its principles and techniques are intended to
be broadly applicable to a wide range of presenting problems.
Process-​Experiential/​ Emotion-​Focused Therapy EFT, also referred to as
process-​experiential therapy (Elliott et al., 2004; Watson & Greenberg,
2017) was developed for individual (Greenberg & Watson, 1998) and couple
formats (Greenberg & Johnson, 1988; Johnson, Hunsely, Greenberg, &
Schindler, 1999), both of which have been tested in several outcome
studies. Couple therapy research is included later in this chapter.
Individual EFT integrates person-​centered and experiential/​gestalt
methods for specific client markers. Several key experiential
interventions (e.g., empty chair) have their origins in gestalt therapy,
yet, unlike gestalt therapy, there is more explicit attention to the
therapeutic relationship. As noted, EFT is designed to be applied across
a spectrum of problem areas, yet most of the outcome research to date
has focused on depression (e.g., Greenberg & Watson, 1998; Watson et
al., 2003), as well as some recent work on anxiety and trauma disorders.
Schottenbauer and colleagues (2005) reviewed the results of two RCTs
that compared EFT to person-​centered therapy (PCT) for depression.
Overall, EFT outperformed PCT on most symptom and functioning measures.
Subsequently, another study reported results from a depression RCT
comparing EFT with PCT that included 38 treatment completers (Goldman,
Greenberg, & Angus, 2006). Although EFT and PCT significantly increased
self-​ esteem, reduced depression symptoms, and improved interpersonal
functioning, EFT led to more improvement on most measures. In the same
sample, EFT clients evidenced a significantly lower relapse rate over 18
months compared to person-​centered clients, as well as maintenance of
symptom and self-​esteem gains (Ellison et al., 2009). In a trial that
involved socially anxious clients, EFT evidenced superior outcomes to
standard PCT (Elliott et al., 2013; Rodgers & Elliott, 2012). There were
small to large Cohen's d effect size differences across outcome
measures, with an average effect size

409

(d = .62) that was comparable to previous trials (e.g., Goldman et al.,
2006). However, the comparative samples were relatively small, and EFT
clients received more sessions on average. After controlling for
researcher allegiance (Elliott et al., 2013), a meta-​analysis of
humanistic psychotherapies more broadly concluded that the efficacy of
EFT was not statistically different from CBT. Outcome research continues
to support the efficacy of EFT for depression and, more recently, social
anxiety; EFT appears to be more effective than PCT yet does not appear
to be more (or less) effective than CBT when direct comparisons have
been conducted (Elliott et al., 2013). (For a more comprehensive review
of EFT literature, readers are directed to Elliott et al. \[2013\] and
Angus et al. \[2015\].) Therapies Originally Designed for a Specific
Disorder Several assimilative treatments have been designed to target
specific disorders, including generalized anxiety disorder (GAD), major
depressive disorder, eating disorders, and complicated grief. Each of
the treatments described below has been tested in at least one RCT.
Integrative Cognitive Therapy for Depression Castonguay and colleagues
(2004) developed and initially tested ICT for depression, which adds
techniques from humanistic and interpersonal therapies to cognitive
therapy for depression to address alliance ruptures. An alliance rupture
reflects negative shifts in the patient--​ therapist bond or sense of
coordinated collaboration (Safran, Muran, & Eubanks-​Carter, 2011). The
crux of this approach involves the therapist (a) inviting patients to
speak directly about potential problems in the therapy relationship, (b)
exploring and validating patients' experience of the rupture, and (c)
taking some responsibility for the rupture by recognizing that
relational problems are inherently dyadic processes. In an RCT with
depressed patients, the ICT group did significantly better statistically
and clinically than a wait-​list control on two measures of depression
and on global functioning. A subsequent small RCT (N = 22) showed that
ICT

410

Future Directions

led to greater posttreatment improvement in depression and global
symptom severity and more clinically significant change than did
standard cognitive therapy (Constantino et al., 2008).

findings that some clients with GAD did not improve with typical CBT
(Borkovec et al., 2002) and have difficulty with interpersonal problems
(Przeworski et al., 2011) and emotional processing (Llera & Newman,
2010), this therapy integrates techniques from humanistic, Integrative
Cognitive-​Affective Therapy interpersonal, and psychodynamic treatments
for Bulimia Nervosa with traditional CBT. One hour of CBT was ICAT
(Wonderlich et al., 2015) for bulimia followed by 1 hour of I/​EP, so
that the therapies nervosa is informed by emotion science and were kept
as distinct components. self-​ discrepancy theory and research. ICAT
Targeting intrapersonal aspects of anxious integrates MI, less
traditional CBT strategies, experience, CBT proceeded through the foland
experiential exercises. It has many lowing steps: (a) identifying
anxiety-​and worry-​ commonalities with standard CBT, which associated
triggers via self-​monitoring and early represents its broader framework,
yet it does not cue detection techniques; (b) therapeutic rainclude
formal cognitive restructuring. Studies tionale; (c) systematic training
in diaphragmatic demonstrate that negative emotional states breathing,
progressive and applied relaxation; often precipitate bulimic symptoms
(Haedt-​ (d) self-​ control coping desensitization (reMatt & Keel, 2011;
Smyth et al., 2007) and that laxation paired with worry trigger
imagery); negative emotions may temporarily subside (e) cognitive
restructuring; (f) behavioral tests after bulimic behaviors occur (Smyth
et al., of alternatives; and (g) long-​term maintenance 2007). A
self-​oriented cognition described as of new skills/​coping. Cognitive
techniques used "self-​discrepancy"---​involving the difference were
individualized and included development between a person's
self-​perception and his or of coping self-​statements, identification of
cogher self-​evaluative standards---​may be an im- nitive predictions and
interpretation about the portant aspect of eating disorder (Strauman
threatening nature of events/​ cues, cognitive et al., 1991). Integrative
ICAT emphasizes challenge and logical analysis, examination emotion
regulation, adaptive coping, self-​ of evidence, labeling of logical
errors, generadirected behaviors, interpersonal relationships, tion of
alternative thoughts, and worry outcome and self-​oriented cognitive
patterns including monitoring. self-​discrepancy (Wonderlich et al.,
2010). The I/​ EP segment had several goals: (a) In an RCT, there were no
significant identification of interpersonal behavior that differences
between ICAT and a transdiagnostic attempted to satisfy needs, (b)
generation of CBT (Fairburn, 2008), yet both were associ- more effective
interpersonal behavior to better ated with significant improvement in
bulimia satisfy needs, and (c) identification and prosymptoms and other
outcomes at end of treat- cessing of avoided emotion associated with all
ment and follow-​up (Wonderlich et al., 2014). therapeutic content. The
interventions were A current trial is under way comparing ICAT based on
the following principles: emphasis with CBT-​ guided self-​ help for binge
eating on emotional experience; therapists' use of disorder
(https://​clinicaltrials.gov/​ct2/​show/​ their own emotional experiences to
identify NCT02043496). points of intervention; use of the therapeutic
relationship to explore affective processes and interpersonal patterns;
provision of homework CBT and Interpersonal/​Emotional experiments;
detection of alliance ruptures and Processing Therapy for Generalized
provision of emotionally corrective experiences Anxiety Disorder in
their resolution; processing of patient's affecNewman and associates
(2004) developed and tive experiencing in relation to past, current,
tested the efficacy of an interpersonal and EFT and in-​session
interpersonal relationships using for GAD, used together with CBT. Based
on emotion-​focused techniques (e.g., Greenberg,

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

2002); and skill training methods to provide more effective
interpersonal behaviors to satisfy identified needs. In a small sample
of clients, a larger percentage improved in the integrative CBT and I/​
EP treatment than in CBT plus supportive listening (SL). Improvements
were maintained at 6 months and 1 year (Newman et al., 2008). A much
larger RCT found no significant difference between the two compared
conditions (Newman et al., 2011). However, in a subsequent secondary
analysis, those with a dismissive attachment style responded
significantly better to CBT + I/​EP than to CBT + SL up to 2-​year
follow-​up (Newman et al., 2015). This finding suggested that individuals
who tend to be avoidant of emotional processing and interpersonal
closeness might do better with a structured and intense treatment that
specifically focuses on emotion and relationship issues, including with
the therapist. However, more empirical work needs to be done to
strengthen this interpretation. Motivational Interviewing and CBT for
Anxiety Westra and colleagues (e.g., Westra & Dozois, 2006) developed
and tested the integration of MI procedures into CBT for anxiety
disorders. MI (Miller & Rollnick, 2002) was designed to increase
intrinsic motivation and decrease ambivalence about change. In MI, the
therapist tries to help the client become his or her own advocate for
change. The four principles of MI are (1) express empathy, (2) develop
discrepancy between the undesirable behaviors and values that are
inconsistent with those behaviors, (3) roll with resistance rather than
confronting it directly, and, (4) support self-​ efficacy. Many MI skills
come directly from traditional client-​centered therapy (e.g., affirming,
summarizing). MI therapists also employ decisional balance procedures to
help clients explore and weigh the pros and cons of change. An initial
study comparing a group of CBT patients who received no pretreatment MI
to a group of CBT participants who received three sessions of
"pretreatment" MI found that the pretreatment MI group had a higher
number of

411

responders than the CBT-​alone group (Westra & Dozois, 2006).
Subsequently, a similar RCT comparing MI plus CBT (MI-​CBT) to CBT alone
for GAD observed significant group differences favoring the MI-​ CBT
group on worry reduction (Westra, Arkowitz, & Dozois, 2009). The size of
this difference was more pronounced for patients with higher worry
severity at baseline. However, neither of these studies controlled for
the additional sessions and therapist contact in the MI-​CBT. A follow-​
up study replicated and extended the preceding findings in an RCT that
controlled for allegiance effects and therapist contact (Westra,
Constantino, & Antony, 2016). Patients in MI-​CBT received four sessions
of MI followed by 11 sessions of CBT integrated with MI; patients in CBT
alone received 15 sessions of just CBT. In the MI-​CBT condition,
therapists were trained to attend and respond to markers of patient
resistance/​ambivalence and respond with MI-​consistent strategies. No
between-​group differences were observed between pre-​and posttreatment;
however, fewer patients dropped out in the integrative therapy
condition, and outcome differences did emerge at 12-​month follow-​up.
Patients who received MI-​CBT demonstrated a steeper decline in worry and
general distress at follow-​up; they were also significantly less likely
to meet diagnostic criteria for GAD when compared to patients who
received CBT alone. In summary, the assimilation of MI strategies into
CBT for GAD is associated with better long-​ term outcomes than CBT
alone. Therapists who deliver CBT can be trained to identify markers of
resistance and ambivalence and to respond with MI-​consistent strategies.
Complicated Grief Treatment CGT (Shear et al., 2005) is a broadly CBT
approach that incorporates elements of interpersonal psychotherapy
(IPT), experiential therapy, and MI. For example, it incorporates the
use of chair work, where the client "interacts" with the deceased. CGT
also relies heavily on attachment theory enriched by self-​ compassion
(Germer & Neff, 2013) and self-​ determination theory (Ryan & Deci,
2000).

412

Future Directions

CGT has shown strong positive outcomes in three separate RCTs. This has
been manifested by reductions in complicated grief and depression
symptoms, suicidal ideation, and global functional impairment. Results
from the first RCT comparing CGT with IPT in a sample of 95 adults
suffering from complicated grief showed that both treatments produced
symptom improvements, yet the overall response rate and trajectory
significantly favored CGT (Shear et al., 2005). A follow-​up study
subsequently compared CGT with grief-​ focused IPT in a larger sample of
elderly persons (Shear et al., 2014). Once again, CGT produced
significantly higher response rates. In a more recent trial, CGT alone
was compared with antidepressant medication in a placebo-​ controlled RCT
(Shear et al., 2016). CGT with placebo outperformed placebo alone in
terms of complicated grief symptoms, and the addition of the active
medication (citalopram) did not significantly improve CGT outcomes.
However, the combination of CGT and medication evidenced significantly
greater improvements in co-​ occurring depression symptoms. Recent years
have witnessed the development of several efficacious assimilative
treatments, the foundational orientations of which have been largely
cognitive-​behavioral and humanistic. In addition, integrative treatments
such as ICT, MI plus CBT, and CGT have outperformed a standard pure-​form
treatment in at least one outcome trial. The methodological rigor (e.g.,
random assignment, fidelity assessment, sample size) of these outcome
studies is also impressive.

THEORETICAL INTEGRATION Theoretically driven integration represents an
amalgam of two or more theories. Those theories may be existing
psychotherapy approaches, newly developed perspectives, or imported from
a relevant discipline (e.g., social ecological theory, personality
theory). The methods similarly hail from two or more systems of
psychotherapy.

Therapies Originally Designed for Multiple Disorders In the following
section, we summarize the outcome research for the following integrative
treatments: transtheoretical psychotherapy, cognitive analytic therapy
(CAT), brief relational therapy (BRT), and schema therapy. Each of these
therapies was developed to be applicable to a broad range of presenting
problems. Transtheoretical Psychotherapy The Transtheoretical Model
(TTM; Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8, this volume; Prochaska &
DiClemente, 2005;Norcross, Krebs, & Prochaska, 2011) posits five stages
of change (precontemplation, contemplation, preparation, action, and
maintenance), with specific processes of change to be used at specific
stages. Clients in the precontemplation stage, which is defined as being
undisturbed by or unaware of problems, and not intending to change, are
at risk for terminating therapy prematurely. Processes of change are
activities and experiences engaged in by individuals when they attempt
to change, either within or outside of therapy, such as
consciousness-​raising, counterconditioning, and helping relationships.
Multiple meta-​ analyses demonstrate that certain change processes are
especially beneficial at particular stages of change or to facilitate
patient progress. For example, clients in the action stage are likely to
be more receptive to directive interventions that prompt engagement in
new behaviors within and outside therapy, whereas clients in the
precontemplation stage are more likely to benefit from interventions
aimed at increasing problem awareness and motivation to change. A
considerable amount of empirical evidence has been gathered in support
of the TTM (Prochaska & Norcross, 2014; Rosen, 2000). Hundreds of
studies have focused on its efficacy on health behaviors, while fewer
have examined its applicability to mental health. A meta-​ analytic
review of 39 psychotherapy studies (N = 8,238 patients) involving
diverse diagnoses reported that stages of change robustly predicted
treatment outcomes, including

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

premature termination (mean effect size of d = .46; Norcross et al.,
2011). This finding highlights the importance of assessing clients'
stages of change before and throughout treatment. The therapist should
take care to match treatment goals and tasks to the client's stage,
including refraining from premature implementation of action-​oriented
interventions. A separate review of six RCTs that utilized TTM for
adolescent smoking cessation demonstrated higher quit rates for TTM
compared to control conditions; that is, the implementation of
stage-​based interventions was associated with a higher likelihood of
cessation (Robinson & Vail, 2012). In RCTs, stage-​ matched treatments
have also outperformed treatment-​ as-​ usual for stress, depression, and
partner violence. The depth and diversity of stage of change and
TTM-​related research over four decades precludes a comprehensive review
in this chapter (see Prochaska & DiClemente, Chapter 8, this volume;
Prochaska & Norcross, 2018; Velicer et al., 2013). Cognitive Analytic
Therapy CAT (Ryle, 2005) is a synthesis of CBT and psychoanalytic object
relations, and includes a series of interventions that can be applied in
a time-​limited format. The main emphasis is on reformulating clients'
problems regarding problematic patterns of relating to self and others
(Ryle & Kerr, 2002). The Self States Sequential Diagram is employed to
visually depict the self-​ maintaining nature of clients' sequences of
beliefs, perceptions, roles, actions, and their consequences. At the end
of therapy, therapists write a letter to clients summarizing what they
have learned about the clients (Ryle & Kerr, 2002). RCTs of CAT have
been conducted for a variety of presenting problems (e.g., Clarke,
Thomas, & James, 2013), yet most have been for personality and eating
disorders and fewer for anxiety, depression, or bipolar disorder
(Calvert & Kellett, 2014; Evans, Kellett, Heyland, Hall, & Majid, 2017).
In a systematic review of 25 CAT outcome studies, five of which were
RCTs, 44% focused on personality

413

disorders (Calvert & Kellett, 2014). A subsequent review examined
uncontrolled effect sizes across 21 studies utilizing various designs
and reported an overall effect size of d = 0.81 (Simmonds, 2016). All
authors concluded that CAT is effective, but not more efficacious than
other active treatments. Brief Relational Therapy Safran and Muran
(2000) developed BRT, which combines maintaining an alliance and
resolving alliance ruptures with elements of relational psychoanalysis,
humanistic/​ experiential therapy, and contemporary theories of cognition
and emotion. BRT is focused on creating the patient's awareness of self
in the interpersonal context and relies heavily on the identification
and resolution of alliance ruptures. Alliance rupture repairs involve a
process of meta-​communication about the therapeutic relationship and the
role of the therapist with regard to the patient's needs. The alliance
rupture resolution consists of four steps: attention to markers that
indicate the alliance rupture, exploration of the experience,
examination of any avoidance of exploration of the ruptured alliance,
and, finally, emergence of a wish or need. Several RCTs of BRT have been
published to date. In a RCT of 128 personality-​disordered clients,
although all groups improved equally, BRT was better at reducing dropout
than short-​ term dynamic therapy (STDT) or brief CBT. In addition, BRT
and CBT showed more clinical improvement than STDT (Muran et al., 2005).
Of the clients randomly assigned to STDT or CBT in another trial (Muran
et al., 2005), 18 identified as high-​risk for treatment failure were
offered reassignment (Safran et al., 2005). These clients then received
BRT, STDT, or short-​term CBT. Among those who opted to be reassigned (n
= 10), 60% of those in BRT had good outcome, whereas 100% of those in
the dynamic and CBT treatments dropped out. In an open trial that
included 30 sessions of BRT with 22 mixed-​diagnosis patients,
within-​patient analyses demonstrated significant, positive

414

Future Directions

pre/​post changes on global symptoms, target complains, and interpersonal
functioning (Rozmarin et al., 2008). Overall, the results of BRT
indicate that clinicians would do well to attend to markers of ruptures
in the alliance, as well as to integrate strategies aimed at their
repair. Such strategies may reduce the risk of dropout and negative
outcome; however, such a conclusion should be made with caution given
the relatively small sample sizes in these studies. Schema Therapy
Schema therapy was developed by Young (1990) to meet the needs of
patients with personality disorders and characterological problems. It
combines cognitive-​ behavioral, interpersonal, and experiential
techniques to bring about change (Martin & Young, 2010; McGinn & Young,
1996; Young, Klosko, & Weishaar, 2003). Although intended for the
treatment of varying personality disorders, schema therapy to date has
been evaluated for treatment of borderline personality disorder (BPD)
and has received some empirical support. It was initially shown to be
effective in a series of six single case reports (Nordahl & Nysaeter,
2005). Since then, two RCTs have demonstrated its efficacy in BPD and
shown that it was more effective than treatment as usual and
transference-​ focused psychotherapy (Farrell, Shaw, & Webber, 2009;
Giesen-​Bloo et al., 2006). (A more detailed account of these studies can
be found in Leahy and McGinn \[2012\].) Therapies Originally Designed
for a Specific Disorder In the following section, we summarize the
outcome research for the following integrative treatments: dialectical
behavior therapy (DBT), multisystemic therapy (MST), and cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy (CBASP). It is notable that
each of these therapies was designed to treat difficult patient
populations---​BPD, conduct disorder, and chronic depression,
respectively.

Dialectical Behavior Therapy Linehan's (1993, 2015) DBT for individuals
with BPD is the most studied integrative therapy for a particular
disorder and is considered to have "strong" research support based on
empirically supported treatment criteria (Chambless & Ollendick, 2001).
DBT integrates dialectics into CBT (Heard & Linehan, 1994; Chapter 12,
this volume). Interventions such as mindfulness, acceptance, and
focusing on dialectical processes are integrated into a framework
consisting of more traditional cognitive-​behavioral interventions, such
as interpersonal reinforcement and problem-​solving (Linehan, 2015).
Offered as both individual sessions and in skill-​building groups,
problematic interpersonal and intrapersonal processes of the clients are
addressed by an emphasis on dialectical processes to resolve their
tendency to vacillate between the extremes of the dialectical poles.
Outcome research on DBT has been extensive, and several meta-​analyses
and systematic reviews of the efficacy and effectiveness of DBT for BPD
have been conducted. A meta-​analysis focused on 16 BPD studies,
including eight RCTs, found a moderate global effect and a moderate
effect size for suicidal and self-​ injurious behaviors (Kliem, Kroger, &
Kosfelder, 2010). Similar results were reported in a meta-​ analysis that
included five RCTs wherein DBT demonstrated significant reductions in
suicide and parasuicidal behavior compared to treatment as usual (Panos
et al., 2014). A Cochrane review of BPD RCTs found moderate to large
statistically significant effects favoring DBT versus treatment as usual
on anger (d = −0.83), parasuicidality (d = −0.54), and general mental
health (d = 0.65; Stoffers-​ Winterling et al., 2012). In addition, in a
systematic review of nonrandomly assigned DBT for inpatients, 11 studies
reported pre-​and posttreatment BPD symptoms and noted significant
heterogeneity in the therapy components and approaches utilized.
Nonetheless, most studies reported reductions in suicidal ideation,
self-​injurious behavior, and depression and anxiety symptoms (Bloom et
al., 2012).

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

Additional studies have supported the effectiveness of DBT for
difficulties beyond BPD, including substance use (e.g., Linehan et al.,
1999, 2002), eating disorders, and depression (e.g., Lynch et al.,
2003). In a meta-​analysis of four DBT studies with a between-​group
analysis (N = 202 patients), there was a large effect size in
problematic eating behavior reduction favoring DBT (Lenz et al., 2013).
Overall, DBT is efficacious for BPD and has accumulated support for its
implementation in other problem areas. Multisystemic Therapy MST
(Henggeler et al., 1998, 2002) is an integrative treatment for youth
with antisocial behaviors. Grounded in systems theory and social
ecology, MST uses a range of multitheoretical techniques and a positive,
present-​oriented focus. Interventions are primarily CBT, structural, and
systemic; individual, family, and community sessions are employed
flexibly. Strengths in the client's systems are used as levers for
change. A hypothesis-​testing approach is used to develop theories
regarding reasons for behavioral maintenance. Numerous studies have
found empirical support for MST in the treatment of delinquent
adolescents, serious juvenile offenders, and substance-​ abusing juvenile
offenders in comparison to wait-​lists and treatment us usual
(Schottenbauer et al., 2005). One of the larger efficacy studies of 176
violent and chronic juvenile offenders found improvements in family
relationships and reductions in recidivism (Borduin et al., 1995). A
follow-​up study showed a 36% reduction in felony arrests from MST
(Borduin, Schaeffer, & Heiblum, 2009). MST has also demonstrated
effectiveness in naturalistic studies (e.g., Henggeler, Pickrel, &
Brondino, 1999). A meta-​analysis of 22 MST outcome studies (N = 4,066)
found small but significant effects on delinquency, psychopathology,
substance use, family relationships, and out-​of-​home placements. MST was
most effective with juveniles under the age of 15 with severe baseline
severity (Van der Stouwe et al., 2014).

415

Cognitive Behavioral Analysis System of Psychotherapy CBASP (see
McCullough, 2002; McCullough & Schramm, Chapter 14, this volume) was
developed to treat chronically depressed clients. It understands
depression through a combination of developmental (Piagetian),
cognitive, and interpersonal theories; interventions include a mix of
CBT and interpersonal techniques. CBASP is similar to CBT approaches in
that it is structured, focuses on teaching social problem-​ solving
skills, and utilizes homework assignments. It has similarities with IPT
in its focus on interpersonal problems. Consistent with psychodynamic
psychotherapy, the relationship with the therapist is used to help
patients become more aware of their impact on others and distinguish
between adaptive and maladaptive relationships (McCullough, 2000). A
major technique used in CBASP is a multiple-​phase situational analysis
(SA). In SA, patients identify a recent, distressing interpersonal
situation and examine it with the therapist. In the initial elicitation
phase, patients describe (a) an interpersonal event, (b) their
interpretation of what occurred, (c) their behavior, (d) the outcome of
the event, (e) what they would have liked the outcome to be, and (f)
whether the desired outcome was achieved. In the subsequent remediation
phase, patients work with the therapist to revise their interpretations,
behaviors, and/​or desired outcome during the situation to increase the
probability of achieving the desired outcome. In the final
generalization phase, patient and therapist review what has been learned
and explore how the patient's new understanding and skills can be
applied to similar situations in the future. The effectiveness of CBASP
has been examined in multiple RCTs and meta-​analyses (e.g., Kocsis et
al., 2009; Michalak Schultze, Heidenreich, & Schramm, 2016; Schramm et
al., 2011; 2015). Klein et al. (2004) reported results from the
psychotherapy arm of the maintenance phase of a large multisite chronic
depression trial (Keller et al., 2000) that found positive results for
both CBASP alone and

416

Future Directions

combined with pharmacotherapy. Their analysis involved 82 patients who
had responded to acute and continuation-​phase CBASP and were
subsequently randomized to monthly CBASP or assessment only for 1 year.
Significantly fewer patients in the CBASP than in the assessment-​ only
condition experienced a recurrence. The two conditions also differed
significantly on change in depressive symptoms over time. A meta-​
analysis that included 16 trials conducted on acute treatments for
chronic depression found no significant differences between CBASP and
medication (Kriston et al., 2014). For the treatment of chronic major
depression, CBASP plus medication was recommended with moderate
strength. Another meta-​analysis conducted on six studies of CBASP for
chronic depression found that CBASP was moderately more effective than
treatment as usual and IPT, and of comparable effectiveness to
antidepressant medication (Negt et al., 2016). In summary, CBASP proves
an effective approach for patients with chronic depressive disorder.
CBASP has consistently outperformed treatment as usual and is comparable
to antidepressant medication. It is unclear yet if it demonstrates
differential efficacy when compared directly to other bona fide
psychotherapies for depression, such as IPT. It is important not to miss
the fact that CBASP shares elements of IPT. Additional research is
needed to determine the types of patients for whom CBASP is likely to be
particularly helpful. To sum up: Several approaches that fall under the
category of transtheoretical integration have garnered significant
research support across multiple controlled trials. Substantial evidence
supports the effectiveness of the TTM, DBT, MST, and CBASP,
specifically. Fewer well-​ powered controlled investigations have been
conducted on CAT, BRT, or schema therapy, yet the results have been
promising with regard to their effectiveness across a range of
disorders. The differential efficacy of these treatments when compared
to other bona fide, pure-​ form therapies is mixed, however.

TECHNICAL ECLECTICISM As noted earlier, technical eclecticism involves
the use of effective methods drawn from different schools of therapy
without subscribing to their underlying theoretical foundations. At the
same time, technical eclectics argue for a systematic approach in
choosing methods and tailoring them to individual clients. Thus,
multimodal therapy (MMT; Lazarus & Lazarus, Chapter 6, this volume)
relies on empirical research and clinical experience to determine which
techniques to employ for given patient problem. Systematic treatment
selection (STS; Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this volume) uses research
reviews determine which patients are most likely to benefit from
different interventions. As such, technical eclecticism is closely tied
to empiricism. Given the flexibility and diverse nature of technical
eclecticism, it proves more difficult to subject such treatments to
traditional comparative efficacy research. A therapist's methods and
relationship stances are likely to change patient to patient. Treatment
components or change principles may have garnered robust empirical
support, yet RCTs might not have tested their delivery in a standardized
sequence. Nevertheless, several eclectic psychotherapies have
accumulated notable empirical support. Therapies Originally Designed for
Multiple Disorders In the following section, we summarize the outcome
literature for two eclectic psychotherapies, STS and feedback-​ informed
therapy (FIT). These two approaches are designed to be applicable to a
broad range of presenting problems. Consistent with technical
eclecticism, routine assessment to inform treatment decisions is the
lynchpin of both. Systematic Treatment Selection The hallmark of
eclectic psychotherapy is the twin ideas that certain clients do better
in certain types of treatment and that techniques can be used from
different systems of therapy regardless of their theoretical origin
(Consoli &

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

417

Beutler, Chapter 7, this volume). Beutler's et al. Reactance is defined
as individuals' ten(2005) STS has the greatest empirical support dency
to oppose following directives; they of the client--​ treatment matching
systems. It prefer to do things their way and maintain conwas originally
based on a comprehensive review trol (Beutler et al., 2011b). Clients
high in reacof the research literature and then subjected to tance
respond more favorably to interventions several RCTs to validate the
matches. Clients low in directiveness (such as client-​ centered are
matched by virtue of their transdiagnostic therapy and MI), whereas
clients low in reaccharacteristics, functional impairment, readi- tance
respond better to interventions high in ness for change, reactance
level, social support, directiveness (such as CBT). A meta-​analysis of
and coping style (Beutler et al., 2004). 27 studies (N = 1,102 patients)
reported a large Several RCTs have been performed on mean effect size in
support of this hypothesis. the STS matches. For example, Beutler et
al. (For a thorough review of client-​ matching (2003) compared standard
cognitive therapy, variables to outcome, see Beutler et al. \[2011a,
cognitive-​ narrative therapy, and STS pre- 2011b\]; Consoli & Beutler,
Chapter 7, this scriptive therapy for 40 clients with comorbid volume).
depression and chemical dependence. STS prescriptive therapy selectively
applied Multimodal Therapy interventions from the other two therapies
using client functional impairment, coping Lazarus's MMT (2005) remains
one of the style, reactance level, and subjective distress as best-​known
systems of eclectic psychotherapy. variables for matching treatments.
The effects MMT is based on an assessment that identifies of the matched
therapy were stronger than ei- a client's problems and also predominant
ther of the other two treatments. modalities (aspects of functioning)
from among Another study compared treatment the BASIC I.D.: Behavior,
Affect, Sensation, matching and mismatching according to four Imagery,
Cognition, Interpersonal relationships, STS variables (Karno, Beutler, &
Harwood, and Drugs/​ biological functioning. Treatment 2002). Cognitive
therapy or family systems is then tailored to the client's problem,
needs, therapy was given to 47 couples in which one and characteristic
modalities. Lazarus employs partner was an alcoholic. Matching on the
STS approximately four dozen techniques, invariables accounted for most
of the abstinence cluding medication, imagery and fantasy, outcomes
(76%), and mismatched treatment client-​centered reflection, and gestalt
empty-​ resulted in the worst outcomes. chair exercises, with an emphasis
on cognitive Two patient characteristics for which the and behavioral
techniques (Lazarus, 2005). research clearly shows treatment matching
Some controlled studies of MMT have been effects are coping style and
reactance level. undertaken in the area of school counseling. In
Externalizing styles of coping consists of acting-​ a 10-​week multimodal
counseling program deout or blaming others, whereas internalizing
veloped for potential middle school dropouts, coping consists of a
client blaming him- attitudes of girls (but not boys) in the treatself
and generating internal distress as a re- ment group became
significantly more posisult. A meta-​analysis of 12 studies (N = 1,291
tive, whereas the control group did not change patients) reported a
moderate mean effect size (Gerler, Drew, & Mohr, 1990). No significant
for matching treatment approach to patient change, however, was observed
in the mulcoping style (Beutler, Harwood, et al., 2011a). timodal group
on a teacher behavior-​ rating Patients who externalized did better in
CBT, scale or on academic performance. In ansymptom-​focused, and
skill-​building therapies other controlled outcome study, clear support
than in insight-​ oriented or relationship-​ was observed for multimodal
assessment and oriented therapies, while internalizing patients therapy
as compared with other approaches for did better in insight-​oriented or
relationship-​ children with learning disabilities (Williams, oriented
therapies. 1988). Additional uncontrolled studies have

418

Future Directions

reported favorable response rates in inpatient settings (e.g., Kwee et
al., 1986; Kwee & Kwee-​Taams, 1994). Although MMT has certainly been the
focus of empirical scrutiny, it is difficult to draw firm conclusions
regarding its efficacy given the lack of more recent rigorous controlled
research. However, it is important to emphasize that many of MMT's
suggested techniques have been supported by other empirical research.
Feedback-​Informed Therapy Miller and associates (2005) advocate for a
technically eclectic psychotherapy that embraces select common factors:
tapping client resources, enhancing the therapeutic relationship, and
adopting the client's worldview regarding his or her problems. They
shift from a framework in which the therapist knows best to one in which
the therapist asks the client for feedback regularly and incorporates
the client's views about therapy into treatment (Miller et al., 2005).
Any number of interventions are then used in service of meeting the
client's needs. FIT relies heavily on the Partners for Change Outcome
Management System (PCOMS), which collects feedback at each session on
the clients' experience of the session and their progress toward their
desired goals. This information is immediately processed by the
therapist and discussed with the client in session. Meta-​ analysis
(Lambert et al., 2018) supports the efficacy of the PCOMS in individual,
couple, and group psychotherapy. Feedback modestly improves treatment
outcomes for all patients but substantially improves outcome and
decreases dropout among patients identified as at risk of deterioration.
(The reader is referred to Maeschalck, Prescott, & Miller \[Chapter 5,
this volume\] and Lambert et al. \[2018\] for further information.)
Pluralistic Therapy Pluralistic therapy (Cooper & McLeod, 2011) combines
diverse treatment methods and strategies in a manner that is tailored
directly to the client's goals and preferences. This

approach is highly collaborative in the selection of strategies and
utilized formal feedback tools to support collaborative task and goal
negotiations. Results from a preliminary open trial showed that the
majority of clients receiving pluralistic therapy experienced clinical
and/​or reliable improvement in symptoms and functioning (Cooper, 2014).
A subsequent multisite pre/​post intervention (nonrandomized) study of
pluralistic therapy for depression found that the majority of treatment
completers (N = 28) demonstrated reliable improvement in self-​ reported
symptoms and functioning (Cooper et al., 2015). Pluralistic therapy has
also been the focus of process research and case studies. Therapies
Originally Designed for a Specific Disorder Technical eclecticism
assumes that a one-​size-​ fits-​all approach to psychotherapy is limited,
so it is not surprising that most eclectic models are intended to be
applied to a wide range of clients and presenting problems. Brief
eclectic psychotherapy (BEP) for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD),
however, was designed specifically for use with trauma-​related
disorders. Brief Eclectic Psychotherapy for PTSD Gersons, Carlier,
Lamberts, and van der Kolk (2000) adapted a treatment for PTSD that uses
CBT techniques (psychoeducation, imaginary guidance, homework tasks, and
cognitive restructuring), focal psychodynamic work targeting moral
emotions and the therapeutic relationship, and a farewell ritual. In a
RCT of 24 PTSD patients, the BEP group evidenced significantly greater
reductions in PTSD and general anxiety symptoms at posttreatment than
did a wait-​list group (Lindauer et al., 2005). Another RCT of PTSD
patients (N = 30) with mixed traumatic events found that those in the
BEP condition demonstrated significantly greater reductions in PTSD
symptoms, as well as comorbid anxiety and depression symptoms, than did
those receiving "minimal attention" (Schnyder et al., 2011).

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

In what appears to be the only comparative treatment trial comparing BEP
to another active treatment, patients diagnosed with PTSD were
randomized to receive BEP (N = 70) or eye-​movement desensitization and
reprocessing (EMDR) (N = 70). Treatments demonstrated similar symptom
outcomes and dropout rates; however, EMDR patients demonstrated a
steeper recovery trajectory (Nijdam et al., 2012). BEP is listed as
"conditionally recommended" in the American Psychological Association's
(APA) practice guidelines for PTSD. Although the term eclecticism has
somewhat fallen out of favor (Norcross et al., 2016), the technically
eclectic approaches just reviewed are on solid empirical ground. The STS
approach has garnered substantial support over decades of research;
PCOMS is designated as an evidence-​based intervention by Substance Abuse
and Mental Health Administration (SAMHSA), and BEP is included in APA's
clinical practice guidelines for PTSD. INTEGRATIVE FAMILY, COUPLES, AND
GROUP PSYCHOTHERAPY Compared to individual therapy, fewer attempts have
been made to investigate the outcomes of integrative treatments in
family, couple, and group formats. This literature consists of two
well-​studied therapies, emotion-​focused couple therapy (Greenberg &
Johnson, 1988) and MST (Henggeler et al., 1998). In addition, there are
a number of therapies with only one or two empirical studies.
Integrative Family Therapies A variety of integrative therapies have
been developed for families, including MST (Henggeler et al., 1998), a
combination of individual and family therapies that was reviewed earlier
in this chapter. (A more comprehensive review of family therapy
research, including literature on integrative family therapy, can be
found in Sexton et al. \[2013\].) As described earlier, MST (Henggeler
et al., 1998, 2002) is an integrative treatment

419

for youth with antisocial behaviors that is grounded in systems theory
and social ecology. Interventions are CBT, structural, or family
therapy. A meta-​analysis of 22 MST outcome studies (N = 4,066) found
significant effects on delinquency, psychopathology, substance use,
family relationships, and out-​ of-​ home placements (Van der Stouwe et
al., 2014). Another integrative family therapy that has been studied in
RCTs is systemic behavioral family therapy (SBFT; Alexander & Parsons,
1982), which combines systemic and behavioral principles (Robin &
Foster, 1989). SBFT was compared to CBT and nondirective supportive
therapy for adolescents with major depressive disorder (Birmaher et al.,
2000). Significant improvements were observed in all treatments, with no
long-​term differences between groups. Secondary analyses from this trial
have failed to find significant differences between the CBT and SBFT
conditions (Barbe et al., 2004a, 2004b), yet the nondirective therapy
appears to have been relatively less effective than the CBT and SBFT
conditions for adolescents with more severe presentations and histories.
Behavioral family systems therapy (BFST) has also been studied in RCTs
for anorexia nervosa (e.g., Robin et al., 1999) and for adolescents with
diabetes. For example, BFST plus medical treatment resulted in improved
family relationships and decreased diabetes-​ related conflicts at both
posttreatment and follow-​up, in comparison to educational support and
treatment as usual (Wysocki et al., 2001). In a study with families of
adolescents with unstable diabetes type 1 (Wysocki et al., 2006, 2007) a
positive effect was found for an adapted form of BFST for diabetics when
compared with standard care or multifamily educational support.
Attachment-​ based family therapy (ABFT; Diamond, 2014) was designed to
treat adolescents with depression, suicidality, and trauma. This
approach is grounded in attachment theory and is heavily influenced by
EFT and traditional family-​based therapy (Diamond, Russon, & Levy,
2016). The first RCT of ABFT compared 12 weeks of ABFT to 6 weeks of a
wait-​list control condition and

420

Future Directions

found that participants in the ABFT condition were less likely to meet
criteria for depression at posttreatment (Diamond et al., 2002). A
subsequent RCT comparing ABFT to usual care for adolescents with
suicidal ideation and depression found that youth treated with ABFT
exhibited significantly greater and faster reductions in suicidal
ideation at posttreatment, and these were maintained at follow-​up
(Diamond et al., 2010). Integrative Couples Therapy Emotion-​ focused
couple therapy (EFCT; Greenberg & Johnson, 1988; Johnson, 2004) blends
the experiential tradition, emphasizing the role of affect through the
use of client-​centered and gestalt methods and the systemic tradition,
focusing on communication and interaction patterns, within the context
of attachment theory. EFCT has received considerable empirical support
(Schottenbauer et al., 2005). Recent research has focused on the
efficacy of EFT for couples with specific difficulties, such as trauma
and depression. An RCT examined the efficacy of EFCT for women with a
history of childhood abuse in comparison to a wait-​ list control group
(Dalton, Johnson, & Classen, 2009). Couples in EFCT demonstrated
significant reductions in relationship distress compared to a wait-​list
control group. EFCT combined with medication versus medication alone in
depressed couples found that women in both groups experienced
significant improvements in their depressive symptoms, yet there was no
between-​group difference on this outcome (Denton et al., 2010). However,
women receiving EFCT combined with medication did experience a
significantly greater improvement in relationship quality. In summary,
EFCT has received substantial attention within the literature and is one
of the two evidence-​based treatments of relationship distress, the other
being behavioral couple therapy (Lebow et al., 2012). Integrative
behavioral couple therapy (IBCT; Jacobson & Christensen, 1996) is
broadly behavioral yet integrates mindfulness

and acceptance strategies. IBCT was compared to traditional behavioral
couple therapy (TBCT) in a large, multisite RCT. Couples in both
conditions improved in relationship satisfaction; however, their
trajectories were significantly different. TBCT couples improved quickly
early on but then tapered off, whereas IBCT couples improved gradually
but consistently throughout the course of treatment. For the first 2
years after termination, IBCT couples maintained their satisfaction at
significantly higher rates than TBCT couples (Christensen et al., 2004,
2006). However, after 2 years of follow-​up, differences between the two
treatments disappeared. Nevertheless, a substantial portion of couples
in both groups maintained improvements through 5 years after treatment
termination (Christensen et al., 2010). Integrative Group Therapies With
the exception of CAT, which has been adapted for a time-​limited group
format, we were unable to identify group therapies that explicitly
identify themselves as integrative in orientation. A recent study on
group CAT used a longitudinal cohort design in a sample of female
survivors of childhood sexual abuse (Calvert, Kellett, & Hagan, 2015).
Moderate pre/​post effect sizes were observed in global symptoms. We were
unable to locate more recent controlled trials examining the efficacy of
group CAT. A recognition of the complexity of the process of change has
been a driving force in the development of psychotherapy integration, as
well as in clinicians' identification with an integrative orientation.
It is not, therefore, surprising that integrative treatments have been
developed and tested for application in complex family and couples
contexts. MST, in particular, is one of the most heavily researched
treatments, and it has also established an impressive dissemination and
implementation portfolio. Similarly, EFCT has established itself as a
frontline therapy for couples. Simply stated, the gold standard
therapies for families and couples are integrative therapies.

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

The state of the outcome literature for integrative group therapies is
less clear. This is due to a lack of bona fide group treatments that
explicitly define themselves as integrative, as well as a lack of
published controlled outcome research on approaches that some might
consider integrative in orientation (e.g., Yalom, 2005). FUTURE
DIRECTIONS Psychotherapy integration has come of age in outcome
research. At least 29 explicitly integrative therapies have been
subjected to rigorous controlled research. The results consistently and
persuasively attest to their safety, feasibility, and effectiveness. Of
course, effectiveness is a relative matter, but we can confidently
declare that integrative treatments uniformly outperform no treatment
and almost uniformly outperform treatments as usual. Few integrative
therapies have been thoroughly compared to bona fide, pure-​form
therapies, so the jury is still out on whether integrative therapies
prove superior in efficacy or applicability to others. CONCLUSION
Similar to the conclusions drawn from RCTs involving any active
interventions (integrative or otherwise), it would be premature and
spurious to conclude that integrative treatments fail to confer added or
unique benefit for individual patients. As argued elsewhere (Stiles,
2009), outcome "equivalence" is likely driven by responsiveness and the
masking of interindividual variability in treatment response. As such,
it is not necessarily the case that integrationists should go back to
the drawing board; rather, additional process--​outcome studies are
needed to increase our understanding of those patients who are more
likely to benefit from an integrative therapy. A host of other promising
integrative therapies, such as Benjamin's (2003) interpersonal
reconstructive therapy, have been developed and received some empirical
attention in recent decades. Any attempt to list these

421

therapies here would be admittedly selective. Nonetheless, our review of
29 integrative psychotherapies probably underestimates the actual
number. In addition, were we to emphasize research designs other than
RCTs to a greater degree, the number of evidence-​based integrative
therapies would undoubtedly increase. Multitheoretical psychotherapy,
pluralistic therapy, several assimilative therapies, and numerous child
therapies (Drewes & Seymour, Chapter 16, this volume) have been
subjected to some empirical scrutiny yet are relatively lacking in
controlled outcome research. We acknowledge that RCTs and related
designs are not without limitations and that diverse research methods
can yield results that inform evidence-​based practice (Norcross,
Beutler, & Levant, 2006). Nevertheless, it is difficult to draw
substantive conclusions regarding the efficacy of a given therapy in the
absence of studies involving random assignment and adequate power.
Conclusions regarding a given therapy's efficacy are not only connected
to the research design, but also to the operationalization and
replicability of the therapy itself. Perhaps due to their evolving
nature, the labels and methods of integrative therapies change over
time, leading one to wonder if the same treatment that was delivered in
the first trial was the same treatment delivered in the second trial.
Such responsiveness may be a boon for patients, but a curse for
researchers (Norcross & Wampold, 2019). This creates a dilemma for
studying integrative treatments because, to their credit, they emphasize
the flexible application of clinical strategies based on emerging
context and client characteristics (Boswell, 2017; Constantino, Boswell,
Bernecker, & Castonguay, 2013). Although outcome research on
psychotherapy integration has progressed dramatically in recent decades,
much work is left to be done. The field still lacks substantial
knowledge regarding the effectiveness of psychotherapy integration as it
is carried out by clinicians in routine practice. This is a difficult
task to accomplish, however. Naturalistic studies examining the
improvement of clients receiving eclectic therapy in routine practice
(e.g., Nordberg

422

Future Directions

et al., 2014) are limited because they have not As similar
multidimensional measures are declearly defined what the therapists did
during veloped and implemented, the capacities to treatment and
therefore are not easily translated both characterize the nature of an
integrative into direct practice recommendations. treatment and explore
the effectiveness of inteIntegrative therapists often state that they
tend grative psychotherapy will be enhanced. to use what works best for
the client---​different Of course, exploring the effectiveness of
combinations of techniques, as well as different integrative
psychotherapy must also include decisional processes. This leaves a
virtually in- targeted assessments of relevant outcomes. finite number
of integrations that would need The increased implementation of routine
outto be studied. come monitoring offers a critical resource for That
potential blizzard of integrations ac- examining the outcomes of
integrative psychocounts in part for the recent movement to a therapy
"in the trenches." In addition, such finite number of change processes
or princi- feedback can aid psychotherapist decision-​ ples.
Practitioners---​and trainers---​need to de- making and the ability to
detect when a change limit the universe of therapeutic methods and of
approach might be indicated. For example, systematically determine which
might be op- feedback that a client is on course to experitimally
employed for a given client and con- ence a negative outcome in the
current course text. In this volume, the integrative therapies of
treatment can function as a marker for inteof common factors (Wampold &
Ulvenes, gration (e.g., implementing a technique from Chapter 3, this
volume), principle-​ based an exogenous theoretical orientation). Future
therapy (Eubanks & Goldfried, Chapter 4, work can identify markers for
integration, as this volume), systematic treatment selection well as
successful (or unsuccessful) response (Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7,
this volume), strategies. and the transtheoretical approach (Prochaska
Although it will be important to continue & DiClemente, Chapter 8, this
volume) all investigating integrative therapies in both have developed
principles/​processes of change controlled and naturalistic settings, a
focus on to be used at certain times. markers and how to respond to the
unfolding In addition, objective characterizations of context might
require a shift in our approach routine practice patterns are difficult
to ob- to studying integrative psychotherapy. As the tain, regardless of
the treatment. It cannot be list of integrative therapies and the
associated taken on faith that clinicians who identify with acronym
alphabet soup grow, there is a danger a specific theoretical
orientation, including that we are recapitulating the very problem an
integrative one, consistently engage in integrative therapies were, at
least in part, orientation-​ specific and consistent behaviors intended
to address. A marker-​and context-​ with their clients (Stirman et al.,
2015). responsive--​driven approach to studying psyResearchers have
developed participant self-​ chotherapy process and outcome appears to
report measures that can provide potentially be a logical response to
this dilemma as well, useful information at some scale. For example,
compared to a proliferation of Integrative the Multidimensional List of
Therapeutic Therapy A versus Pure Form Therapy B outInterventions
assesses the nature of psycho- come trials. In addition to a strong
likelihood therapy delivered in routine settings across of demonstrating
statistical equivalence on broad theoretical orientation-​ linked domains
posttreatment outcomes, such comparative (McCarthy & Barber, 2009). The
Comparative outcome trials, on their own, do little to eluPsychotherapy
Process Scale assesses the pres- cidate principles that can guide
clinician ence of interventions across broad psychody- decision-​making
with a given patient. namic and CBT domains (Hilsenroth et al., It may
prove more fruitful to study within-​ 2005), while a routine assessment
tool for child and between-​ patient mechanisms, which anxiety treatment
was developed to assess treat- can guide integrative practice. Matching
ment adherence (Southam-​Gerow et al., 2016). treatments to the patient's
stage of change

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration

(TTM) and their reactance level and coping style (STS) illustrates one
form of this matching---​ to patient transdiagnostic markers. We expect
additional work on in-​ session markers. For example, markers of alliance
ruptures: upon the identification of such a marker, clinicians can shift
into rupture repair strategies. Process--​outcome research can then
examine how different markers might manifest in certain subgroups of
patients, as well as how repair strategies might be tailored to
subgroups of patients. Such research and research-​ derived guidelines
may be more useful to clinicians than the knowledge that Treatment A
(integrative or pure form) is generally effective. In the United States,
the National Institute of Mental Health has been the largest funder of
psychotherapy outcome research. Significant changes in its funding
priorities and requirements have taken place over the past decade. It is
much more difficult to obtain large grants for investigator-​ initiated
psychotherapy outcome trials, and, in the foreseeable future, there will
be far fewer funded studies involving the comparative efficacy of
integrative and pure-​form psychotherapies. Integration researchers will
need to be more creative in their research questions and methods, and
researchers must consider alternative funding sources. Given the current
funding environment, the more innovative outcome research is likely to
come from researchers in countries outside of the United States.
Finally, all of psychotherapy research needs to be conducted with more
racially, ethnically, and sexually representative populations. Several
of the research-​heavy integrative therapies in this chapter have been
performed with unrepresentative populations to date. For example, the
vast majority of DBT research has been performed with entirely or
primarily female patients (Rizvi et al., 2013). Likewise, MST has been
criticized for not being sufficiently attentive to cultural norms in
some settings. That will certainly constitute a direction for future
research, so that we might, one day, confidently assert the
effectiveness of integrative therapies for patients of all cultural
identities.

423

References Alexander, J., & Parsons, B. V. (1982). Functional family
therapy. Monterey, CA: Brooks/​Cole. Angus, L., Watson, J. C., Elliott,
R., Schneider, K., & Timulak, L. (2015). Humanistic psychotherapy
research 1990--​ 2015: From methodological innovation to evidence-​
supported treatment outcomes and beyond. Psychotherapy Research, 25,
330--​347. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1080/​ 10503307.2014.989290 Barbe, R. P.,
Bridge, J. A., Birhamer, B., Kolko, D. J., & Brent, D. A. (2004a).
Lifetime history of sexual abuse, clinical presentation, and outcome in
a clinical trial for adolescent depression. Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry, 65, 77--​83. Barbe, R. P., Bridge, J. A., Birhamer, B.,
Kolko, D. J., & Brent, D. A. (2004b). Suicidality and its relationship
to treatment outcome in depressed adolescents. Suicide and Life-​
Threatening Behavior, 34, 44--​55. Benjamin, L. S. (2003). Interpersonal
reconstructive therapy: Promoting change in nonresponders. New York:
Guilford. Beutler, L. E., Consoli, A. J., & Lane, G. (2005).
Prescriptive psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.),
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 121--​ 144). New
York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L. E., & Harwood, T. M. (2000).
Prescriptive psychotherapy: A practical guide to systematic treatment
selection. New York: Oxford University Press. Beutler, L. E., Harwood,
T. M., Kimpara, S., Verdirame, D., & Blau, K. (2011a). Coping style. In
J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​
based responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 336--​353). New York: Oxford
University Press. Beutler, L. E., Harwood, T. M., Michelson, A., Song,
X., & Holman, J. (2011b). Reactance/​ resistance level. In J. C. Norcross
(Ed.), Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​ based
responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 261--​ 300). New York: Oxford University
Press. Beutler, L. E., Moleiro, C., Malik, M., Harwood, M., Romanelli,
R., Gallagher-​Thompson, D., et al. (2003). A comparison of the Dodo,
EST, and ATI factors among comorbid stimulant-​ dependent, depressed
clients. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 10, 69--​85. Birmaher,
B., Brent, D. A., Kolko, D., Baugher, M., Bridge, J., Holder, D., et
al. (2000). Clinical

424

Future Directions

outcome after short-​ term psychotherapy for Chambless, D. L., &
Ollendick, T. H. (2001). adolescents with major depressive disorder.
Empirically supported psychological interven­ Archives of General
Psychiatry, 57, 29--​36. tions: Controversies and evidence. Annual Bloom,
J. M., Woodward, E. N., Susmaras, T., & Review of Clinical Psychology,
52, 685--​716. Pantalone, D. W. (2012). Use of dialectical Chambless, D.
L., Goldstein, A. J., Gallagher, behavior therapy in inpatient treatment
of R., & Bright, P. (1986). Integrating behavior borderline personality
disorder: A systematic therapy and psychotherapy in the treatment of
review. Psychiatric Services, 63, 881--​888. agoraphobia. Psychotherapy,
23, 150--​159. Borduin, C. M., Mann, B. J., Cone, L. T., Henggeler,
Chorpita, B. F., Yim, L. M., Donkervoet, J. C., S. W., Fucci, B. R.,
Blaske, D. M., & Williams, Arensdorf, A., Amundsen, M. J., McGee, C., R.
A. (1995). Multisystemic treatment of serious et al. (2002). Toward
large-​scale implementation juvenile offenders: Long-​ term prevention of
of empirically supported treatments for criminality and violence.
Journal of Consulting children: A review and observations by the and
Clinical Psychology, 63, 569--​578. Hawaii Empirical Basis to Services
Task Force. Borduin, C. M., Schaeffer, C. M., & Heiblum, Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, N. (2009). A randomized clinical
trial of 165--​190. multisystemic therapy with juvenile sexual
Christensen, A., Atkins, D. C., Baucom, B., & Yi, J. offenders: Effects
on youth social ecology and (2010). Marital status and satisfaction five
years criminal activity. Journal of Consulting and following a
randomized clinical trial comparing Clinical Psychology, 77, 26--​37.
traditional versus integrative behavioral couple Borkovec, T. D.,
Newman, M. G., Pincus, A. L., therapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical & Lytle, R. (2002). A component analysis of Psychology, 78,
225--​235. cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for generalized Christensen, A.,
Atkins, D. C., Berns, S., Wheeler, anxiety disorder and the role of
interpersonal J., Baucom, D. H., & Simpson, L. E. (2004). problems.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Traditional versus integrative
behavioral Psychology, 70, 288--​ 298. doi:10.1037/​ couple therapy for
significantly and chronically 0022-​006X.70.2.288 distressed married
couples. Journal of Consulting Boswell, J. F. (2017). Psychotherapy and
Clinical Psychology, 72, 176--​191. integration: Research, practice, and
training Christensen, A., Atkins, D. C., Yi, J., Baucom, at the leading
edge. Journal of Psychotherapy D. H., & George, W. H. (2006). Couple and
Integration, 27, 225--​235. http://​dx.doi.org/​ individual adjustment for
2 years following a 10.1037/​int0000055 randomized clinical trial
comparing traditional Boswell, J. F., & Goldfried, M. R. (2010). versus
integrative behavioral couple therapy. Psychotherapy integration. In I.
B. Weiner & W. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, E.
Craighead (Eds.), The Corsini encyclopedia of 74, 1180--​1191. psychology
(4th ed., pp. 1--​3). New York: Wiley. Clarke, S., Thomas, P., & James,
K. (2013). Cognitive Calderon, C. (2003). Integrative psychotherapy in
analytic therapy for personality disorder: personality disorder
treatment: A descriptive Randomized controlled trial. British Journal
study of therapeutic results. Psykhe: Revista de of Psychiatry, 202,
129--​134. doi: 10.1192/​bjp. la Escuela de Psicologia, 12, 97--​107.
bp.112.108670 Calvert, R., & Kellett, S. (2014). Cognitive Constantino,
M. J., Boswell, J. F., Bernecker, S. L., & analytic therapy: A review of
the outcome Castonguay, L. G. (2013). Context-​responsive evidence base
for treatment. Psychology and integration as a framework for unified
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, and Practice, psychotherapy and
clinical science: Conceptual 87, 253--​277. and empirical considerations.
Journal of Calvert, R., Kellet, S., & Hagan, T. (2015). Group Unified
Psychotherapy and Clinical Science, cognitive analytic therapy for
femail survivors 2, 1--​20. of childhood sexual abuse. British Journal of
Constantino, M. J., Marnell, M. E., Haile, A. J., Clinical Psychology,
54, 391--​413. Kanther-​Sista, S. N., Wolman, K., Zappert, L., Castonguay,
L. G., Schut, A. J., Aikins, D. E., & Arnow, B. A. (2008). Integrative
cognitive Constantino, M. J., Laurenceau, J., Bology, L., therapy for
depression: A randomized pilot et al. (2004). Integrative cognitive
therapy for comparison. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, depression: A
preliminary investigation. Journal Practice, Training, 45, 122--​134.
doi: 10.1037/​ of Psychotherapy Integration, 14, 4--​20.
0033-​3204.45.2.122

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration Cooper, M. (2014).
Strathclyde pluralistic protocol. London: University of Roehampton.
Cooper, M., & McLeod, J. (2011). Pluralistic counselling and
psychotherapy. London: Sage. Cooper, M., Wild, C., van Rijn, B., Ward,
T., McLeod, J., Cassar, S., . . . Sreenath, S. (2015). Pluralistic
therapy for depression: Acceptability, outcomes, and helpful aspects in
a multisite study. Counselling Psychology Review, 30, 6--​20. Dalton, J.,
Johnson, S. M., & Classen, C. (2009). Treating relationship distress and
the effects of childhood abuse with emotion focused couple therapy: A
randomized controlled trial. Unpublished manuscript, Ottawa, Canada.
Denton, W. H., Nakonezny, P. A., Wittenborn, A. K., & Jarrett, R. B.
(2010). Augmenting antidepressant medication treatment of women with
EFT. In W. Denton (Chair), New research findings in EFT for couples.
Paper presented at the EFT Summit, San Diego, CA. Diamond, G., Russon,
J., & Levy, S. (2016). Attachment-​based family therapy: A review of the
empirical support. Family Process, 55, 595--​ 610. doi:
10.1111/​famp.12241 Diamond, G. M. (2014). Attachment-​based family
therapy interventions. Psychotherapy, 51, 15--​ 19. doi: 10.1037/​a0032689
Diamond, G. S., Reis, B. F., Diamond, G. M., Siqueland, L., & Isaacs, L.
(2002). Attachment-​based family therapy for depressed adolescents: A
treatment development study. Journal of the American Academy of Child &
Adolescent Psychiatry, 41, 1190--​1196.
doi:10.1097/​00004583-​200210000-​00008 Diamond, G. S., Wintersteen, M. B.,
Brown, G. K., Diamond, G. M., Gallop, R., Shelef, K., et al. (2010).
Attachment-​based family therapy for adolescents with suicidal ideation:
A randomized controlled trial. Journal of the American Academy of Child
& Adolescent Psychiatry, 49, 122--​131. doi:10.1016/​j.jaac.2009.11.002
Dollard, J., & Miller, N. E. (1950). Personality and psychotherapy: An
analysis in terms of learning, thinking, and culture. New York:
McGraw-​Hill. Duignan, I., & Mitzman, S. (1994). Change in clients
receiving time-​limited cognitive analytic group therapy. International
Journal of Short-​ Term Psychotherapy, 9, 1151--​1160. Elliott, R.,
Watson, J., Greenberg, L. S., Timulak, L., & Freire, E. (2013). Research
on humanistic-​ experiential psychotherapies. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.),
Bergin & Garfield's handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (6th
ed., pp. 495--​538). New York: Wiley.

425

Elliott, R., Watson, J. C., Goldman, R. N., & Greenberg, L. S. (2004).
Learning emotion-​ focused therapy: The process-​ experiential approach to
change. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. Ellison, J.
A., Greenberg, L. S., Goldman, R. N., & Angus, L. (2009). Maintenance of
gains at follow-​ up in experiential therapies for depression. Journal of
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 77, 103--​112. doi:10.1037/​a0014653
Evans, M., Kellett, S., Heyland, S., Hall, J., & Majid, S. (2017).
Cognitive analytic therapy for bipolar disorder: A pilot randomized
controlled trial. Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, 24, 22--​ 35.
doi: 10.1002/​cpp.2065 Fairburn, C. G. (2008). Cognitive Behavior Therapy
and Eating Disorders. Guilford Press. Farrell, J. M., Shaw, I. A., &
Webber, M. A. (2009). A schema-​focused approach to group psychotherapy
for outpatients with borderline personality disorder: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 40, 317--​328. French, T. M. (1933). Interrelations between
psychoanalysis and the experimental work of Pavlov. American Journal of
Psychiatry, 89, 1165--​1203. doi:10.1176/​ajp.89.6.1165 Gerler, E. R.,
Drew, N. S., & Mohr, P. (1990). Succeeding in middle school: A
multimodal approach. Elementary School Guidance & Counseling, 24,
263--​271. Germer, C. K., & Neff, K. D. (2013). Self-​ compassion in
clinical practice. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 69(8), 856--​867.
Gersons, B. P. R., Carlier, I. V. E., Lamberts, R. D., & van der Kolk,
B. A. (2000). Randomized clinical trial of brief eclectic psychotherapy
for police officers with posttraumatic stress disorder. Journal of
Traumatic Stress, 13, 333--​347. Giesen-​ Bloo, J., van Dyck, R.,
Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., Dirksen, C., van Asselt, T., . . .
Arntz, A. (2006). Outpatient psychotherapy for borderline personality
disorder: Randomized trial of schema-​focused therapy vs. transference
focused psychotherapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 63, 649--​658.
Goldfried, M. R., Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Fuertes, J. N.,
Magnavita, J. J., Sobell, L., & Wolf, A. W. (2014). On the dissemination
of clinical experiences in using empirically supported treatments.
Behavior Therapy, 45, 3--​ 6. doi:10.1016/​j.beth.2013.09.007 Goldman, R.
N., Greenberg, L. S., & Angus, L. (2006). The effects of adding
emotion-​focused

426

Future Directions

interventions to the client-​centered relationship Johnson, S. M.,
Hunsley, J., Greenberg, L., & conditions in the treatment of depression.
Schindler, D. (1999). Emotionally focused Psychotherapy Research, 16,
537--​549. couples therapy: Status and challenges. Clinical Greenberg, L.
S. (2002). Emotion-​focused Psychology: Science and Practice, 6, 67--​79.
therapy: Coaching clients to work through Karno, M. P., Beutler, L. E.,
& Harwood, T. M. their feelings. Washington, DC: American (2002).
Interactions between psychotherapy Psychological Association. procedures
and client attributes that predict Greenberg, L., & Johnson, S. (1988).
Emotionally alcohol treatment effectiveness: A preliminary focused
therapy for couples. New York: Guilford. report. Addictive Behaviors,
27, 779--​797. Greenberg, L., & Watson, J. (1998). Experiential Keller,
M. B., McCullough, J. P., Klein, D. N., therapy of depression:
Differential effects Arnow, B., Dunner, D. L., Gelenberg, A. J., of
client-​ centered relationship conditions et al. (2000). A comparison of
nefazodone, and process experiential interventions. the cognitive
behavioral-​ analysis system of Psychotherapy Research, 8, 210--​224.
psychotherapy, and their combination for the Haedt-​Matt, A., & Keel P.
K. (2011). Revisiting the treatment of chronic depression. New England
affect regulation model of binge eating: A meta-​ Journal of Medicine,
342, 1462--​1470. analysis of studies using ecological momentary Kliem,
S., Kroger, C., & Kosfelder, J. (2010). assessment. Psychological
Bulletin, 137, Dialectical behavior therapy for borderline 660--​681.
personality disorder: A meta-​ analysis using Heard, H. L., & Linehan, M.
M. (1994). Dialectical mixed-​effects modeling. Journal of Consulting
behavior therapy: An integrative approach to and Clinical Psychology,
78, 936--​951. the treatment of borderline personality disorder. doi:
10.1037/​a0021015 Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 4, 55--​82. Klein,
D. N., Santiago, N. J., Vivian, D., Arnow, B. A., Henggeler, S. W.,
Pickrel, S. G., & Brondino, M. J. Blalock, J. A., Dunner, D. L., . . .
Keller, M. B. (1999). Multisystemic treatment of substance (2004).
Cognitive-​behavioral analysis system of abusing and dependent
delinquents: Outcomes, psychotherapy as a maintenance treatment for
treatment fidelity, and transportability. Mental chronic depression.
Journal of Consulting and Health Services Research, 1, 171--​184.
Clinical Psychology, 72, 681--​688. doi: 10.1037/​ Henggeler, S. W.,
Schoenwald, S. K., Borduin, 0022-​006X.72.4.681 C. M., Rowland, M. D., &
Cunningham, Kocsis, J. H., Gelenberg, A. J., Rothbaum, B. P. B. (1998).
Multisystemic treatment of O., Klein, D. N., Trivedi, M. H., Manber,
antisocial behavior in children and adolescents. R., . . . Thase, M. E.
(2009). Cognitive New York: Guilford. behavioral analysis system of
psychotherapy Henggeler, S. W., Schoenwald, S. K., Rowland, and brief
supportive psychotherapy for M. D., & Cunningham, P. E. (2002).
augmentation of antidepressant nonresponse Serious emotional disturbance
in children in chronic depression: The REVAMP trial. and adolescents:
Multisystemic therapy. Archives of General Psychiatry, 66, 1178--​1188.
New York: Guilford. Kriston, L., von Wolff, A., Westphal, A., Hölzel, L.
P., Hilsenroth, M. J., Blagys, M. D., Ackerman, S. J., & Härter, M.
(2014). Efficacy and acceptability Bonge, D. R., & Blais, M. A. (2005).
Measuring of acute treatments for persistent depressive psychodynamic-​
interpersonal and cognitive-​ disorder: A network meta-​analysis.
Depression behavioral techniques: Development of the and Anxiety, 31,
621--​630. http://​dx.doi.org/​ Comparative Psychotherapy Process Scale.
10.1002/​da.22236 Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Kwee, M. G.
T., Duivenvoorden, H. J., Trijsburg, R. Training, 42, 340--​356.
http://​dx.doi.org/​ W., & Thiel, J. H. (1986). Multimodal therapy
10.1037/​0033-​3204.42.3.340 in an inpatient setting. Current
Psychological Ivey, A. (2000). Developmental therapy. Amherst, Research
& Reviews, 5, 344--​357. MA: Microtraining Associates. Kwee, M. G. T., &
Kwee-​ Taams, M. K. (1994). Jacobson, N. S., & Christensen, A. (1996).
Integrative Klinishegedragstherapie in Nederland & vlaan-​ couple
therapy. New York: Norton. deren. Delft, Holland, Netherlands: Eubron.
Johnson, S. M. (2004). Creating connection: The Lambert, M. J. (Ed.).
(2013). Bergin and Garfield's practice of emotionally focused marital
therapy handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (2nd ed.). New
York: Brunner/​Routledge. (6th ed.). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration Lambert, M. J., Whipple,
J. L., & Kleinstauber, M. (2018). Collecting and delivering progress
feedback: A meta-​analysis of routine outcome monitoring. Psychotherapy,
55, 520--​537. Lazarus, A. A. (2005). Multimodal therapy. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(2nd ed., pp. 105--​ 120). New York: Oxford University Press. Leahy, R.
L., & McGinn, L. K. (2012). Cognitive behavior therapy of personality
disorders. In T. A. Widiger (Ed.), Oxford handbook of personality
disorder (pp. 727--​ 750). Oxford University Press. Lebow, J. L.,
Chambers, A. L., Christensen, A., & Johnson, S. M. (2012). Research on
the treatment of couple distress. Journal of Marital & Family Therapy,
38, 145--​168. doi: 10.1111/​ j.1752-​0606.2011.00249.x Lenz, A. S.,
Taylor, R., Fleming, M., & Serman, N. (2013). Effectiveness of
dialectical behavior therapy for treating eating disorders. Journal of
Counseling and Development, 92, 26--​35. doi:
10.1002/​j.1556-​6676.2014.00127.x Lindauer, R. J. L., Gersons, B. P. R.,
van Meijel, E. P. M., Blom, K., Carlier, I. V. E., Vrijlandt, I., &
Olff, M. (2005). Effects of brief eclectic psychotherapy in patients
with posttraumatic stress disorder: Randomized clinical trial. Journal
of Traumatic Stress, 18, 205--​212. Linehan, M. M. (1993).
Cognitive-​behavioral treatment of borderline personality disorder. New
York, NY: The Guilford Press. Linehan, M. M. (2015). DBT skills training
manual (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Linehan, M. M., Dimeff, L. A.,
Reynolds, S. K., Comtois, K. A., Shaw Welch, S., Heagerty, P., et
al. (2002). Dialectical behavior therapy for the treatment of opioid
dependent women meeting criteria for borderline personality disorder.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 67, 13--​26. Linehan, M. M., Schmidt, H.,
Dimeff, L. A., Craft, J. C., Kanter, J., & Comtois, K. A. (1999).
Dialectical behavior therapy for patients with borderline personality
disorder and drug dependence. American Journal on Addictions, 8,
279--​292. Llera, S. J., & Newman, M. G. (2010). Effects of worry on
physiological and subjective reactivity to emotional stimuli in
generalized anxiety disorder and nonanxious control participants.
Emotion, 10, 640--​650. doi:10.1037/​a0019351 Lynch, T. R., Morse, J. Q.,
Mendelson, T., & Robins, C. J. (2003). Dialectical behavior therapy for

427

depressed older adults. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 11,
33--​45. Martin, R., & Young. J. E. (2010). Schema therapy. In K. S.
Dobson (Ed.), Handbook of cognitive-​ behavioral therapies (3rd ed.,
pp. 317--​ 346). New York: Guilford. McCarthy, K. S., & Barber, J. P.
(2009). The Multitheoretical List of Therapeutic Interventions (MULTI):
Initial report. Psychotherapy Research, 19, 96--​113. McCullough, J. P.
(2000). Treatment of Chronic Depression. Cognitive Behavioral Analysis
System of Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. McCullough, J. P.
(2002). Patient's manual for CBASP. New York: Guilford. McGinn, L. K., &
Young, J. E. (1996). Schema-​ focused therapy. In D. Clark & P.
Salkovskis (Eds.), Frontiers of cognitive therapy (pp. 182--​ 207). New
York: Guilford. Messer, S. B. (2001). Introduction to the special issue
on assimilative integration. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 11,
1--​19. Michalak, J., Schultze, M., Heidenreich, T., & Schramm, E.
(2016). A randomized controlled trial on the efficacy of mindfulness-​
based cognitive therapy and a group version of cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy for chronically depressed patients.
Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 83, 951--​963. Miller, S.
D., Duncan, B. L., Sorrell, R., & Brown, G. S. (2005). The Partners for
Change Outcome Management System. Journal of Clinical Psychology: In
Session, 61, 199--​208. doi: 10.1002/​jclp.20111 Miller, W. R., &
Rollnick, S. (2002). Motivational interviewing: Preparing people for
change (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Morgan, T. D., Winterowd, C. L., &
Fuqua, D. R. (1999). The efficacy of an integrated theoretical approach
to group psychotherapy for male inmates. Journal of Contemporary
Psychotherapy, 29, 203--​222. Muran, J. C., Safran, J. D., Samstag, L.
W., & Winston, A. (2005). Evaluating an alliance-​ focused treatment for
personality disorders. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice,
Training, 42, 532--​ 545. doi: 10.1037/​ 0033-​3204.42.4.532 Negt, P.,
Brakemeier, E. L., Michalak, J., Winter, L., Bleich, S., & Kahl, K. G.
(2016). The treatment of chronic depression with cognitive behavioral

428

Future Directions

analysis system of psychotherapy: A systematic Norcross, J. C., Beutler,
L. E., & Levant, R. F. review and meta-​ analysis of randomized-​ (2006).
Evidence-​ based practices in mental controlled clinical trials. Brain
and Behavior, 6, health: Debate and dialogue on the fundamental e00486.
doi: 10.1002/​brb3.486 questions. Washington, DC: American Newman, M. G.,
Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T. Psychological Association Press. D.,
Fisher, A. J., Boswell, J. F., Szkodny, L. Norcross, J. C., & Goldfried,
M. R. (Eds.). (2005). E., & Nordberg, S. S. (2011). A randomized
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). controlled trial of
cognitive-​behavioral therapy New York: Oxford University Press. doi:
10.1093/​ for generalized anxiety disorder with integrated
med:psych/​9780195165791.001.0001 techniques from emotion-​ focused and
Norcross, J. C., & Karpiak, C. P. (2012). Clinical interpersonal
therapies. Journal of Consulting psychologists in the 2010s: 50 years of
the and Clinical Psychology, 79, 171--​181. APA division of clinical
psychology. Clinical Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, T.
Psychology: Science and Practice, 19, 1--​12. D., Fisher, A. J., &
Nordberg, S. S. (2008). An doi:10.1111/​j.1468-​2850.2012.01269.x open
trial of integrative therapy for generalized Norcross, J. C., Krebs, P.
M., & Prochaska, J. O. anxiety disorder. Psychotherapy: Theory, (2011).
Stages of change. In J. C. Norcross (Ed.), Research, Practice, Training,
45, 135--​147. Psychotherapy relationships that work: Evidence-​
doi:10.1037/​0033-​3204.45.2.135 based responsiveness (2nd ed., pp. 279--​
300). Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Borkovec, New York: Oxford
University Press. T. D., & Molnar, C. (2004). Integrative Norcross, J.
C., Nolan, B. M., Kosman, D. C., & psychotherapy. In R. G. Heimberg, C.
L. Turk, Fernandez-​ Alvarez, H. (2016). Redefining & D. S. Mennin
(Eds.), Generalized anxiety the future of SEPI: Member characteristics,
disorder: Advances in research and practice (pp. integrative practices,
and organizational 320--​350). New York: Guilford. satisfactions. Journal
of Psychotherapy Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G., Jacobson, N.
Integration, 27, 3--​12. C., & Moore, G. A. (2015). Adult attachment
Norcross, J. C., & Rogan, J. D. (2013). Psychologists as a moderator of
treatment outcome for conducting Psychotherapy in 2012: Current
generalized anxiety disorder: Comparison practices and historical trends
among Division between cognitive--​ behavioral therapy 29 members.
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, (CBT) plus supportive listening and CBT
Practice, Training, 50, 490--​ 495. doi:10.1037/​ plus interpersonal and
emotional processing a0033512 therapy. Journal of Consulting and
Clinical Norcross, J. C., & Wampold, B. E. (Eds.) (2019). Psychology,
83, 915--​ 925. doi:10.1037/​ Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd
ed., a0039359 Vol. 2). New York: Oxford University Press. Nielsen, G.,
Havik, O. E., Barth, K., Haver, B., Nordahl, H. M., & Nysaeter, T. E.
(2005). Schema Molstad, E., Rogge, H., & Skatum, M. therapy for patients
with borderline personality (1987). The Bergen Project on Brief Dynamic
disorder: A single case series. Journal of Psychotherapy: An outline. In
W. Huber (Ed.), Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry, Progress
in psychotherapy research (pp. 325--​ 36, 254--​264. 333). Louvain la
Neuve, Belgium: Presses Nordberg, S. S., Castonguay, L. G., Fisher, A.
J., Universitaires de Louvain. Boswell, J. F., & Kraus, D. (2014).
Validating Nijdam, M. J., Gersons, B. P. R., Reitsma, J. B., de the
rapid responder construct within a practice Jongh, A., & Olff, M.
(2012). Brief eclectic research network. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
psychotherapy v. eye movement desensitization 70, 886--​903. doi:
10.1002/​jclp.22077 and reprocessing therapy for post-​ traumatic Panos,
P. T., Jackson, J. W., Hasan, O., & Panos, stress disorder: Randomized
controlled trial. A. (2014). Meta-​ analysis and systematic British
Journal of Psychiatry, 200, 224--​231. review assessing the efficacy of
dialectical doi: 10.1192/​bjp.bp.111.099234 behavior therapy (DBT).
Research on Social Norcross, J. C. (2005). A primer on psychotherapy
Work Practice, 24, 213--​ 223. doi: 10.1177/​ integration. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried 1049731513503047 (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy integration Prochaska, J. O., & DiClemente, C. C. (2005).
A (2nd ed., pp. 3--​ 23). New York: Oxford transtheoretical approach. In
J. C. Norcross University Press. & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration psychotherapy integration
(2nd ed., pp. 145--​ 171). New York: Oxford University Press. Prochaska,
J. O., DiClemente, C. C., & Norcross, J. C. (1992). In search of how
people change: Applications to addictive behaviors. American
Psychologist, 47, 1102--​1114. Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C.
(2014). Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (8th ed.).
Stamford, CT, US: Cengage. Prochaska, J. O., & Norcross, J. C. (2018).
Systems of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (9th ed.). New
York: Oxford University Press. Przeworski, A., Newman, M. G., Pincus, A.
L., Kasoff, M. B., Yamasaki, A. S., Castonguay, L. G., & Berlin, K. S.
(2011). Interpersonal pathoplasticity in individuals with generalized
anxiety disorder. Journal of Abnormal Psychology, 120, 286--​298.
doi:10.1037/​a0023334 Rizvi, S. L., Steffel, L. M., & Carson-​Wong, A.
(2013). An overview of Dialectical Behavior Therapy for professional
psychologists. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 44,
73--​80. Robin, A. L., & Foster, S. L. (1989). Negotiating
parent-​adolescent conflict: A Behavioral-​Family Systems approach. New
York: Guilford Press. Robin, A. L., Siegel, P. T., Moye, A. W., Gilroy,
M., Dennis, A. B., & Sikand, A. (1999). A controlled comparison of
family versus individual therapy for adolescents with anorexia nervosa.
Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 38,
1482--​1489. Robinson, L. M., & Vail, S. R. (2012). An integrative review
of adolescent smoking cessation using the transtheoretical model of
change. Journal of Pediatric Health Care, 26, 336--​345. http://​
dx.doi.org/​10.1016/​j.pedhc.2010.12.001 Rodgers, B., & Elliott, R. (July,
2012). Person-​ centred & experiential approaches to social anxiety:
Outcome analysis. Paper presented at the conference of the World
Association for Person-​Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy and
Counselling, Antwerp, Belgium. Rosen, C. S. (2000). Is the sequencing of
change processes by stage consistent across health problems? A
meta-​analysis. Health Psychology, 19, 593--​604. Rosenzweig, S. (1936).
Some implicit common factors in diverse methods of psychotherapy.
American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 6, 412--​ 415.
doi:10.1037/​1053-​0479.12.1.5 Rozmarin, E., Muran, J. C., Safran, J.,
Gorman, B., Nagy, J., & Winston, A. (2008). Subjective and
intersubjective analyses of the therapeutic

429

alliance in brief relational therapy. American Journal of Psychotherapy,
62, 313--​328. Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-​determination
theory and the facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development,
and well-​being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68--​78. Ryle, A. (2005).
Cognitive analytic therapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.),
Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 196--​ 218). New
York: Oxford University Press. Ryle, A., & Kerr, I. B. (2002).
Introduction to cognitive-​ analytic therapy: Principles and practice.
New York: Wiley. Safran, J. D., & Muran, J. C. (2000). Negotiating the
therapeutic alliance: A relational treatment guide. New York: The
Guilford Press. Safran, J. D., Muran, J. C., & Eubanks-​ Carter, C.
(2011). Repairing alliance ruptures. Psychotherapy, 48, 80--​87. Safran,
J. D., Muran, J. C., Samstag, L. W., & Winston, A. (2005). Evaluating
alliance-​ focused intervention for potential treatment failures: A
feasibility study and descriptive analysis. Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research, Practice, Training, 42, 512--​531. doi: 10.1037/​
0033-​3204.42.4.512 Schnyder, U., Muller, J., Maercker, A., & Wittmann,
L. (2011). Brief eclectic psychotherapy for PTSD: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 72, 564--​566.
Schottenbauer, M. A., Glass, C. R., & Arnkoff, D. B. (2005). Outcome
research on psychotherapy integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 459--​ 493). New York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/​
med:psych/​ 9780195165791.003.0022 Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Dykierek, P.,
Kech, S., Brakemeier, E-​ L., Kulz, A., & Berger, M. (2011). Cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy versus interpersonal
psychotherapy for early-​ onset chronic depression: A randomized pilot
study. Journal of Affective Disorders, 129, 109--​116. doi:10.1016/​
j.jad.2010.08.003 Schramm, E., Zobel, I., Schoepf, D., Fangmeier, T.,
Schnell, K., Walter, H., . . . Normann, C. (2015). Cognitive behavioral
analysis system of psychotherapy versus escitalopram in chronic major
depression. Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 84, 227--​ 240. doi:
10.1159/​ 000381957 Sexton, T. L., Datchi, C., Evans, L., LaFollette, J.,
& Wright, L. (2013). The effectiveness of couple

430

Future Directions

and family-​based clinical interventions. In M. J. with borderline
personality disorder. Cochrane Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield's
handbook Database of Systematic Reviews, 8, CD005652. of psychotherapy
and behavior change (6th ed., doi: 10.1002/​14651858.CD005652.pub2
pp. 587--​639). New York: Wiley. Strauman, T. J., Vookles, J.,
Barenstein, V., Chaiken, Shear, K., Frank, E., Houck, P. R., & Reynolds,
C. S., & Higgins, E. T. (1991). Self-​discrepancies F. (2005). Treatment
of complicated grief: A and vulnerability to body dissatisfaction and
randomized controlled trial. JAMA, 293, disordered eating. Journal of
Personality and 2601--​2608. Social Psychology, 61, 946--​956. Shear, M.
K., Reynolds, C. F., Simon, N., Zisook, van der Stouwe, T., Asscher, J.
J., Stams, G. J. J. M., S., Want, Y., Mauro, C., . . . Skritskaya, N.
Dekovic, M., & van der Laan, P. H. (2014). (2016). Optimizing treatment
of complicated The effectiveness of Multisystemic Therapy grief: A
randomized clinical trial. JAMA (MST): A meta-​analysis. Clinical
Psychology Psychiatry, 73, 685--​ 694. doi:10.1001/​ Review, 34, 468--​481.
jamapsychiatry.2016.0892 Velicer, W. F., Brick, L. A. D., Fava, J. L., &
Prochaska, Shear, M. K., Wang, Y., Skritskaya, N., Duan, J. O. (2013).
Testing 40 predictions from the N., Mauro, C., & Ghesquiere, A. (2014).
transtheoretical model again, with confidence. Treatment of complicated
grief in elderly Multivariate Behavioral Research, 48, 220--​240.
persons: A randomized clinical trial. JAMA doi:
10.1080/​00273171.2012.760439 Psychiatry, 71, 1287--​ 1295. doi:10.1001/​
Watson, J. C., Gordon, L. B., Stermac, L., Kalogerakos,
jamapsychiatry.2014.1242 F., & Steckley, P. (2003). Comparing the
Simmonds, R. (2016). Cognitive Analytic Therapy effectiveness of
process-​ experiential with (CAT): A review of the outcome evidence and
cognitive--​behavioral psychotherapy in the an investigation of the
effectiveness of group treatment of depression. Journal of Consulting
CAT for female survivors of childhood sexual and Counseling Psychology,
71, 773--​781. abuse. Unpublished Dissertation Thesis. Watson, J. C., &
Greenberg, L. S. (2017). Emotion-​ University of Sheffield, UK. focused
therapy for generalized anxiety. Smyth, J. M., Wonderlich, S. A., Heron,
K. E., Washington DC: American Psychological Sliwinski, M. J., Crosby,
R. D., Mitchell, J. E., Association. & Engel, S. G. (2007). Daily and
momentary Westra, H. A., Arkowitz, H., & Dozois, D. J. A. mood and
stress are associated with binge eating (2009). Adding a motivational
interviewing and vomiting in bulimia nervosa patients in the
pretreatment to cognitive behavioral therapy natural environment.
Journal of Consulting and for generalized anxiety disorder: A
preliminary Clinical Psychology, 75, 629--​638. randomized controlled
trial. Journal of Anxiety Southam-​Gerow, M. A., McLeod, B. D., Arnold,
Disorders, 23, 1106--​ 1117. doi:10.1016/​ C. C., Rodriguez, A., Cox, J.
R., Reise, j.janxdis.2009.07.014 S. P., . . . Kendall, P. C. (2016).
Initial Westra, H. A., Constantino, M. J., & Antony, M. M. development
of a treatment adherence measure (2016). Integrating motivational
interviewing for cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for child with
cognitive-​behavioral therapy for severe anxiety. Psychological
Assessment, 28, 70--​80. generalized anxiety disorder: An allegiance-​
doi:10.1037/​pas0000141 controlled randomized clinical trial. Journal
Stiles, W. B. (2009). Responsiveness as an obstacle of Consulting and
Clinical Psychology, for psychotherapy outcome research: It's worse 84,
768--​782. http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​ than you think. Clinical
Psychology: Science ccp0000098 and Practice, 16, 86--​91. Westra, H. A.,
& Dozois, D. J. A. (2006). Preparing Stirman, S. W., Gutner, C. A.,
Crits-​Christoph, P., clients for cognitive behavioral therapy: A
Edmunds, J., Evans, A. C., & Beidas, R. S. randomized pilot study of
motivational (2015). Relationships between clinician-​ level interviewing
for anxiety. Cognitive Therapy attributes and fidelity-​ consistent and
fidelity-​ and Research, 30, 481--​ 498. doi 10.1007/​ inconsistent
modifications to an evidence-​based s10608-​006-​9016-​y psychotherapy.
Implementation Science, 10, Williams, T. A. (1988). A multimodal
approach to 115. doi 10.1186/​s13012-​015-​0308-​z assessment and
intervention with children with Stoffers-​ Winterling, J. M., Völlm, B.
A., Rücker, learning disabilities. Unpublished doctoral G., Timmer, A.,
Huband, N., & Lieb, K. dissertation, Department of Psychology, (2012).
Psychological therapies for people University of Glasgow, Scotland.

Outcome Research in Psychotherapy Integration Wonderlich, S. A.,
Peterson, C. B., Crosby, R. D., Smith, T. L., Klein, M. H., Mitchell, J.
E., & Crow, S. J. (2014). A randomized controlled comparison of
integrative cognitive-​ affective therapy and cognitive-​behavioral
therapy-​enhanced for bulimia nervosa. Psychological Medicine, 44,
543--​553. doi: 10.1017/​S0033291713001098 Wonderlich, S. A., Peterson, C.
B., Leone Smith, T., Klein, M. H., Mitchell, J. E., & Crow, S. J.
(2015). Integrative cognitive-​analytic therapy for bulimia nervosa: A
treatment manual. New York: Guilford. Wonderlich, S. A., Peterson, C.
B., Smith, T. L., Klein, M., Mitchell, J. E., Crow, S. J., & Engel, S G.
(2010). Integrative cognitive-​ affective therapy for bulimia nervosa. In
G. G. Grilo, & J. E. Mitchell (Eds.), The treatment of eating disorders:
A clinical handbook (pp. 317--​338). New York: Guilford. Wysocki, T.,
Greco, P., Harris, M. A., Bubb, J., & White, N. H. (2001). Behavior
therapy for families of adolescents with

431

diabetes: Maintenance of treatment effects. Diabetes Care, 24, 441--​446.
Wysocki, T., Harris, M. A., Buckloh, L. M., Mertlich, D., Lochrie, A.
S., Mauraus, N., et al. (2007). Randomized trial of behavioral family
systems therapy for diabetes. Maintenance of effects on diabetes
outcomes in adolescents. Diabetes Care, 30, 555--​560. Wysocki, T.,
Harris, M. A., Buckloh, L. M., Mertlich, D., Lochrie, A. S., Taylor, A.,
et al. (2006). Effects of behavioral family systems therapy for diabetes
on adolescents' relationships, treatment adherence, and metabolic
control. Journal of Pediatric Psychology, 31, 928--​938. Yalom, I.
(2005). Theory and practice of group psychotherapy (5th ed.). New York:
Basic. Young, J. E. (1990). Cognitive therapy for personality disorders:
A schema-​focused approach. Sarasota, FL: Professional Resource Press.
Young, J. E., Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A
practitioner's guide. New York: Guilford.

20 Integrating Research and Practice LOUIS G. CASTONGUAY, MICHAEL J.
CONSTANTINO, AND HENRY XIAO

The history of modern psychotherapy can be traced through many
discontents and dismissals. Debates have flourished for years about the
validity and usefulness of divergent theoretical models, as well as the
role of different facets of treatment, such as relationship variables,
technical factors, and participant characteristics. From our
perspective, though, the most troublesome schism in our field has been
the disconnect between researchers and practitioners. Most of these
professionals belong to different communities of knowledge seekers, with
relatively few engaging in fruitful collaboration despite converging
interests and complementary expertise (Castonguay, 2011). This
disconnect reflects une indifference maladroite (a clumsy indifference),
which comes at a high price for understanding the complexity of
psychopathology and improving the effectiveness of mental healthcare.

The consequences of this indifference, or practice--​research gap, are
manifold. In one direction rests the sad realization that the field has
let the knowledge of clinicians drop through the holes of a colander
(Kazdin, 2008). At its worst, this indifference might take the form of
an empirical imperialism (Castonguay, 2011), where treatment and
training guidelines rest primarily on the work of researchers. The
irony, if not danger, of such unidirectional knowledge translation is
its questionable assumption that the most valid information guiding
practitioners to conduct therapy comes almost exclusively from
individuals who tend to see few, if any, patients. In the other
direction resides the disconcerting, but persistent, belief that
clinical judgment trumps empirical evidence and the corresponding notion
that systematic research is largely irrelevant to the everyday clinical
situation. Yet, the data are clear---​clinical

432

Integrating Research and Practice

predictions based solely on human judgment can be inaccurate, even when
made by seasoned professionals (Garb, 2005), and data-​supported
predictions outperform clinical judgment alone (Hannan et al., 2005).
Furthermore, naturalistic research robustly indicates that therapists
differ in their effectiveness (Baldwin & Imel, 2013); yet therapists
have been shown to overestimate their own success (Walfish et al.,
2012). This unidirectional dismissal of research evidence can also prove
dangerous to the patients we treat (Boswell et al., 2017). The goal of
this chapter is not to describe the reasons for the practice--​research
gap---​much has already been written about this sad state of affairs
(e.g., Goldfried & Wolfe, 1996; Parloff, 1982). Rather, our optimistic
aim is to demonstrate the integration of research and practice by
multiple efforts in collaboration and information sharing. This aim
squares with that of recent initiatives, such as the "two-​way" bridge
project initiated by the American Psychological Association's Division
12 (Society of Clinical Psychology). This project, among others,
highlights the practitioner's voice in the research process by surveying
their experiences in delivering empirically supported treatments (ESTs;
e.g., Goldfried, 2011a, 2011b; Teachman et al., 2012). Through this
mechanism, which mirrors the one in place in medicine, practitioners
provide feedback on empirically supported treatments to other
practitioners and researchers. This voice can illuminate the nuances of
treatment efficacy and can help adapt and test ESTs to meet the demands
of clinical reality. We describe here several facets of practice-​
oriented research that rely, more or less tidily, on bidirectional
partnership between researchers and practitioners. We believe that such
partnership is an optimal vehicle to embody and actualize the
integration of research and practice---​an integration that might enhance
the effectiveness and applicability of psychotherapy. We also believe
that research--​practice integration may hold promise for stimulating
meaningful advances in psychotherapy integration more broadly as the
inputs from such advances will come from many conceptual, clinical, and
epistemological angles.

433

DEFINING PRACTICE-​O RIENTED RESEARCH Most research has been guided by
the researchers' interests, which are largely shaped by graduate
training, peer review, and institutional reward structures. It is no
wonder that researchers pursue projects that are likely to earn them
academic tenure, federal grants, and journal citations rather than the
gratitude of clinical practitioners. From the beginning, then, although
researchers and practitioners may share keen interest in the subject of
psychotherapy, the nature of psychotherapy research is often driven by
questions that may not be at the forefront of clinicians' preocupations.
Statements of directly applicable practice implications are usually
restricted to a few aspirational lines in the discussion section of a
journal article---​ a section that many practitioners may never reach, if
they start to read the article at all. With the academic landscape and
reward structure, the researcher's overarching goal is often to maximize
internal validity, which increases the perceived scientific rigor of the
work. Internal validity is inherently stronger when research is
conducted in controlled settings and under standardized conditions.
These methodological controls include specific patient inclusion and
exclusion criteria, manualized treatment protocols, and systematic
checks for therapist adherence and competence to the method under study.
Historically, when clinicians are involved in a research study, their
primary task has been to implement with fidelity (according to
predetermined parameters) procedures designed and manualized by the
investigators. Contrary to this top-​down approach, practice-​ oriented
research (POR) is conducted within naturalistic clinical settings where
clinicians are practicing as usual. It addresses questions that are of
utmost relevance to clinicians' concerns, and efforts are made, both in
study design and implementation, to avoid major impositions and burdens
on clinical routine (e.g., no attempted manipulations of therapist
behavior, limited patient exclusion criteria, no onerous measurement
battery). To achieve these goals,

434

Future Directions

this bottom-​up approach relies on various levels involve more extensive
collaboration between of practitioner involvement beyond the delivery
researchers and clinicians and fruitful integraof externally scripted
procedures. In fact, most tion of psychotherapy research and practice.
POR has emerged from collaboration between researchers and practitioners
where the knowledge and expertise of both participants are PATIENT-​F
OCUSED RESEARCH valued as necessary assets for scientifically rigorous
and clinically impactful studies. This type of POR centers on typically
large Although POR represents a philosophical samples of patients
receiving psychotherapy and methodological shift from most traditional
in naturalistic settings. Spurred by the work research on psychotherapy,
these two empir- of Kenneth Howard, it marked a departure ical
strategies are not inherently antagonistic. from the predominant
attention of traditional To the contrary, one could argue that both
outcome research, or what has frequently be are necessary for developing
a comprehensive referenced as "randomized clinical trials." and
translatable knowledge base (Barkham & Rather than investigating what
types of therapy Margison, 2007; Barkham et al., 2010; Sobell, work
(typically in comparison to other types 1996). Because of their
complementary na- and in a tightly controlled and therefore less ture,
these scientific strategies can compensate ecologically valid manner),
patient-​focused refor the other's limitations; for example, POR search
examines how change occurs over treatemphasizes external or ecological
validity, ment, either for a given patient or on average while
traditional designs emphasize internal across patients. validity.
Furthermore, when similar findings An exemplar of patient-​ focused
research are obtained (about between-​therapist effects, is a study of
the dose--​ effect model, which for example) in each of the two
epistemolog- examines the relation between the number of ical routes, we
can place more confidence in sessions attended and patient improvement.
In the results. In addition, having more research an early study, Howard
and colleagues (1986) guided by diverse sources of expertise and in-
found that patients, on average, demonstrated terest will, by necessity,
broaden the scope of a decrease in symptoms with every session, with our
scientific radar. 50% judged as "improved" by their eighth sesWhereas
practitioners can certainly learn sion. The researchers also found that
improvefrom full-​time researchers (e.g., about process--​ ment occurred,
on average, more rapidly in outcome correlations, patient factors that
mod- the earlier sessions, with perhaps diminishing erate an effect of
treatment on an outcome), returns later. These findings not only inform
there are also clinical phenomena and realities practitioners about a
particularly beneficial to which full-​time clinicians have unique ac-
window of change in practice, but can also cess. Thus, POR provides
opportunities to de- inform treatment policies within healthcare fine,
measure, and investigate topics that might systems. In fact, when the
first author of this otherwise remain unexplored were clinicians chapter
(LGC) presented these results at an not involved in deciding what to
study and how administrative meeting during the first week of best to
study it. his clinical internship, the clinic administrators POR can
take many forms (Castonguay, changed the policy on session limit from
six Barkham, Lutz, & McLeavey, 2013). These to eight. empirical efforts
have been differentiated into Further specifying change patterns in
routhree, more or less, distinct types: patient-​ tine practice, another
study by Howard and focused, practice-​based, and practice--​research
colleagues (1993) revealed that significant imnetwork (PRN). In what
follows, we provide provement takes place within two sessions with a few
examples of findings that have emerged respect to patient-​rated
well-​being. Reductions from the first two types of POR. We then pay in
symptomatic distress and improvements in special attention to PRN
studies as they tend to life functioning, however, occur more gradually.

Integrating Research and Practice

This study also showed that change in psychotherapy is generally
contingent on the success of the previous phase of improvement: decrease
of general distress (or remoralization) precedes the decrease of
specific symptoms (or remediation), which in turn precedes the decreases
of maladaptive functioning (or rehabilitation). Clinicians might draw on
these results to shape a patient's expectation about the course and
outcome of his or her therapy and to develop a treatment plan that
capitalizes on these change sequences. The dose--​ effect and phase
models have varied across later studies. They are, for example, affected
by the patient's severity level (e.g., Lambert, Hanson, & Finch, 2001;
Stulz & Lutz, 2007). The dose--​effect association can also be moderated
by treatment setting, further indicating the need to gather data from
diverse settings (Lambert et al., 2001). The investigation of patient
change patterns has also provided valuable tools to meet clinicians'
most important ethical duty to "do no harm." Unfortunately, between 5%
and 10% of adult patients will deteriorate during the course of
treatment (albeit not always because of treatment), with an even higher
harm rate for patients with substance abuse (Castonguay et al., 2010;
Lambert, 2010). There is also evidence that clinicians tend to
underestimate the rate of deterioration in their own caseloads and, to
make matters worse, that they are inaccurate in predicting which of
their own patients are likely to deteriorate (Hannan et al., 2005).
Multiple practice-​ oriented investigations, however, have shown that
providing therapists with feedback about their patients' progress can
help mitigate the deterioration problem. In a landmark study, Lambert
and colleagues (2001) showed that routinely monitoring outcome and
providing progress feedback (including alert signals for patients at
risk of deteriorating) during routine care significantly reduced
deterioration (and increased improvement) for patients failing to
progress (i.e., not-​on-​track patients). In a subsequent investigation,
adding clinical support tools (i.e., brief strategies to facilitate
alliance quality, patient motivation, social support, and possible need
for medication) to the

435

therapist feedback for their not on track patients further decreased
deterioration and promoted improvement (Whipple et al., 2003). These are
only a few examples of studies conducted in naturalistic settings (with
no manipulation of the types of therapy) that have demonstrated the
value of outcome monitoring and clinical feedback (see Lambert, Whipple,
& Kleinstäuber, 2019). As a whole, the findings suggest that routinely
collecting a patient's outcome data, feeding back the information to the
therapist, and offering support tools improves outcomes for that
particular case, particularly for patients at risk for deterioration.
Put differently, patient-​ level feedback can improve patient-​level
outcomes. Although this patient-​ level research says little about
improving therapists' overall effectiveness across all patients, it does
point to the ability to affect change with individual patients for whom
outcomes are routinely monitored. Such practices can be implemented
without imposing drastic changes to the way clinicians practice, such as
shifting theoretical orientations or adhering closely to manualized
interventions. Rather, therapists of all theoretical persuasions can
request that their patients regularly complete a brief measure over the
course of treatment. Then, to maximize the effect, therapists commit to
using such information to improve psychotherapy, as opposed to viewing
it as ancillary, or even irrelevant, assessment information (de Jong et
al., 2012). PRACTICE-​B ASED RESEARCH Displaying a broader palette of
investigations, practice-​based research has focused less intensively on
how patients change and more on how different components of clinical
practice can influence such change. The first of these components is the
therapist him-​or herself. In a typical RCT, therapist differential
effectiveness represents a variable (or noise) to be reduced---​or at
least controlled---​in order to keep everything equal except the
treatments being compared. By contrast, therapists have been viewed in
POR as legitimate contributors

436

Future Directions

to outcome, with the recognition that therapist-​ level results can and
should inform training, practice, and healthcare policy (Boswell et al.,
2017). Empirical research has now robustly confirmed what many have
repeatedly observed but would rarely admit publicly: therapists differ
from each other in their average effectiveness across the patients in
their caseloads. More specifically, this so-​called therapist effect
explains approximately 5--​8% of outcome variance (Castonguay & Hill,
2017). This effect is even more pronounced in naturalistic settings
compared with RCTs (where standardized treatment delivery is emphasized)
and for patients with greater impairment (where the challenge of the
case may render general variability in therapist skill more clinically
vital than with less severe or more "straightforward" cases; Barkham et
al., 2017). Put bluntly, not all therapists are the highly effective
generalists that they believe themselves to be (Walfish et al., 2012).
Some studies have also suggested that therapists may possess relative
strengths and weaknesses within their own practice depending on their
patients' presenting problem; that is, many clinicians may be
particularly effective at treating certain problems or personalities
than others, even if they are unaware of this specialization (Kraus et
al., 2011). Although it remains unclear whether therapist effects are
primarily a matter of general competence or domain-​specific skills
(Constantino et al., 2017; Wampold et al., 2017), it seems reasonable to
suggest that therapists (and their patients) could benefit from
identifying what therapists are particularly good at (and perhaps what
they could teach others) and what they are less good at (and thus can
learn from others). Only by knowing their outcomes can clinicians
harness information about their own efficacy in relation to other
clinicians---​ and their own strengths and weaknesses in relation to
themselves---​to improve their practice. Research advances have also been
made in identifying potential determinants of between-​ therapist
differences in effectiveness. To date, at least four of such promising

variables may account for part of the therapist effect: facilitative
interpersonal skill, self-​doubt, deliberative practice, and fostering
good therapeutic relationships (Wampold et al., 2017). Although, again,
such work on therapist effects determinants is just emerging, the
following tentative implications can be derived: As ways to increase
their effectiveness, therapists should strive to become better at
developing, maintaining, and repairing the alliance with clients. They
should also make use of and enhance their verbal and emotional
expressiveness, motivational skills (persuasiveness and hopefulness),
warmth and empathic attitude, and problem focus. Moreover, they should
adopt and/​ or maintain a sense of humility toward their ability to help
their clients. When not working with clients, therapists should also
repeatedly and consistently devote time to improve their work, such as
thinking about difficult cases, preparing and reflecting upon sessions,
and attending training workshops. (Hill & Castonguay, 2017, p. 328).

It is difficult to imagine clinicians not being interested in the
practice-​based findings that have emerged so far demonstrating the
importance of therapists themselves! It is also difficult to
underestimate the practical implications of these findings, including
how we select candidates into graduate programs, which competencies we
teach, which videotaped examples and live models students might emulate,
who should teach coursework, who should supervise students, and so
forth. In addition to investigating the effectiveness of therapists,
practice-​ based researchers have examined the effectiveness of services,
centers, and practices. Some studies conducted in the United Kingdom
have focused on the naturalistic delivery of theoretical orientations
that have tended to receive less attention in RCTs, such as
person-​centered and psychodynamic-​ interpersonal therapies (Gibbard &
Hanley, 2008; Paley et al., 2008). This is an example of how the
complementarity of practice-​oriented research and traditional research
(where cognitive-​behavior therapy \[CBT\] approaches have been given
predominant emphasis) can

Integrating Research and Practice

increase the breadth of scientific investigations in psychotherapy. Two
large studies conducted in the United Kingdom have found the outcomes of
CBT, person-​ centered therapy, and psychodynamic therapy to be fairly
similar in National Health Service routine practice (Stiles et al.,
2006, 2008). Assessing the effectiveness of treatment centers or
practices, however, has not been restricted to the work of UK practice-​
based researchers. For example, as part of a 40-​year-​ old practice and
training infrastructure based in Argentina (Aiglé Foundation),
clinicians have conducted several studies, on their own and in
collaboration with researchers from other countries, on the impact of
therapy (as delivered in natural settings) for specific disorders (see
Fernández-​Alvarez, Gómez, & Garcia, 2015). For at least two decades, in
the United States, Persons and colleagues have examined the impact of
cognitive therapy for depression in private practice (Persons et al.,
1988, 2006). Other researchers have examined the outcomes of a
residential treatment for adolescents and young adults with substance
abuse problems. They discovered, first, that their services did not
address a specific problem of their patients (i.e., high level of
anger). They then demonstrated that the implementation of a therapeutic
approach specifically targeting this problem (rational-​ emotive behavior
therapy) substantially improved their therapists' ability to reduce it
(Adelman, 2006; Adelman et al., 2015). Practice-​ based research,
however, has not been restricted to the measurement of treatment
effectiveness. Mirroring other efforts to understand how therapy works,
process studies have drawn on datasets collected in practice settings,
examining the contribution of relationship variables, characteristics of
the therapist, characteristics of the patient, and interactions among
such factors. As a case in point, some research conducted at the Aiglé
Foundation in Argentina has investigated the role of process and
participant characteristics, such as the focus of therapy, alliance
quality, therapist personal style, and the interaction between therapist
and patient characteristics (Fernández-​Alvarez et al., 2015).

437

Within the previously mentioned residential treatment setting where
clinicians delivered rational-​ emotive behavior therapy, another study
demonstrated that a positive association between alliance quality and
patient outcome was moderated by patient attachment history.
Specifically, the facilitative effect of a good alliance was stronger
for patients with more problematic attachment, thereby suggesting a
corrective interpersonal experience for patients most in need of one
(Zack et al., 2015). Underscoring the importance of such process studies
conducted in practice settings, this study suggests that two constructs
historically emphasized in psychodynamic therapy (attachment and
alliance) might explain part of how CBT works, again underscoring the
way in which practice-​based research can promote treatment and theory
integration. Practice-​ based research has also been conducted on
training psychotherapy. As a prime example, Koerner created a
participatory research community allowing clinicians to learn
evidence-​backed interventions (e.g., behavioral activation skills,
two-​chair techniques) in their own clinical settings (for details, see
Koerner & Castonguay, 2015). This type of research is particularly
noteworthy considering the paucity of studies that have been conducted
on training (Hill & Knox, 2013), especially in clinicians' own settings.
One could argue that almost all translational research is practice-​
based research. Moving research evidence from science to service, from
the (lab) bench to the bedside, necessarily involves practitioners in
collaboration with researchers. Translation(al) research inclusively
refers to the process of moving research-​ supported discoveries into
established practice and policy. The thousands of translational studies
in healthcare and hundreds in psychotherapy involve first dissemination,
entailing raising awareness of resources and their availability,
particularly the supporting research evidence, and then implementation,
which involves getting research-​ supported methods routinely used in
practice. The consistent take-​home lesson from these legions of
naturalistic studies is that effective

438

Future Directions

translation involves both practitioners and researchers working together
from the beginning (Norcross et al., 2017; Straus et al., 2010).
Researchers unilaterally imposing methods onto practitioners is not
likely to be an optimal way to foster therapeutic change; neither is
clinicians practicing in the absence of, or in conflict with, robust
research.

PRACTICE-​R ESEARCH NETWORK Practice-​based research covers a broader
range of topics than patient-​focused studies, but PRNs have gone even
further in expanding the scope of investigations. PRNs are defined as a
formal collaboration among a system of practitioners and clinical
scientists to investigate questions of high relevance to the
practitioner while drawing on the methodological know-​how of the
researchers. Networks can vary in size, but all have in common the goal
to conduct salient research in ecologically valid settings to promote
clinically actionable results (Borkovec et al., 2001). PRNs directly
address a wide array of phenomena of interest to practitioners who, as
equal partners, have a voice on the selection, design, implementation,
and dissemination of joint empirical projects. In its optimal form, the
PRN is an antidote to empirical imperialism. Going beyond research
translation (from the controlled environments of academia to the murky
ground of clinical reality), PRNs foster a synergetic combination of
expertise and experience, a shared ownership of ideas and data, and a
full respect for epistemological complementarity. PRN infrastructures
have evolved in a diversity of mental health communities, and we
describe next a sample of empirical fruits that have emerged from four
clinical settings (training clinics, private practices, community
centers, and university counseling centers) and two professional
organizations (American Psychiatric Institute for Research and
Education, National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network).

Training Clinic PRNs Early in graduate school, most psychotherapy
trainees learn the hard way that research and clinical work are
demanding activities and that they are also mostly unrelated. Both of
these activities require their own separate time, each is aimed at
meeting distinct academic and professional goals, and when students are
engaged in one of them they are frequently navigating in a conceptual
land foreign to the other. Conducting statistical analyses and preparing
for a therapy session do not just feel like wearing two hats; it feels
more like wearing different parts of an outfit that, for the most part,
do not match. Such a dichotomous way of learning, however, is not
necessary for the early professional development of clinical
researchers. Systematically integrating clinical and research activities
protects the most precious commodity of graduate students (time) and
fosters an early attachment to the scientist-​ practitioner or
scholar-​practitioner model. One way to achieve such integration is to
transform psychology training clinics into a PRN in which students can
conduct their master's and doctoral theses (or any research) at the same
time---​and in the same environment---​ where they complete their
supervised clinical work. An example of a training clinic PRN is the one
created in the adult track of the clinical psychology program at Penn
State University (Castonguay et al., 2015). This infrastructure is
anchored in key components: (1) the adoption and standardized
implementation of assessment instruments that are helpful to clinical
case formulations and that are essential to research in many labs, (2)
the creation of a clinic/​ research committee to review research
proposals from the perspective of multiple stakeholders (students,
faculty, clinic staff, local practitioners), and (3) an agreement with
the Office of Research Protection, which allows for Institutional Review
Board approval for requests to access data collected in the clinic. We
next describe a few exemplar research projects emanating from the Penn
State training clinic PRN.

Integrating Research and Practice

One master's thesis (Nordberg et al., 2014) focused on whether specific
change patterns observed in managed care could also reflect the change
profiles of patients seen by novice therapists. Replicating previous
findings (Stulz et al., 2007), the results indicated that a substantial
number of patients begin therapy with a high level of depression, but
that they eventually split into two groups: one in which patients showed
rapid response as therapy progressed, and another in which patients
maintained their high level of distress. Furthermore, the study
identified clinical factors that predicted membership in the second
group, such as high levels of suicidality and social conflicts. Another
master's thesis examined trainee self-​ reported use of empirically
supported interventions (via the Multitheoretical List of Therapeutic
Intervention; McCarthy & Barber, 2009) in relation to patient-​rated
session helpfulness (Boswell, Castonguay, & Wasserman, 2010). The
intervention profiles correlated neither with their self-​identified
theoretical preference nor the theoretical orientation espoused (and
taught) by their supervisors. By contrast, the use of some techniques
did relate to the patients' perceived session helpfulness---​ but in a
nuanced way. Specifically, patients whose therapist typically used high
levels of common factor relational interventions (e.g., warmth,
acceptance) perceived sessions to be less helpful than when the
therapist shifted to using more cognitive-​behavioral interventions in
those sessions. Although these findings are preliminary and unique to
one treatment setting, they provide an example of how research conducted
within a training clinic PRN can begin to reveal ways in which clinician
behavior relates to patients' session outcomes. Replication, of course,
is warranted. Importantly to the core mission of PRNs, such studies were
conducted under both research and clinical oversight. The clinical
research committee approval of these studies attested that they were
investigating clinically relevant issues in a way that did not disturb
the clinical routine nor impose undue burdens to therapists, patients,
and clinical staff. In addition, also consistent with the PRN mission,

439

such findings can directly inform future practice in this, or perhaps
similar, training settings (Castonguay, Pincus, et al., 2015). Private
Practice PRNs PRNs primarily involving independent practitioners form a
conduit for them to reconnect with their interest in conducting research
(Borkovec et al., 2001). This has certainly been one of the motivations
of the members of the Pennsylvania Psychological Association (PPA) PRN,
which emerged after years of friendly but heated dialogues about the
value of knowledge derived from research between Tom Borkovec, a
full-​time academician, and Steve Ragusea, a full-​time clinician. As a
way to settle their debate, they agreed to test whether it would be
possible to find therapists interested in collecting data in their
independent practices that would also be relevant to it. At the launch
of their infrastructure, they gathered practitioners from across the
state for a meeting, created committees related to specific topics
(e.g., assessment measures, ethics), and set up a collaborative process
to select, design, and implement research projects and to analyze and
disseminate the results. For the first PPA-​PRN study, more than 50
clinicians investigated the feasibility of adopting a standardized
outcome measure in their day-​ to-​day practice. They also aggregated the
data obtained to assess patient improvement, as well as to examine
variables related to such change. They met their primary goal of
feasibility by successfully implementing the routine outcome monitoring
process across several independent practices, a process that has since
been established as an evidence-​based practice (Boswell et al., 2015;
Lambert et al., 2019). While being cautious about the implications of
their findings, they found evidence for the positive impact of therapy
conducted in private practice. They also identified factors that may
foster or interfere with therapeutic benefits, such as the number of
patients in a therapist's caseload and patients' interpersonal problems
prior to treatment (Borkovec et al., 2001; Ruiz et al., 2004). For the
second PPA-​PRN study (Castonguay, Boswell, Zack, et al., 2010), a
smaller group of

440

Future Directions

therapists designed a research project centered on a inquiry voiced by
one of the clinicians: "At the end of every session, I would like to
know if there are things that happened that my client found helpful and/​
or hindering." Then, for the next 18 months, practitioners invited their
new patients to participate in a study in which they would document
helpful or hindering events that took place during the prior session.
Therapists also documented what they saw as helpful or hindering.
Analyses of close to 1,500 events revealed that, for both therapist and
patients, the most frequent type of helpful event was an increase in
patients' self-​ awareness. The second most frequent helpful event for
therapists (who represented a variety of theoretical orientations) were
those that involved the strengthening of the therapeutic relationship.
Results also indicated that the most prominent focus or content of
helpful events (reported by the patients and the therapists) was the
therapeutic interaction. Interestingly, relatively few hindering events
were reported, but the most prominent focus of these events (reported by
both patients and therapists) was, again, the therapeutic interaction.
When therapists were interviewed about their participation in this PRN
study (Castonguay, Nelson et al., 2010), one of the benefits was that
the helpful/​ hindering event form completed by their patients provided
them with helpful feedback about how to be best attuned to those
patients' needs. This is an example of a clinically syntonic
investigation that, to us, is an optimal characteristic of POR. (A
clinically syntonic study is one that simultaneously serves both
research and clinical purposes.) The results of the interviews conducted
with the clinicians guided the choice and design of a third PPA-​PRN
study: feedback provided by patients at the end of every session. Rather
than using open-​ended questions about helpfulness, a decision was made
to use the Multitheoretical List of Therapeutic Intervention as a
measure of interventions used by therapists and a brief measure of
session impact. Preliminary findings showed that the interventions
(rated by the therapists and the patients) that were more strongly and
consistently related to positive

impact were interventions common to most, if not all, orientations
(Castonguay et al., 2014). The three studies conducted to date in the
PPA-​PRN were designed and implemented by a relatively small number of
therapists. This has imposed obvious limitations on uncovering the scope
of clinicians' interests, not only in terms of sample sizes and
statistical power to test some questions, but also in the variety of
interests and expertise among the PRN membership. Fortunately, a large
private practice PRN has been developed in Canada, which sheds some
light on these matters (Tasca et al., 2015). In a flagship study, 41
survey items were developed following focus groups comprising 82
psychotherapists and then administered to more than 1,000 participants,
mostly practicing clinicians, to be rated on perceived importance to
clinical work. Unsurprisingly, the respondents were most interested in
the therapeutic relationship, mechanisms of change, therapist and
patient factors, and professional development. The lowest ranked items
may have been perceived as externally driven or imposed, such as
technological interventions, progress monitoring, manuals, and matching
patients and therapists; these issues are perhaps comparatively distant
from the actual process of therapy. Thus, the use of PRNs becomes even
more clearly synergistic: just as clinicians have room to voice unique
insights and interests, dissemination of research to practitioners can
become more organic. Community Center PRNs Another example of
partnership, the Practice & Research: Advancing Collaboration (PRAC;
Garland & Brookman-​ Frazee, 2015), has convened researchers and
clinicians working in publicly funded community centers. The first phase
of this project examined the treatment of children with disruptive
behavior problems in naturalistic settings. After months of work on the
questions, methods, and feasibility of the study, the collaboration
collected data on more than 3,000 therapy sessions conducted by more
than 80 therapists and with more than 200 patients across six clinical
sites. One of the goals

Integrating Research and Practice

of this ambitious study was to investigate how much the interventions
used in clinical routine are consistent with evidence-​based principles
of change for children with disruptive behavior problems and their
families. Perhaps not surprisingly, the coding of more than 1,200
sessions showed a generally low level of convergence between usual care
and evidence-​ based practice. A possible exception was cognitive-​
behavioral and behavioral therapists who, consistent with other findings
(Stewart & Chambless, 2007), showed higher level of compliance with
cognitive and behavioral techniques, which are often considered to be
empirically supported (Brookman-​Frazee et al., 2010). However, as a sign
of openness to a diversity of knowledge and action, a second-​phase PRAC
is focused on the training and supervision, in community settings, of
evidence-​based practices (Garland & Brookman-​Frazee, 2015). University
Counseling Center PRNs If the inclusion of six clinical sites allowed
for the planning and implementing of ambitious studies in the PRAC
partnership, so, too, has the adoption of standardized assessment
instruments by more than 500 university counseling centers that are
members of the Center for Collegiate Mental Health (CCMH). CCMH is a
large PRN infrastructure that has relied on the shared interest of
stakeholders (clinicians, faculty members, graduate students,
administrators, information science and technological experts, industry
partners, and funders) in understanding the mental health difficulties
of college students. It has described services delivered in counseling
centers, developed clinical tools to inform practitioners' work,
provided information that can assist counseling centers' self-​advocacy
purposes, and conducted research relevant to the needs of and treatment
provided to college students (Castonguay, Locke, & Hayes, 2011; Locke et
al., 2012). Although each counseling center owns the data it collects as
part of its routine care, data across centers are aggregated in a
repository centrally managed at Penn State University. At this time,

441

the aggregation has produced a sample size of more than 150,000 new
patients per year, as well as several thousands of psychotherapists. The
early research efforts conducted in CCMH focused on the psychometric
validation of its main assessment tools, difficulties experienced by
minority students, and predictors of utilization of counseling services
(McAleavey et al., 2015). More recently, psychotherapy has taken center
stage. One study showed that students who received counseling over a
6-​week period reported a significant reduction of academic distress
(Lockard et al., 2012). Over the same period, a group of students
recruited via a research pool at the same university did not. Going one
step further, another study provided evidence---​ for the sake of
skeptical members in our field, as much as for the sense of
self-​efficacy of CCMH stakeholders---​ that individual psychotherapy in a
counseling centers produces substantial improvement in a broad array of
psychological problems (McAleavey et al., 2019). Despite the fact that
treatments are of shorter duration in counseling centers, the level of
change observed for distressed patients is similar to what has been
observed in RCTs, with more change occurring for individuals
experiencing the highest levels of distress. Other CCMH studies have
examined patient factors that relate to the process of change (e.g.,
Boswell et al., 2012; Nordberg et al., 2016), and yet others have
investigated problems in mental care treatment: dropout and session
nonattendance (e.g., Xiao, Castonguay, et al., 2017; Xiao, Hayes, et
al., 2017). Recent studies have also explored questions related to
between-​therapist effects, and these have provided new directions to
CCMH stakeholders to improve its services. For example, Hayes and
colleagues (2016) found that some therapists are more effective with
racial and ethnic minority patients than with white patients, that
others show the reverse pattern, and that some are highly effective with
both racial/​ethnic groups. Another study demonstrated that between-​
therapist variability explains a particularly large amount of outcome
variance in the treatment of a clinical problem that is

442

Future Directions

significant on college campuses: alcohol abuse (Youn et al., 2015). From
a research perspective, the findings of these studies help us to specify
the therapist's contribution to outcomes above and beyond what we can
glean from the population of patients at large. From a practice
perspective, these findings can inform best therapeutic practices. We
hope to identify "super-​shrinks" (those, for example, with multicultural
expertise and with particular competence in treating alcohol problems),
examine their clinical work, and use the results of these examinations
as the basis for future clinical guidelines in terms of training,
practice, and research. Professional Organization PRNs A number of PRNs
have emerged from professional and scientific organizations, and we
highlight the infrastructure (and some empirical contributions) of two
of them. The American Psychiatric Institute for Research and Education
(APIRE) was originally conceived as a means to gather systematic and
longitudinal data to inform the development of the American Psychiatric
Association's practice guidelines (West et al., 2015). Starting with
nearly 800 psychiatrists, the APIRE is now a PRN that largely recruits
clinician participants through randomly selected samples from the
American Medical Association Physician Masterfile. As stated by West and
colleagues (2015), the engagement of practitioners in this research
partnership has led to valuable scientific benefits. Our experience in
developing the PRN and conducting practice-​ based research has
demonstrated that involving clinicians in the research enterprise
significantly enhances the quality of the research. In addition to their
primary contribution of participating in and implementing the actual
studies which are fielded, our clinician collaborators have helped us to
strengthen our research enterprise and efforts by: (i) Identifying and
selecting topics that are clinically relevant and important; (ii)
ensuring that studies are designed to optimize feasibility and success;
and (iii) facilitating dissemination

of findings. The input and participation of our clinician collaborators
have proven to be particularly valuable in improving the quality,
feasibility, and strength of our studies through their generous
contributions of time, expertise, and valuable insights to strengthen
our research. (p. 153).

Among its research initiatives, the APIRE PRN has fostered the
investigation of specific patient disorders and their treatments,
including treatment-​resistant patients with schizophrenia and children
and adolescents with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder,
depression, and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD). These studies have
allowed for empirical analysis on what kinds of treatments, including
therapy and medications, were being used and where there was room for
improvement in administering evidence-​ based treatments. For example,
among treatment-​resistant patients with schizophrenia, two-​thirds of
psychiatrists considered long-​acting injectable medications to be
effective for treatment, but fewer than one-​fifth of their patients were
actually prescribed these medications (West et al., 2008). Additional
studies have examined patient characteristics and psychiatric treatments
across public and private treatment settings, comorbidity patterns in
routine psychiatric care, and race/​ethnicity variations in diagnosis and
treatment. The National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) has also
maintained a PRN in the form of its National Drug Abuse Treatment
Clinical Trials Network (Tai et al., 2010). Much of the extensive
research (more than 270 published journal articles as of 2011) that has
emerged from this infrastructure focuses on the efficacy of
pharmacologic treatments, but there are also several studies providing
research on psychotherapeutic and behavioral treatments. These include
research on the process and effectiveness of brief strategic family
therapy for adolescents with substance abuse and delinquency problems
(Szapocznik et al., 2015). Research within this Clinical Trial Network
is structured to be collaborative, efficient, and effective. Projects
can start with discussion and planning at a regional "node," such as
around a clinic-​based practitioner or university-​based researcher.
Collaboration occurs both within

Integrating Research and Practice

these nodes between researchers and providers and also between nodes, as
many research projects seek at least three nodes to increase external
validity. This partnership is exemplified in its steering committee,
comprising equal representation of practitioners and researchers at each
node. When a potential project is ready for implementation, the NIDA is
responsible for approval and support. Finally, clinical training for
research protocols and data/​statistical efforts are overseen by a
centralized management.

FUTURE DIRECTIONS As surveyed in this chapter, POR has focused on many
dimensions of psychotherapy and a wide range of variables (e.g., patient
and therapist characteristics, relationship and technical factors).
Although the complexity of psychotherapy intrinsically calls for the
investigation of many issues, we believe that it is more important to
end this chapter by emphasizing the need to develop further practitioner
and researcher partnerships than to identify specific topics for future
investigations. There are three reasons to do so. First, because the
three authors of this chapter "live" in Babel towers of academia,
proposing a list of research topics would be a perpetuation, albeit
nonmalevolent, of empirical imperialism---​where researchers have
historically driven the agenda of what should be studied. We believe
that delineating of contents of future POR is best done collaboratively
by clinicians and researchers together. And this also applies to the
delineation of directions regarding how to do future practice-​oriented
research. Fortunately, the voices of both clinicians and researchers
(from countries across three continents) have been pulled together in a
recent series of papers created to guide future partnerships by
identifying benefits, obstacles, and strategies to cope with them and
general recommendations for designing and implementing POR in various
clinical settings (Castonguay & Muran, 2015). The second reason to
emphasize the need for more POR is that this type of investigation

443

offers a unique pathway for the actualization of scientific knowledge
about psychotherapy. As previously mentioned, POR complements some of
the restrictions and limitations of traditional research. Encouraging
this knowledge acquisition is therefore likely to be a fruitful strategy
to build more robust, broader, and more valid empirical foundations for
our field (Barkham & Margison, 2007; Barkham et al., 2010). The third
reason is that, in the mainstream territories of practice and training
guidelines, POR may also promote the viability of psychotherapy
integration. It is well known that the credibility of a professional
tradition is based in part on its scientific foundations. It is also
well established that a large percentage of clinicians identify
themselves as integrationists, but integrative therapies have received
less research attention than prominent "pure-​form" treatments. By
promoting the full engagement of practitioners in the design and
implementation of research, especially within their own work
environments, many future studies will investigate topics directly
related to integrative practice. We believe that the futures of POR and
psychotherapy integration are closely linked and that such nesting can
only benefit the science-​practitioner and scholar-​practitioner models
underlying our field.

References Adelman, R. W. (2006). The angry adolescent and
constructivist REBT. In P. Cummins (Ed.), Working with anger: A
constructivist approach (pp. 99--​113). London: Wiley & Sons. Adelman, R.
W., Castonguay, L. G., Kraus, D. R., & Zack, S. E. (2015). Conducting
research and collaborating with researchers: The experience of
clinicians in a residential treatment center. Psychotherapy Research,
25, 108--​120. Baldwin, S. A., & Imel, Z. E. (2013). Therapist effects:
Findings and methods. In M. J. Lambert (Ed.), Bergin and Garfield's
handbook of psychotherapy and behavior change (pp. 258--​ 297). Hoboken,
NJ: Wiley. Barkham, M., Lutz, W., Lambert, M. J., & Saxon, D. (2017).
Therapist effects, effective therapists, and the law of variability. In
L. G. Castonguay

444

Future Directions

& C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist effects: Toward Mental Health and Mental
Health Services understanding how and why some therapists Research, 37,
254--​269. are better than others (pp. 13--​36). Washington, Castonguay,
L. G. (2011). Psychotherapy, psycho­ DC: American Psychological
Association Press. pathology, research and practice: Pathways of
Barkham, M., & Margison, F. (2007). Practice-​ connections and
integration. Psychotherapy based evidence as a complement to evidence-​
research, 21, 125--​140. based practice: From dichotomy to chiasmus.
Castonguay, L. G., Barkham, M., Lutz, W., & In C. Freeman & M. Power
(Eds.), Handbook McAleavey, A. A. (2013). Practice-​ oriented of
evidence-​based psychotherapies: A guide for research: Approaches and
application. In M. J. research and practice (pp. 443--​476). Chichester,
Lambert (Eds.), Bergin and Garfield's handbook UK: Wiley. of
psychotherapy and behavior change (6th ed.) Barkham, M., Stiles, W. B.,
Lambert, M. J., & Mellor-​ (pp. 85--​133). New York: Wiley. Clark, J.
(2010). Building a rigorous and relevant Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J.
F., Constantino, M. J., knowledge base for the psychological therapies.
Goldfried, M. R., & Hill, C. E. (2010). Training In M. Barkham, G. E.
Hardy, & J. Mellor-​Clark implications of harmful effects of
psychological (Eds.), Developing and delivering practice-​based
treatments. American Psychologist, 65, evidence: A guide for the
psychological therapies 34--​49. (pp. 21--​61). Chichester: Wiley.
Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J. F., Zack, S., Baker, Borkovec, T. D.,
Echemendia, R. J., Ragusea, S. A., S., Boutselis, M., Chiswick, N., . .
. Grosse & Ruiz, M. (2001). The Pennsylvania practice Holtforth, M.
(2010). Helpful and hindering research network and future possibilities
events in psychotherapy: A practice research for clinically meaningful
and scientifically network study. Psychotherapy, 47, 327--​344. rigorous
psychotherapy research. Clinical Castonguay, L. G., Eubanks-​Carter, C.,
Goldfried, Psychology: Science and Practice, 8, 155--​167. M. R., Muran,
J. C., & Lutz, W. (2015). Research Boswell, J. F., Castonguay, L. G., &
Wasserman, R. in psychotherapy integration: Relevance of the H. (2010).
Effects of psychotherapy training and past and necessity for the future.
Psychotherapy intervention use on session outcome. Journal Research, 25,
365--​382. of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, Castonguay, L. G.,
& Hill, C. E. (2017). (Eds.). 717--​723. Therapist effects: Toward
understanding how Boswell, J. F., Kraus, D. R., Constantino, M. J., and
why some therapists are better than others. Bugati, M., & Castonguay, L.
G. (2017). Washington, DC: American Psychological The implications of
therapist effects for Association Press. routine practice, policy, and
training. In L. Castonguay, L. G., Locke, B. D., & Hayes, J. A. G.
Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist (2011). The Center for
Collegiate Mental effects: Toward understanding how and why some Health:
An example of a practice-​ research therapists are better than others
(pp. 309--​323). network in university counseling centers. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Journal of College Student Psychotherapy, 25,
Association Press. 105--​119. Boswell, J. F., Kraus, D. R., Miller, S., &
Lambert, Castonguay, L. G., & Muran, J. C. (2015). Fostering M. J.
(2015). Implementing routine outcome collaboration between researchers
and assessment in clinical practice: Benefits, clinicians through
building practice-​ oriented challenges, and solutions. Psychotherapy
research: An introduction. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 6--​19. Research,
25, 1--​5. Boswell, J. F., McAleavey, A. A., Castonguay, L. G.,
Castonguay, L., Nelson, D., Boutselis, M., Chiswick, Locke, B. D., &
Hayes, J. A. (2012). Previous N., Damer, D., Hemmelstein, N., . . .
Borkovec, mental health service utilization and change T. (2010).
Clinicians and/​or researchers? in counseling clients' depressive
symptoms. A qualitative analysis of therapists' experiences Journal of
Counseling Psychology, 59, 368--​378. in a practice research network.
Psychotherapy, Brookman-​Frazee, L., Haine, R. A., Baker-​Ericzen, 47,
345--​354. M., Zoffness, R., & Garland, A. F. (2010). Castonguay, L. G.,
Pincus, A. L., & McAleavey, Factors associated with use of evidence-​ A.
A. (2015). Practice-​ research network in based practice strategies in
usual care youth a psychology training clinic: Building an
psychotherapy. Administration and Policy in infrastructure to foster
early attachment to the

Integrating Research and Practice

445

scientific-​practitioner model. Psychotherapy Hannan, C., Lambert, M. J.,
Harmon, C., Nielsen, Research, 25, 52--​66. S. L., Smart, D. W.,
Shimokawa, K., & Sutton, Castonguay, L. G., Youn, S. J., McAleavey, A.
S. W. (2005). A lab test and algorithms for A., Boswell, J. F.,
Boutselis, M., Braver, identifying clients at risk for treatment
failure. M., . . . O'Leary, W. (2014, June). The use of Journal of
Clinical Psychology: In Session, 61, empirically based techniques in
day-​ to-​ day 155--​163. practice: Does it matter and if so, for whom?
Hayes, J. A., McAleavey, A. A., Castonguay, L. Paper presented at the
annual meeting of G., & Locke, B. D. (2016). Psychotherapist the Society
for Psychotherapy Research, effects with white and racial/​ ethnic
minority Copenhagen, Denmark. clients: First, the good news. Journal of
Constantino, M. J., Boswell, J. F., Coyne, A. E., Counseling Psychology,
63, 261--​268. Kraus, D. R., & Castonguay, L. G. (2017). Who Hill, C. E.,
& Castonguay, L. G. (2017). Therapist works for whom and why?
Integrating therapist effects: Integration and conclusions. In L.
effects analysis into psychotherapy outcome G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill
(Eds.), Therapist and process research. In L. G. Castonguay & effects:
Toward understanding how and why some C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist
effects: Toward therapists are better than others (pp. 325--​341).
understanding how and why some therapists Washington, DC: American
Psychological are better than others (pp. 55--​68). Washington,
Association Press. DC: American Psychological Association Press. Hill,
C. E., & Knox, S. (2013). Training and de Jong, K., van Sluis, P.,
Nugter, M. A., Heiser, supervision in psychotherapy. In M. J. Lambert W.
J., & Spinhoven, P. (2012). Understanding (Eds.), Bergin and Garfield's
Handbook of the differential impact of outcome psychotherapy and
behavior change (sixth monitoring: Therapist variables that moderate
edition) (pp. 775--​812). New York: Wiley. feedback effects in a
randomized clinical Howard, K. I., Kopta, M., Krause, M. S., & Orlinsky,
trial. Psychotherapy Research, 22, 464--​474. D. E. (1986). The dose-​
effect relationship doi: 10.1080/​10503307.2012.673023 in psychotherapy.
American Psychologist, 41, Fernández-​ Alvarez, H., Gómez, B., & García,
F. 159--​164. (2015). Bridging the gap between research Howard, K. I.,
Lueger, R. J., Maling, M. S., & and practice in a clinical and training
Martinovich, Z. (1993). A phase model of network: Aigle's program.
Psychotherapy psychotherapy: Causal mediation of outcome. Research, 25,
84--​94. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, Garb, H. N.
(2005). Clinical judgment and decision 61, 678--​685. making. Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology, Kazdin, A. E. (2008). Evidence-​based
treatment and 1, 67--​89. practice: New opportunities to bridge clinical
Garland, A. F., & Brookman-​ Frazee, L. (2015). research and practice,
enhance the knowledge Therapists and researchers: Advancing base, and
improve patient care. American collaboration. Psychotherapy Research,
25, Psychologist, 63, 146--​159. 95--​107. Koerner, K., & Castonguay, L.
G. (2015). Practice-​ Gibbard, I., & Hanley, T. (2008). A five-​ year
oriented research: What it takes to do evaluation of the effectiveness
of person-​ collaborative research in private practice. centred
counselling in routine clinical practice Psychotherapy Research, 25,
67--​83. in primary care. Counselling and Psychotherapy Kraus, D. R.,
Bentley, J. H., Alexander, P. C., Research, 8, 215--​222. Boswell, J. F.,
Constantino, M. J., Baxter, E. Goldfried, M. R. (2011a). Building a
two-​way bridge E., & Castonguay, L. G. (2016). Predicting between
research and practice. The Clinical therapist effectiveness from their
own practice-​ Psychologist, 63, 1--​3. based evidence. Journal of
Consulting and Goldfried, M. R. (2011b). Generating research Clinical
Psychology, 84, 473--​483. questions from clinical experience:
Therapists' Kraus, D. R., Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J. F., experiences
in using CBT for panic disorder. Nordberg, S. S., & Hayes, J. A. (2011).
Therapist The Behavior Therapist, 34, 57--​62. effectiveness:
Implications for accountability Goldfried, M. R., & Wolfe, B. E. (1996).
and patient care. Psychotherapy Research, 21, Psychotherapy practice and
research: Repairing 267--​276. a strained relationship. American
Psychologist, Lambert, M. J. (2010). Prevention of treatment 51,
1007--​1016. failure: The use of measuring, monitoring, and

446

Future Directions

feedback in clinical practice. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Lambert, M. J., Hansen, N. B., & Finch, A. E. (2001).
Patient-​focused research: Using patient outcome data to enhance
treatment effects. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 69,
159--​172. Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., & Kleinstäuber, M. (2019).
Collecting and delivering feedback. In J. C. Norcross & M. J. Lambert
(Eds.), Psychotherapy relationships that work (3rd ed.). Volume 1. New
York: Oxford University Press. Lambert, M. J., Whipple, J. L., Smart, D.
W., Vermeersch, D. A., Nielsen, S. L., & Hawkins, E. J. (2001). The
effects of providing therapists with feedback on client progress during
psychotherapy: Are outcomes enhanced? Psychotherapy Research, 11,
49--​68. Lockard, A. J., Hayes, J. A., McAleavey, A. A., & Locke, B. D.
(2012). Change in academic distress: Examining differences between a
clinical and nonclinical sample of college students. Journal of College
Counseling, 15, 233--​ 246. doi: 10.1002/​j.2161-​1882.2012.00018.x Locke,
B. D., Bieschke, K. J., Castonguay, L. G., & Hayes, J. A. (2012). The
Center for Collegiate Mental Health (CCMH): Studying college student
mental health through an innovative research infrastructure that brings
science and practice together. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 20,
233--​245. McAleavey, A. A., Lockard, A. J., Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, J.
A., & Locke, B. D. (2015). Building a practice research network:
Obstacles faced and lessons learned at the center for collegiate mental
health. Psychotherapy Research, 25,134--​151. McAleavey, A. A., Youn, S.
J., Xiao, H., Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, J. A., & Locke, B. D. (2019).
Effectiveness of routine psychotherapy: Methods matters. Psychotherapy
Research, 29, 139--​156. McCarthy, K. S., & Barber, J. P. (2009). The
Multitheoretical List of Therapeutic Interventions (MULTI): Initial
report. Psychotherapy Research, 19, 96--​113. Norcross, J. C., Hogan, T.
P., Koocher, G. P., & Maggio, L. A. (2017). Clinician's guide to
evidence-​ based practices: Behavioral health and addictions (2nd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press. Nordberg, S. S., Castonguay, L. G.,
Fisher, A. J., Boswell, J. F., & Kraus, D. (2014). Validating the rapid
responder construct within a practice research network. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 70, 886--​903,

Nordberg, S. S., Castonguay, L. G., McAleavey, A. A., Locke, B. D., &
Hayes, J. A. (2016). Enhancing feedback for clinical use: Creating and
evaluating profiles of clients seeking counseling. Journal of Counseling
Psychology, 63, 278--​293. Paley, G., Cahill, J., Barkham, M., Shapiro,
D. A., Jones, J., Patrick, S., & Reid, E. (2008). The effectiveness of
psychodynamic-​ interpersonal psychotherapy in routine clinical practice:
A benchmarking comparison. Psychology and Psychotherapy: Theory,
Research and Practice, 85, 157--​175. Parloff, M. B. (1982).
Psychotherapy research evidence and reimbursement decisions: Bambi meets
Godzilla. The American Journal of Psychiatry, 139, 718--​ 727. doi:
10.1176/​ ajp.139.6.718 Persons, J. B., Burns, D. D., & Perloff, J. M.
(1988). Predictors of dropout and outcome in cognitive therapy for
depression in a private practice setting. Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 12, 557--​575. Persons, J. B., Roberts, N. A., Zalecki, C. A.,
Brechwald, W. A. G. (2006). Naturalistic outcome of
case-​formulation-​driven cognitive-​ behavioral therapy for anxiety
depressed outpatients. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 44, 1041--​1051.
Ruiz, M. A., Pincus, A. L., Borkovec, T. D., Echemendia, R. J.,
Castonguay, L. G., & Ragusea, S. A. (2004). Validity of the inventory of
interpersonal problems for predicting treatment outcome: An
investigation with the Pennsylvania Practice Research Network. Journal
of Personality Assessment, 83, 213--​222. doi:
10.1207/​s15327752jpa8303\_​05 Sobell, L. C. (1996). Bridging the gap
between scientists and practitioners: The challenge before us. Behavior
Therapy, 27, 297--​320. Stewart, R. E., & Chambless, D. L. (2007). Does
psychotherapy research inform treatment decisions in private practice?
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 63, 267--​281. Stiles, W. B., Barkham,
M., Mellor-​ Clark, J., & Connell, J. (2008). Effectiveness of
cognitive-​behavioural, person-​centered, and psychodynamic therapies in
UK primary care routine practice: Replication with a larger sample.
Psychological Medicine, 38, 677--​688. Stiles, W. B., Barkham, M., Twigg,
E., Mellor-​ Clark, J., & Cooper, M. (2006). Effectiveness of cognitive-​
behavioural, person-​ centred, and psychodynamic therapies as practiced
in UK

Integrating Research and Practice National Health Service settings.
Psychological Medicine, 36, 555--​566. Straus, S. E., Richardson, W. S.,
Glasziou, P., & Haynes, R. B. (2010). Evidence-​based medicine: How to
practice and teach EBM (4th ed.). London: Elsevier. Stulz, N., & Lutz,
W. (2007). Multidimensional patterns of change in outpatient
psychotherapy: The phase model revisited. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 63, 817--​833. Stulz, N., Lutz, W., Leach, C., Lucock, M., &
Barkham, M. (2007). Shapes of early change in psychotherapy under
routine outpatient conditions. Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, 75, 864--​874. Szapocznik, J., Muir, J. A., Duff, J. H.,
Schwartz, S. J., & Brown, C. H. (2015). Brief strategic family therapy:
Implementing evidence-​based models in community settings, Psychotherapy
Research, 25, 121--​133. Tai, B., Straus, M. M., Liu, D., Sparenborg, S.,
Jackson, R., & McCarty, D. (2010). The first decade of the National Drug
Abuse Treatment Clinical Trials Network: Bridging the gap between
research and practice to improve drug abuse treatment. Journal of
Substance Abuse Treatment, 38(Suppl. 1), S4--​S13. Tasca, G. A.,
Sylvestre, J., Balfour, L., Chyurlia, L., Evans, J., Fortin-​Langelier,
B., . . . Wilson, B. (2015). What clinicians want: Findings from a
psychotherapy practice research network survey. Psychotherapy, 52,
1--​11. Teachman, B. A., Drabick, D. G., Hershenberg, R., Vivian, D.,
Wolfe, B. E., & Goldfried, M. R. (2012). Bridging the gap between
clinical research and clinical practice: Introduction to the special
section. Psychotherapy, 49, 97--​100. doi: 10.1037/​a0027346 Walfish, S.,
McAlister, B., O'Donnell, P., & Lambert, M. J. (2012). An investigation
of self-​assessment bias in mental health providers. Psychological
Reports, 110, 639--​644. doi: 10.2466/​02.07.17. Wampold, B. E., Baldwin,
S. A., Grosse Holtforth, M., Imel, Z. E. (2017). What characterizes

447

effective therapists? In L. G. Castonguay & C. E. Hill (Eds.), Therapist
effects: Toward understanding how and why some therapists are better
than others. (pp. 37--​ 53). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press. West, J. C., Marcus, S. C., Wilk, J., Countis, L. M.,
Regier, D. A., & Olfson, M. (2008). Use of depot antipsychotic
medications for medication nonadherence in schizophrenia. Schizophrenia
Bulletin, 34, 995--​1001. West, J. C., Mościcki, E. K., Duffy, F. F.,
Wilk, J. E., Countis, L., Narrow, W. E., & Regier, D. A. (2015). APIRE
Practice Research Network: Accomplishments, challenges, and lessons
learned. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 152--​165. Whipple, J. L., Lambert,
M. J., Vermeersch, D. A., Smart, D. W., Nielsen, S. L., & Hawkins, E. J.
(2003). Improving the effects of psychotherapy: The use of early
identification of treatment failure and problem solving strategies in
routine practice. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 58, 59--​68. Xiao,
H., Castonguay, L. G., Janis, R. B, Youn, S. J., Hayes, J. A., & Locke,
B. D. (2017). Therapist effects on dropout from a college counseling
center practice research network. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 64,
424--​431. Xiao, H., Hayes, J. A., Castonguay, L. G., McAleavey, A. A., &
Locke, B. D. (2017). Therapist effects and the impacts of therapy non-​
attendance. Psychotherapy, 54, 58--​65. Youn, S. J., Xiao, H., Janis, R.,
Castonguay, L. G., Hayes, J., & Locke, B. (2015, June). Therapist
effects in naturalistic settings. Paper presented at the annual meeting
of the Society for Psychotherapy Research, Philadelphia, PA. Zack, S.
E., Castonguay, L. G., Boswell, J. F., McAleavey, A. A., Adelman, R.,
Kraus, D., & Pate, G. A. (2015). Attachment history as a moderator of
the alliance outcome relationship in adolescents. Psychotherapy, 52,
258--​267.

21 International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration BEATRIZ GÓMEZ,
SHIGERU IWAKABE, AND ALEXANDRE VAZ

Integrative psychotherapies have grown significantly worldwide since the
1980s and currently hold a central place on most continents. In this
chapter, we present a landscape of practice, training, and research in
psychotherapy integration in select countries in Asia, Latin America,
and Europe. This panorama allows us to see the global similarities in
integration beyond particular contexts while also noticing the cultural
differences and idiosyncrasies influencing psychotherapy integration. In
other words, we seek to explicate both common themes as well as local
characteristics around the world. Psychotherapy is defined by common
features throughout the world and, at the same time, is practiced
differently according to geographical regions and cultural contexts. On
the one hand, the scientific tradition is worldwide. Researchers are
receptive to ideas from

any place in the world, pursue long-​distance collegial ties, and
disseminate their creations globally (Schott, 1993). Knowledge diffusion
is highly global, more widespread than social ties such as informal
exchanges, collaboration, and bestowal of recognition among scientists
(Schott, 1991). Some theoretical concepts and procedures in
psychotherapy are strikingly similar in different regions because they
have a common source in world standards. On the other hand, the
sociocultural environment in which therapy takes place, the
ethnocultural background of clients and clinicians, and the attitudes
toward psychotherapy all profoundly affect therapy in each place it is
delivered. Attitudes toward psychotherapy vary from society to society
based on the general attitude toward mental health and illness. The
client's style of problem presentation,

448

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

complaint, and suffering, as well as the desired goals and expectations
of psychotherapy, will be shaped by cultural factors. A more complex
phenomenon is the progressive cultural heterogeneity in many regions.
Increased migrations across national borders have altered old categories
that assumed a homology between nation-​states, populations, and cultures
(Kirmayer, 2006). Cultural worlds are open systems, increasingly shaped
by forces of migration, globalization, and hybridization
(Papastergiadis, 2000). Global and local properties of knowledge and
practice are complementary and give shape to psychotherapy in different
regions of the world. This chapter is based on brief descriptions of
integrative psychotherapy movements and contributions in different world
regions in order to furnish a view of integration at an international
level. We asked contributors to provide overviews of integration in
their respective countries in terms of specific models, training
programs, and research programs, concluding with the current state of
psychotherapy integration. Following summaries of integration in
Asia-​Pacific, Latin America, and Europe and select countries therein, we
highlight recurrent themes across countries. The landscape includes
considerations about incentives and challenges to the growth of
psychotherapy integration in every region as well as obstacles to
address. PSYCHOTHERAPY INTEGRATION IN ASIA-​PACIFIC Asian countries are
diverse in their religious, ethnic, linguistic, economic, historical,
and political backgrounds. Although the influence of Buddhism is
pervasive in the philosophy of life, Catholicism, Islam, and other
religions form substantial minorities in some countries. Many Asian
countries share the history of colonialization by European countries
over four centuries that significantly influenced the course of
development of commerce, politics, and culture. While it brought rapid

449

development in some sectors of the economy based on trading of the rich
resources of these countries, they were forcibly brought into the power
struggles of Western countries, militarized, and coerced into
international economic competition. Asian countries have for years
struggled to find their own national identity. Many Asian countries have
a rich and long history of indigenous healing practices from Buddhist
meditation, shamanism, religious rituals, and traditional medicine. In
some countries, Western psychotherapies have a relatively long history,
but, in comparison to many Western countries, psychotherapy has not
gained sufficient recognition in facilitating mental health. In other
countries, Western psychotherapies are relatively new, introduced only
recently by those academics who studied abroad. Most commonly,
biological psychiatry is considered the main provider of treatment of
mental illness, and strong stigma is attached to mental illness. Help-​
seeking is largely suppressed to avoid shaming oneself and one's family
in collectivist societies. Adapting Western psychotherapy to the Asian
worldview and lifestyle has been one of the central themes of
integrative attempts in Asian countries. The majority of Asian
psychotherapists are eclectic or integrative. They tend to adjust their
understanding of a psychotherapy model to their own population and
clinical settings. The exceptions are Australia and New Zealand. Both
are Anglophone countries with Western cultural backgrounds. Australia
and New Zealand Australia takes up a special place in Asia-​ Pacific. It
is an English-​speaking country with many natural resources and a highly
developed economic system, ranking highly in per capita income and
having the second-​highest human development index globally. New Zealand,
located southeast of Australia and consisting of two main islands and
many small islands, is also a developed country that ranks highly in
international comparisons of nations' wealth and

450

Future Directions

power, such as health, education, economic freedom, and quality of life.
Psychotherapy is relatively well developed in these two countries: there
are more than 50 professional psychotherapy associations. The
Psychotherapy and Counselling Federation of Australia, which is a
national body for counsellors, psychotherapists, and professional
associations, promotes and supports the diversity of approaches within
the profession and provides a united forum for mental health
professionals; therefore, its basic nature is integrative (Schofield &
Roedel, 2012). Several surveys have been conducted to examine the
theoretical orientations of Australian and New Zealander
psychotherapists (e.g., Poznanski & McLennan, 1998). The most recent
large survey of psychotherapists and counselors who are members of the
Psychotherapy and Counselling Federation of Australia showed that the
five most salient theoretical approaches were humanistic (39%),
interpersonal (38%), analytic/​ psychodynamic (36%), experiential (35%),
and family/​systems (33%) (Schofield & Roedel, 2012). When asked to what
extent they regarded their orientation as eclectic or integrative,
approximately 70% of therapists answered greatly or very greatly. Most
graduate schools in counseling takes an integrative stance when
different models of therapy are taught, and students learn to examine
the match between client problems and model characteristics. O'Hara and
O'Hara (2015), however, point out that this is relatively superficial
psychotherapy integration because the actual meaning of integration is
not developed at a deeper level, and theories are mostly combined at a
pragmatic level. There are training institutes for integrative
approaches. Emotion-​ focused therapy, for example, has its own training
programs in major cities of Australia. The Australian Centre for
Integrative Studies offers an original integrative training based on
transactional analysis. Australia has lagged behind in terms of
representing counseling and psychotherapy in the higher education
because public mental health is dominated by psychiatry, nursing, and
psychology, all operating within a medical

model of health (Day, 2015). Common factors across approaches might
become a strong base that pushes psychotherapy and counseling to grow in
Australia. In particular, the therapeutic relationship as a common
factor in treatment effectiveness may provide a solid scaffolding for
psychotherapy and counseling (Day, 2015). China China has experienced
rapid social and economic transformations in past 50 years. The
landscape of China is dramatically changing, and its economic
development is transforming the lifestyle of many Chinese people. The
rates of common mental health problems, such as mood disorders, anxiety
disorders, and suicide, are also on the rise (Lee & Kleinman, 1997).
However, psychotherapy is still very limited in its availability and its
use (Chang et al., 2013). Chinese psychiatrists and psychologists have
attempted to import and disseminate the Western psychotherapies (Li et
al., 1994). Newer models of psychotherapy have been introduced by those
Chinese psychologists who studied overseas. In addition, master
therapists have been invited to give professional workshops in China.
Professional organizations for major psychotherapy systems have been
formed, and these host annual conferences and provide training
workshops. However, Chinese therapists are not equipped with basic
theories of psychotherapy or counseling skills; therefore, they tend to
rigidly apply the interventions that they learn without examining the
underlying values of Western psychotherapy. Western values such as
individuation, self-​control, and self-​efficacy are not easily accepted
in Chinese culture, though they are often well-​regarded by young people.
Teaching from an integrative point of view is much needed but not yet
common. One psychotherapy integration that is commonly attempted in
China is a version of cultural integration in which cultural values of
Chinese society are added to Western psychotherapy (Chang et al., 2013).
Confucianism and Taoism are particularly relevant because they have
permeated the Chinese people's

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

psychological, social, and moral life for thousands of years.
Confucianism emphasizes hierarchy, moral development, achievement, and
social responsibility, and excessive compliance with it may give rise to
rigidity and overresponsibility. In contrast, Taoism focuses on
conforming to natural laws, letting go of excessive control, and the
flexible development of personality. Extreme adherence to this approach
may foster passive compromise, resignation, and apathy (Zhang et al.,
2002). A prominent example of a psychotherapy integration that
incorporates these Chinese cultural values is Chinese Taoist cognitive
psychotherapy (CTCP), a culturally adapted cognitive therapy (Zhang et
al., 2002). CTCP is based on the assumption that when clients learn more
adaptive modes of thinking, affective and behavioral changes naturally
follow; however, it does not emphasize rationality, objectivity, and
logicalness as in conventional cognitive therapy. Clients apply Taoist
analytic thinking to evaluate their thoughts, feelings, and behavior.
Outcome research in two trials on generalized anxiety disorder
demonstrated that CTCP was more effective than medication alone.

451

and instituted professional training such as gestalt therapy,
psychoanalysis, EMDR, and emotion-​focused therapy. Cognitive-​behavioral
therapy (CBT) is the most common approach, and other short-​term
problem-​solving approaches are preferred over long-​ term
insight-​oriented therapies (Leung, 2017, personal communication).
Psychotherapy is relatively underdeveloped in Hong Kong (Yuen, Leung, &
Chan, 2014), and there is a lack of public recognition of its importance
in enhancing psychological health. Help-​seeking behavior is also
suppressed due to stigma against mental illness. Mental health services
in Hong Kong are dominated by psychiatrists, nurses, and social workers,
while psychologists are not included in national projects funded by the
government. Therefore, the clientele in Hong Kong is limited to a small
portion of relatively wealthy and expatriates. Indeed, many private
practices in Hong Kong are conducted by European and Anglophone
therapists who treat international clients. Many therapists in Hong Kong
are integrative or eclectic, with CBT as a primary orientation. However,
there is no academic organization or community for psychotherapy
integration.

Hong Kong Hong Kong, officially the Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region of The People's Republic of China, is a cosmopolitan city that
was a former British colony until it was returned to China in 1997; it
is renowned for its economic and cultural prosperity. However, it is
also struggling from many social problems, such as long working hours,
large income disparity, escalating property prices, lack of social care
for the elderly, and rising inflation. Pressures are also being put on
young children: there is a strong focus on examination results and
achievement in education, thus contributing to a high need for
psychological services in educational settings (Leung, December 13,
2017, personal communication). Because English is the official language
of Hong Kong, psychotherapy and its research are easily introduced.
Major schools of psychotherapy have established their own associations

Japan Japan is often represented as a country of intricate yet
contradictory culture in which the elements of the most advanced
technology and an ancient cultural heritage coexist. The slogan Wa-​kon
Yo-​sai, meaning "maintaining Japanese spirit and acquiring and
integrating Western technology," which was central to Japan's
modernization in late 19th century, had long mobilized Japanese people
toward development while maintaining a feeling of connection to their
ancestry and spiritual core. Psychotherapy in Japan has been rapidly
expanding and developing since the 1990s in response to problems such as
the growing rates of truancy and bullying in middle schools, depression
and other mental health issues in workplaces, the high suicide rate, and
two major earthquakes (Iwakabe & Enns, 2012). Japanese psychotherapists
have translated and

452

Future Directions

introduced new approaches developed in the Western countries. There are
more than 30 associations affiliated with particular theoretical
approaches. The psychodynamic approach is dominant, followed by CBT,
which has grown in past 10 years. Japanese indigenous therapies, such as
Morita therapy and Naikan therapy, form small minorities among Western
approaches. According to a survey of the Japanese Society of Certified
Clinical Psychologists (2009), more than 70% of Japanese clinical
psychologists are integrative or eclectic. Most therapists learn to be
integrative through their clinical experience of working with different
populations in a myriad of clinical settings. There have been a few
models of integrative therapy created by Japanese therapists (e.g.,
Hiraki, 1996; Murase, 2003). Murase (2003), for example, constructed an
integrative, multiaxial therapy based on her work with children and
their families. Most recently, major works of integrative therapists
have been translated into Japanese, and textbooks of psychotherapy
routinely make reference to psychotherapy integration as one of the
important movements. Probably the most common form of psychotherapy
integration is cultural adaptation (Iwakabe, 2008), in which therapists
modify or adjust some aspects of the therapy to fit Japanese clients.
The most poignant example is Doi's (1973) theory of dependence, which
proposes the capacity to construct a mutually dependent relationship is
central to healthy psychological development in Japan. Another example
is the Ajase complex. Kosawa thought that the Oedipus complex needed to
be replaced with the Ajase complex, wherein the Buddhist legend of
Prince Ajatasattu (ajase in Japanese) reflects the strong mother-​son tie
in Buddhist culture (Dale, 1987). There are two Japanese groups active
in psychotherapy integration. One is the Society for the Exploration of
Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI)-​ Japan regional group in Tokyo and
Eastern Japan that started their regular meetings in 2005; the other is
the Kansai Institute of Eclectic Psychotherapy (KIEP) in Western Japan,
which was formed in 2008. The two groups have been working toward
forming a national academic association.

In Japan, 2 years of master-​ level education is necessary to be a
clinical psychologist. The certification does not specify any particular
theoretical orientations; therefore, graduate students are typically
exposed to more than two approaches. Two organizations offer formal
training in integration. The Institute of Psychotherapy Integration in
Tokyo, funded by Noriko Hiraki, has provided integrative family therapy
training for more than 20 years. The Kansai Counseling Center in Osaka
was established in 1965 to provide counseling service and training to a
wider population of lay counselors with or without a graduate degree in
psychology. The Center launched a 3-​year integrative training program
under the leadership of Yasushi Sugihara. The most frequent type of
psychotherapy article in Japan has been the clinical case study
(Iwakabe, 2015), which comprises 60% of the articles published in the
main academic journal, the Journal of Japanese Clinical Psychology. Many
of these therapists appear to practice some form of integrative or
eclectic therapy. However, the authors usually do not report their
theoretical approach. The reluctance of Japanese therapists to discuss
their integrative attempts needs to be addressed to develop a more open
discussion about psychotherapy integration in action. Malaysia Malaysia
is one of the fastest growing countries in the South East Asia and a
multicultural society where Malays, Chinese, Indians, and other
indigenous groups and ethnic minorities cohabitate. Reflecting these
multicultural backgrounds, there is diversity in the popular view of
mental health, ranging from the supernatural to modern Western
psychiatry (Ng, 2011). The number of people suffering from mental
illness rising sharply; however, the number of mental health
professionals remains small. Psychotherapy in Malaysia did not develop
until the 1970s (Azhar & Varma, 2000). The mental health service is
predominantly associated with psychiatrists who are more

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

biological in orientation. Many approaches to psychotherapy were
recently brought home by those psychiatrists and psychologists trained
in English-​speaking countries. There is no formal regulation or
accreditation for psychological practice. A survey of 30 clinical
psychologists out of a total of 42 in the country found that the
majority were younger than 35 (Ng, 2011). There is a strong inclination
toward CBT. Its collaborative and authoritative teaching stance fits the
interaction style of Malaysians, which is characterized by a
hierarchical and an expert--​ patient relationship with health
professionals. Psychodynamic approaches are underrepresented in
Malaysia; some believe that psychodynamic theory is incompatible with
the indigenous cultural and religious beliefs. A more formal integrative
CBT model by Azhar Zain incorporates Islamic and sociocultural elements
of Malaysian lives (Azhar & Varma, 2000). Most therapists practice more
or less integratively, though they may not identify their primary
approach as such. In addition, they do not necessarily articulate what
they practice or what guides their clinical thinking; their integration
is implicit (Ng, personal communication, December 1, 2017). Training
resources for psychotherapy integration are scarce (Ng, personal
communication, December 1, 2017). The resources to support professional
development, such as supervision and continuing education, need to be
established. Male therapists are underrepresented. In a multicultural
society, training therapists of diverse linguistic and cultural
backgrounds, as well as therapists who are equipped to work with clients
of diverse backgrounds, is an urgent task. Another important area of
training is in family therapy. The problems that therapists in Malaysia
deal with most often require family work because all ethnic groups in
Malaysia consider family as the most important system (Ng, personal
communication, December 1, 2017). Individual therapies may not fit the
client's conceptualization of the problem, and behavior change often
involves the entire family rather than a single individual. The
combination of

453

individual and family therapy is one of the integrative models that is
needed. Singapore Singapore is one of the leading economic countries in
the world, located at the southern end of the Malay Peninsula. It is a
multicultural country with 5 million inhabitants: approximately 75% of
the population is Chinese, 13% Malay, and 9% Indian. English is the
official language, and, among employed persons, approximately 1 in 3 is
a foreigner, many coming from China, India, and other Asian countries.
As in many Asian countries, Singaporeans are more familiar with the term
"counseling" than "psychotherapy." Counseling was first introduced in
the 1960s and developed most strongly in the area of school and
educational settings (Yeo, Tan, & Neihart, 2012). Commonly, counseling
is short-​term, practical, and problem-​focused. The average length of
treatment tends range between 3 and 5 sessions (Chuan, December 15,
2017, personal communication). On the other hand, psychotherapy is an
emergent field that started to grow in past 10 years, and the term is
used mainly by Western private practitioners in Singapore and by those
academics trained in Anglophone countries. Most Singaporean
psychotherapists practice integrative or eclectic therapy, though
psychotherapy integration is not a topic that has caught their
attention. Some therapists, however, have made creative integrative
attempts. One is the assimilative integration of traditional Chinese
medicine into the Western model of psychotherapy (Lee, 2015). Lee found
that three cultural practices have a profound influence on the lives of
Chinese Singaporeans. One is traditional Chinese medicine, a holistic
approach that integrates mind and body in treating diseases. It is
concerned more with prevention than treatment by having a balanced diet,
regulating emotions and desires, valuing moderation and self-​control,
and using herbal medicines. The second is Dang-​ki, which is shamanism
that relates psychological problems to external causes such as fate,
astrological forces,

454

Future Directions

and supernatural entities. The third is Feng-​ shui, literally translated
as "wind and water." This is a type of fortune-​telling and divination
based on the belief that human fate and fortune are largely controlled
by cosmological forces. Feng-​shui addresses psychological problems by
advising the client to restructure the physical environment, such as
rearranging a building's interior design and furniture so that the
energy (qi) in the building will flow properly. Lee maintains that these
practices can be integrated into a form of assimilative integration
within the basic framework of CBT. One study that has a high relevance
to psychotherapy integration in Asian countries was conducted by Lee and
Bishop (2001), who examined Chinese Singaporeans' beliefs about the
etiology and treatment of psychological problems. The result showed that
therapists, clients, and non-​clients all equally endorsed Western
psychological beliefs over indigenous beliefs based on Chinese medicine,
while therapists endorsed Western psychological beliefs more than did
the clients and the non-​client sample. These findings suggest that
Chinese Singaporeans tend to be quite open to Western psychological
explanations for psychological problems. South Korea The concept of
Western psychotherapy was introduced into Korea as early as the 1930s,
but it was only in the 1950s, after the Korean War (1950--​1953), that
clinicians began to practice psychotherapy. It was after 1996 that
mental health professionals other than psychiatrists were allowed
legally to practice psychotherapy in South Korea (Joo, 2009). Today,
psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, counselors, social workers, and
lay practitioners are the main providers of psychotherapy. Among these
practitioners, however, psychiatrists still have the strongest political
power and professional jurisdiction. Many Koreans still rely on
traditional practices fusing shamanistic rituals and Oriental medicine
when faced with psychological disorders. Stigma against seeking mental

health service is strong. As in many Asian countries, people often
complain of somatic symptoms when their problems are psychological in
nature. Seeking psychotherapy is the last resort after other kinds of
support have been exhausted. Two surveys of South Korean
psychotherapists found that the majority are eclectic, with the
humanistic orientation as their main foundation (Bae, Joo, & Orlinsky,
2003; Joo, 2009). Joo (2009) gives three reasons for a strong eclectic
orientation in South Korean therapists. First, South Korean therapists
often experienced difficulty in applying psychotherapy based on a
Western worldview that in some ways conflicts with Korean values.
Second, professional organizations have not provided advanced training
in specific treatment approaches Third, Korean society is based on the
Confucian worldview (In-​ bon-​ Ju-​ euh Sa-​sang) that has much affinity
with humanistic eclecticism, which allows therapists to flexibly work
with their clients without creating cultural and value conflicts. This
open stance is particularly suited for promoting a sense of agency and
emotional involvement in Korean clients. Many Korean clients come to
therapy with an expectation that the relationship with the therapist
will reflect the traditional hierarchical relationships in which the
therapist teaches, gives guidance, and leads, while the client's role is
that of a student, patient, or follower who is expected to be obedient,
diligent, and faithful. It is helpful for many Korean clients to change
this expectation to take an active and agentic stance in therapy (Joo,
2009). A growing number of Korean psychotherapists are attempting to
combine familiar traditions of Taoism, Zen Buddhism, and Korean
shamanism to better attune psychotherapy to the special needs of the
Korean setting (Craig, 2007). Korean culture is in flux, with
traditional values still forming the foundation of the society, while
Western values are influencing younger generations more strongly than
ever. Thus, psychotherapy in Korea must incorporate and balance these
two value systems in working with individuals.

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

Taiwan Taiwan, located in South East Asia, is a relatively small
tropical island with a highly modernized economy that enjoys one of the
highest qualities of life in Asia. The practice of counseling and
psychotherapy has traditionally remained small, mainly in the public
school system. However, the recent passage of the Psychologist Law (Guo
et al., 2013) mandated that both central and local governments install
and manage community mental health and school counseling services for
the public. Although there are still concerns regarding government
control over the provision of counseling services (Wang, 2006),
licensure enhances the recognition of professional counselors in Taiwan.
On the other hand, psychotherapy in private practice remains rare.
Western psychotherapy theories were introduced by Taiwanese
psychologists trained in the United States and other Anglophone
countries. Therefore, some therapists in Taiwan strictly follow Western
psychological practices. Taiwanese society has been deeply affected by
Western cultures, and this sort of direct application was still
considered acceptable or even necessary. On the other hand, many
psychotherapists trained domestically practice a form of eclectic
therapy that incorporates Eastern Asian traditional values with
techniques of Western psychotherapies. Taiwan scholars have been
developing indigenous psychologies that reflect Taiwanese cultures.
Hwang and Chang (2009), for example, argue that the Western ideal of
individualism and free will does not fit in the countries where an
Eastern philosophical tradition has prevailed for centuries.
Self-​cultivation practices originated from Confucianism, Taoism, and
Buddhism, each of which contributed to the emphasis on the importance of
following the laws of nature and detachment from the state of egoism.
They argue that core values arising from these cultural traditions need
to be integrated into the therapeutic endeavor to fully appreciate Asian
individuals. Hwang and Chang also suggest modifications to the
therapeutic relationship. They argue that, for many Asians, a one-​to-​one
relationship

455

or a face-​ to-​ face dialogue is uncomfortable. Having to disclose one's
faults triggers shame, making it difficult to self-​disclose and explore
personal feelings. Instead, therapists should take a teaching role,
passing down tradition by word of mouth to clients who are advised to
live according to these principles. Such a relationship is in agreement
with Confucian ethics that advocates the maintenance of interpersonal
harmony by respecting those above in the hierarchy and the principle of
favoring the intimate---​those with whom one has a blood relationship
(Hwang, 2001). Thailand Thailand is a newly industrialized country with
manufacturing, agriculture, and tourism as leading sectors of the
economy. Buddhism is integral to Thai identity and culture, with
approximately 95% of the population identifying themselves as Buddhists
of the Theravada tradition. Social stigma against mental health has
prevailed, and thus far the mental health service has remained small,
limited to those with severe mental illnesses. The social climate for
mental health service, however, has dramatically changed due to major
national crises. One was the HIV/​AID epidemic in the 1990s. The need for
long-​term support as well as psychoeducation about HIV became an
essential health goal. The economic crisis in 1997 resulted in
considerable distress due to unemployment and also led to suicide
prevention and other supports for psychological problems. Similarly,
drug problems demanded the development of rehabilitation services.
Finally, the 2004 tsunami spawned the establishment of support for
survivors and families of victims. International supports also helped
train Thai professionals (Sangganjanavanich & Nolrajsuwat, 2013).
Counseling and psychotherapy, however, are still new and foreign to most
Thai people. Psychotherapy practice is largely limited to private
settings by European and North American practitioners for expatriates
and to academic settings by psychologists who see a small number of
clients using a particular approach.

456

Future Directions

Client-​centered therapy and CBT are the leading approaches in Thailand.
Thai therapists use these while endorsing Eastern philosophies and
Buddhist teaching as the guiding worldview. The Buddhist psychological
notions about human drive or motivation (desire or craving), distress
and suffering (dissatisfaction and disharmony), as well as its
resolution (right understanding, right thoughts, right action), are all
blended into the clinical training and practice. One of the best
examples of Buddhist integrative attempts is integrative group therapy
by Chongruksa and colleagues (2015). This group treatment integrates
CBT, art work using mandala drawing, and reality therapy to reduce the
risk of developing traumatization among army rangers and Thai police
officers who work in terrorist attacks. Recently, the integrative
movement, as well as basic concepts of psychotherapy integration, has
been introduced into the Thai language (Sakunpong, 2014). The more
psychotherapists in Thailand become acquainted with psychotherapy
integration, the more systematic their integrative practice may become
in the future. The number of training programs in clinical psychology
and counseling has sharply risen in recent years in Thailand. However,
there are still challenges facing the development of psychotherapy.
First, there is no regulating board for counselors, psychologists, or
psychotherapists. This is a major disadvantage because Thai
psychotherapists cannot secure positions in the health system, and
salaries are not guaranteed. Second, medical professions have the
strongest influence in mental health services, and the role of
psychologists tends to be limited to assessment and testing. Finally,
the stigma against mental illness is still so strong that people do not
frequently seek psychological treatment. PSYCHOTHERAPY INTEGRATION IN
EUROPE Europe was home to many important contributions to the philosophy
of science,

such as Karl Popper's and Michael Polanyi's innovative works. In this
sense, integration as an inevitable driving force in scientific
development should have found a secure home in the "old continent." At
the same time, many cultural and historical factors retarded integrative
initiatives. As the birthplace of psychoanalysis, many European
countries were for many decades almost exclusively psychodynamic. The
establishment of different approaches came later and with considerable
effort. As a consequence, most European countries have not explicitly
delved into integrative research and training, with some notable
exceptions. More frequently and more recently, multiple therapy models
have co-​existed in a state of mutual existence, with no active
collaboration. Europe is home to noteworthy early integrative scholars,
such as Anthony Ryle in the United Kingdom and António Branco Vasco in
Portugal. SEPI has regularly held conferences in Europe for the past
decades, and attendance from European professionals is usually high and
steadily rising. Austria\* Austria has had some integrative initiatives,
mainly focused on the development of theory, practice, and training. One
early example of such an initiative was Packesch's Integrative Seminar
for Psychotherapy, which was founded in 1969 and is still offering "a
psychotherapy discourse that spans different schools and is enriched by
an interdisciplinary approach" (www.seminargleichenberg.at). Probably
the most significant Austrian contribution to the field of integration
has been the development of an approach simply named "integrative
therapy." This approach was recognised in Austria as an independent
method of therapeutic practice in 2005, and it is an anchor-​point for
psychotherapy integration in Austria. Integrative therapy was
historically closely associated with Petzold and initially linked to
gestalt therapy. It is oriented toward interdisciplinarity, being
influenced

- The section has been contributed by Silke Birgitta Gahleitner and
  colleagues.

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

by fields such as neurobiology. It does not include influences from
either local healing traditions or religious or spiritual components
(see Austrian Psychotherapy Act; Kierein, Pritz, & Sonneck, 1991). The
Austrian Society of Integrative Therapy (Österreichische Gesellschaft
für Integrative Therapie \[ÖGIT\]) was founded in 1990. In addition to a
degree in psychotherapy specializing in integrative therapy, it offers
further training at Danube University Krems in the form of a
postgraduate program leading to a master's degree in education. Other
integrative efforts exist, such as another recognized modality called
integrative gestalt therapy and more recent integrative endeavors under
way in institutes of behavior therapy. Thus, the Institut für
Verhaltenstherapie (Institute of Behavioural Therapy) now offers further
training in dialectical behavioral therapy and schema therapy. Medical
psychotherapy training also offers integrative behavioral therapy as a
major subject. Despite these initiatives, to our knowledge, no
systematic research has been conducted on integrative approaches in
Austria. Contacts with SEPI have been made mainly by Silke Birgitta
Gahleitner. From 2018 onward, the Austrian SEPI network has been
coordinated by members of the ÖGIT. As a result of international
networking with SEPI, the strengthening of the integrative movement may
bring additional clinical expertise to Austria, as well as future
developments in training, practice, and research.

457

training and practice. More recently, a growing community of
practitioners and researchers has spawned six psychotherapy training
programs that have focused explicitly on integration. Two of these,
briefly described here, are accredited by the European Association for
Integrative Psychotherapy. Some integrative Czech scholars have
developed the concept of a "personal therapeutic approach" (Řiháček &
Roubal, 2017a), focusing on the idiosyncratic style and person of the
therapist in a research-​informed fashion. This construct drives the
integrative training program based in Brno, Training in Psychotherapy
Integration (Roubal & Kostínková, 2017). In addition, this training is
grounded on a common factors approach, emphasizing the importance of the
therapeutic relationship and principles of therapeutic change. This
endeavor has also spawned a number of integrative research initiatives.
Jan Roubal, a researcher and member of the country's SEPI Regional
Network, and colleagues received a 5-​year state grant to investigate
their training (e.g., Kostínková & Roubal, 2015; Plchová et al., 2016).
One of their studies estimated the prevalence of Czech therapists'
integrationism, which found that the proportion could range from 21% all
the way up to 99% depending on the criterion used (e.g., actual
psychotherapy training or use of psychotherapy techniques; Řiháček &
Roubal, 2017b). This study serves as an early indicator that the Czech
Republic does indeed have a growing investment in psychotherapy
integration. A second integrative training program is called the
Integrative System of Psychotherapy Czech Republic (Instep). It is led
by M. Jara and J. Drahota Historically, the Czech Republic has pioneered
and is based on the assimilative model of ina number of integrative
psychotherapies. tegration, with gestalt therapy as the ground These
include SUR, a Czech integrative-​ approach. It may be that the Czech
Republic's expepsychodynamic group psychotherapy whose rience as a small
nation, historically overruled name is derived from the first names of
its by bigger nations and totalitarian regimes, may founders: Skála,
Urban, and Rubeš; integrated have alerted Czech citizens to the danger
of psychotherapy, an original Czech integrative big ideologies, making
them cautious of conmodel; and satitherapy, a Czech mindfulness-​
sidering any single therapeutic approach as the based approach.
Psychodynamic and cognitive-​ "truth" (J. Roubal, personal communication,
behavioral therapies are also prominent in both

458

Future Directions

August 13, 2017). This cultural characteristic may have played a role in
the Czech Republic's pluralistic spirit and its integrative interests.

United Kingdom\*

The historical development of psychotherapy in Britain has been
characterized by the dominant influence of separate schools of therapy.
France From the 1930s, an extensive psychoanalytic To the best of our
knowledge, psychotherapy community developed, with an organizational
integration has not had a significant impact in center at the Tavistock
Institute. In the immeFrance thus far. France has historically been
diate postwar years, the Institute of Psychiatry at the forefront of
many innovations in psy- in London was a leading international center
chotherapy, such as the study of trauma and for training and research in
behavior therapy. At dissociation (Janet), hypnosis (Liebault and the
same time, the ideas of Carl Rogers began Bernheim, Puysegur), and
suggestion (Coue). to have a strong influence within the emerging
Psychoanalysis found a strong following there, counseling community.
Until the 1970s, psyand France retains this strong psychoanalytic
chotherapy and counseling in Britain lacked influence. Cognitive-​
behavioral approaches professional associations and journals that made
significant inroads over the past decades, would enable dialogue to take
place across theculminating with the creation of a French oretical
orientations. Early signs of interest in psychotherapy Association of
Behavior and Cognitive Therapy in 1990 (Seiden, 1994). Graduate training
and integration took the form of training in inresearch tend to
represent a single theoretical tegrative models imported from the United
approach. As one French integrative therapist States: Egan's Skilled
Helper model (Wosket, and SEPI member jokingly stated, "We have 2006)
and Lazarus's Multimodal Therapy to be radically for or against
psychoanalysis (Palmer, 2000) approaches that continue to or CBT, with
or without having an adequate prove influential among UK professionals.
The knowledge of either" (M. Bachelart, personal beginnings of a
distinctive British tradition in integrative therapy began to
crystallize in the communication, August 10, 2017). During the 1990s, a
few psychotherapists 1990s (Hollanders, 1999). An important source
contributed to psychotherapy integration in the of influence during this
phase was the Sheffield book The Basics of Psychotherapy: Integrative
Psychotherapy Project (Barkham, 1992), which and Eclectic Approach
(Chambon & Marie-​ investigated the additive effects of combining
Cardine, 2010). Despite this, the psychotherapy exploratory and
prescriptive treatments within integration movement has not made had a
the same protocol. Also significant was the facillong-​ standing impact
or resulted in training itative role of Windy Dryden (1992), a Rational
Emotive Therapist, whose intellectual curiosity programs or research
efforts. Importantly, France has also been under- enabled a growing
openness to new therapeutic represented at SEPI, with only a small
number ideas (Dryden, 1992). Within the psychoanof active members
representing the country, alytic community, Jeremy Holmes (2002) fuland
none of them being faculty from major filled a similar function. Surveys
of psychotherapists and counselors universities. Despite this, a younger
generation of integrationists may be on the rise. in Britain have found
that 13--​50% of clinicians Specifically, Maximilien Bachelart, current
explicitly define themselves as eclectic or intecoordinator of the
French SEPI Regional grative in orientation (Hollanders & McLeod,
Network, has written four papers on psycho- 1999). However, when asked
about the actherapy integration and the first French book tual
techniques they used in their work with clients, as many as 80% could be
categorized as devoted to the topic (Bachelart, 2017).

- This section has been contributed by John McLeod and Mick Cooper.

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

459

informally or implicitly adopting an integrative counseling psychology
and clinical psychology approach (Hollanders & McLeod, 1999). programs
at the doctoral level require trainees Since the 1990s, a number of
home-​ to demonstrate competence in at least two grown models of
psychotherapy integration single-​theory models. have been developed in
Britain. A broadly Regarding research in psychotherapy inrelational-​
developmental form of integrative tegration, substantial amounts of
research therapy evolved at the Metanoia Institute, have been conducted
into the process and drawing on psychodynamics, gestalt, transac-
outcomes of both cognitive analytic therapy tional analysis, and
phenomenology. It was (Calvert & Kellett, 2014) and psychodynamic-​
originally formulated by Clarkson (2003), fur- interpersonal therapy
(Barkham et al., 2016). ther articulated by others (Gilbert, 2010), and
Over the past decade, the pluralistic approach disseminated through the
British Journal of has been an active area of research, with
exPsychotherapy Integration. Psychodynamic-​ ploration of its clinical
outcomes (Cooper interpersonal therapy is an evidence-​based ap- et al.,
2015), processes of change (Antoniou proach that includes ideas and
methods from et al., 2017), and the development of tools for
psychodynamic, interpersonal, and human- shared decision-​making in
therapy (Cooper & istic psychotherapies (Barkham et al., 2016).
Norcross, 2016). Cognitive analytic therapy is another evidence-​ In
Britain, the overall movement toward psybased integrative therapy that
combines psycho- chotherapy integration has been supported by dynamic,
cognitive, and postmodern dialogical an awareness of international
developments, perspectives (Ryle, 1990). A more recent model by SEPI,
and by the Journal of Psychotherapy of psychotherapy integration to have
originated Integration. It has also been facilitated by the in the UK
has been pluralistic therapy (Cooper institutional openness that
characterizes coun& McLeod, 2011). This is a flexible, collabo- seling
and psychotherapy in Britain. rative approach to therapy based on shared
There are perhaps three main challenges decision-​ making, in which
therapists and that stand in the way of the further developclients work
together to use methods from a va- ment of psychotherapy integration in
Britain. riety of sources. First, there are few positions for tenured
facThere are three main psychotherapy ulty in psychotherapy, and those
holding such associations in the UK. The British Psychological positions
are typically required to run training Society has oversight of training
in clinical programs that leave little time for research. psychology and
counseling psychology. The Second, the government has aggressively
United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy pursued policies, such as the
Improving Access (UKCP) and the British Association for to Psychological
Therapies initiative, which Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP) val-
have been based around the delivery of single, idate training programs
for psychotherapists manualized therapies. A third challenge is the and
counselors, respectively. A significant pro- absence of organizational
structures to support portion of trainees within BACP-​and UKCP-​ the
activities of integrative therapists. Although validated programs tend
to be mature students many clinicians are aware of SEPI, few attend with
previous careers in field such as education, meetings or read articles.
social work, health care, and the clergy. These individuals typically
exhibit a pragmatic, open-​ Portugal\* minded stance toward therapy,
along with a desire to make use of what they already know. António
Branco Vasco, who was supervised by UKCP, as well as BACP, accredit both
Dianne Arnkoff and Carol Glass in the United single-​orientation and
integrative programs. All States, both of whom served for decades on

- This section was contributed by António Branco Vasco and Nuno
  Conceição.

460

Future Directions

SEPI's steering committee, published the first papers on psychotherapy
integration in Portugal. He also started two courses on integrative and
eclectic therapies at the University of Lisbon, in 1996 and 2007,
respectively, which continue to this day. Nuno Conceição served as SEPI
President in 2017. In Portugal, there is a rising interest in
psychotherapy. The public is making use of therapy more often, is better
informed about therapy, and is also starting to understand its
preventive and personal development potentials. The "crazy" stigma seems
to be losing strength. In a recent survey of the general population (N =
4,893), about 20% had sought the help of a mental health professional.
This increase in psychotherapy demand also has to do with increasing
availability, in that there has been a steady increase in the number of
mental health professionals in recent years (2,000+ professionals
formally doing psychotherapy in Portugal, for a population of about 10
million). Furthermore, as compared to 10 years ago, psychotherapists are
becoming more professionalized and have more training, supervision,
personal therapy, and, of course, more experience. Regulations to
practice psychotherapy are becoming clearer, at least for psychologists.
Following the directives of the European Association for Psychotherapy
that promotes training standards for scientifically based practice, the
Board of Portuguese Psychologists has established rules concerning the
training required for a psychologist to be also considered a
psychotherapist: namely---​ formal training provided by some societies or
associations of psychotherapy, which tends to foster affiliation with a
particular brand or school of treatment. However, some of the training
includes psychotherapy integration approaches. For example, formal
training in psychotherapy integration is provided in some modules by the
Portuguese Association of Cognitive, Behaviour and Integrative
Therapies. Other societies, for example, the Society of Existential
Therapy, also offer some training in integration. \* This section has
been contributed by Luis Botella.

Clearly, there is a growing interest in and a wider acceptance of
integrative views in Portugal. Based on a survey (Vasco, 2001), the most
influential orientations in Portugal were the analytic/​dynamic and the
cognitive-​ behavioral---​about 30% each. A smaller percentage of
therapists endorsed systemic and client-​ centered orientations (about
11%\_​ . Based on that survey, more than 25% of all therapists considered
themselves integrative. Of course, it all depends on the way one defines
integration: there was a prevalence of about 18%, when using a very
demanding criterion. And when the criterion was not so demanding, the
prevalence rose to about 80%! Despite the growing openness to
psychotherapy integration, rivalry continues to prevent a more inclusive
climate, be it in academia, in professional associations, or even in
clinical settings. Still, dialogues on psychotherapy integration
continue to be of paramount importance in Portugal, especially if one
wants to train better and more responsive therapists. The 2007 SEPI
Conference was held in Lisbon, as will be the 2019 conference. Research
studies on psychotherapy integration are intermittently published by
several investigators, but the primary source of research has been the
Paradigmatic Complementarity Lab at the University of Lisbon, which
delivers several master's level and doctoral studies each year (Vasco,
Conceição, Silva, & Vaz-​ Velho, 2018). Its aim is to help therapists
organize relevant contributions from several (also integrative)
approaches in order to understand clinical situations in a more
comprehensive manner. Spain\* The first contact Spain made with the
international psychotherapy integration community was through Guillem
Feixas during his stay in the United States in the late 1980s. The
connection between the Spanish integrative community and SEPI has
existed since then. Spanish integrative efforts materialized in June
1990, when Manuel Villegas, Luis Botella,

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

and Guillem Feixas founded the Sociedad Española para la Integración de
la Psicoterapia (Spanish Society for Psychotherapy Integration) as both
a Spanish association in its own right and a regional branch of SEPI.
The three founding members played a significant role in a number of
psychotherapy training programs, both their own (Universitat de
Barcelona, Universitat Ramon Llull i) and others, both nationally and
internationally. Also, the active involvement of visiting researchers
and professors helped create training and research that attracted a
number of younger researchers and practitioners that continue the
interest in integration. These initial efforts produced in 1992, among
other things, an issue of the Revista de Psicoterapia devoted to
psychotherapy integration. Subsequently, there has been a growing body
of publications and research from Spanish authors in the field.
Accreditation in clinical psychology in Spain is regulated in two ways.
The first is via an internship program and the second via a master's
degree. It is strongly advised that both paths are complemented by
specific training in psychotherapy (not just clinical psychology) via
another master's degree. The influence of psychotherapy integration in
such programs is especially visible here. While some of the master's
programs still align with a single theoretical orientation, a growing
number of programs explicitly emphasize combining and/​ or integrating
approaches. This fact is probably influenced by the significant number
of Spanish practitioners who identify themselves as integrative and/​or
eclectic. In 2006, this was estimated at around 54% (Alonso et al.,
2006). Psychotherapy integration is facing the challenge of the general
movement toward a heavy medico-​biological view of mental health and
psychotherapy. Such moves are visible in the official curricula of
compulsory training programs for clinical psychologists in Spain, where
more psychological topics have been replaced with psychopathological and
medical ones. Recent integrative publications of Spanish authors suggest
several future directions. These

461

include transdiagnostic models and their role in psychotherapy
integration; integrating research and practice, not only theoretical
approaches; the role of mindfulness-​based psychotherapies in
integration; and research on the outcome of integrated models in
practice. Sweden\* Among the pioneers of psychotherapy integration in
Sweden are Bengt Eriksson and Lars-​ Gunnar Lundh. Both trained as
psychologists and psychotherapists at Uppsala University, where their
PhD dissertations focused on theoretical integration in the 1980s. Both
were members of SEPI from the beginning. In 1994, Lundh and Eriksson
published a book, Psykoterapins skolbildningar (The Schools of
Psychotherapy), which included chapters on psychotherapy integration and
common factors and argued for the need of better communication across
school boundaries. This book was used as a textbook at training programs
for a number of years. Lundh taught classes on psychotherapy integration
as part of the 5-​year psychologist program in Uppsala from 1986 to 1993,
and at Stockholm University from 1993 to 2002. In 2003, he was appointed
professor of clinical psychology at Lund University, where he
contributed to a more integrative model for the psychotherapy course for
both psychologists and psychotherapists. As part of his research, Lundh
has published integrative papers (e.g., Lundh, 2014, 2017). Eriksson,
who worked as an integratively oriented psychotherapist and supervisor
from the 1980s onward, developed at Örebro University an integrative
psychotherapy course from 2004 at their new psychologist program. This
was the probably the first fully integrative psychotherapy training in
Sweden. Within an integrative frame, the students were taught
psychodynamic, cognitive-​ behavioral, and humanistic-​ existential
psychotherapies. As part of his research, Eriksson (2014) has also

- This section was partly contributed by Lars-​Gunnar Lundh.

462

Future Directions

published a book on conceptualization in psychodynamic therapy from an
integrative perspective. Another integrative development came in the
late 1990s and early 2000, when Rolf Sandell, originally a
psychoanalyst, implemented a common factors--​based training at Linköping
University. Unfortunately, these training activities were not
complemented with integrative research efforts. Despite these
integrative initiatives, psychotherapy integration has not had a
significant impact in Sweden, which maintains a greater interest in
singular theoretical approaches (B. Philips, personal communication,
August 3, 2017). Nonetheless, in a survey of more than 400 Swedish
therapists, approximately 24% regarded themselves as "eclectic" (Sandell
et al., 2004). A Swedish SEPI Regional Network contact describes the
current climate in Sweden as one with a clear lack of collaboration
between different therapy approaches. Although different schools are
operating quite well in university and training settings, recent
national guidelines for depression and anxiety disorders recommend a
focus on cognitive-​ behavioral and pharmacological treatments,
discouraging other psychotherapeutic orientations. This governmental
pressure may have hindered integrative research and practice (B.
Philips, personal communication, August 3, 2017).

Switzerland A 2012 survey reported that Switzerland had about 15,000
psychologists, which represents 1.8 psychologists per 1,000 inhabitants.
Psychologists and psychotherapists subscribe to the following
theoretical orientations: 32% psychoanalytic, 19% cognitive-​ behavioral,
17% humanistic, and 12% systemic, with the remaining 20% stating that
they adhere to "several approaches" of psychotherapy in an integrative
or eclectic way (Stettler et al., 2012). Looking at the roots and links
between Swiss psychotherapists and SEPI, the University of Bern group of
scholars centered around Klaus

Grawe (now deceased) and Franz Caspar. These two researchers attended
SEPI meetings for decades, with Franz Caspar being present at these
conferences since the early 1980s and maintaining an active involvement
in SEPI committees to this day. Through them, many Swiss students and
younger practitioners have become familiar with the psychotherapy
integration movement. In the 1980s, this Bern group opened an outpatient
university clinic based on an original integrative model. This model
integrated CBT with interpersonal elements. These interpersonal aspects
were based on the "plan analysis" case formulation method, which has
been one of the cornerstones in integrative thinking coming from
Switzerland (Caspar, 2007). The University of Bern clearly stands out as
the main integrative force in this country, as does, more recently, the
University of Lausanne. Psychotherapy integration also materialized
early on, for instance, through the work of Klaus Grawe on "schema
theory" and later in 1998 through the publication of his landmark book
presenting an integrative approach (Grawe, 2004). In Lausanne
University, there is a tradition of having several coexisting therapy
models. Only in recent years has there been discussion of having a
common base for all university psychotherapy training. This proposed
integrative training is now in place, starting with common principles of
psychotherapeutic change and promoting dialogues and case discussions
between practitioners of different approaches. As in other countries,
governmental pressure influences psychotherapy training, research, and
practice. In Switzerland, there is a legal requirement for training
programs to subscribe to a particular model. Even within training
programs that are open to ideas outside their base orientation, priority
is given to the single model. Specific laws regulating therapeutic
practice vary across cantons (Caspar, 2008). Just as there is a great
cultural and linguistic richness to Switzerland, there also exists a
wide offering of quality training for therapy models, such as CBT,
psychodynamic, humanistic, and systemic interventions.

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

Swiss Regional Network director Ueli Kramer has reported that
contemporary students are increasingly valuing research that is informed
by clinical observation, in contrast with an older approach where
research was "translated" more or less directly to the clinical setting.
Two Swiss SEPI-​related groups exist, one in French and one in German.
This has facilitated integrative venues in which to discuss cases from
multiple theoretical perspectives, thus cross-​ fertilizing ideas across
the boundaries. Moreover, SEPI Regional Network meetings have occurred
there since early 2017. These meetings suggest that Swiss integrative
professionals have started to move from a generic interest in
theoretical integration toward more assimilative and eclectic forms.
Turkey\* The Psychotherapy Institute, via its president Tahir Özakkaş,
was the first to encourage psychotherapy integration in Turkey. The
contacts started in 2007 and evolved into relationships at an
institutional level after 2010. The Institute has been striving to
follow the efforts being made toward psychotherapy integration and is
especially interested in European and American integration studies, but
the organic bond was formed only after 2010. Since then, the Institute
has contributed to SEPI activities and become a Regional Network center.
In Turkey, psychotherapy has traditionally been a no-​ man's land,
unclaimed by either psychiatrists or psychologists. Due to the absence
of legal regulation of psychotherapy, professionals other than
psychiatrists are not allowed to treat clients. Psychologists and
psychological consultants have been mostly trained to be examiners, so
psychotherapy has not been addressed in academic curricula until
recently. Recent legal arrangements and increasing public demand for
psychotherapy, which could not be met by the existing base of
psychiatrists, promoted mental health professionals' interest

- This section was contributed by Tahir Özakkaş.

463

in psychotherapy. Currently, psychologists can see clients in state and
private hospitals as long as they work with medical doctors.
Psychotherapy has only recently been taught in psychology departments,
and psychotherapy integration has not yet made an impact in university
settings. Cognitive-​behavioral therapies are the dominant force.
Consequently, the Psychotherapy Institute has offered the only
integrative training program in Turkey. Each year, 50 mental health
professionals are enrolled in a 4-​year training to become integrative
psychotherapists. Institute graduates have begun to offer brief
informative seminars on integrative psychotherapy at universities,
counseling centers, and research organizations. In select seminars at
universities, there have been references made to the integrative
literature, and these have been translated and published by the
Psychotherapy Institute. Other initiatives include seminars on
integrative psychotherapy taught by academics, a recent Türkiye Bütüncül
Psikoterapi Dergisi \[Integrative Psychotherapy Journal of Turkey\], and
a National Integrative Psychotherapy Congress, organized annually by the
Psychotherapy Institute. Despite this thriving integrative community,
there is no appreciable research activity on psychotherapy integration
in Turkey. Only the theses of the Institute's trainees sometimes
research psychotherapy integration. Because there is no formal licensure
of psychotherapists, the prevlance of integrative practice can only be
estimated through private societies regarding the dominant therapy
orientations. Cognitive-​behavioral approaches are dominant in the
country, and the number of CBT therapists is between 500 and 1,000. The
number of integrative psychotherapists is around 500, mostly trained at
the Psychotherapy Institute. In a country of 80 million, there is a huge
and increasing need for psychotherapists. Right now, the demand is quite
high and increasing.

464

Future Directions

PSYCHOTHERAPY INTEGRATION IN LATIN AMERICA Latin America is a vast
region of the American continent, populated by approximately 650 million
inhabitants (Worldometers, 2018). It includes a heterogeneous set of
nations formed under the cultural influence of Latin countries in
Western Europe. It presents common cultural features such as language
proximity (Spanish and Portuguese), religion (most are Catholic), and
political systems (republican democracies). On the other hand, it shows
great diversity due to its social composition, the various ethnic roots
of its native people, and the migratory flows that influenced each
region (Fernández-​Alvarez, 2017). It is difficult to estimate the exact
number of professionals practicing psychotherapy on this continent due
to a lack of systematic studies. Numerous reports insist that the number
is proportionally high in relation to other regions of the world, even
larger than in European countries and in many parts of North American.
This is accompanied by a large percent of practices that are guided by
the psychoanalytic model. However, this has changed in recent years, to
the extent that other theoretical approaches have developed (Muller &
Palavezzatti, 2015). In Latin America, psychologists obtain their
licensure upon the completion of their undergraduate degree and, along
with psychiatrists, are allowed to practice psychotherapy without taking
further courses. Although there is not a formal requirement,
psychologists and psychiatrists frequently consider it necessary to
obtain a qualification in psychotherapy for the purposes of social and
professional recognition. Within this context, graduate training has
flourished. Many of the more prestigious academic and clinical centers
provide graduate studies in various approaches and methods, and there is
an increasing range of opportunities for training in integration. The
Latin American pioneers in psychotherapy integration established
training

programs based on the integrative models developed by Héctor
Fernández-​Alvarez (Argentina), Roberto Opazo (Chile), Lucio Balarezo
(Ecuador), and Margarita Dubordieu (Uruguay). These individuals train
both local therapists in their respective countries and foreign
therapists abroad, thereby disseminating their models. Developments are
expanding in different countries, including Bolivia, Colombia,
Guatemala, Mexico, and Paraguay, thus promoting diverse forms of
exchange. In Latin America, the integration movement rapidly gathered
momentum due to multiple conferences. The 10th SEPI conference was held
in Buenos Aires in 1994. In 2001, the Chilean Institute of Integrative
Psychotherapy organized the 17th annual SEPI conference. During the
First Latin American Conference of Integrative Psychotherapies, held in
2006 in Ecuador, the Latin American Association of Integrative
Psychotherapy was formed. The Second Latin American Meeting took place
in October 2008, in Uruguay. In 2007, the First Argentine and Uruguayan
Integrative Psychotherapy Conference took place in Buenos Aires and
resulted in the creation of an Argentine and Uruguayan integrative
movement. It was a sign of acknowledgment for the Latin American
integrative movement when Beatriz Gómez (of the Aiglé Foundation,
Argentina) was elected SEPI president in 2016. Argentina\* Argentina has
one of the highest utilization rates of psychotherapy in the world, and
it has traditionally been psychoanalytic (Fernández-​ Alvarez, 2008). Its
early roots were favored by the fact that several psychoanalysts from
Central Europe immigrated to Argentina in the late 1930s. The cultural
specifics of the population facilitated this process as well, since
Argentina was a heterogeneous and cosmopolitan society with a high
proportion of European immigrants (Vezzetti, 1996).

- This section was contributed by Héctor Fernández-​Alvarez.

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

Argentina counts 93,811 active psychologists, with 226 practitioners per
100,000 inhabitants (Alonso & Klinar, 2016). In a recent study of 1,854
psychologists (Alonso, Gago, & Klinar, 2017), 84% were psychotherapists,
of whom 47% were psychoanalysts, 29% integrative, 14% cognitive-​
behavioral, 8% systemic, and 3% humanistic-​ existential. In an earlier
survey (Muller & Palavezzatti, 2015) of 314 psychotherapists from state
hospitals, the psychoanalytic model also emerged as predominant,
representing 53% of the sample. The integrative model, at 42%,
constituted the second largest group. Argentina has a long-​ standing
integrative tradition, beginning with Héctor Fernández-​ Alvarez in the
1980s and facilitated by the creation of a mental health and research
institution, the Aiglé Foundation, in 1976. Fernández-​ Alvarez
participated for the first time in a SEPI conference in 1990, and he set
up the Regional Latin American Network together with the Argentine
Network of Integrative Psychotherapies in 1991. The movement gathered
momentum at the beginning of the '90s. This process was developed by
regular visits from well-​known North American and European
psychotherapists who conducted seminars and workshops at the Foundation.
Argentine therapists utilized the developments taking place abroad as
well, creating new versions of these practices in their own work
(Fernández-​Alvarez, 2001,2008). Collaborative research as well as
education and supervised experience have shaped the Aigle integrative
model over time. The training is a 2-​ year, graduate-​ level program
conducted jointly with state and private universities in Argentina and
in agreement with the Ackerman Institute for the Family (Fernández-​
Alvarez, Consoli, & Gómez, 2016). The training is delivered annually to
500 students in Buenos Aires and other cities in the country. Faculty
members of Aiglé also travel regularly to teach in other countries in
Latin America and Spain.

- This section was contributed by Roberto Opazo.

465

Research work started early on. The activities in this area are
characterized by strong communication between clinicians and researchers
and efforts to translate knowledge into clinical applications and
training. Special efforts have been devoted to the development and study
of the personal style of the therapist (Fernández-​ Alvarez, Gómez, &
García, 2015). Currently, two research projects are being carried out to
study routine outcome monitoring and short-​ term outcome follow-​ up.
Since 1992, Aiglé has published the Revista Argentina de Clínica
Psicólogica \[Argentine Journal of Clinical Psychology\], which in turn
publishes papers based on all theoretical orientations. Finally,
integration of psychotherapy is at work in Argentina under conditions
that differ from traditional office practice. Clinical projects are
carried out in various regions, particularly in the south of the
country, where psychotherapists work side by side with practitioners of
traditional healing methods. In some of the Patagonian provinces, health
care centers incorporate the cultural framework of indigenous groups. An
active collaboration between local healers and psychotherapists enhances
client confidence in the help they are offered (Arrúe & Kalinsky, 1991).
Chile\* As is the case for most Latin American countries, there are
scant data regarding psychotherapists' orientations in Chile. However,
psychoanalytic, humanistic, systemic, and behavioral therapies are known
to be prevalent, with an estimated predominance of eclectic approaches
(Bagladi, 2014). In 1991, the Center for Scientific Psychological
Development, directed by Roberto Opazo, organized a Congress in Santiago
de Chile under the title "Integration in Psychotherapy." In that
context, a survey was conducted to identify the theoretical orientation
of attendees. Results indicated that 15% of the attendees subscribed to
the psychoanalytic

466

Future Directions

approach, 20% to the systemic approach, 22% to the behavioral approach,
and 15% to eclecticism. Most respondents considered it important to
promote integration, and about a third considered it particularly
imperative to achieve integration in psychotherapy. These data, however,
must be evaluated within the context of an "integrative" congress.
Psychotherapy integration was introduced in Chile by Opazo and his
group. As early as 1981, members of the integrative center published an
article entitled "Towards an Integral Therapy" (Opazo et al., 1981). The
first direct contact with integration in psychotherapy occurred in a
presentation of the integrative supraparadigm by Opazo in 1983, during
the annual congress of the Association for the Advancement of Behavioral
Therapies. In 1985, the Institute presented its first graduate
psychotherapy courses, including discussing the subject of psychotherapy
integration. Ten years later, they were the first accredited institution
in Chile authorized to teach accredited courses of psychotherapy with an
integrative orientation (Opazo & Bagladi, 2010). Connections with SEPI
began in the early '90s, through contacts facilitated by Héctor
Fernández-​Alvarez and through attendance at the SEPI conference in 1995.
The The Chilean SEPI Network was created, and, in 1997, the integrative
model was published in the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration (Opazo,
1997). In 2000, CECIDEP changed its name to Chilean Institute of
Integrative Psychotherapy (ICPSI). The institution has maintained close
ties with SEPI, and, over the years, more than 10 international SEPI
members taught courses at the institution. Especially enriching have
been the contributions of SEPI members Michael Mahoney, Paul Wachtel,
John Norcross, George Stricker, Jeremy Safran, Marvin Goldfried, Barry
Wolfe, and Louis Castonguay, among others. Master's programs in
integrative psychotherapy began in 1998, in agreement with the
University of Santiago de Chile. In 2001,

- This section was contributed by Lucio Balarezo.

the Institute signed an agreement with Adolfo Ibáñez University to
create a master's program in clinical psychology, including the term
integrative psychotherapy. To date, more than 400 master's students and
more than 600 students from the other graduate training programs have
received education in integrative psychotherapy (Bagladi, 2002, 2014).
Most of the Chilean research in integration has been carried out within
the context of ICPSI. To date, this amounts to 300 studies on the
integrative supraparadigm. Among the topics addressed are the functions
of the system of the self, validations of comprehensive psychodiagnosis,
integrative psychotherapy in personality disorders, integrative
psychotherapy and personal development, integrative psychotherapy with
youth, and comparative results of psychotherapy. The Institute has
published numerous articles and books centered on integrative themes. A
newly released book is Integrative Psychotherapy IES (Opazo, 2017). The
institutional links with SEPI, Latin-​ American Association of
Integrative Psychotherapy (ALAPSI) ALAPSI, and with the World Council
for Psychotherapy have facilitated the dissemination of Chilean
integration. Furthermore, there are relationships with the Aiglé
Foundation in Argentina, which has consisted of a long and close
collaboration. Ecuador\* The integrative movement in Ecuador was
formalized in 1999, in Argentina, during a foundational meeting among
Héctor Fernández-​Alvarez, Roberto Opazo, and Lucio Balarezo at the first
Latin American Congress on Psychotherapy. This event not only solidified
a friendly exchange among the three practitioner-​scholars, but also
established an academic relationship that fostered in Ecuador an
integrative psychotherapy that focuses on personality as the central
organizing concept (Bautista, 2015).

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

With this background, the Ecuadorian Society of Integrative Counseling
and Psychotherapy (SEAPSI) was established. The Society is committed to
the dissemination and expansion of the integrative model in the country,
and it has achieved acceptance in both scientific circles and
therapeutic practice (Balarezo & Velástegui, 2014). In 2001, a group of
Ecuadorian researchers and clinicians led by Balarezo participated for
the first time in a SEPI conference in Chile, which in turn eventually
spurred the organization of the Ecuador SEPI Regional Network in 2016.
With the emergence of the integrative movement, some new training for
integrative psychotherapists occurred through the creation of a master's
program in integrative psychotherapy and through training groups. Thus
far, five master's programs have been developed: one in the city of
Quito at the Central University, and four at the University of Azuay.
Regarding informal training, training groups have been established in
the cities of Quito, Loja, Ambato, and Quevedo Undergraduate training at
the university level embraces all well-​ established theoretical
orientations, and most universities take an integrative stance. In fact,
at the Pontifical Catholic University of Ecuador, traditionally a
psychoanalytically oriented institution, an integrative program was
established in 2016. At the graduate level and in continuing education
programs, the demand for integrative models is also high. Master's
degree programs, courses, seminars, and workshops have been endorsed by
universities. At some universities, integrative psychotherapy has been
incorporated as a separate course or as one of the main units in the
syllabus (Balarezo, 2011). There are currently three research groups
aiming to validate personality instruments and guidelines for
psychotherapy. The studies are descriptive and correlational in nature.
Over the past 10 years, there have been developments in guidelines on
family mentoring, clients with kidney failure, drug abuse, depression,
and

- This section was contributed by Margarita Dubordieu.

467

cancer (Balarezo, 2011). Ecuador also publishes a primary Latin American
journal on integrative orientation, the Revista Pser-​Integrativo.
Uruguay\* Although psychoanalysis has prevailed in Uruguay for decades,
psychotherapy integration has been growing and currently holds a
significant place. That is the case in undergraduate education, graduate
training, and clinical care delivered in state and private practice
(Dubourdieu, 2016). In 1995, Margarita Dubourdieu founded the Humana
Center in Uruguay, where therapists began to be trained in an
integrative model called integrative psychotherapy. The model integrates
contributions from cognitive, interpersonal, systemic, existential, and
humanistic developments, as well as from other disciplines. In 2002, the
Uruguayan Society of Psycho-​ Neuro-​Immuno-​Endocrinology was founded and
integrates the areas of medicine, psychotherapy, and nutrition
(Dubordieu, 2017). The Uruguayan Federation of Psychotherapy was created
in 2004, bringing together 23 psychotherapy associations. This
organization developed the Psychologist Law and Code of Ethics and
established the regulation of psychotherapeutic practice under the joint
jurisdiction of the Ministry of Education and Culture and the
Parliament. In 2005, Dubourdieu contacted Opazo in Chile to initiate an
exchange about the development of integrative psychotherapy. In 2006,
after a meeting in Buenos Aires, Fernández-​ Alvarez invited her to
participate in the First Latin American Conference of Integrative
Psychotherapies. She attended several SEPI conferences, thereafter
establishing the Uruguay SEPI Regional Network. Training programs in
integrative psychotherapy were developed at the undergraduate and
graduate levels at the University of the Republic, Catholic University,
and San Francisco de Asis University. The Human Center

468

Future Directions

is recognized by the Ministry of Education and Culture to deliver a
2-​year graduate training in integrative psychotherapy as well as a
training program at the Catholic University. Both courses must be
complemented with 100 hours of supervised internship to obtain the
national and Latin American Certificate of Integrative Psychotherapist.
Since 1995, integrative psychotherapy has been incorporated into
hospital work and also included in interventions with adolescents. This
work takes place at the Clinical Hospital of Medicine and utilizes
individual, couples, and group therapy approaches. Psychological care is
provided to adolescents at risk at a local clinic, mainly with self-​
injury, and for drug abuse disorders in a population facing adverse
socioeconomic conditions. Research in psychotherapy integration is
starting to develop in Uruguay. Studies have been conducted on the
impact of stress on health in hospital populations in oncology and in
gastroenterology, and on the effects of biopsychoeducation on treatment
outcome. A recent book on this subject reflects work in this area
(Dubordieu & Nasi, 2017). RECURRENT INTERNATIONAL THEMES In this
section, we reflect on the global landscape of psychotherapy integration
and extract recurring international themes from the preceding
contributions. Specifically, we discuss and amplify seven themes. First,
the surveys of psychotherapists reviewed in this chapter show that
integrative psychotherapy is widely used across the globe. It is no
longer restricted to the United States and Western Europe. In many
countries, the integration movement gave rise to a diversity of models,
in many cases with their own training programs. Second, psychotherapy
integration spawned distinctive proposals, but most adapt psychotherapy
to particular features of their place of origin. The models adapt
strategies to differences and peculiarities of the context in

each country in terms of health needs, patient preferences, therapist
availability, and governmental requirements. This approach to
integration typically begins with research-​ supported treatments and
then adapts them to the cultural needs and institutions of particular
countries. At the same time, one major problem to overcoming
psychotherapy fragmentation is a persistent tendency of therapists to
create new models and to defend a particular territory, which sometimes
corresponds more to marketing than to science (Paris, 2015).
Psychotherapy integration may be at risk of falling into new divided and
competing territories instead of contributing to a common, albeit
complex, mental health field. A third recurrent theme is that
socioeconomic conditions prove fundamental in shaping both demand and
supply. The harsh socioeconomic conditions in many countries,
particularly in Latin America and Asia, have increased the demand for
psychotherapy but simultaneously reduced the resources available to meet
this growing demand. In this sense, psychotherapy faces a powerful
challenge to help clients broaden their horizons, which have shrunk not
only internally but externally (Gómez, 2007). Fourth, multiple
contributors to this chapter observed the power of both national and
international organizations in providing a socioacademic home and
professional support to psychotherapy integration. Many specifically
cite the influence of SEPI and its members, although contributors were
undoubtedly aware that the chapter authors (and book editors) also have
been long-​ term SEPI enthusiasts. Organizations provide publications,
conferences, trainings, social forums, and reinforcing identities.
Fifth, one detects the mutual facilitation among practice, education,
and research in these integrative accounts. Collaboration between
integrative scholars and psychotherapy practitioners is fostering a
greater rapprochement between research and practice. Reciprocal
collaboration and exchanges seem to be a meaningful trend within the
integration movement. Open-​mindedness, flexibility, and

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration

humility to accept the limits of our knowledge are some of our
foundational attitudes. Sixth, many of the integrative psychotherapies
developed across the world have not been subjected to rigorous
evaluation for their comparative effectiveness. Lack of controlled
outcome research on integrative therapies probably hindered the uptake
and impact of psychotherapy integration. In an age where evidence-​based
practice and randomized controlled trials dictate much psychotherapy
policy and academic relevancy, integrative research warrants further
investment (Castonguay et al., 2015). Seventh, and final, a major
constraint that prevents researchers and clinicians alike from
benefitting more from each other's contributions worldwide stems from a
language barrier. Not everything that is produced can realistically be
translated, and even when such translations are available in English, in
many cases the therapists do not possess sufficient English skills to
benefit meaningfully from reading these contributions. Still, one
mediating factor is the existence of international organizations and
congresses, which are facilitators for exchange. In this sense, the
contributions of SEPI and the Journal of Psychotherapy Integration as
communication and information channels among countries stand out as
driving forces in facilitating the psychotherapy movement. CONCLUSION
This chapter illustrates the variety and richness of contributions to
integration in psychotherapy in Europe, Latin American, and Asia. These
contributions are nourished by schools of thought from different regions
but emerge with their own unique features, enriched by cultural
components and social conditions of great diversity. A challenge will be
to discover creative ways to integrate the values and worldviews of
multiple cultures within the demands for efficiency and evidence that
dominate psychological care. Such integration will produce a healthier
future for the field and for populations

469

that turn to psychotherapy for a better quality of life (Norcross,
Pfund, & Prochaska, 2013). Another challenge for the field will be to
increase the exchange between the more developed countries and the less
developed ones. This means overcoming cultural barriers in which
psychotherapies are exported from developed countries, mainly from North
America and Western Europe, to other regions with scarce movement in the
opposite direction. This undertaking will entail mutual efforts.
Psychotherapies generated in less developed countries will need to
increase controlled outcome studies and their visibility. The greatest
difficulty at this point probably lies in the available resources,
especially economic. Therapists and schools from more developed
countries will need to recognize the value of these contributions in
order to learn from them and benefit from their creativity. This will
also be true for education and training programs coming from less
favored regions, so they contribute to therapy training in the rest of
the world. At the same time, theories and treatments appropriate for the
original population of each country also require constant adjustment to
the rapid changes of a mobile and migrating world. More and more people
are moving away from their country of origin. In 1990, 150 million
people across the world were classified as international migrants; 25
years later, that number has increased by almost 100 million (World
Economic Forum, 2017). Migration will clearly influence the training of
psychotherapists. Programs will require grounding in integrative,
cultural-​sensitive psychological perspectives that view patients as
cultural beings immersed in multiple contexts, facing significant
challenges, and as human beings who bring unique strengths (Fernández-​
Alvarez, 2017). This is reason enough to make greater efforts toward
fuller integration. In the future, psychotherapy around the world will
undoubtedly become more fully integrative, not only in terms of blending
theoretical perspectives, but also in mutually beneficial collaborative
efforts between practitioners and researchers. Most importantly,
integration

470

Future Directions

seeks to enhance the effectiveness of psychological help in relieving
human suffering any place in the world where people happen, have to, or
choose to live.

References Alonso, M., Ávila, A., Caro, I., Coscollá, A., Rodriguez, S.,
& Orlinsky, D. (2006). Theoretical orientations of Spanish psycho­
therapists: Integration and eclecticism as modern and postmodern
cultural trends. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 16(4), 398--​416.
Alonso, M., & Klinar. D. (2016). Los psicólogos en Argentina.
Relevamiento Cuantitativo 2015 (Resultados preliminares). Poster
presented at the VIII Congreso Internacional de Investigación y Práctica
Profesional en Psicología; XXIII Jornada de Investigación; XII Encuentro
de Investigadores de Psicología del Mercosur. Alonso M. M., Gago P., &
Klinar D. (2017). Distribución ocupacional de los psicólogos en
Argentina 2017. Encuesta exploratoria. Datos preliminares sobre 1854
profesionales. Poster in: IX Congreso de Investigación y Práctica en
Psicología, Buenos Aires. Antoniou, P., Cooper, M., Tempier, A., &
Holliday, C. (2017). Helpful aspects of pluralistic therapy for
depression. Counselling and Psychotherapy Research, 17(2), 137--​147.
Arrúe, W., & Kalinsky, B. (1991). De "la médica" y la terapeuta: La
gestión intercultural de la salud en el sur de la provincia del Neuquén.
Buenos Aires: Centro Editor de América Latina. Azhar, M. Z., & Varma, S.
L. (2000). Mental illness and its treatment in Malaysia. In I. Al-​Issa
(Ed.), Al-​Junūn: Mental illness in the Islamic world (pp. 163--​ 186).
Madison, CT: International Universities Press. Bachelart, M. (2017).
L'approche integrative en psychothérapie: Un anti-​ manuel a l'usage des
thérapeutes \[The integrative approach in psychotherapy: An anti-​ manual
manual for therapists\]. Paris: ESF. Bae, S. H., Joo, E., & Orlinsky, D.
E. (2003). Psychotherapists in South Korea: Professional and practice
characteristics. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research, Practice, Training,
40(4), 302--​316.

Bagladi, V. (2002). Psychotherapy in Chile. In A. Pritz (Ed.),
Globalized psychotherapy. Vienna, Austria: Facultas Universitätsverlag.
Bagladi, V. (2014). The psychotherapeutic profession in Chile. IFP
Newsletter, International Federation for Psychotherapy, 1(14), 6--​12.
Balarezo, L. (2011). Autobiografía. Pser-​Integrativo, Revista de la
Sociedad Ecuatoriana de Asesoramiento y Psicoterapia Integrativa, 5,
95--​104. Balarezo, L., & Velástegui, M. (2014). La psicología en el
Ecuador. Pasado y presente. En G. Salas (Ed.): Historias de la
psicología en América del Sur. Diálogos y perspectivas (pp. 122--​141).
La Serena (Chile): Nueva Mirada. Barkham, M. (1992). Research in
integrative and eclectic therapy. In W. Dryden (Ed.), Integrative and
eclectic therapy: A handbook (pp. 239--​268). Milton Keynes: Open
University Press. Barkham, M., Guthrie, E., Hardy, G., & Margison, F.
(2016). Psychodynamic-​interpersonal therapy: A conversational model.
London: Sage. Bautista, P. (2015). Relación de rasgos de personalidad y
conductas negligentes: Diseño de un plan de psicoterapia según el modelo
integrativo focalizado en la personalidad. Pser-​ Integrativo, Revista de
la Sociedad Ecuatoriana de Asesoramiento y Psicoterapia Integrativa, 8,
81--​90. Calvert, R., & Kellett, S. (2014). Cognitive analytic therapy: A
review of the outcome evidence base for treatment. Psychology and
Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 87, 253--​277. Caspar, F.
(2007). Plan analysis. In T. D. Eells (Ed.), Handbook of psychotherapy
case formulation (2nd ed., pp. 251--​289). New York: Guilford. Caspar, F.
(2008). The current status of psychotherapy integration in Germany and
Switzerland. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 18(1), 74.
Castonguay, L. G., Eubanks, C. F., Goldfried, M. R., Muran, J. C., &
Lutz, W. (2015). Research on psychotherapy integration: Building on the
past, looking to the future. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 365--​382.
Chambon, O., & Marie-​Cardine, M. (2010). Les bases de la psychothérapie:
Approche intégrative et éclectique \[The basics of psychotherapy:
Integrative and eclectic approach\]. Paris: Dunod. Chang, D. F., Cao,
Y., Shi, Q., Wang, C., & Qian, M. (2013). Counseling and psychotherapy
in China: Building capacity to serve 1.3 billion. In R. Moodley, U. P.
Gielen, & R. Wu (Eds.), Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration in an international
context (pp. 182--​ 192). New York: Routledge/​Taylor & Francis.
Chongruksa, D., Prinyapol, P., Sawatsri, S., & Pansomboon, C. (2015).
Integrated group counselling to enhance mental health and resilience of
Thai army rangers. Asia Pacific Journal of Counselling and
Psychotherapy, 6(1--​2), 41--​57. Chuan, Eng. (2017, December 15th).
Personal communications. Clarkson, P. (2003). The therapeutic
relationship. London: Whurr. Cooper, M., & McLeod, J. (2011).
Pluralistic counselling and psychotherapy. London: Sage. Cooper, M., &
Norcross, J. C. (2016). A brief, multidimensional measure of clients'
therapy preferences: The Cooper-​Norcross Inventory of Preferences
(C-​NIP). International Journal of Clinical and Health Psychology, 16(1),
87--​98. doi: 10.1016/​j.ijchp.2015.08.003 Cooper, M., Wild, C., van Rijn,
B., Ward, T., & McLeod, J. (2015). Pluralistic therapy for depression:
Acceptability, outcomes and helpful aspects in a multisite open-​label
trial. Counselling Psychology Review, 30(1), 6--​20. Craig, E. (2007).
Tao psychotherapy: Introducing a new approach to humanistic practice.
The Humanistic Psychologist, 35, 109--​133. Dale, P. (1987). The myth of
Japanese uniqueness. London: Routledge. Day, E. (2015). Psychotherapy
and counselling in Australia: Profiling our philosophical heritage for
therapeutic effectiveness. Psychotherapy and Counselling Journal of
Australia, 3(1). Doi, T. (1973). The anatomy of dependence. New York:
Kodansha International. Dryden, W. (Ed.). (1992). Integrative and
eclectic therapy: A handbook. Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Dubourdieu, M. (2016). Uruguay SEPI regional network background: Society
for Integrative Therapy. Newsletter: The Integrative Therapist, 2 (2),
23--​26. Dubourdieu, M. (2017). Psicoterapia integrativa. "
Psiconeuroinmunoendocrinología. Integración cuerpo-​mente-​entorno" (4ta
ed.). Montevideo, Uruguay: Psicolibros. Dubourdieu, M., & Nasi, L.
(2017). Cáncer y psiconeuroinmunología. Clínica integral en oncología.
Buenos Aires, Argentina: Nativa Eitorial. Eriksson, B. (2014).
Konceptualisering i psykodynamisk terapi. Lund, Sweden:
Studentlitteratur.

471

Fernández-​ Alvarez, H. (2001). Fundamentals of an integrated model of
psychotherapy. New York: Jason Aronson. Fernandez-​ Alvarez, H. (2008).
Integration in psychotherapy: An approach from Argentina. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 18, 79--​86. Fernández Alvarez, H. (2017).
Psicoterapia en un mundo emergente. El paisaje de América Latina.
Revista Argentina de Clínica Psicológica, 26(3), 255, 260.
Fernández-​Álvarez, H., Consoli, A. J., & Gómez, B. (2016). Integration
in psychotherapy: Reasons and challenges. American Psychologist, 71(8),
820--​830. Fernández-​ Alvarez, H., Gómez, B., & García, F. (2015).
Bridging the gap between research and practice in a clinical and
training network: Aigle's Program. Psychotherapy Research, 25(1),
84--​94. Gilbert, M. (2010). Integrative therapy (100 key points).
London: Routledge. Gómez, B. (2007). Psychotherapy in Argentina: A
clinical case from an integrative perspective. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 63(8), 713--​723. Grawe, K. (2004). Psychological therapy.
Boston: Hogrefe Publishing. Guo, Y. J., Wang, S. C., Combs, D. C., Lin,
Y. C., & Johnson, V. (2013). Professional counseling in Taiwan: Past to
future. Journal of Counseling & Development, 91(3), 331--​335. Hiraki, N.
(1996). Integrating individual and family counseling. Japanese Journal
of Counseling Science, 29, 68--​76. Hollanders, H. (1999). Eclecticism
and integration in counselling: Implications for training. British
Journal of Guidance and Counselling, 27(4), 483--​500. Hollanders, H., &
McLeod, J. (1999). Theoretical orientation and reported practice: A
survey of eclecticism among counsellors in Britain. British Journal of
Guidance and Counselling, 27, 405--​414. Holmes, J. (Ed.). (2002).
Integration in psychotherapy: Models and methods. New York: Oxford
University Press. Hwang, K. K. (2001). The deep structure of
Confucianism: A social psychological approach. Asian Philosophy, 11,
179--​204. Hwang, K. K., & Chang, J. (2009). Self-​cultivation: Culturally
sensitive psychotherapies in Confucian societies. The Counseling
Psychologist, 37(7), 1010--​1032.

472

Future Directions

Iwakabe, S. (2008). Psychotherapy integration in Japan. Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 18, 103--​125. Iwakabe, S. (2015). Case
studies in Japan: Two methods, two world views. Pragmatic Case Studies
in Psychotherapy, 11, 65--​80. Iwakabe, S., & Enns, C. Z. (2012).
Counseling and psychotherapy in Japan. In R. Moodley, U. P. Gielen, & R.
Wu (Eds.), Handbook of counseling and psychotherapy in an international
context (pp. 204--​214). New York: Routledge. Japanese Society of
Certified Clinical Psychologists. (2009). Rinsho-​ Shinrishi no Douko
narabini Ishiki Chosa (A membership survey of clinical psychologists)
\[Issue. 5\]. Tokyo. Author. Joo, E. (2009). Counselors in South Korea:
A qualitative study of senior professionals. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 87(4), 466--​474. Kierein, M., Pritz, A., & Sonneck, G.
(1991). Psychologen-​Gesetz, Psychotherapie-​Gesetz: Kurzkommentar. Wien:
Orac. Kirmayer, L. (2006). Culture and Psychotherapy in a creolizing
world. Transcultural Psychiatry, 43(2), 163--​168. Kostínková J., &
Roubal J. (2015). Forming an integrative training concept: A case study
of the training in psychotherapy integration. European Journal for
Qualitative Research in Psychotherapy, 8, 32--​54. Lee, B. O. (2015,
October). Integration of Asian traditional healing into psychotherapy:
Rationales, opportunities and challenges. Paper presented at the
Singapore Association for Counselling symposium, Singapore. Lee, B. O.,
& Bishop, D. G. (2001). Chinese clients' belief systems about
psychological problems in Singapore. Counseling Psychology Quarterly,
14, 219--​240. Lee, S., & Kleinman, A. (1997). Mental illness and social
change in China. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 5, 43--​46. Leung, S.
(2017, Decemver 14th). Personal communications. Li, M.-​G., Duan, C.,
Ding, B.-​K., Yue, D.-​M., & Beitman, B. D. (1994). Psychotherapy
integration in modern China. Journal of Psychotherapy Practice &
Research, 3(4), 277--​283. Lundh, L. G. (2014). The search for common
factors in psychotherapy. Two theoretical models, with different
empirical implications. Psychology and Behavioral Sciences, 3, 131--​150.
Lundh, L. G. (2017). Relation and technique in psychotherapy: Two partly
overlapping

categories. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27(1), 59--​78. Muller,
F., & Palavezzatti, C. (2015). Orientación teórica y práctica clínica:
Los psicoterapeutas de Buenos Aires (2012). Revista Argentina de Clínica
Psicológica, 24 (1), 13--​21. Murase, K. (2003). Togoteki Shinriryoho no
Kangaekata: Shinriryoho no Kiso to Narumono \[How to conceptualize
interactively in psycho­ therapy: Foundations constituting
psychotherapy\]. Tokyo: Kongo Publications. Ng, W. S. (2011). The
development of clinical psychologists in Malaysia. In A. H. Quek (Ed.),
Multiple perspectives of psychology: Issues, challenges and future
directions (pp. 31--​ 51). Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia: HELP University. Ng,
W. S. (2017 December 1st). Personal communications. Norcross, J. C.,
Pfund, R. A., & Prochaska, J. O. (2013). Psychotherapy in 2022: A Delphi
poll on its future. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
44(5), 363. O'Hara, D. J., & O'Hara, E. F. (2015). Counselling and
psychotherapy: Professionalization in the Australian context.
Psychotherapy and Counselling Journal of Australia, 3(1). Opazo, R.
(1997). In the hurricane's eye: A supraparadigmatic integrative model.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 7(1), 17. Opazo, R. (2017).
Psicoterapia Integrativa EIS. Profundizando la comprensión. . .
Potenciando el cambio. Santiago: Ediciones ICPSI. Opazo, R., Andreani,
M. A., Alliende, F., & Barriga, E. (1981). Los procesos cognitivos en un
marco teórico conductual: Hacia una terapia integral. Revista del Primer
Encuentro Nacional de Psicólogos Clínicos. Opazo, R., & Bagladi, V.
(2010). Historia del modelo integrativo en Chile. En M. A. Laborda & V.
E. Quezada (Eds.), Notas históricas acerca de la psicología en Chile
(pp. 261--​282). Santiago de Chile: Universidad de Chile. Palmer, S.
(2000). Multimodal therapy. In S. Palmer & R. Woolfe (Eds.), Integrative
and eclectic counselling and psychotherapy (pp. 141--​162). London: Sage.
Papastergiadis, N. (2000). The turbulence of migration. Cambridge, UK:
Polity. Paris, J. (2015). Applying the principles of psychotherapy
integration to the treatment of borderline personality disorder. Journal
of Psychotherapy Integration, 25(1), 13--​19. Plchová, R., Hytych, R.,
Řiháček, T., Roubal, J., & Vybíral, Z. (2016). How do trainees choose

International Themes in Psychotherapy Integration their first
psychotherapy training? The case of training in psychotherapy
integration. British Journal of Guidance & Counselling, 44(5), 487--​503.
Poznanski, J. J., & McLennan, J. (1998). Theoretical orientations of
Australian counseling psycho­ logists. International Journal for the
Advance­ ment of Counselling, 20, 253--​261. Řiháček, T., & Roubal, J.
(2017a). Personal therapeutic approach: Concept and implications.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27(4), 548--​560. Řiháček, T., &
Roubal, J. (2017b). The proportion of integrationists among Czech
psychotherapists and counselors: A comparison of multiple criteria.
Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27(1), 13. Roubal J., & Kostínková
J. (2017). Forming an integrative training. The Integrative Therapist,
3(1), 20--​22. Ryle, A. (1990). Cognitive analytic therapy: Active
participation in change. Chichester, UK: Wiley. Sakunpong, N. (2014).
Counseling and psycho­ therapy integration. Journal of Mental Health of
Thailand, 22, 104--​114. Sandell, R., Carlsson, J., Schubert, J.,
Broberg, J., Lazar, A., & Grant, J. (2004). Therapist attitudes and
patient outcomes: I. Development and validation of the Therapeutic
Attitudes Scales (TASC-​2). Psychotherapy Research, 14(4), 469--​484.
Sangganjanavanich, V. F., & Nolrajsuwat, K. (2013). Counseling in
Thailand. In T. H. Hohenshil, N. E. Amundson, & S. G. Niles (Eds.),
Counseling around the world: An international handbook (pp. 153--​ 159).
Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association. Schofield, M. J., &
Roedel, G. (2012). Australian psychotherapists and counsellors: A study
of therapists, therapeutic work, and professional development.
Melbourne, Australia: La Trobe University. Schott, T. (1991). The world
scientific community: Globality and globalisation. Minerva, 29, 440--​62.
Schott, T. (1993). World science: Globalization of institutions and
participation. Science, Technology and Human values, 18(2), 196--​208.

473

Seiden, D. Y. (1994). Behavior and cognitive therapies in France: An
oral history. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental Psychiatry,
25(2), 105--​112. Stettler, P., Stocker, D., Gardiol, L., Bischof, S., &
Künzi, K. (2012). Strukturerhebung zur psychologischen Psychotherapie in
der Schweiz 2012. Berne, Switzerland: Federation of Swiss Psychologists
(FSP). Vasco, A B. (2001). Eclectic tendencies among Portuguese
therapists: Comparisons with a previous study. Psicologia, XV(2),
289--​298. Vasco, A. B., Conceição, N., Silva, A. N., Ferreira, J. F. &
Vaz-​Velho, C. (2018). The Paradigmatic Complementarity (Meta)Model. In
I. Leal (Ed.), Psychotherapies. Lisboa: Lidel/​Pactor. Vezzetti, H.
(1996). Los estudios históricos de la psicología en la Argentina.
Cuadernos Argentinos de Historia de la Psicología, 2(1-​2), 79--​93. Wang,
S. (2006). From "support" to "resistance": On my changing positions
regarding the licentiation of counseling psychologists. Research in
Applied Psychology, 30, 21--​36. World Economic Forum. (2017). Migration
and its impact on cities. Retrieved from www.weforum.
org/​reports/​migration-​and-​its-​impact-​on-​cities Worldometers. (2018).
Retrieved from www. worldometers.info/​ w orld-​ p opulation/​ l atin-​
america-​and-​the-​caribbean-​population/​. Wosket, M. (2006). Egan's skilled
helper model: Developments and implications in counselling. London:
Routledge. Yeo, L. S., Tan, S. Y., & Neihart, M. F. (2012). Counseling
in Singapore. Journal of Counseling & Development, 90, 243--​247. Yuen,
S., Leung, A. S., & Chan, R. T. H. (2014). Professional counseling in
Hong Kong. Journal of Counseling & Development, 92, 99--​103. Zhang, Y.,
Young, D., Lee, S., Li, L., Zhang, H., Xiao, Z., . . . Chang, D. F.
(2002). Chinese Taoist cognitive psychotherapy in the treatment of
generalized anxiety disorder in contemporary China. Transcultural
Psychiatry, 39(1), 115--​129.

22 Future Directions in Psychotherapy Integration CATHERINE F. EUBANKS,
MARVIN R. GOLDFRIED, AND JOHN C. NORCROSS

Any movement that merits a third edition of a handbook clearly has
reached a position of recognition and strength. In the past 40 years,
psychotherapy integration has grown into a well-​ established and
influential movement in mental health. Any number of objective indictors
point to this fact. Integration (or occasionally eclecticism) represents
the modal theoretical orientation of psychotherapists in most countries
(see Chapter 1 for a review). Scores of professional books and textbooks
characterize themselves as integrative in their approach. The
integrative movement boasts an international association (Society for
the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration, or SEPI) with dozens of
regional branches, several journals (e.g., Journal of Psychotherapy
Integration), and thousands of publications in multiple

languages. Students crave systemic training in less doctrinaire and more
secular psychotherapy that, ideally, proves more efficient, applicable,
and efficacious for their clients. Research on psychotherapy integration
overall is still at an adolescent stage (Castonguay et al., 2015), but
outcome research has now been published on at least 30 hybrid or
integrative psychotherapies (see Boswell, Newman, & McGinn, Chapter 19,
this volume). Psychotherapy integration is here and, by all indications,
is here to stay. A recent poll of psychotherapy experts from diverse
persuasions predicted that integration in its various forms (e.g.,
theoretical integration, technical eclecticism; see Chapter 1) will
continue to increase in the next decade (Norcross, Pfund, & Prochaska,
2013). In fact, integrative therapies

474

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration

were forecast to increase the third most among 31 psychotherapies, only
behind mindfulness therapies and cognitive-​behavioral therapy. In the
previous edition of this Handbook, the concluding chapter on future
directions (Eubanks-​ Carter, Burckell, & Goldfried, 2005) noted that
integration had not yet fulfilled its promise. It was observed that
there was a tension between action and exploration, between those who
want the field to reach a consensus about the principles or strategies
that characterize effective integrative psychotherapy and those who
argued that reaching consensus is premature and will hamper innovation.
That earlier chapter on the future expressed concern that the lack of
consensus on an action plan resulted in integration standing on the
sidelines while the proliferation of new therapies continues unabated,
as some had long predicted and feared (Goldfried, 1980). Although many
talented researchers continue to focus on "proving" that certain
therapeutic approaches are superior to others, these efforts continue to
fail to find evidence of a clear winner (Luborsky et al., 2002; Wampold
& Imel, 2015). Now, well into the 21st century, we find ourselves
reaching the same conclusion that Saul Rosenzweig reached back in 1936,
when he observed that, due to the complexity of psychological phenomena
and the presence of common processes, multiple forms of psychotherapy
will prove effective. That resulted in the verdict of the Dodo bird that
"Everybody has won and all must have prizes" (Rosenzweig, 1936). With a
humble recognition that, as Niels Bohr once observed, prediction is very
difficult, especially when it comes to the future, we endeavor in this
chapter to suggest where psychotherapy integration may be headed in the
areas of theory, practice, research, and training, as well as its status
as a formal movement. Our primary objective, however, is to advance
discussion about several future directions that seem particularly
promising. In doing so, we draw on our collective experiences and the 21
other chapters in this volume. A content analysis of the future
directions sections of those other chapters

475

revealed that 88% of the chapter authors addressed the future of
integrative practice and 72% research, but only 22% addressed training
directions and only 17% the future of theory. Here, we try to redress
that inequity and speak equally to all four domains of psychotherapy
integration. DIRECTIONS IN INTEGRATIVE THEORY Theory has always played
an important role in psychotherapy integration. For example, Wachtel's
(1977; Wachtel & Gagnon, Chapter 9, this volume) seminal theoretical
work on integrating psychodynamic and behavioral therapies was a major
contribution to the integration movement. He subsequently (1997) added
relational and interpersonal theories to the mix, demonstrating the
fluid and evolving nature of integration. Wachtel recognized both the
essential similarities and the fundamental differences between disparate
theories; identifying the similarities as potential points of clinical
convergence that can serve as bridges across the chasms of divergence.
Virtually every combination of theories have been blended or bridged in
the literature or in practice. When 187 self-​identified integrative
therapists were asked to rate their use of six theories (behavioral,
cognitive, humanistic, interpersonal, psychoanalytic, systems), the
resulting 15 possible combinations of two theories were each selected by
at least one therapist (Norcross, Karpiak, & Santoro, 2005). The typical
combination in the late 1970s was psychoanalytic-​ behavioral; in the
late 1980s, the three most popular hybrids all involved cognitive
therapy; and in the early 2000s, cognitive and third-​ wave (acceptance,
mindfulness, meditation) theories dominate the list of combinations.
Which theories are the probable source of future integrations? To be
sure, neuroscience finds its way increasingly into psychotherapy book
titles and journal titles. Multicultural perspectives should be part of
all psychotherapies, but most integrative

476

Future Directions

therapies do not yet have culture as a major has generated a number of
publications, books, emphasis (Harris, Shukla, & Ivey, Chapter 15, and
an online journal but, to our knowledge, this volume). We foresee both
neuroscience no process or outcome research. and multicultural
perspectives occupying privSeveral aspects of the quest for unification
ileged positions in coming years, in and out of are promising. Working
toward a unified psychointegrative treatments. therapy would entail
reaching greater agreement Sometimes the theoretical innovation on
language. As the jargon of each orientation originates not from
researchers or theoreticians, forms a language barrier that prevents us
from but from patients. A case in point are the recognizing areas where
we agree (Goldfried, stages of change in the transtheoretical model
1987), efforts to use common language to ex(Prochaska & DiClemente,
Chapter 8, this press our ideas as clearly and straightforwardly
volume). Clients described their change as possible could help us to
reach greater conmethods in terms of when change occurred, sensus by
facilitating the productive exchange of subsequently labeled the
precontemplation, ideas and by aiding the recognition of the extent
contemplation, preparation, action, and to which we already agree but
simply use difmaintenance stages. That conceptualiza- ferent words to
express the same ideas. tion provided a useful framework that helps
Recent efforts to work toward integration or practitioners of all
orientations assess and tailor unification also emphasize basing theory
on their interventions in accord with the client's research evidence.
Efforts to ground our work readiness for change. in research, including
not only psychotherapy In recent years, two integrative models research
but research from the basic sciences that seek to ambitiously
incorporate most psy- as well---​such as social cognition, attribution,
chotherapy systems have been advanced by decision-​making---​is laudable
and could help numerous writers. The first, pluralistic coun- to foster
consensus in some areas. seling and psychotherapy, is more popular in At
the same time, voices within the integrathe United Kingdom and Europe.
It seeks to tion movement have registered concerns about break away from
the orientation-​specific way the feasibility and desirability of a grand
unificain which services and training have been his- tion, suggesting
that differences in perspective torically conducted. Different clients
are likely are unavoidable (e.g., Messer, 2008). Indeed, to want---​ and
benefit from---​ different things the various unification proposals
cannot agree in therapy. Hence, therapists should be open on the
underlying or foundational substrate---​ to respecting practices from
across the psy- is it systems theory, neuroscience, developchotherapy
spectrum and sharing decision-​ mental, evolution, cognition, empiricism,
or making with patients. Pluralism can be a way humanism? Prioritizing
one perspective means of thinking about therapy, or it can be a spe-
inescapably neglecting others, which leads to cific practice in which
the therapist draws on a renewed quarrels about the superiority of
select range of different understandings and methods theories.
Alternatively, the pluralistic approach (www.pluralistictherapy.com). It
has generated values all theories that work and relies heavily several
books and a fair bit of published process on the client's experiences to
determine which and outcome research. methods to employ. More popular in
the United States, uniHopes for unification need to recognize fied
psychotherapy is a biopsychosocial systems the inherent complexity
involved in undermodel that draws from many major therapy standing human
behavior and the change approaches. The aim is that such an approach
process. Psychotherapy, in this view, is not a could be grounded in
clinical science and would universe but a multiverse. For example, even
bring together the structures, processes, and agreeing on a commitment
to empiricism to mechanisms of human functioning into one co- identify
"what works" is a complex proposition. herent model that could guide
psychotherapy. Psychotherapists need to agree first on the rela(e.g.,
Henriques, 2011; Magnavita & Anchin, tive proportion or proper
sequencing assigned to 2014; Melchert, 2015). Unified psychotherapy
research evidence, clinical expertise, and client

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration

input in treatment decisions (Norcross et al., 2017). An agreement must
then be reached on what constitutes quality research and on how to
properly interpret those research findings. The reality is that research
topics are chosen and studies are designed and conducted by complex
human beings, with assumptions and biases impacting every step of the
empirical process. A profitable direction for integrative theory might
be to shift focus from integrative theories to integrative
practitioners---​ the individuals using the theories. Psychotherapists
have long recognized the healing impact of the person of the therapist
and the therapeutic relationship; researchers have now repeatedly
substantiated that clinical conviction (e.g., Castonguay & Hill, 2017;
Norcross & Lambert, 2019; Wampold & Imel, 2015). Better understanding of
how therapists are (or are not) guided by theory when they are working
clinically could help point to more effective ways to integrate; we can
build better theories if we have a better understanding of clinicians'
needs and struggles. Focusing on the person who uses the theory could
direct us to focus more on areas such as therapist decision-​ making
(Magnavita, 2015), navigation of choice points (Messer, 1986), and
therapists' awareness of their own experience (Gelso & Hayes, 2008) as a
means of identifying critical moments in therapy. Greater attention to
how therapists use theory would involve recognizing the strengths and
limitations of theory---​ how theory helps therapists organize their
experience and navigate challenging clinical situations with greater
confidence and skill, and how theory can bias and blind us. Better
understanding of how therapists use theory could also inform our efforts
to teach and disseminate theory effectively (Norcross & Finnerty,
Chapter 18, this volume). DIRECTIONS IN INTEGRATIVE PRACTICE AND
RESEARCH When beginning to write this chapter, we intended to have
separate sections on the future of integrative practice and the future
of

477

integrative research. However, we have found that these are probably
best discussed together as we predict that the futures of these two
domains are intertwined. As pressures mount on practitioners to
demonstrate the value of their work and as funding opportunities
diminish for psychotherapy researchers (Goldfried, 2016), practice that
is informed by research and research that is informed by and relevant
for practice stand a greater chance of surviving. Indeed, the
integration of practice and research is increasingly being highlighted
as a key component of psychotherapy integration, as acknowledged in
recent mission statements of SEPI (www.sepiweb.org) and in the addition
of an entire chapter in this Handbook devoted to integrating research
and practice (Castonguay, Constantino, & Xiao, Chapter 20, this volume).
Most researchers and practitioners are united in their pursuit to
determine what works in psychotherapy. A frequent plea in psychotherapy
integration is to "stop all the theorizing and help us to better treat
our patients!" That's a quest endorsed by virtually every clinician. The
relation between research and practice in integration frequently proves
mutually beneficial: outcome research findings can support integrative
treatments, and furthermore, the mind sets and methodologies of
integrative researchers and practitioners make them ideally suited to be
at the forefront of research critical for the advancement of
psychotherapy (Castonguay et al., 2015). Specifically, dialogues across
orientations could play a pivotal role in identifying harmful effects in
therapy and ways to address them. Advancements in the field can also be
made by studying the characteristics of effective therapists and
identifying best practices for training. Reaching across theoretical
divides will increase the likelihood of making new and innovative
connections, and researchers and practitioners interested in integration
could be key figures in fostering such collaborations. An example of
fostering collaboration between researchers and practitioners in the
spirit of integration is the Two-​Way Bridge initiative. A collaboration
between Divisions 12 (Society

478

Future Directions

of Clinical Psychology) and 29 (Society for the Advancement of
Psychotherapy) of the American Psychological Association, the two-​ way
bridge is modeled after a system used to monitor pharmaceuticals in the
United States. The Food and Drug Administration encourages medical
practitioners to give feedback on drugs based on their clinical
experiences. Goldfried and colleagues (2014) took this concept and
adapted it for the field of psychotherapy. To date, several surveys have
been conducted to gather feedback from practicing therapists on the use
of CBT for various anxiety disorders (e.g., Jacobson, Newman, &
Goldfried, 2016; McAleavey, Castonguay, & Goldfried, 2014; Szkodny,
Newman, & Goldfried, 2014). This initiative aims to foster two-​way
dialogue between researchers and practitioners about what works and what
does not work in real-​world settings. Practicing therapists can
disseminate their clinical observations to researchers on what needs to
be studied, and researchers can disseminate to therapists the findings
that result from such research. Another example of the integration of
research and practice is feedback-​ informed therapy, also referred to as
routine outcome monitoring (Maeschalck, Prescott, & Miller, Chapter 5,
this volume). This involves tracking client progress using reliable
measures and immediately providing feedback from the measures to the
therapist. This approach empowers clinicians to be true
scientist-​practitioners in the therapy room, drawing on data to inform
their work with their patients. Routine outcome monitoring systems that
identify patients at risk of treatment failure reduce deterioration
rates and enhance positive outcomes (Lambert, Whipple, & Kleinstäuber,
2018). In addition, feedback systems provide excellent opportunities to
encourage and study integration across orientations. For example, with
the Outcome Questionnaire (OQ) system (Lambert, 2015), when clients'
ratings indicate that they are not progressing as expected in
psychotherapy, the system assesses the clients' stage of change, the
therapeutic alliance, social support, and stressful life events. The OQ
system then provides clinicians with clinical

support tools and interventions that the therapist could consider to be
more responsive to the patient. This is an excellent way to present
therapists with opportunities to integrate: the system provides feedback
that the current approach may not fit this patient and also provides
recommendations for introducing new methods that research suggests may
be helpful. Further research on how therapists use this information and
what forms of integration are most effective are used to refine the
clinical support tools. In this way, routine outcome monitoring provides
an opportunity for clinicians and researchers to engage in a continuous
feedback loop, with researchers creating clinical tools and then
collaborating with clinicians to test and further refine the tools. As
detailed by Castonguay, Constantino, and Xiao (Chapter 20, this volume),
important integrative contributions are made by conducting
practice-​oriented research. They review a number of ways in which this
can occur, including practice research networks, where therapists
directly collaborate with researchers in studying what actually
transpires in clinical practice. Another future direction for
integrative research and practice is to garner research evidence for
integrative treatments. Although all the integrative treatments featured
in this Handbook have research supporting their general tenets, several
do not have controlled research on their treatment outcomes or attesting
to their efficacy. Both research and practice in an era of
accountability demand such research evidence; otherwise, we fear such
integrative therapies will gradually expire. Many evidence-​based
treatments are often associated with a particular orientation but are
actually quite integrative. Greater recognition of their integrative
nature could bolster the credibility of integration. In this volume
alone, dialectical behavior therapy (Chapter 12) and the
cognitive-​behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy (Chapter 14) are
widely regarded as expanded CBT, but reading the chapters leaves no
doubt about their integrative nature. Similarly, schema-​ focused therapy
(Young, Klosko, & Weishaar, 2003) is usually associated

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration

with CBT, but it is an integrative approach that blends elements from
CBT, attachment, gestalt, object relations, and constructivist
approaches. It has garnered empirical support for its efficacy in
treating borderline personality disorder (Giesen-​Bloo et al., 2006).
Another avenue to integrating research and practice is to focus on a
single clinical problem. Focusing on various approaches that are
specific to a clinical problem is one way to highlight common themes
that underlie different techniques. When therapists from different
orientations observe clinical issues associated with a given problem,
they are often likely to see the same things. Indeed, when asked if they
would use cognitive therapy with patients whose depression was the
result of complicated grief, two well-​known cognitive therapists once
indicated that they would not. Instead, they would intervene with grief
therapy---​an intervention usually associated with interpersonal therapy.
When comparing multiple approaches for one disorder, it would probably
prove useful to focus on an intermediate level of abstraction---​
somewhere between theory and technique (Goldfried, 1980). At higher
levels of abstraction (e.g., psychodynamic, cognitive-​ behavioral,
experiential, family/​systems), philosophical differences and language
barriers can obscure agreement. At lower levels of abstraction (e.g.,
specific techniques), surface differences may mask functional
similarities. By focusing on an intermediate level of clinical
strategies or principles (e.g., corrective experiences, therapeutic
relationship), it is easier to recognize how different approaches may be
using different techniques in service of the same principle. Research
showing positive relations between treatment outcome and change
principles, such as client expectations, the alliance, client awareness,
and corrective experience, is growing (Eubanks & Goldfried, Chapter 4,
this volume). Beutler, Castonguay, and colleagues have also identified
principles that can be used to responsively tailor the therapist's
approach to the patient, such as adjusting therapist directiveness in
accordance with the patient's level of reactance (Consoli & Beutler,
Chapter 7, this volume).

479

Research on principles of change and treatment selection can guide
comparisons of different approaches to the same clinical problem in
order to identify common principles. For example, most
research-​supported treatments for posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
include some form of exposure to the painful memories of the trauma. In
prolonged exposure, patients engage in repeated imaginal and in vivo
exposures to trauma-​related thoughts, feelings, and situations (Foa,
Hembree, & Rothbaum, 2007). In cognitive processing therapy, patients
repeatedly write about their traumatic experience and work in therapy to
change the content of their cognitions about a trauma (Resick &
Schnicke, 1993). In eye movement desensitization and reprocessing (EMDR;
Shapiro, 2001), patients recount their traumatic experiences while
focusing their eyes on an external stimulus, often engaging in
therapist-​directed lateral eye movements. In both emotion-​focused
therapy for trauma (Paivio & Pascual-​Leone, 2010) and in narrative
exposure therapy (Schauer, Neuner, & Elbert, 2011), client storytelling
around their trauma memories is central as patients and therapists work
toward a reconstruction of the clients' trauma narratives. Identifying
the common ingredients of these approaches strongly indicates that
exposure to traumatic memories may be a key common strategy to address
PTSD. Research examining the different ways in which these approaches
employ exposure could identify treatment selection principles: Do
specific techniques work better for different types of patients or
traumas? Or, given how challenging exposure can be for clinicians (van
Minnen, Hendriks, & Olff, 2010), could different approaches to exposure
be more appealing or easier to implement for different types of
therapists? Are any of the techniques that accompany exposure (e.g.,
homework, hand movements) extraneous, or do they serve additional
functions? The specific techniques associated with any given approach
may be seen as testable parameters of the more general principle. By
starting from a principle-​ based appreciation of the common ground these
approaches share, comparisons of these

480

Future Directions

treatments can proceed in the spirit of fostering generative
conversations rather than zero-​sum competitions. Progress in integrative
research and practice will also require attention to the role of the
cultural contexts of patients and how therapists can best tailor
treatment to be maximally effective with a diverse range of patients
(Harris, Shukla, & Ivey, Chapter 15, this volume). Here, we refer to
culture writ large and inclusively---​race, ethnicity, national heritage,
gender, sexual orientation, religion, disability status, age, and so on.
As recognition of the importance of multicultural competence grows
(e.g., Hook et al., 2017), therapists and researchers with experience
integrating multiple treatments may be well-​positioned to be leaders in
encouraging openness to different cultural perspectives. That certainly
proves the case in integrating research and practice in countries around
the world. In their review of global psychotherapy integration, Gómez,
Iwakabe, and Vaz (Chapter 21, this volume) repeatedly demonstrate how a
country's cultural and historical background significantly influenced
the nurturance or hindrance of integrative endeavors. Moreover,
psychotherapy integration necessarily adapted to particular features of
their place of origin, to differences and peculiarities in each country
in terms of health needs, patient preferences, therapist availability,
and governmental requirements. A final promising direction for advancing
psychotherapy practice and research in the integrative tradition is by
embracing multiple research methods. Fishman and Messer (2005, 2013)
have proposed an innovative way to integrate practice and research via
the pragmatic case study method. With this method, both quantitative and
qualitative research methodologies are applied to a single case, or
qualitative case studies complement quantitative analyses within
psychotherapy trials (Fishman et al., 2017). When we discard the
"either/​or" and embrace the "both/​and," psychotherapy practice and
research thrive. The phenomena become fuller, richer, more verdant---​and
more consequential for those receiving our services. Embracing
contrasting perspectives increases

our understanding of the case at hand. As more cases are studied in this
way, comparisons across cases allow for unifying themes and theoretical
generalizations to emerge from the bottom up through meaningful
dialogue. DIRECTIONS IN INTEGRATIVE TRAINING If we want to advance our
field, we must focus on training as that will shape the future of
theory, research, and practice. Learning to be a psychotherapist rooted
in one orientation is an intellectually and emotionally challenging
task; learning to be an integrative therapist brings particular
challenges as it requires exposure to more than one orientation, as well
as knowledge of how and when to integrate across orientations. The
knowledge, skills, and flexibility integration entails place
considerable demands on a trainee. Broad, integrative training in
psychotherapy is universally desired, but the challenge has been how to
do so systematically in ways that ensure student clinical competence.
All agree that integration as a concept and as a goal should be
introduced at the beginning of clinical training, but, beyond that,
there is not a consensus in the educational community on how to train
toward that goal (Norcross & Finnerty, Chapter 18, this volume). Some
educators believe that students should first achieve minimal competence
in one or two pure-​form psychotherapies and then gradually integrate
additional competencies, in the tradition of assimilative integration.
Other educators believe that training graduate students in multiple
psychotherapies and treatment formats proves unfeasible. Instead, they
advocate for principle-​based training. An early example is found in the
Transtheoretical Model associated with stages of change (Prochaska &
DiClemente, Chapter 8, this volume), in which students are trained to
assess the patient's stage of change and to tailor treatment methods and
relationship stances to that stage. What works for a patient in
precontemplation differs markedly from the patient in, say, the action
stage. Such principles

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration

or mini-​models reduce the universe to a manageable number for training
and practice. A more elaborate principle-​ based training occurs in
systematic treatment selection (STS; Consoli & Beutler, Chapter 7, this
volume). Students are taught and supervised to follow a series of
research-​fueled integrative change principles, such as developing an
alliance and matching therapy to patient transdiagnostic features, such
as reactance level, functional impairment, and coping style. Highly
reactant patients, for instance, profit most from a less directive
treatment, whereas patients who are low on reactance fare better on
average with a more directive approach. Numerous RCTs have determined
that such matching improves treatment outcomes. Systematic treatment
selection, is, to our knowledge, the only supervision, integrative or
otherwise, to demonstrate in an RCT its superiority to an alternative
method. Patients whose therapists were trained and supervised according
to the STS model demonstrated greater therapeutic gains when compared to
supervision as usual (Holt et al., 2015; Stein et al., 2017). A similar,
promising model that aims to make integration more feasible for a
trainee is context-​responsive integration (Constantino et al., 2013).
This approach reframes common factors as clinical situations that
therapists will frequently encounter and to which they need to be
responsive rather than continuing with treatment as usual. To date, this
approach has proposed five context-​responsive markers: low outcome
expectations, ambivalence, patient self-​strivings for positivity and
verification, alliance ruptures, and outcomes monitoring. The model
proposes principle-​driven and evidence-​ based strategies that therapists
can employ when they identify these markers in session. The "if-​then"
structure makes it much easier for therapists to identify opportunities
for integration. For example, in the area of alliance ruptures,
therapists can be taught to recognize markers of ruptures (such as
markers of confrontation and withdrawal) and resolution strategies that
can be employed to facilitate resolution with each of these types of
markers (Eubanks-​ Carter, Muran, & Safran, 2015).

481

Unprecedented training opportunities abound in and through technology.
Trainees can now watch hundreds of streaming videotaped psychotherapy
demonstrations. The classic "Gloria" films, once watchable only on bulky
film reels, now fit easily onto a single memory stick. Standardized
patient presentations and stimulus prompts are available at a push of a
button. Students can access the research literature with a few
keystrokes. Researchers can monitor and collect real-​time client
responses. Internet-​ mediated supervision and psychotherapy are
commonplace. Supervisors can observe every moment of every session of a
trainee's case. We confess to being a bit staggered and bewildered by
the embarrassment of riches for hybrid instruction, training, and
supervision in integrative psychotherapy afforded by technology. It is
not clear yet which technology-​ enabled training methods will flourish
and which will flop, but technology will certainly impact the future of
training in psychotherapy integration. Another promising area for
training is the growing literature on deliberate practice. Deliberate
practice, or individualized training to improve specific skills, has
long been a part of improving performance in areas such as music, chess,
and sports (Ericsson & Lehmann, 1996). Although there are only a few
studies of deliberate practice in psychotherapy, it will probably prove
useful in training mental health professionals in the future
(Rousmaniere, 2017). The amount of time therapists spend alone in
deliberate practice activities, such as reviewing recordings of one's
therapy sessions, has been linked to client outcomes (Chow et al.,
2015). Deliberate practice exercises should target particular skills
that the therapist seeks to improve. The research highlights
psychotherapists' improving interpersonal and alliance-​ building skills
in session and reducing negative countertransferential reactions between
sessions. Exercises geared toward enhancing therapists' skills with a
specific technique could be particularly valuable for therapists
interested in integrating a new approach into their clinical repertoire.

482

Future Directions

DIRECTIONS IN THE INTEGRATION MOVEMENT A recent survey of members of the
Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI;
Norcross, Nolan et al., 2017) found that almost a third of respondents
indicated that the type of integration that best represents their
practice is assimilative integration, in which therapists are anchored
in one approach and thoughtfully integrate ideas from other orientations
into that approach (Messer, 1992). This finding indicates that many
people interested in integration still identify with a primary
orientation and manifest interest in learning about other approaches. In
the future, will more therapists begin to identify as integrative, and
will integration become another entry in the theoretical orientation
horse race? Or could we be moving toward a time when therapists do not
think so much in terms of specific schools of thought? What would a
post-​ orientation world look like in psychotherapy? As some of the
contributors to the previous edition of this Handbook observed, perhaps
one future direction for integration is to view it as "less of an
orientation and more of a perspective---​a way of thinking (in terms of
convergence, divergence, complementarity, synergy, synthesis, and
anti-​thesis) aimed at constantly challenging our conceptualizations and
improving our clinical practice" (Castonguay, Holtforth, & Maramba, as
quoted in Norcross & Goldfried, 2005, p. 457). Perhaps integration is
less about which techniques or theories one uses and more about the
stance of the therapist. At its core, integration is an effort to work
toward what Stiles and colleagues have termed responsiveness, or
therapeutic behavior that is affected by what seems to be required
therapeutically in the emerging clinical context (Stiles, Honos-​Webb, &
Surko, 1998). As we have suggested earlier, the integrative therapist is
willing to change or adapt his or her approach to meet the needs of the
patient as they emerge. Multiple meta-​analyses on therapist
responsiveness to clients (Norcross & Wampold, 2019) support exactly
this point: that

responsiveness occurs moment to moment, session to session, and, of
course, patient to patient. This attuned flexibility---​ perhaps even
more than the skillful use of a variety of techniques---​ may be the
greatest strength of the integrative therapist. In reviews of therapist
effectiveness, theoretical orientation does not explain why some
therapists are more effective than others (e.g., Anderson et al., 2009;
Schöttke et al., 2016; Wampold et al., 2017). Rather, the research
points to several factors that have received empirical support in
explaining differences between therapists. These include, most
prominently, the common factor of the therapeutic relationship:
practitioners who establish a positive alliance, demonstrate an empathic
connection, manifest support and warmth, and so on achieve better
treatment outcomes across patients. Two other nascent factors supported
by the research were therapists' self-​doubt about their skill in helping
patients (Nissen-​Lie et al., 2013), and engaging in deliberate practice
(Chow et al., 2015). Awareness of the limitations of one's approach and
motivation to expend extra effort to expand one's skills sound like the
profile of an integrative therapist. Finally, we reiterate that the
future of integration as a formal movement will assuredly become more
international and interdisciplinary in nature. Most of the early impetus
of the movement hailed from North America (see Goldfried, Pachankis, &
Goodwin, Chapter 2, this volume), but integration has clearly taken root
around the world. And, although much of the early integrative literature
and leadership came from psychologists, it is becoming---​and will
increasingly grow---​---​into an interdisciplinary force in mental health.
CONCLUSION Coming full circle, we conclude this chapter where we began
it---​by quoting Saul Rosenzweig (1936) and his discussion of common
factors and the Dodo bird verdict. More than 80 years ago, Rosenzweig
(1936) observed that it may be of "comparatively little consequence"
what

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration

particular method a therapist uses, so long as the therapist (a) employs
an approach that she or he has mastered, (b) is responsive to the
patient's needs, and (c) possesses an "effective personality"
(pp. 414--​415). Rosenzweig declined to elaborate on what characterizes
an effective personality because the personal qualities of the good
therapist "elude description" (p. 413). Perhaps this is where
integrative therapists can show the way forward---​by blending practice,
research, theory, and training in identifying and modeling the effective
psychotherapist. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We appreciate the assistance of
Ms. Nicole G. Plantier, who performed a content analysis on the future
directions sections of the preceding chapters in this volume.

References Anderson, T., Ogles, B. M., Patterson, C. L., Lambert, M. J.,
& Vermeersch, D. A. (2009). Therapist effects: Facilitative
interpersonal skills as a predictor of therapists' success. Journal of
Clinical Psychology, 65, 755--​768. doi: 10.1002/​ jclp.20583 Castonguay,
L. G., Eubanks, C. F., Goldfried, M. R., Muran, J. C., & Lutz, W.
(2015). Research in psychotherapy integration: Building on the past,
looking to the future. Psychotherapy Research, 25, 365--​382. doi:
10.1080/​10503307 Castonguay, L. G., & Hill, C. E. (Eds). (2017). How and
why are some therapists better than others? Understanding therapist
effects. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. doi:
10.1037/​0000034-​000 Chow, D. L., Miller, S. D., Seidel, J. A., Kane, R.
T., Thornton, J. A., & Andrews, W. P. (2015). The role of deliberate
practice in the development of highly effective psychotherapists.
Psychotherapy, 52, 337--​345. doi: 10.1037/​pst0000015 Constantino, M. J.,
Boswell, J. F., Bernecker, S. L., & Castonguay, L. G. (2013).
Context-​responsive psychotherapy integration as a framework for a
unified clinical science: Conceptual and empirical considerations.
Journal of Unified Psychotherapy and Clinical Science, 2, 1--​20.

483

Ericsson, K. A., & Lehmann, A. C. (1996). Expert and exceptional
performance: Evidence of maximal adaptation to task. Annual Review of
Psychology, 47, 273--​305. Eubanks-​Carter, C., Burckell, L. A., &
Goldfried, M. R. (2005). Future directions in psychotherapy integration.
In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
integration (2nd ed., pp. 503--​ 521). New York: Oxford University Press.
Eubanks-​ Carter, C., Muran, J. C., & Safran, J. D. (2015). Alliance-​
focused training. Psychotherapy, 52, 169--​ 173. doi: 10.1037/​ a0037596
Fishman, D. B., & Messer, S. B. (2005). Case-​ based studies as a source
of unity in applied psychology. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed)., Unity in
psychology: Possibility or pipedream? (pp. 37--​ 59). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. doi: 10.1037/​10847-​003 Fishman, D.
B., & Messer, S. B. (2013). Pragmatic case studies as a source of unity
in applied psychology. Review of General Psychology, 17, 156--​161.
http://​dx.doi.org/​10.1037/​a0032927 Fishman, D. B., Messer, S. B.,
Edwards, D. J. A., & Dattillio, F. M. (Eds). (2017). Case studies within
psychotherapy trials: Integrating qualitative and quantitative methods.
New York: Oxford University Press. Foa, E. B., Hembree, E. A., &
Rothbaum, B. O. (2007). Prolonged exposure therapy for PTSD: Emotional
processing of traumatic experiences: Therapist guide. New York: Oxford
University Press. doi: 10.1093/​9780195308501.001.0001 Gelso, C. J., &
Hayes, J. (2008). Countertransference and the therapist's inner
experience: Perils and possibilities. London: Routledge. Giesen-​Bloo,
J., van Dyck, R., Spinhoven, P., van Tilburg, W., Dirksen, C., van
Asselt, T., . . . Arntz, A. (2006). Outpatient psychotherapy for
borderline personality disorder: Randomized trial of schema-​focused
therapy vs. transference-​ focused psychotherapy. Archives of General
Psychiatry, 63, 649--​658. Goldfried, M. R. (1980). Toward the
delineation of therapeutic change principles. American Psychologist, 35,
991--​999. Goldfried, M. R. (1987). A common language for the
psychotherapies: Commentary. Journal of Integrative & Eclectic
Psychotherapy, 6, 200--​204. Goldfried, M. R. (2016). On possible
consequences of National Institute of Mental Health funding for
psychotherapy research and training.

484

Future Directions

Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 47, 77--​83. doi:
10.1037/​pro0000034 Goldfried, M. R., Newman, M. G., Castonguay, L. G.,
Fuertes, J. N., Magnavita, J. J., Sobell, L. C., & Wolf, A. W. (2014).
On the dissemination of clinical experiences in using empirically
supported treatments. Behavior Therapy, 45, 3--​6. Henriques, G. (2011).
A new unified theory of psychology. New York: Springer Science +
Business Media. doi: 10.1007/​978-​1-​4614-​0058-​5 Holt, H., Beutler, L. E.,
Kimpara, S., Macias, S., Haug, N. A., Shiloff, N., . . . Stein, M.
(2015). Evidence-​based supervision: Tracking outcome and teaching
principles of change in clinical supervision to bring science to
integrative practice. Psychotherapy, 52, 185--​189. Hook, J. N., David,
D., Owen, J., & DeBlaere, C. (2017). Cultural humility: Engaging diverse
identities in therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Jacobson, N. C., Newman, M. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (2016).
Clinical feedback about empirically supported treatments for
obsessive-​compulsive disorder. Behavior Therapy, 47, 75--​90. Lambert, M.
J. (2015). Progress feedback and the OQ-​ system: The past and the
future. Psychotherapy, 52, 381--​390. Lambert, M.J., Whipple, J.L., &
Kleinstäuber, M. (2018). Collecting and delivering progress feedback: A
meta-​analysis of routine outcome monitoring. Psychotherapy, 55, 520-​537.
http://​ dx.doi/​10.1037/​pst0000167 Luborsky, L., Rosenthal, R., Diguer,
L., Andrusyna, T. P., Berman, J. S., Levitt, J. T., . . . Krause, E. D.
(2002). The dodo bird verdict is alive and well---​mostly. Clinical
Psychology: Science and Practice, 9, 2--​12. Maganvita, J. J. (Ed.).
(2015). Clinical decision making in mental health practice. Washington,
DC: American Psychological Association. Magnavita, J. J., & Anchin, J.
C. (2014). Unifying psychotherapy: Principles, methods, and evidence
from clinical science. New York: Springer. McAleavey, A. A., Castonguay,
L. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (2014). Clinical experiences in conducting
cognitive-​behavioral therapy for social phobia. Behavior Therapy, 45,
21--​35. Melchert, T. P. (2015). Biopsychosocial practice: A science-​
based framework for behavioral health care. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Messer, S. B. (1986). Behavioral and
psychoanalytic perspectives at therapeutic choice points.

American Psychologist, 41, 1261--​1272. doi: 10.1037/​0003-​066X.41.11.1261
Messer, S. B. (1992). A critical examination of belief structures in
integrative and eclectic psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 130--​165).
New York: Basic. Messer, S. B. (2008). Unification in psychotherapy: A
commentary. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 18, 356--​ 363. doi:
10.1037/​ a0013491 Nissen-​Lie, H. A., Monsen, J. T., Ulleberg, P., &
Rønnestad, M. H. (2013). Psychotherapists' self-​ reports of their
interpersonal functioning and difficulties in practice as predictors of
patient outcome. Psychotherapy Research, 23, 86--​104. Norcross, J. C., &
Goldfried, M. R. (Eds.). (2005). Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(2nd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., Hogan, T.
P., Koocher, G. P., & Maggio, L. A. (2017). Clinician's guide to
evidence-​ based practices: Behavioral health and addictions (2nd ed.).
New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C., Karpiak, C. P., &
Santoro, S. O. (2005). Clinical psychologists across the years: The
division of clinical psychology from 1960 to 2003. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 61, 1467--​1483. doi: 10.1002/​jclp.20135 Norcross, J. C., &
Lambert, M. J. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work.
Volume 1. (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Norcross, J. C.,
Nolan, B. M., Kosman, D. C., & Fernandez-​ Alvarez, H. (2017). Redefining
the future of SEPI: Member characteristics, integrative practices, and
organizational satisfactions. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 27,
3--​12. Norcross, J. C., Pfund, R. A., & Prochaska, J. O. (2013).
Psychotherapy in 2022: A Delphi poll on its future. Professional
Psychology: Research & Practice, 44, 363--​370 Norcross, J. C., &
Wampold, B. E. (Eds.). (2019). Psychotherapy relationships that work.
Volume 2. (3rd ed.). New York: Oxford University Press. Paivio, S. C., &
Pascual-​ Leone, A. (2010). Emotion-​ focused therapy for complex trauma:
An integrative approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Resick, P. A., & Schnicke, M. K. (1993). Cognitive
processing therapy for rape victims: A treatment manual. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage. Rosenzweig, S. (1936). Some implicit common factors in diverse
methods of psychotherapy.

Directions in Psychotherapy Integration American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 6,412--​ 415. doi: 10.111/​j.1939-​ 0025.1936.tb05248.x
Rousmaniere, T. G. (2017). Deliberate practice for psychotherapists: A
guide to improving clinical effectiveness. New York: Routledge. Schauer,
M., Neuner, F., & Elbert, T. (2011). Narrative exposure therapy: A
short-​ term treatment for traumatic stress disorders (2nd ed.). Boston:
Hogerfe. Schöttke, H., Flückiger, C., Goldberg, S. B., Eversmann, J., &
Lange, J. (2016). Predicting psychotherapy outcome based on therapist
interpersonal skills: A five-​ year longitudinal study of a therapist
assessment protocol. Psychotherapy Research, 27, 642-​ 652. http://​
dx.doi.org/​10.1080/​10503307.2015.1125546. Shapiro, F. (2001). Eye
movement desensitization and reprocessing: Basic principles, protocols,
and procedures (2nd ed.). New York: Guilford. Stein, M., Beutler, L. E.,
Kimpara, S., Haug, N. A., Brunet, H., Someah, K., . . . Macias, S.
(2017). The impact of cross-​interventions and principle-​ based
supervision on trainee effectiveness. Manuscript submitted for
publication. Stiles, W. B., Honos-​Webb, L., & Surko, M. (1998).
Responsiveness in psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and
Practice, 5, 439--​458.

485

Szkodny, L. E., Newman, M. G., & Goldfried, M. R. (2014). Clinical
experiences in conducting empirically supported treatments for
generalized anxiety disorder. Behavior Therapy, 45, 7--​20. van Minnen,
A., Hendriks, L., & Olff, M. (2010). When do trauma experts choose
exposure therapy for PTSD patients? A controlled study of therapist and
patient factors. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48, 312--​320. Wachtel,
P. L. (1977). Psychoanalysis and behavior therapy. New York: Basic.
Wachtel, P. L. (1997). Psychoanalysis, behavior therapy, and the
relational world. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Wampold, B. E., Baldwin, S. A., grosse Holtforth, M., & Imel, Z. E.
(2017). What characterizes effective therapists? In L. G. Castonguay &
C. E. Hill (Eds.), How and why are some therapists better than others?
Understanding therapist effects (pp. 37--​53). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Wampold, B. E., & Imel, Z. (2015). The great
psychotherapy debate (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge. Young, J. E.,
Klosko, J. S., & Weishaar, M. E. (2003). Schema therapy: A
practitioner's guide. New York: Guilford.

Name Index

Abbas, M., 69, 74--​76 Abbass, A., 223 Abelson, J. L., 231 Ablon, J. S.,
73, 229--​30 Abramowitz, J. S., 196 Abrams, D. B., 170 Accurso, E. C.,
14t Achenbach, T. M., 347 Ackerman, B. P., 311 Adams, S. J., 358--​59
Adelman, R. W., 437 Adelson, J., 107 Agras, W. S., 230 Ahmed, M., 287
Ahn, H., 75--​76 Aikins, D., 230, 244 Aitken, R., 258--​59, 271, 273 Ajax,
E. T., 109 Akinola, M., 196--​97 Albeniz, A., 46 Alberts, G., 386
Alcaine, O. M., 231 Alden, L. E., 232--​33 Alexander, F., viii, 31, 35,
94, 95, 185, 186, 191, 208, 238--​39, 259, 344 Alford, B. A., 43, 47
Allen, D. M., 39, 395 Allen, G. J., 391 Allison, E., 191 Allmon, D., 261
Allport, G. W., 20 Alonso, M. M., 461, 465 Altenstein-​Yamanaka, D.,
245--​46 Altmaier, E. M., 14t

Altschul, D., 333 Ametrano, R. M., 74--​75 Amsterdam, J. D., 74--​76, 81
Anastasiades, P., 76 Anchin, J. C., 38, 306, 476 Ancis, J. R., 394
Andersen, S. M., 50, 197 Anderson, T., 81, 381, 482 Andersson, G., 285,
288, 359, 360, 363, 367 Andrews, J. D. W., 21, 41, 396--​97 Andrews, W.
P., 77, 81, 382, 481, 482 Andrusyna, T. P., 475 Angus, L., 285, 289
Anton, B. S., 106 Antoniou, P., 459 Antony, M. M., 52, 245, 285, 286,
288--​​91, 293, 297--99 Apelberg, B. J., 360 Apodaca, T. R., 359 Aponte,
H. J., 379 Appel, S., 358 Appelbaum, S. A., 35 Arkowitz, H. S., 7, 12,
39, 41, 43, 44, 259, 284, 297, 359 Armijo-​Olivo, S., 73 Armstrong, C.
M., 358--​59 Armstrong, H. E., 261, 277 Arnkoff, D. B., 8, 13, 18, 37,
41, 43, 44, 48, 186--​87, 352 Arnow, B. A., 306, 310, 318 Aron, L., 191
Arredondo, P., 326--​27 Arrúe, W., 465 Asnaani, A., 69

487

488

Name Index

Atkins, D. C., 368--​69 Atkinson, D. R., 325--​26, 327 Auerbach, A. H.,
15--​16 Austad, C. S., 7 Ávila, A., 461 Aviram, A., 52, 285--​91, 297
Axelrod, S. R., 261--​62 Axelson, D. A., 261--​62 Axsen, R., 108 Ayduk,
Ö., 196--​97 Aylott, H., 396 Azhar, M. Z., 452--​53 Baardseth, T. P.,
70--​71 Babcock, H. H., 41 Bąbel, P., 196 Babins-​Wagner, R., 118, 299
Bachelart, M., 458 Backenstrass, M., 318 Bae, S. H., 454 Bagladi, V.,
465, 466 Bahrick, L. E., 197 Bailer, J., 318 Bailey, R., 107 Bailey, V.
S., 74--​75 Baillie, A. J., 369 Baker-​Ericzen, M., 441 Baker, S., 244,
435 Balarezo, L., 464, 466, 467 Balderson, B. H. K., 15--​16 Baldwin, S.
A., 81, 106, 246--​47, 432--​33, 436, 482 Balfour, L., 440 Balte, M. B.,
174 Bandura, A., 37, 74, 89, 165, 196, 305, 306 Banks, P. L., 318
Barber, B., 28 Barber, J. P., 18, 299, 439 Barbui, C., 278--​79 Barends,
A. W., 75 Barett, S., 165 Bargmann, M. T., 113 Barker, J., 357, 360
Barker, P., 272 Barkham, M., 44, 107, 198, 246--​47, 434, 436--​37, 439,
443, 458, 459 Barlow, D. H., 69, 75--​76, 231, 232 Barnes, J. B., 245--​46
Barnett, J. E., 93 Barnett, N. P., 93 Barnhart, R., 266 Barrachina, J.,
266 Barrett, C. L., 342 Barry, C. T., 361

Bass, E. B., 360, 365 Basseches, M., 259 Bastine, R., 34--​35, 37
Batchelder, S. T., 93 Baucom, B., 368--​69 Baurer, M. R., 178 Bausch, P.,
319 Bautista, P., 466 Beach, S. H., 39 Beadnell, B., 279 Beattie, M.,
144 Beauchaine, T. P., 263 Beck, A. T., 38--​39, 47, 167--​68, 186,
232--​33, 244, 306 Beck, J. S., 93 Becker, K. D., 346 Beckstead, D. J.,
275 Bedi, R., 14t Bedics, J., 231 Beebe, B., 197 Beekman, A., 360
Beevers, C. G., 245--​46 Begin, A., 167 Behar, E., 231 Beier, E. G., 208
Beitman, B. D., 38--40, 42, 48, 450 Bejarano, M., 143 Bell, A., 177
Bell, E. C., 75--​76 Bell, S. K., 345 Bellido, C., 333 Belyea-​Caldwell,
S., 308 Bendit, N., 278 Benedetti, F., 73, 74 Benish, S. G., 78, 332
Benson, L. A., 361 Benum, K., 379 Berant, E., 196 Berenson, K., 197
Berg, I. K., 109 Bergan, J., 153 Berggraf, L., 81 Berghoff, C. R., 359
Bergin, A. E., 13, 17, 32--​33, 37, 40--​42 Berk, M. S., 197 Berking, M.,
288 Berlin, K. S., 231, 285 Berman, J. S., 475 Bernal, G. E., 96--​97,
293, 332--​33, 336--​37, 392 Bernard, J. M., 396 Bernecker, S. L., 50--​52,
101, 285, 358, 481 Bernstein, D. A., 236 Bernstein, D. P., 309
Bertolino, B., 111--​13

Name Index Berzins, S., 299 Beutler, L. E., viii, 6, 9, 11, 15--​16, 38,
40, 42, 44, 46, 51, 95, 100, 101, 125, 141--​49, 153--55, 171, 195--​96,
208, 209, 216, 287, 290--​91, 344, 369, 379, 381, 383, 384, 386, 389,
392, 393, 395, 479, 481 Beyermann, S., 245--​46 Bezborodovs, N., 196--​97
Bhati, K. S., 70 Bhola, P., 382 Bickman, L., 342, 349 Bieschke, K. J.,
328, 441 Bijl, R. V., 357--​58 Bike, D. H., 14t, 387 Binder, J. L., 286
Birk, L., 32--​34, 41, 48 Birmaher, B., 261--​62 Bischof, S., 462 Bishop,
D. G., 454 Biyanova, T., 15 Blackard, S., 345 Blackburn, I.-​M., 244
Blagys, M. D., 229, 230 Blalock, J. A., 306, 318 Blanchard, M., 111
Blasey, C., 306 Blaustein, A. B., 35 Bleich, S., 318 Blomqvist, J., 357,
360 Bockting, C. L., 245--​46 Boettcher, J., 367 Bogart, D., 358 Bohart,
A. C., 38, 42, 73, 93, 210--​11, 216, 290--​91 Bohmer, R., 396--​97 Bolger,
N., 198 Bologh, L., 230, 244 Bongar, B., 142--​45, 148, 151 Bonilla, J.,
333 Booth, P., 345 Borckardt, J. J., 92--​93 Bordin, E. S., 72, 75, 93,
97--​98, 107, 290 Borge, F.-​M., 81 Borian, F. E., 304, 306, 318 Boring,
E. G., 28, 52 Borkovec, T. D., 74--​76, 230--​32, 236, 241, 243, 284, 293,
438--40 Boswell, J. F., viii, 13, 21, 50--​52, 74--​76, 92, 101, 243, 244,
285, 298, 359, 378, 432--​33, 435--​36, 437, 439--41, 474, 481 Botanov,
Y., 274 Botella, L., 460--​61 Botermans, J., 388 Boucher, H. C., 197

Boutselis, M., 244, 435, 440 Bowlby, J., 75, 147, 197, 215 Bradford, D.
C., 109 Brady, J. P., 32, 37 Brakemeier, E. L., 318, 319 Brandenburg,
N., 165, 177 Bratton, S. C., 345 Braver, M., 440 Braverman, A., 271--​72
Bravin, J. I., 369 Brazelton, T. B., 197 Brazier, D., 45 Brazil, L. A.,
93 Brechwald, W. A. G., 437 Brehm, J. W., 148--​49 Brehm, S. S., 148--​49
Brinkley-​Birk, A., 34 Broberg, J., 462 Brogan, M. M., 166
Bronfenbrenner, U., 333 Bronner, L., 261--​62 Brookman-​Frazee, L., 14t,
440--​41 Brooks-​Harris, J. E., 46--​47, 51, 326, 333, 334 Brown, B. S.,
367 Brown, C. H., 442 Brown, G., 232--​33 Brown, J., 106--​8 Brown, L. A.,
74--​75 Brown, M. Z., 277, 279 Brown, P. J., 74--​75 Brown, T. A., 231,
232 Brownell, C. A., 288, 293 Bruce, T. J., 284--​85 Brunet, H., 384,
386, 393, 481 Bruno, A., 343--​44 Bruschweiler-​Stern, N., 198 Buchheim,
A., 319 Buck, K. A., 197 Budge, S. L., 70, 107 Bugati, M., 432--​33,
435--​36 Bugental, J. F. T., 378 Buhin, L., 333 Bullis, J., 75--​76 Bunge,
E. L., 369 Burckell, L. A., 380, 475 Burish, T. G., 258 Burkard, A. W.,
392 Burke, B. L., 93, 288, 293, 359 Burlingame, G. A., 106 Burlingame,
G. M., 109 Burns, D. D., 230, 239, 244, 364, 437 Burns, J., 361--​62
Busch, F. N., 76

489

490

Name Index

Bush, N. E., 358--​59, 361 Butler, C., 93, 290--​91 Butler, E. A., 73
Butler, S. K., 326--​27, 337 Butters, R., 93 Button, M. L., 286, 291
Bystritsky, A., 74--​75 Cacioppo, J. T., 73 Cacioppo, S., 73 Cahill, J.,
436--​37 Caldwell, D. M., 73, 76 Callahan, J. L., 80--​81, 96--​97 Calvert,
R. D., 245, 459 Cameron, R. P., 328 Campbell, L. F., 196--​97, 358--​59,
361, 362, 364, 365, 399 Campbell, W., 366 Campins, M. J., 266 Canning,
S. S., 359 Cao, Y., 450--​51 Caplan, E., 70 Captari, L. E., 96--​97
Carbonari, J. P., 163, 169, 172, 177 Cardish, R. J., 278 Carere-​Comes,
T., 48 Carlbring, P., 360, 363, 367 Carlile, J. A., 231 Carlin, M., 344
Carlsson, J., 462 Carney, M. M., 177 Caro, I., 461 Carroll, K. M., 177
Carter, G. L., 278 Carter, J. A., 73 Carter, R. T., 326, 329 Casas, M.,
169 Cashdan, S., 41 Caspar, F., 319, 462 Cass, V. C., 328 Cassidy, J.,
196, 231 Cassin, S. E., 14t Castagnini, C., 334 Castonguay, L. G., viii,
8, 11--​12, 40, 41, 44--​45, 50, 51--​52, 71, 100, 101, 141--​43, 195--​96,
229--​32, 239, 243--​47, 285--​86, 298, 369, 378--81, 384, 386, 393, 399,
432--43, 466, 469, 474, 477--​78, 481, 482 Cavanagh, K., 360 Cavett, A.,
343, 344--​45 Cebria, A., 266 Cecero, J. J., 14t, 18

Cermak, I., 19 Chalk, M. B., 106--​7 Chamberlain, P., 287 Chambless, D.
L., 36, 74--​75, 141, 441 Chambon, O., 458 Chan, R. T. H., 451 Chander,
G., 360 Chaney, J. M., 15--​16 Chang, D. F., 450--​51 Chang, J., 455
Chapman, A. L., 277 Chawla, N., 196 Cheavens, J. S., 261--​62 Chen, H.,
197 Chen, K., 369 Chen, P., 73, 76 Chen, S., 197 Chevron, E. S., 318
Chiswick, N., 244, 435, 440 Chongruksa, D., 456 Chopra, T., 392
Chorpita, B. F., 346, 398--​99 Chow, D. L., 77, 81, 111, 118--​19, 379,
382, 481, 482 Christensen, A., 361, 368--​69 Christensen, C. M., 396--​97
Christian, C., 185 Christiani, K., 14t Chu, J., 151 Chuan, Eng., 453
Chyurlia, L., 440 Cicchetti, D., 311 Cicila, L. N., 361 Cisin, I. H.,
174 Ciulla, R. P., 358--​59 Claiborn, C. D., 7--​8, 71 Clark, D. M., 76,
81 Clark, J. A., 16 Clark, S. W., 308--​9 Clarkin, J. F., 9, 40, 42, 76,
137, 142--​45, 148, 278, 379, 398--​99 Clarkson, P., 459 Clement, P. W.,
346 Clement, S., 196--​97 Clifford, J. S., 362 Cloud, W., 357, 360 Clum,
G. A., 359, 361, 363, 364 Coan, J. A., 73 Coble-​Temple, A., 328
Cobstanino, M. J., 141--​42, 393 Cody, S., 74--​75 Cohen, J. A., 344--​45
Cohen, L. H., 37

Name Index Cohen, Z. D., 101--​2 Cohn, J. F., 197 Colby, S. M., 93
Coleman, D., 230 Combs, D. C., 455 Comtois, K. A., 265, 277, 278, 280
Conboy, L. A., 73 Conceição, N., 459--​60 Conley, K. A., 309 Connell, J.,
72--​73, 436--​37 Connors, C. K., 347 Connors, G. J., 170, 177, 367
Connors, L., 287 Conrad, A. M., 278 Consoli, A. J., viii, 6, 9, 11, 51,
101, 145--47, 171, 209, 216, 290--​91, 344, 379, 384, 392, 399, 465, 479,
481 Constantino, M. J., viii, 51--​52, 74--​76, 92, 101, 143, 230,
244--​46, 285, 286, 288--​91, 293, 297--99, 369, 398--​99, 432--​33,
435--​36, 477, 478, 481 Contreras-​Tadyc, D. A., 392 Cook, J. M., 15 Cook,
J. R., 343--​44 Coombs, M. M., 230 Coonerty, S., 343, 344, 346--​47
Cooper, M., 12, 80--​81, 96--​97, 385, 398, 399, 436--​37, 459 Corbella,
S., 147 Cordes, C. C., 328 Corey, G., 329 Corno, C., 179 Coryell, W.,
311 Coscollá, A., 461 Costello, E., 74--​75, 241 Cotet, C. D., 278--​79
Cottraux, J., 244 Cottrell, D., 343 Countis, L., 442 Coyne, A. E.,
74--​76, 92, 285, 290, 291, 298, 436 Coyne, J. C., 15, 229 Craft, J. C.,
277--​78 Craig, E., 454 Cramer, P., 196 Craske, M. G., 74--​75 Cremer, S.,
71 Cristea, I. A., 278--​79 Cristol, A. H., 35 Crits-​Christoph, K., 399
Crits-​Christoph, P., 399 Crocker, P., 239 Crouch, C., 170, 172, 179
Crowell, S. E., 263

491

Crum, A. J., 73, 74 Cucherat, M., 244 Cuijpers, C., 278--​79 Cuijpers,
P., 285, 288, 319, 359, 360, 369 Cukrowicz, K. C., 261--​62 Cullari, S.,
48 Cyr, M., 386 Dahlin, M., 360 Daldrup, R. J., 153 Dale, P., 452
Daleiden, E. L., 346 Dallos, R., 382 Damer, D., 440 Danelova, E., 19
Darley, J. M., 196--​97 Dasgupta, N., 196--​97 Dattilio, F. M., 70, 480
David, D., 97 Davidson, R. J., 73 Davis, D. E., 96--​97, 293, 480 Davis,
L., 365 Davis, R. B., 73, 358 Davis, R. D., 45 Davis, S. M., 304, 306
Davison, G. C., 33, 35, 45, 46, 138, 148--​49, 258 Day, E., 450 de Graaf,
R., 357--​58 de Ridder, M. A. J., 278 Deacon, B. J., 74, 196 Deane, F.
P., 14 DeBlaere, C., 97, 480 Deblinger, E., 344--​45 DeBord, K. A., 328
Decety, J., 73 Del Re, A. C., 70--​71, 75--​76, 93, 107, 290 Delaney, H.
D., 366 Den Boer, P. C., 359 Denneson, L. M., 361 DePree, J. A., 231
deRidder, D., 45 Dermen, K. H., 367 DeRubeis, R. J., 74--​76, 81, 101--​2,
229, 299 Devilly, G. J., 75--​76 Dexter-​Mazza, E. T., 277 Diamond, R. E.,
36 Dick, B., 73 DiClemente, C. C., viii, 8, 10, 39, 40, 51, 92, 101,
146, 161--​72, 174, 175, 177, 179, 212, 345, 360, 384, 392, 476, 480--​81
Diener, M. J., 223 Diep, H., 151

492

Name Index

Diep, L. M., 261--​62 Diguer, L., 475 Dimaggio, G., 137, 398--​99 Dimeff,
L. A., 261, 266, 277--79 Dimidjian, S., 75--​76, 81 DiNardo, P. A., 232
Ding, B.-​K., 450 Dion, D., 113 Dirksen, C., 478--​79 Dixon, D. N., 380,
395, 398 Dlugos, R. F., 399 Dobscha, S. K., 361 Dobson, K. S., 14t,
367--​68 Doell, F. K., 52 Doi, T., 452 Dollard, J., 30--​31, 185--87, 196,
207--​8 Domenech Rodríguez, M., 96--​97 Donker, T., 285, 359, 360 Donovan,
D. M., 170, 177 Dörig, N., 245--​46 Doss, B. D., 361 Dossett, K., 381
Downey, G., 197 Dozois, D. J. A., 74--​75, 297 Drabick, D. G., 433
Drahota, J., 457--​58 Dreessen, A., 261 Dreis, S., 108 Drewes, A. A.,
viii, 342--​50 Driessen, E., 223 Drinane, J. M., 293 Driscoll, R., 21, 39
Dryden, W., 12, 16, 37, 38, 42, 44, 46, 458 Duan, C., 450 Dubose, A. P.,
274, 275 Dubourdieu, M., 464, 467, 468 Duff, J. H., 442 Duffy, F. F.,
442 Duhl, B., 39 Duhl, F., 39 Duncan, B. L., 11, 42, 44, 77, 78,
106--​11, 118, 210--​11, 216, 217, 224, 349, 384, 393--​94 Dunner, D. L.,
310, 318 Durgam, S., 363 Durlak, J. A., 106 Dyason, K. M., 379 Eagle, G.
T., 48 Ebesutani, C., 346 Ebmeier, K. P., 319 Echemendia, R. J., 438,
439 Eckshtain, D., 341

Edelstein, B., 386 Edwards-​Stewart, A., 12--​13, 358--​59, 365, 367--​68
Edwards, C., 95, 154 Edwards, D. J. A., 480 Edwards, L., 178--​79
Edwards, T., 197 Egan, G., 34--​35 Eifert, G. H., 359 Eisenberg, D. M.,
358 Elbert, T., 479 Elger, F. J., 364 Elhai, J., 15 Elkins, G., 363
Ellickson, J. L., 392 Ellinstad, T., 357, 360 Elliott, R. K., 40, 73,
93, 94, 240, 290--​91 Ellis, A., 167--​68, 186, 271--​72, 366 Ellis, M. V.,
391, 394, 396 Emery, G., 306 Endicott, J., 306, 311 Engle, D., 142, 153
Enns, C. Z., 451--​52 Entwhistle, S. R., 141 Epstein, J. N., 347 Erbaugh,
J., 244 Erickson, T. M., 231, 285 Ericsson, K. A., 119, 481 Eriksson,
B., 461--​62 Erkens, N., 319 Errázuriz, P., 223 Ethier, N., 198 Ettner,
S. L., 358 Eubanks-​Carter, C. F, 93, 95, 245, 331, 380, 438, 475, 481
Eubanks, C. F., viii, 11, 93, 198, 229, 245, 384, 438, 469, 474, 477,
479 Evans-​Lacko, S., 196--​97 Evans, J., 440 Everly, G., 45 Evers, K. E.,
178 Eversmann, J., 81, 482 Eyberg, S. M., 345 Eysenck, H. J., 9, 70--​71
Fairburn, C. G., 364 Fairhurst, S., 164 Falkenström, F., 72--​73 Fall,
M., 346 Fang, A., 69 Fanning, P., 366 Farber, B., 111 Farrell, E. V.,
367

Name Index Faust, D., 389 Fava, J. L., 166, 177--​78 Fay, A., 127
Feather, B. W., 34, 344 Febbraro, G. A. R., 363 Fedewa, A. L., 341, 342,
349, 352 Feixas, G., 460--​61 Feldman, G. C., 245--​46 Feldman, L. B., 39,
343--​44 Feldman, S. I., 197 Fenichel, O., 89 Fensterheim, H., 38, 46
Fernández-​Álvarez, H., 6, 9, 49, 50, 145, 147, 379, 399, 437, 464--67,
469, 482 Ferreira, J. F., 460 Fersch-​Podrat, R. K., 261--​62 Ferster, C.
B., 34 Feyerabend, P., 3 Fields, S., 349 Figured, K. J., 47 Finch, A.
E., 435 Fink, L., 309 Finnerty, M., viii, 20, 477, 480 Finney, J. W.,
359--​60 Finniss, D. G., 74 First, M. B., 308--​9 Fischer, J., 36 Fisher,
A. J., 74--​75, 231, 243, 441 Fisher, D., 142 Fishman, D. B., 480
Fitzpatrick, H., 396 Flechner, I. S., 367 Fleming, A. P., 261 Floyd, R.,
151 Flückiger, C., 70--​71, 75--​76, 81, 93, 107, 290, 482 Foa, E. B., 75,
231, 368--​69, 479 Follette, V. M., 186--​88 Follick, M., 170 Fonagy, P.,
191, 198--​99, 343, 379 Forand, N. R., 101--​2 Ford, J. D., 386 Forder,
L., 360 Fordwood, S. R., 341 Forgatch, M. S., 287 Forman, E. M., 70--​71
Forrester, B., 153, 154, 209 Forsell, E., 360 Forsyth, D. R., 149
Forsyth, J. P., 359 Forsyth, N. L., 149 Fortin-​Langelier, B., 440 Fosha,
D., 186 Fotopoulou, A., 73

493

Fournier, J. C., 101--​2 Fowler, J., 170 Frances, A., 5, 40 Francis, N.,
290--​91 Frank, J. B., 11, 43, 71, 72, 74, 76 Frank, J. D., 11, 31,
34--​35, 43, 69, 71, 72, 74, 76, 92 Frank, K. R., 185, 191, 192, 213, 218
Franklin, A. J., 326, 329 Freedheim, D. K., 43 Freeman, A., 211, 344
Freire, P., 330 Freitas, A. L., 197 Freitas, G. J., 396 French, T. M.,
5, 29, 49, 52, 94, 95, 185, 186, 191, 208, 238--​39 Freud, S., 3, 5, 187,
194, 217, 304 Freudenberger, H. J., 43 Frey, R. M., 359--​60 Friedlander,
M. L., 394, 399 Friedling, C., 16 Friedman, P., 39 Frost, N. D., 69,
70--​71, 74--​76 Fuentes, J., 73 Fuertes, J. N., 50, 477--​78 Funabashi,
M., 73 Furukawa, T. A., 73, 76 Gabriel, T., 397 Gage, R., 14t Gago, P.,
465 Gahm, G. A., 359 Galavotti, C., 165 Gallagher-​Thompson, D., 145,
153, 154 Gallagher, M. W., 75--​76 Gallardo, M. E., 332 Gallop, R. J.,
277, 399 Ganger, W., 14t Garb, H. N., 432--​33 Garcia-​Marques, L., 16
Garcia, E., 361 García, F., 50, 437, 465 Gardiol, L., 462 Garfield, S.
L., 6, 8, 16--​18, 31, 35, 37, 38, 41, 71 Garland, A. F., 14t, 440--​41
Garvert, D. W., 361 Gaston, L., 45, 46 Gaztambide, D. J., 97
Gehred-​Schultz, A., 165 Gelder, M. G., 32, 76 Gelenberg, A. J., 310, 318
Gelfand L. A., 101--​2 Geller, J. D., 387, 388 Gelso, C. J., 73, 96, 477

494

Name Index

Gentili, C., 278--​79 Georgia, E. J., 361 Gerberding, J. L., 398 Gevins,
A., 38--​39 Gibbard, I., 436--​37 Gibbons, M. B. C., 399 Gibson, J., 328
Giesen-​Bloo, J., 478--​79 Giesler, R. B., 258, 271 Gil, E., 343--​45
Gilbert, L. A., 329 Gilbert, M., 47, 380--​81, 459 Gillaspy, J. A., 118
Giller, E., 389 Ginpil, S. E., 161--​62 Glasgow, R. E., 363, 364 Glass,
C. R., 8, 18, 41, 43, 44, 48, 74--​75, 186--​87, 342--​45, 346, 349, 352
Glass, G. V., 70--​71, 106 Glasziou, P., 437--​38 Glazer, H. I., 38
Gloaguen, V., 244 Gnam, W. H., 278 Gold, J. R., viii, 11--​12, 44, 47,
185, 207--​​10, 213--​15, 217--​18, 223, 257, 342--44, 350 Goldberg, D. N.,
178 Goldberg, R., 165 Goldberg, S. B., 69--​71, 74--76, 81, 299, 482
Goldblum, P., 151 Goldenthal, P., 346 Goldfried, M. R., viii, 5, 11, 12,
16, 20, 35--38, 40--​50, 70, 88--90, 94, 95, 147--​49, 162, 195--​96, 215,
229--​30, 236, 238--​39, 244--​46, 258, 272, 285--​86, 328, 380, 381, 383,
384, 389, 394, 433, 438, 441, 466, 469, 474--479, 482 Goldman, R. E.,
18, 223 Goldman, R. N., 94 Goldner-​deBeer, L., 398 Goldsamt, L. A.,
229--​30 Goldstein, A. J., 36 Goldstein, T. R., 261--​62 Gomez Penedo, J.
M., 285, 291 Gómez, B., viii, 4, 6, 15, 50, 52, 379, 399, 437, 464, 465,
468, 480 Goncalves, O. F., 46--​47 Gonzales, A. M., 278 Good, G. E., 329
Goodlad, J. K., 75--​76 Goodwin, B. J., viii, 5, 285, 482 Goodyear-​Brown,
P., 345 Goodyear, R. K., 7--​8, 14t, 71, 81, 382, 396 Gordon, J. R., 218

Gordon, T., 364 Gorman, B. S., 18, 245 Gorman, J. M., 75--​76, 230--​31
Gotlib, I. H., 229 Gottlieb, N. H., 165 Gottman, J. M., 263 Goyer, J.
P., 73 Grace, C., 326, 329 Graham, T., 196--​97 Grant, J., 72--​73, 462
Grant, S., 72--​73 Grawe, K., 142, 153, 240, 462 Gray, L. A., 394
Graydon, M., 179 Greaves, D. W., 13, 17, 42 Grebstein, L. C., 39
Greenberg, J., 208--​9 Greenberg, L. S., 15, 39--41, 94, 186--88, 196,
198, 240 Greenberg, R. P., 21, 72--​​75, 92--​93, 106 Greene, G., 178--​79
Greening, T. C., 35--​36 Greenspan, S. I., 344 Gregory, R. J., 359
Gregory, W. H., 179 Grehan, P. M., 211, 344 Grencavage, L. M., 7--​8, 41,
42, 71, 346 Grimlund, A., 363 Griner, D., 96--​97, 293, 332--​33, 336--​37
Grinker, R. R., 35 Grohol, J. M., 358, 361, 364, 365, 399 Gross, D. P.,
73 Gross, P. H., 196--​97 grosse Holtforth, M., 11--​12, 244, 245--​47,
435, 436, 482 Grossman, M., 261--​62 Grosso, T., 395 Groth-​Marnat, G.,
142 Grothgar, B., 153 Guadagnoli, E., 169--​70 Guidano, V. F., 39, 40, 41
Guimond, T., 266, 278 Guo, Y. J., 455 Gurman, A. S., 36--39, 75, 224
Guthrie, E., 459 Guyll, M., 196--​97 Gyurak, A., 196--​97 Haavind, H., 379
Habinski, L., 266 Hackmann, A., 76 Haefferl, G. J., 363 Haga, E.,
261--​62

Name Index Hagen Glynn, L., 287 Haine-​Schlagel, R., 14t Haine, R. A.,
441 Halgin, R. P., 40, 352--​53, 379, 381, 390--​92, 396--​97 Hall, K. L.,
165 Halvorsen, M. S., 379 Hamada, W., 333 Hambrecht, M., 169--​70 Hampe,
I. E., 342 Hanawahine, G., 334 Handelsman, J., 349 Handler, L., 92--​93
Hanh, T. N., 258--​59 Hanks, D. L., 311 Hanley, T., 436--​37 Hannan, C.,
106, 432--​33, 435 Hansen, N. B., 109, 435 Hara, K., 299 Hara, K. M., 286
Hardy, G. E., 198, 459 Harmon, C., 77, 106, 432--​33, 435 Harmon, S. C.,
107 Harned, M. S., 277, 279 Harris, J. E., viii, 12--​13, 325--​26,
328--​29, 331--​34, 399, 475--​76, 480 Harrison, A. M., 198 Hart, J., 39
Härter, M., 318 Hartman, V. L., 15--​16 Hartmann-​Boyce, J., 359 Harvey
Livingston, K., 14t Harwood, T. M., 142--​45, 149, 151--53, 287, 361,
364, 379 Hashtpari, H., 399 Hatcher, C., 39 Hatcher, N. M., 347 Hatcher,
R. L., 75 Haug, N. A., 143, 144, 154, 155, 384, 386, 393, 481 Havens, R.
A., 36 Havik, O. E., 358 Hawkins, E. J., 77, 435 Hawkins, K. A., 279
Hawkley, L. C., 73 Hayes, A. H., 229--​30 Hayes, A. M., 41--​42, 229--​30,
245--​46, 285--​86 Hayes, J. A., 436, 441--​42, 477 Hayes, S. C., 186--​88,
259 Haynes, R. B., 437--​38 Hays, P., 327, 333--​34 Hazlett-​Stevens, H.,
236 Heagerty, P., 278 Heard, H. L., viii, 41--​42, 245, 261, 274, 277--79

495

Heather, N., 177, 179 Heide, F. J., 389--​90 Heidenreich, T., 318 Heim,
C. M., 311 Heiman, J., 364 Heller, K., 357 Hembree, E. A., 75, 479
Hemmelstein, N., 440 Hendrickson, S. M. L., 70 Hendriks, L., 479--​80
Henriques, G., 476 Henry, W. E., 396 Henry, W. P., 387 Hepple, J., 245
Herman, J., 362 Herman, S. M., 130 Hernandez, E., 169 Hershenberg, R.,
433 Herzberg, A., 30 Hester, R. K., 366 Hettema, J., 93, 293 Hickman, E.
E., 18 Higa-​McMillan, C. K., 398--​99 Hill, C. E., 8, 51, 100, 101, 244,
246--​47, 380, 381, 386, 399, 436, 437, 477 Hilsenroth, M. J., 18,
70--​71, 75--​76, 223, 229, 230 Himawan, L., 381 Hines, C. E., 230, 243
Hinshelwood, R. D., 395 Hipolito-​Delgado, C., 326--​27, 337 Hiraki, N.,
452 Hiripi, E., 357--​58 Hirschfeld, R. M. A., 306 Hoadley, A., 93
Hodges, J. Q., 360, 364 Hoff, A. L., 15--​16 Hoffart, A., 81 Hoffer, A.,
304 Hoffman, J. E., 361 Hofmann, S. G., 69, 73, 76 Hogan, T. P.,
437--​38, 476--​77 Hoge, M. A., 93 Hollanders, H., 14, 48, 395, 458--​59
Holliday, C., 459 Hollon, S. D., 75--​76, 81, 258 Holloway, E. L.,
391--​92 Holman, J., 287 Holmes, J., 46, 458 Holmqvist, R., 72--​73
Holstein, L., 7 Holt-​Lunstad, J., 73 Holt, H., 143, 144, 154, 155, 209,
384, 393, 481 Holt, P., 397

496

Name Index

Holtforth, M. g., 81 Hölzel, L. P., 318 Holzer, C. E., 304, 306
Hönekopp, J., 179 Honos-​Webb, L., 101, 482 Honyashiki, M., 73, 76 Hood,
K., 290--​91 Hook, J. N., 96--​97, 293, 480 Horgan, A., 360 Hormann, M.,
223, 304 Horowitz, M. J., 38, 43 Horvath, A. O., 70, 75, 93, 107, 290
Horwitz, J. A., 311 Houck, J., 70 Houts, P. S., 33 Howard, G. S., 379
Howard, K. I., 40, 71, 434--​35 Howe, L. C., 73 Howell, M. K., 361
Howland, R. H., 304, 306 Hoyer, J., 231 Hoyt, T. V., 358--​59 Hoyt, W.
T., 81, 96--​97, 299 Hubble, M. A., 11, 106, 107, 109, 111, 113, 117--19,
210--​11, 216, 217, 379, 384 Huedo-​Medina, T. B., 74 Hughes, D., 346
Hughes, S. O., 163, 169, 177 Huibers, M., 288 Humphrey, N., 71
Humphreys, K., 359--​61, 364, 366, 367 Hungr, C., 198 Hunt, H. F., 36
Hunter, J. A., 286 Hurlburt, M. S., 14t Hutman, H., 14t Hutto, D. D., 74
Hutton, H. E., 360 Hwakins, E., 379 Hwang, K. K., 455 Ichikawa, K., 73,
76 Iles, B. R., 74--​76 Imel, Z. E., 11, 69--​71, 74--​76, 80, 81, 141,
246--​47, 330--​31, 357, 384, 389, 432--​33, 436, 475, 477, 482 Inman, A.
G., 392 Ip, J., 285 Ivanov, A., 274 Ivanova, E., 360 Ivey, A. E., viii,
12--​13, 46--​47, 329, 330, 475--​76, 480 Iwakabe, S., viii, 4, 15, 52,
451--​52, 480 Izard, C. E., 311

Jackson, R., 442 Jacob, T., 153 Jacobson, E. E., 73 Jacobson, N. C.,
231, 243--​44, 477--​78 Jacobson, N. S., 45, 48 Janis, O. L., 165, 170--​71
Janis, R., 441--​42 Janis, R. B., 441 Jara, M., 457--​58 Jarmon, H., 379
Jayaratne, S., 17 Jennette, D., 334 Jensen, J. P., 13, 17, 42 Jernberg,
A., 345 Jiménez-​Chafey, M. I., 332 Jobst, A., 319 Johansson, R., 285,
359, 360 John, M., 365 Johnson Jennings, M. D., 70 Johnson, A. J., 392
Johnson, B. T., 74, 341 Johnson, J. L., 178 Johnson, L. D., 108--​9
Johnson, M., 15--​16 Johnson, S. M., 15 Johnson, V., 175, 455 Jones, A.
C., 36 Jones, E. E., 44--​45, 229--​30 Jones, F., 360 Jones, H., 178--​79
Jones, J., 436--​37 Jones, N., 367--​68 Joo, E., 454 Jürgensen, R., 153
Jussim, L., 196--​97 Kabat-​Zinn, J., 258--​59 Kahl, K. G., 318 Kahler, C.
W., 359--​60 Kalinsky, B., 465 Kamphaus, R. W., 347 Kane, R. T., 77, 81,
382, 481, 482 Kang, N. J., 197 Kanter, J., 277--​78 Kanuri, N., 361
Kaplan, B., 18--​19 Kaplan, H. S., 34 Kaptchuk, T. J., 73 Karasu, T. B.,
12 Karcher, N. R., 367--​68 Karno, M. P., 153 Karpiak, C. P., 6, 9, 14,
14t, 475 Karver, M., 349

Name Index Kasoff, M. B., 231, 243, 285 Katz, L. F., 263 Kavanagh, K.,
287 Kaye, A. L., 308 Kazantzis, N., 14 Kazdin, A. E., 341, 342, 348,
357--​58, 368, 432 Keefe, J. R., 74 Kegan, R., 259 Kellam, T., 345
Keller, M. B., 304, 306, 310, 311, 318 Kellet, S., 245, 459 Kelley, J.
M., 73 Kelley, S. D., 342 Kelly, J. F., 359, 360, 367 Kenagy, J.,
396--​97 Kendall, J., 343 Kendler, K. S., 306--​7 Kennedy, C. L., 395
Kenny, M. C., 344 Kenter, R. M., 360 Kernberg, O. F., 278 Kerr, C. E.,
73 Kerr, I. B., 208 Kerr, S., 41, 229--​30 Kertes, A., 285, 287, 289
Kessler, J. W., 43 Kessler, R. C., 357--​58 Khattra, J., 285 Khouri, H.,
197 Kierein, M., 456--​57 Kiesler, D. J., 13, 238--​39, 305--7, 310,
314--​15 Kikuzawa, S., 357 Kim, H., 244 Kim, J., 327 Kim, S., 76, 347
Kimpara, S., 143, 144, 154, 155, 384, 386, 393, 481 Kirmayer, L., 449
Kirsch, I., 74--​75 Kissil, K., 379 Kivlahan, D. R., 177 Kivlighan, D.
M., Jr., 73 Klatt, M., 71 Klaw, E., 361, 366 Klein, D. N., 304, 306,
308--​10, 318 Klein, J. P., 319 Klein, O., 196 Klein, S., 223 Kleinman,
A., 450 Kleinstäuber, M., 106--​7, 117, 394, 435, 439, 478 Klerman, G.
L., 38--​39, 311, 318 Kliem, S., 278--​79 Klinar, D., 465 Kline, M., 231

Klingemann, H., 357, 360 Klonsky, E. D., 70--​71 Klosko, J. S., 245,
478--​79 Knell, S. M., 345 Knobloch, J., 36 Knobloch, R., 36 Knock, M.
K., 348 Knox, S., 380, 381, 386, 392, 437 Koch, U., 153 Kocsis, J. H.,
306 Koerner, K., 279, 437 Koeter, M. W. J., 278 Kohlenberg, R. J., 231
Kohn, R., 357--​58 Kohut, H., 185, 215 Kolaski, A. Z., 399 Kollins, S.
C., 347 Kommer, D., 37 Konrad, M., 71 Koo, M., 113 Koocher, G. P., 343,
437--​38, 476--​77 Koole, S., 288 Koons, C. R., 278 Kopta, M., 107, 434
Korathu-​Larson, P., 398--​99 Korman, L., 278 Kornstein, S. G., 304, 306,
308 Korslund, K. E., 277 Kosfelder, J., 278--​79 Koslowski, B., 197
Kosman, D. C., 49, 482 Kostínková, J., 457 Kownacki, R. J., 359--​60
Kozak, M. J., 75, 231 Kozlowski, J. M., 392 Kratochwill, T. R., 358
Kraus, D. R., 50, 298, 432--​33, 435--​37, 439, 441 Krause, E. D., 475
Krause, M. S., 434 Krebs, P. M., 92, 146, 165, 178, 366 Kreider, D. E.,
392 Kreische, R., 231 Krieger, T., 245--​46 Kring, M., 69, 74--76
Kristellar, J., 165 Kriston, L., 153, 318, 319 Kröger, C., 278--​79
Krueger, S. J., 342--​45, 346, 349, 352 Krull, J., 398--​99 Kruse, J.,
223, 304 Kubie, L. S., 29 Kuhn, E., 361 Kuhn, T. S., 3

497

498

Name Index

Kune, N. F., 293 Kunz, C., 288, 293 Künzi, K., 462 Kuppens, S., 341
Kuprian, N., 18 Kurtz, R., 6, 16--​18, 35, 41 Kurtz, Z., 343 Kwee-​Taams,
M. K., 137 Kwee, M. G. T., 137 Kyrouz, E. M., 359--​60 L'Abate, L., 361,
364 Labouvie, E., 359--​60 Lachmann, F. M., 197 Lackenbauer, S. D.,
196--​97 Ladany, N., 394 Laforge, R., 166, 177--​78 Lai, R., 361--​62 Lam,
C. S., 165 Lambert, M. J., 7--​8, 21, 44, 50--​51, 77, 80, 81, 97, 100--​1,
106--​7, 109, 117, 191, 208, 209, 217, 224, 246--​47, 275, 288, 379, 381,
389, 393--​94, 399, 432--​36, 439, 443, 477, 478, 482 Lambley, P., 34, 35
Lampropoulos, G. K., 380, 391--​92, 395, 398 Lancaster, T., 359 Landes,
A. A., 130 Landreth, G. L., 343, 345 Landsman, J. T., 22 Landsman, T.,
34 Lane, C., 290--​91 Lane, R. D., 187, 397 Lange, J., 81, 482 Langer, E.
J., 74 Lanotte, M., 74 Larson, D., 3, 37 Laska, K. M., 75, 224
Laurenceau, J.-​P., 198, 230, 244--​46 Lavori, P. W., 311 Laws, H. B., 290
Lazar, A., 462 Lazarus, A. A., 9, 32, 33, 35--​37, 42--​44, 125--28, 133,
134, 137--​38, 216, 344, 388 Lazarus, C. N., 9, 32, 125--128, 130,
133--35, 216 Leach, C., 107, 439 Lebow, J. L., 4, 39, 341--​42, 350
Lecompte, C., 40, 386 Lee, B. O., 453--​54 Lee, E., 327 Lee, S., 450--​51
Lee, T. W., 359 Lehmann, A. C., 119, 481

Leibing, E., 231 Leichsenring, F., 223, 231, 304 Lembo, A. J., 73
Lemmens, F., 45 Lenzenweger, M. F., 278 Leon, A. C., 76 Leong, S., 361
Leung, A. S., 451 Leung, S., 451 Levay, A. N., 35 Levenson, H., 211
Leventhal, A. M., 32 Levesque, D. A., 178 Levins, R., 259 Levitt, J. T.,
475 Levy, K. N., 278 Levy, R., 73 Levy, S. R., 18, 223 Leweke, F., 223
Lewin, T. J., 278 Lewinsohn, P., 364 Lewis, O., 47 Lewontin, R., 259 Li,
L., 450--​51 Li, M.-​G., 450 Li, Q. S., 74 Liberman, B. L., 74--​75
Lichtenberg, J. W., 7--​8, 14t, 71 Lieberman, M. D., 73 Lietaer, G., 42
Lilienfeld, S. O., 363, 369 Lin, Y. C., 455 Lindner, P., 360 Lindquist,
J., 397 Linehan, M. M., viii, 41--​42, 45, 186--​88, 245, 257--​59,
261--​66, 269--272, 275, 277--​78, 364 Links, P. S., 278 Linsenhoff, A.,
37 Liotti, G., 39 Lister, K. M., 6, 9 Liu, D., 442 Liu, W. M., 330
Livesley, W. J., 137, 398--​99 Livingston, R. B., 14t Llera, S. J., 246,
285 Lockard, A. J., 441 Locke, B. D., 441--​42 Lohr, J. M., 363 London,
P., 4, 6, 7, 31--​32, 34, 41, 125--​26 Long, D., 231 Longabaugh, R., 70,
144, 153 Loomis, C., 359--​60

Name Index Lopiano, L., 74 LoPiccolo, J., 364 Lord, B. D., 309
Lorenzo-​Luaces, L., 101--​2 Luborsky, L., 7, 141, 209, 475 Lucock, M.,
107, 439 Ludman, E. J., 72--​73 Lueger, R. J., 434--​35 Lui, J. L., 361
Lundahl, B. W., 93, 288, 293 Lundh, L. G., 461 Lungu, A., 277--79
Lunnen, K., 109 Luo, Y., 73 Lutz, W., 107, 118, 245, 246--​47, 434--36,
438, 439, 469, 474, 477 Luyten, P., 223 Ly, K. H., 360 Lynch, T. R.,
261--​62, 278 Lynn, S. J., 363 Lyons-​Ruth, K., 198--​99 Lytle, R., 231,
241 Macaulay, C., 285 MacDonald, R., 142, 153 Machado, P. P. P., 15--​16,
141--​42 Macias, S., 143, 144, 154, 155, 384, 386, 393, 481 Maddoux, J.
A., 399 Madon, S., 196--​97 Madson, M. B., 392 Maeschalck, C. L., viii,
11, 108, 478 Magaletta, P. R., 169--​70 Maganvita, J. J., 476 Maggi, G.,
74 Maggio, L. A., 437--​38, 476--​77 Maggioni, F., 196--​97 Magill, M., 93
Magnavita, J. J., 50, 51, 477--​78 Magnusson, K., 367 Mahoney, M. J., 7,
33, 36, 37, 39, 40, 43, 45, 186--​87, 230, 284, 381, 395, 466 Mahrer, A.
R., 42 Main, M., 197 Mains, J. A., 359 Makari, G., 70 Malik, M. L., 142,
145 Maling, M. S., 434--​35 Mallams, J. H., 364 Malloy, P., 144 Manber,
R., 306 Manheimer, D. I., 174 Mankowski, E. S., 364 Mann, L., 165,
170--​71

499

Mannarino, A. P., 344--​45 Mao, J. J., 74 Marcus, B., 170 Marcus, D. K.,
75--​76, 361 Marcus, J., 363 Marcus, M., 74--​75, 289 Margison, F., 434,
443, 459 Margolis, A., 197 Marie-​Cardine, M., 458 Markin, R. D., 73
Marks, I. M., 32 Marks, J. S., 398 Marlatt, G. A., 218 Marmor, J.,
31--33, 37 Martin, A. M., 309 Martin, C. G., 34 Martinex, J., 299
Martinovich, Z., 434--​35 Masters, J. C., 258 Masters, W., 175 McAleavey,
A. A., 244, 434, 437, 440, 441--​42, 477--​78 McAlister, A. L., 165
McAlister, B., 379, 432--​33, 436 McCambridge, J., 177, 290--​91 McCarthy,
G., 360 McCarthy, K. S., 439 McCarty, D., 442 McClintock, A. S., 381
McClure, R. F., 14t McConnaughy, E. A., 163 McCrady, B. S., 359--​60
McCuan, R. S., 165 McCullough, J. P. Jr., viii, 46, 240, 245, 303--​15,
318 McCullough, J. R., 326--​27, 337 McCullough, L., 81 McDavis, R. J.,
326--​27 McElroy-​Heltzel, S. E., 96--​97 McGinn, L. K., viii, 13, 21, 474
McGrath, P. J., 364 McKay, D ., 70--​71 McKinnon, J. M., 198 McLean, C.
P., 368--​69 McLennan, J., 13, 450 McLeod, J., 12, 14, 48, 378, 379,
383--85, 398, 458--​59 McMahon, B. T., 165 McMahon, R. J., 261 McMain, S.
F., 239, 266, 278 McNeill, B. W., 390--​92 Mee-​Lee, D., 107 Mehlum, L.,
261--​62 Meichenbaum, D., 33

500

Name Index

Meisch, L., 245--​46 Melchert, T. P., 10, 476 Mellinger, G. D., 174
Mellor-​Clark, J., 434, 436--​37, 443 Meltzoff, J., 389 Menchola, M., 359
Mendelson, M., 244 Mendelson, T., 261--​62 Mendes, W. B., 196--​97
Meredith, K., 153 Merranko, J., 261--​62 Merriam, P., 165 Merrill, C.,
261--​62 Merry, W., 153 Merton, R. K., 196--​97 Messer, S. B., 4, 11--​12,
20, 21, 37, 39--​41, 43, 47, 185, 208, 382--​84, 476, 477, 480, 482
Messinger, D., 197 Metzger, R. L., 293 Meyer, R., 39 Meyer, T. J., 293
Michaelis, B., 197 Michalak, J., 318 Michelson, A., 287 Miciak, M., 73
Mickelson, K. D., 357--​58 Middleton, H., 76 Miga, E. M., 278, 279
Mikeal, C., 118 Mikulas, W. L., 36 Mikulincer, M., 196 Miller, A. L.,
261--​62 Miller, D. J., 97 Miller, I., 306 Miller, K., 154 Miller, L.,
342 Miller, M. L., 293 Miller, N. E., 30--​31, 33, 185--87, 196, 207--​8
Miller, R., 18, 223 Miller, S. D., viii, 11, 50, 77, 81, 106--​7,
108--​​13, 117--19, 210--​11, 216, 217, 379, 382, 384, 393--​94, 439, 481,
482 Miller, T. I., 70--​71, 106 Miller, W. R., 70, 93, 177, 285, 289--​91,
293, 299, 359--​60, 366, 367 Millon, T., 45 Milne, D., 396 Milrod, B. L.,
76 Minami, T., 107 Mintz, J., 368--​69 Miranda, R., 197 Mitchell, K. M.,
33 Mitchell, S. A., 208--​9

Mock, J., 244 Moertl, K., 285 Moffitt, M., 367--​68 Mohr, D. C., 142,
153, 285, 359, 360, 367, 368--​69 Mokdad, A. H., 398 Moleiro, C., 145
Moleni, T., 93 Molina, S., 231 Molnar, C., 230--​32 Mona, L. R., 328
Mondragon, S. A., 106 Monroe-​DeVita, M., 93 Monsen, J. T., 482 Moore, G.
A., 243--​44 Moore, T. E., 363, 364 Moore, T. J., 74 Moos, R. H.,
359--​60, 364 Moran, L. R., 261 Morgan, A. C., 198 Morgenstern, J.,
359--​60 Morrison, N. R., 285 Morrissey, S. A., 379 Morse, G., 93 Morse,
J. Q., 261--​62, 278 Morten, G., 325--​27 Mościcki, E. K., 442 Moultrup,
D., 4 Moyers, T. B., 70, 287, 290--​91, 299 Muir, J. A., 442 Muise, A.,
196--​97 Mullen, P., 172 Muller, F., 464, 465 Mullin, T., 72--​73 Mullins,
L. L., 15--​16 Munoz, R. F., 364, 366, 368--​69 Muran, J. C., 93, 95, 97,
147--​48, 185, 188, 191, 198, 239, 245, 331, 438, 443, 469, 474, 477, 481
Murase, K., 452 Murphy, D., 93 Murphy, J. G., 93 Murphy, J. J., 118
Murphy, M. J., 149 Murphy, R. A., 391 Murray, A. M., 277 Murray, E.,
361--​62 Murray, N. E., 35 Murray, P., 239 Myers, P., 379 Nacapoy, A.,
333 Nace, D. K., 108 Nadel, L., 187 Naglieri, J. A., 347

Name Index Nahum, J. P., 198 Nakamura, B. J., 346, 398--​99 Nance, D. W.,
379 Napolitano, G., 10, 12 Narduci, J., 399 Narrow, W. E., 442 Nash, M.,
92--​93 Nasi, L., 468 Nassar-​McMillan, S., 326--​27, 337 Nathan, P. E.,
230--​31 Nathanson, D., 261--​62 Nazareth, I., 361--​62 Neacsiu, A. D.,
266, 277--79 Negt, P., 318 Neihart, M. F., 453 Neimeyer, G. J., 399
Neimeyer, R. A., 186--​87 Nelson, D., 440 Nelson, G., 391 Nelson, M. L.,
394 Nelson, P. L., 106 Nemeroff, C. B., 311 Neufeldt, S. A., 15--​16
Neuner, F., 479 Newman, C. F., 41--​42, 44, 70, 474 Newman, M. G., viii,
11--13, 21, 50, 74--​75, 230, 231--​32, 235, 241, 243--​44, 246, 285,
477--​78 Ng, M. Y., 341 Ng, W. S., 452--​53 Niaura, R. S., 170 Nicholson,
J. M., 92 Niec, L. N., 348 Nielsen, A. C., 37 Nielsen, S. L., 81, 106,
432--​33, 435 Niemiec, R. M., 361 Ninan, P. T., 311 Nissen-​Lie, H. A.,
482 Noel, N., 144 Nolan, B. M., 9, 49, 482 Nolrajsuwat, K., 455 Noma,
H., 73, 76 Norcross, J. C., viii, 4, 6--​10, 12--​18, 14t, 20, 21, 40--42,
44, 47, 49--​51, 70, 71, 77, 80--​81, 92, 100--​2, 125, 143, 146, 148,
161--​62, 169--​70, 191, 209, 234, 259, 288, 329--​30, 333, 344, 346, 349,
352--​53, 358--​62, 364--66, 368, 369, 378--81, 383, 384, 387--​93,
395--​99, 437--​38, 459, 466, 469, 474--​75, 476--​77, 480, 482 Nordberg, S.
S., 243, 436, 441 Nordgreen, T., 358 Norouzian, N., 287, 299 Norwood, A.
E., 179

501

Norwood, E., 342 Nowlan, K. M., 361 Nurco, D. N., 367 O'Conner, E. P.,
358 O'Connor, K., 345 O'Donnell, P., 379, 432--​33, 436 O'Grady, K. E.,
367 O'Hara, D. J., 385, 450 O'Hara, E. F., 450 O'Leary, K. D., 36, 39,
258 O'Leary, W., 440 O'Neill, J., 366 Obegi, J. H., 196 Ockene, I., 165
Ockene, J., 165 Oddli, H. W., 385 Odelola, O., 360 Offord, D. R.,
357--​58 Ogles, B. M., 81, 106, 482 Okiishi, J., 109 Okruch, A., 243
Oleen-​Junk, N. A., 69, 74--​76 Olff, M., 479--​80 Olieveira-​Berry, J., 334
Ollendick, T. H., 141, 149 Omer, H., 41, 109 Opazo, R., 465--​66
Orchowski, L., 93 Orlans, V., 380--​81 Orlinsky, D. E., 14--​15, 40, 71,
380, 387, 388, 396, 434, 454, 461 Orne, M. T., 92--​93 Osatuke, K., 198
Osler, W., 365, 392--​93 Ostafin, B., 196 Ouimette, P. C., 359--​60
Overland, E., 14t Owen, J. J., 75--​76, 97, 107, 111, 223, 293, 330--​31,
480 Özakkaş, T., 463 Pace, B. T., 70--​71, 75--​76 Pachankis, J. E., viii,
5, 195--​96, 328, 482 Padawer, W., 38, 229 Padberg, F., 319 Padula, J.
A., 178 Paivio, S. C., 479 Palavezzatti, C., 464, 465 Paley, G., 436--​37
Palmer, J. O., 39 Palmer, M., 7, 41 Palmer, S., 458

502

Name Index

Palomba, D., 278--​79 Pansomboon, C., 456 Papajohn, J. C., 39
Papastergiadis, N., 449 Pardo, S., 151 Parham, T. A., 332 Paris, J., 468
Paris, M. Jr., 93 Park, A., 398--​99 Parkin, S. R., 80--​81, 96--​97 Parks,
M., 42 Parloff, M. B., 433 Pascual-​Leone, A., 479 Pascual, J. C., 266
Pate, G. A., 437 Patrick, S., 436--​37 Patterson, C. H., 9, 32, 47
Patterson, C. L., 81, 381, 482 Patterson, G. R., 287 Patterson, K. M.,
153 Patterson, T., 47 Paul, G. L., 137--​38, 303 Pederson, P. B.,
325--​26, 329 Pedulla, B. M., 343 Pelham, B. W., 196--​97 Penberthy, J.
K., 303--5, 307, 309--​11 Penny, D., 169--​70 Perepletchikova, F., 261--​62
Perez de los Cobos, J., 169 Perez Gomez, A., 38 Perez-​Stable, E. J., 369
Perez, J. E., 46--​47 Perez, R. M., 328 Pérez, V., 266 Perlman, C.,
245--​46 Perloff, J. M., 437 Persons, J. B., 437 Pescosolido, B., 357
Peterson, A. L., 368--​69 Peterson, A. P., 261 Peterson, D. R., 43 Petit,
D., 76 Pfahler, C., 93 Pfeiffer, S. L., 347 Pfund, R. A., 4, 361, 368,
469, 474--​75 Phillips, B., 462 Phillips, J., 48, 343 Phillips, R. D.,
343 Piaget, J., 305, 306, 311 Pincus, A. L., 230--​33, 241, 285, 378, 439
Pine, F., 342--​43 Pinel, E. C., 50 Pinsof, W. M., 6, 39, 46

Pirritano, M., 299 Pitman, S. R., 18, 223 Pitre, N., 358--​59 Plum, B.,
107 Polanyi, M., 314, 456 Pollo, A., 74 Pollock, L. R., 270 Polster, E.,
89 Polster, M., 89 Pomerantz, A. M., 13 Pope-​Davis, D. B., 330 Pope, B.,
37 Poppen, P. J., 16, 35 Popper, K., 456 Popple, L. M., 378, 389, 396
Pott, E., 74--​75 Poulin, L., 299 Powell, D. H., 41 Powers, M. B., 74--​75
Poznanski, J. J., 13, 450 Pratt, J., 343 Prentice, J. L., 367--​68
Prescott, D. S., viii, 11, 108, 478 Presser, N. R., 367--​68 Price, D.
P., 74 Priddy, D. A., 165 Prinyapol, P., 456 Pritz, A., 456--​57
Prochaska, J. M., 161--​62, 166, 175, 178--​79 Prochaska, J. O., viii, 4,
6, 8, 10, 15--​17, 36, 39--41, 51, 92, 101, 146, 161--​67, 169--​71, 174,
175, 177--​79, 212, 329--​30, 345, 360, 361, 366, 368, 378, 379, 381, 384,
392, 395, 469, 474--​76, 480--​81 Prout, H. T., 341, 342, 349, 352 Pruitt,
N. T., 392 Pruzinsky, T., 231 Przeworski, A., 231, 285 Przybylinski, E.,
50, 197 Pulos, S. M., 44--​45, 229--​30 Qian, M., 450--​51 Quintana, S.,
78, 332 Rabbitt, S. M., 357--​58, 368 Rabung, S., 223 Rachman, S. J.,
70--​71 Raguram, A., 382 Ragusea, S. A., 438, 439 Raimy, V., 34--​35
Rainero, I., 74 Rajab, M. H., 363 Ramberg, M., 261--​62

Name Index Ramirez, M. III, 43 Rampy, N. M., 50 Randall, A. K., 73
Rapee, R. M., 369 Rappaport, J., 360--​61 Rathus, J. H., 261--​62 Ratts,
M. J., 326--​27, 337 Rauch, S. A. M., 368--​69 Raue, P. J., 44--​45, 230,
285--​86 Ravenscroft, I., 74 Raw, S. D., 46 Re, A. C. D., 107 Reese, R.
J., 77, 78 Reeves, G., 343--​44 Reger, M. A., 359 Regier, D. A., 442
Reid, E., 436--​37 Reid, J. B., 243, 287 Reisman, J. M., 382 Remer, P.,
329 Rennie, D., 286 Resick, P. A., 479 Resnick, R., 46 Resorla, L. A.,
347 Reynolds, C. R., 347 Reynolds, S. K., 278 Rhoads, J. M., 34, 41, 344
Rhode, A., 245--​46 Rice, A., 113 Rice, L. N., 41, 240 Rice, S. L., 70
Richards, D., 359 Richardson, T., 359 Richardson, W. S., 437--​38
Rickles, K., 174 Ricks, D. F., 16, 35 Ridley, C. R., 331--33
Rigazio-​Digilio, S. A., 46--​47 Řiháček, T., 14t, 15, 19, 457 Rimm, D.
C., 258 Riso, L. P., 304, 306 Ritzert, T., 359 Rivera, L. M., 196--​97
Rivera, M., 261--​62 Rizvi, S. L., 266 Roberts, N. A., 437 Roberts, W.
C., 308 Robertson, M. H., 9, 16, 36, 40, 46, 381, 382, 386, 395 Robins,
C. J., 95, 229, 261--​62, 278 Robins, E., 306 Robinson, E., 231 Robles,
T. F., 73 Roddy, M. K., 361

Rodolfa, E., 330--​31 Rodríguez, M. D., 293, 332--​33, 336--​37, 392
Rodriguez, S., 461 Rodriquez, B. F., 48 Roedel, G., 450 Roemer, L., 231
Rogan, J. D., 14t Rogers, C. R., 31, 34--​35, 45, 147, 215--​17, 458
Rohrbaugh, M., 8, 153 Rojas-​Arauz, B. O., 330 Rollins, A. L., 93
Rollnick, S., 93, 177, 285, 289--​91 Romanelli, R., 145 Rombauts, J., 42
Romero-​Canyas, R., 197 Rompay, M. V., 358 Rønnestad, M. H., 14--​15, 378,
380, 388, 396, 482 Roodman, A. A., 363 Roose, S. P., 74--​75 Rose, S.,
304, 308 Rosen, G. M., 163, 363, 364, 369 Rosen, S., 272 Rosenbaum, R.,
389--​90 Rosenberg, J., 39 Rosenthal, R., 475 Rosenzweig, S., 5, 29, 33,
71, 208, 475, 482--​83 Rossi, J. S., 164--66, 169, 170, 177--​79, 366
Rossi, S. R., 178--​79 Roth, A., 379 Roth, W. T., 76 Rothbaum, B. O., 75,
479 Rotter, J. B., 22 Roubal, J., 14t, 15, 457 Rounsaville, B. J., 318
Rousmaniere, T. G., 81, 298--​99, 382, 481 Roy-​Byrne, P., 74--​75
Rozental, A., 360, 367 Rüddel, H., 153 Rudden, M., 76 Ruggiero, L., 166,
177--​79 Ruiz, A. S., 327 Ruiz, M. A., 438, 439 Ruscio, A., 230--​31 Rush,
A. J., 306, 311, 318 Rusk, G. S., 42 Russ, S. W., 348 Russell, R. L.,
348 Rutherford, B. R., 74--​75 Ruzek, J. I., 361 Ryan, L., 187 Rychtarik,
R. G., 367 Ryle, A., 10, 36--​43, 208, 245, 456, 459

503

504

Name Index

Sabourin, S., 386 Saccone, A. J., 74--​75 Sadler, P., 198 Safran, J. D.,
11--​12, 39--42, 47, 93, 95, 147--​48, 185, 188, 191, 198, 230, 231,
238--40, 244, 245, 331, 466, 481 Sakunpong, N., 456 Salkovskis, P. M.,
76 Salyers, M. P., 93 Salzer, M. S., 360--​61 Salzer, S., 231 Samko, M.,
272 Sampson, H., 209 Samstag, L. W., 93, 245 Sandberg, L. S., 76
Sandell, R., 462 Sander, L. W., 198 Sanderson, W. C., 284--​85 Sandler,
I. N., 106 Sangganjanavanich, V. F., 455 Santoro, S. O., 475 Santrock,
J. W., 358--​59, 361, 364, 365, 399 Sapigao, W., 330 Saposnek, D. T., 272
Sarason, I. G., 36 Saribay, S. A., 197 Sass, L. A., 41 Sauer-​Zavala, S.
E., 75--​76 Savage, S., 333 Sawatsri, S., 456 Sawyer, A. T., 69 Saxon,
D., 246--​47, 436 Sayette, M. A., 13 Sbarra, D. A., 73 Scarsella, G. M.,
231 Schacht, T. E., 43, 382--​83 Schaefer, C. E., 343, 346--​49 Schaefer,
H. S., 73 Schamberger, M., 399 Schatz, D. M., 14t, 387 Schatzberg, A.
F., 311, 318 Schauer, M., 479 Schauman, O., 196--​97 Schenkenberg, T.,
109 Scher, M., 329 Scherr, K. C., 196--​97 Schick, M., 397 Schmidt, H.,
277--​78 Schmidt, J. A., 307, 310, 314--​15 Schneider, R. J., 178
Schneier, F. R., 74--​75 Schnicke, M. K., 479 Schnurr, P. P., 15

Schofield, M. J., 385, 450 Schott, T., 448 Schottenbauer, M. A., 18, 48,
352 Schöttke, H., 81, 482 Schramm, E., viii, 240, 245, 303--5, 307,
309--​11, 318, 319 Schubert, J., 462 Schuckard, E., 106, 107, 113, 117
Schueller, S. M., 367--​69 Schultz-​Ross, R. A., 377 Schultze, M., 318
Schulz, H., 153 Schut, A. J., 230, 231, 243, 244 Schwalberg, M., 76
Schwartz, B. D., 37--​38 Schwartz, R. M., 45 Schwartz, S. J., 442
Schweiger, U., 319 Scoboria, A., 74 Scogin, F. R., 359, 367, 369 Scoles,
M. T., 118 Seals, K., 231 Sechrest, L., 45--​46 See Tai, S., 361--​62
Segal, S. P., 360, 364 Segal, Z. V., 11--​12, 42, 230, 231, 238, 239
Segraves, R. T., 35, 38, 39 Segre, L., 360--​61 Seidel, J. A., 77, 81,
108, 111, 119, 379, 382, 481, 482 Seiden, D. Y., 458 Selagea, F., 358,
361, 364, 365, 399 Selby, V. C., 170 Seligman, M. E. P., 359--​60 Serber,
M., 33 Sexton, H., 81 Seymour, J. W., viii, 352--​53 Shadish, W. R.,
359--​60 Shaker, A., 147--​48, 188, 191 Shandel, T., 147 Shanely, D. C.,
379 Shankman, S. A., 304, 308 Shapiro, A. K., 71 Shapiro, D. A., 40,
198, 436--​37 Shapiro, D. H. Jr., 36 Shapiro, E. S., 71 Shapiro, F., 479
Shaughnessy, E. A., 369 Shaver, P. R., 196 Shaw Welch, S., 278 Shaw, B.
F., 306 Shaw, M. A., 179 Shear, M. K., 75--​76 Shedler, J., 209

Name Index Shelton, R. C., 75--​76, 81 Sherbourne, C., 74--​75 Sherman, W.
O., 7 Sherry, P., 392 Shi, Q., 450--​51 Shiloff, N., 143, 144, 154, 155,
384, 393, 481 Shimizu, M., 196--​97 Shimokawa, K., 106, 432--​33, 435
Shin, K. E., 231 Shirk, S. R., 47, 343, 344, 348 Shmukler, D., 47
Shoham-​Salomon, V., 43, 44 Shoham, V., 8, 153 Short, E. L., 327 Shukla,
N., viii, 12--​13, 475--​76, 480 Siddiqui, J. R., 70--​71 Siebert, E. C.,
231 Siegel, D. F., 18, 223 Sijbrandij, M., 288 Sijercic, I., 286 Silva,
A. N., 460 Silverman, L. H., 34 Simek-​Downing, L., 42 Simmons, K., 361
Simon, G. E., 72--​73 Sims, J. H., 396 Singer-​Nussbaum, B., 299 Singer,
A. R., 14t Singer, B., 7 Singer, E., 217 Singh, A. A., 326--​27, 337
Sinha, R., 279 Sisson, R. W., 364 Skinner, B. F., 258, 305, 306, 313
Skovolt, T. M., 378, 380 Skow, J., 364--​65 Skutch, J. M., 279 Slade, K.,
77, 107 Sloane, R. B., 32, 35 Smailes, D., 179 Smart, D. W., 106, 107,
432--​33, 435 Smith-​Hansen, L., 399 Smith, B., 45--​46 Smith, D. A., 8, 9,
48 Smith, D. S., 15--​16 Smith, J. L., 272 Smith, M. L., 70--​71, 106
Smith, R. C., 35 Smith, T. B., 96--​97, 293, 332--​33, 336--​37 Smith, T.
P., 358--​59, 362 Smits, J. A. J., 73, 74--​76 Smolenski, D., 361 Snow, M.
G., 169

505

Snyder, M., 196 Sobell, L. C., 50, 357, 360, 434, 477--​78 Soeller, I.,
74 Soler, J., 266 Sollod, R. M., 19, 34, 381 Sollod, R. N., 40, 395
Solomonov, N., 18 Someah, K., 95, 154, 384, 386, 393, 481 Sommer, R.,
358--​59, 361, 362, 364, 365, 399 Song, X., 287, 381 Sonneck, G., 456--​57
Sorrell, R., 106--​7 Soto, A., 96--​97, 293, 336--​37 Sotskova, A., 381
Sparenborg, S., 442 Sparks, J., 224 Spengler, E. S., 97 Spengler, P. M.,
97 Spinhoven, P., 478--​79 Spitz, R. L., 311 Spitzer, R. L., 306 Spoth,
R., 196--​97 Spray, S. L., 396 Spurling, L., 12 Sripada, R. K., 368--​69
Staats, A. W., 258 Staples, F. R., 35 Starace, N., 346 Stasiewicz, P.
R., 367 Stead, L. F., 359 Stedmon, J., 382 Steele, J., 93, 293 Steer, R.
A., 232--​33 Stegman, S., 143 Stein-​Seroussi, A., 258, 271 Stein, M. B.,
74--​75, 143, 144, 154, 155, 209, 384, 386, 393, 481 Stein, P. T., 343
Steinert, C., 223, 304 Steinfeld, G. J., 39 Stephens, N., 170, 172, 179
Stern, D. B., 184--​85, 189 Stern, D. N., 198 Stettler, P., 462 Stewart,
R. E., viii, 441 Steyer, R., 245--​46 Stich, S., 74 Stijnen, T., 278
Stiles, T. C., 81 Stiles, W. B., 40, 101, 198, 434, 436--​37, 443, 482
Stock, M., 71 Stocker, D., 462 Stoltenberg, C. D., 390--​92

506

Name Index

Stotts, A., 172 Stout, R., 144 Strassle, C. G., 92--​93 Straus, M. M.,
442 Straus, S. E., 437--​38 Strauss, C., 360 Strauss, J., 389 Streiner,
D. L., 266 Stretcher, A. L., 399 Stricker, G., viii, 11--​12, 16, 44,
46--48, 185, 207--​​10, 213--​15, 217--​18, 257, 344, 379, 466 Strong, S.
R., 40--​41 Stroup, D. F., 398 Strupp, H. H., 33--36, 38, 43, 44, 48,
286, 387 Stulz, M., 107, 439 Stulz, N., 435 Suarez, A., 261 Sue, D. W.,
325--​32 Sugihara, Y., 452 Sullivan, H. S., 35, 75, 185, 187, 238 Surko,
M., 101, 482 Sutton, S. W., 106, 432--​33, 435 Suzuki, L. A., 327
Svartberg, M., 81 Svensson, A., 360 Swales, M. A., 258--​59, 267 Swann,
W. B. Jr., 196--​97, 258, 271 Sweeney, J., 360 Swift, J. K., 21, 72--​73,
80--​81, 92--​93, 96--​97, 106 Swindle, R., 357 Sylvestre, J., 440 Syme, M.
L., 328 Symonds, D., 75, 107 Szapocznik, J., 442 Szkodny, L. E., 243,
477--​78 Szollos, S. J., 391 Tai, B., 442 Tallman, K., 210--​11, 216 Tan,
S. Y., 453 Tanaka, S., 73, 76 Tang, E. A., 360 Tannahill, H. S., 368--​69
Tao, K. W., 293, 330--​31 Target, M., 343 Tasca, G. A., 440 Taylor, C.
B., 361 Taylor, J. M., 399 Teachman, B. A., 433 Tejero, A., 169 Telch,
M. J., 74--​75 Tempier, A., 459 Tennen, H., 74--​75

Textor, M. R., 38 Thase, M. E., 311 Theis, F. J., 71 Thoma, N. C., 14t,
18 Thomas, B. L., 20, 41 Thomas, E., 361 Thombs, B. D., 70--​71 Thompson,
L., 145, 153, 154 Thoresen, C. E., 34 Thorne, F. C., 30--​31 Thornicroft,
G., 196--​97 Thornton, J. A., 77, 81, 382, 481, 482 Thorp, S. R., 261--​62
Tiana, T., 266 Todorov, A., 72--​73 Tolin, D. F., 70--​71 Tollefson, D.,
93, 288, 293 Tollefson, G. D., 308 Tomasino, K. N., 367, 369 Tomlins, J.
B., 153, 154 Tonigan, J. S., 359--​60 Tonigan, S., 367 Toporek, R. L.,
330 Tørmoen, A. J., 261--​62 Torrey, E. F., 34 Toscoova, R., 359--​60
Tougas, K., 147 Town, J. M., 223 Tracey, T. J. G., 7--​8, 71, 392
Tragust, S., 71 Tran, G. Q., 74--​75 Travaglini, L., 179 Trimble, J. E.,
332, 336--​37 Tronick, E. Z., 197, 198 Trost, S., 245--​46 Truax, C. B.,
33 Trujols, J., 169 Trusz, S., 196 Tsai, K., 398--​99 Tsai, M., 231 Tsoh,
J. Y., 166 Tucker, J., 357, 360 Tuma, J., 343 Turkewitz, H., 36 Turner,
R. M., 278 Tutek, D. A., 261 Tweed, J. L., 278 Twigg, E., 436--​37 Twisk,
J., 369 Tyler, J. D., 16 Ugueto, A. M., 341 Uhlenhuth, E. H., 174

Name Index Ulleberg, P., 482 Ulvenes, P. G., viii, 11, 81 Umpress, V.,
109 Vaillant, L. M., 394 Vallis, T. M., 178--​79 van Asselt, T., 478--​79
van den Bosch, L. M. C., 278 van den Bosch, R. J., 359 van den Brink,
W., 278 van der Kolk, B. A., 343 van Dyck, R., 478--​79 van Lankveld, J.
J. D. M., 359 Van Marter, D. F., 178 van Minnen, A., 479--​80 van Rijn,
B., 459 van Straten, A., 285, 359, 360, 369 van Tilburg, W., 478--​79
VanBalen, R., 42 Vandenbergbhe, L., 20 VandenBos, G. R., 7, 18
vanLieshout, P., 45 Varma, S. L., 452--​53 Vasco, A. B., 14t, 15, 16,
456, 459--​60 Vaughn-​Coaxum, R., 341 Vaz-​Velho, C., 460 Vaz, A., viii, 4,
15, 52, 480 Veeser, W. R., 395 Velasquez, M. M., 164, 170, 172, 179
Velástegui, M., 467 Velicer, W. F., 161--​66, 177--​78 Vellegas, M.,
460--​61 Velton, E., 366 Verheul, R., 278 Vermeersch, D. A., 81, 435, 482
Vernmark, K., 360 Vezzetti, H., 464 Vieira, E. D., 20 Vighetti, S., 74
Villanueva, J. J., 73 Vîslă, A., 74--​76, 92 Vives, A., 243 Vivian, D.,
306, 433 Vollmer, B. M., 80--​81 von Wolff, A., 318 Vonk, I. J. J., 69
Vyleta, M. L., 71 Wachtel, E. F., 39, 188, 190--​91, 198, 345, 346
Wachtel, P. L., 3, 10, 35, 38, 39, 40, 43, 47--​48, 148, 175, 184--​​92,
194--​99, 208--​9, 212, 380, 390--​91, 466, 475 Wagner, K., 334

507

Wainwright, N. A., 394 Waite, L. J., 73 Wakefield, J. C., 303--​​7
Wakefield, P. J., 141 Walfish, S., 379, 432--​33, 436 Walker, J. A.,
261--​62, 394 Wallin, D. J., 188 Walton, C. J., 280 Walton, D. E., 15--​16
Wambach, K., 318 Wampold, B. E., viii, 7--11, 21, 69--​71, 74--​76, 78,
80--​81, 101--​2, 106, 107, 113, 141, 224, 246--​47, 299, 330--33, 357,
366, 382, 384, 389, 391--​93, 398--​99, 436, 475, 477, 482 Wandersman, A.,
16, 35 Wang, C., 450--​51 Wang, S. C., 455 Ward-​Ciesielski, E. F., 265
Ward, C. H., 244 Ward, T., 459 Warmerdam, L., 369 Warren, J. S., 106
Warren, S., 73 Wasserman, R. H., 439 Watkins, C. E. Jr., 47, 396
Watkins, P. L., 359, 361, 364 Watson, G., 29--​30 Watson, J. C., 73, 93,
94, 290--​91 Watzke, B., 153 Webb, C. A., 75--​76, 81, 299 Wedding, D.,
361 Weinberger, J., 46 Weishaar, M. E., 245, 478--​79 Weiss, J., 209
Weissberg, J. H., 35 Weissman, A. N., 232--​33 Weissman, M. M., 318
Weisz, J. R., 106, 341 Weitzman, B., 32 Wender, P. H., 92--​93 Wentz, R.,
243 Werner, H., 18--​19 West, J. C., 442 West, M., 344 Westen, D., 41--​42
Westphal, A., 318 Westra, H. A., viii, 52, 74--​75, 245, 284--93,
297--​99, 398--​99 Whipple, J. L., 77, 81, 106--​7, 117, 299, 389, 394,
435, 478 Whipple, K., 35 Whisman, M. A., 230--​31 Whitaker, C., 271--​72

508

Name Index

Whitehouse, F. A., 32 Whiteside, S. P. H., 196 Whitley, D., 74--​75
Wickless, C., 74--​75 Wiersma, D., 359 Wiggins, J. S., 232--​33 Wilber,
K., 259 Wild, C., 459 Wile, D. B., 190--​92 Wiley, J. F., 74--​75 Wilhelm,
F. H., 76 Wilk, J. E., 442 Wilkey, S., 358 Willard, J., 196--​97 Willcox,
C. H., 278 Williams, B. E., 391 Williams, H. B., 361 Williams, J. M. G.,
270 Williams, O. B., 142, 143, 151--​52 Williams, R. E., 141, 147
Williams, T. A., 137 Willis, J., 72--​73 Wilm, K., 245--​46 Wilson, B.,
440 Wilson, E. O., 71, 73 Wilson, G. T., 70--​71, 125--​26, 258 Wilson, L.
M., 360 Windle, R., 272 Winick, C. B., 344 Winkelbach, C., 231
Winnicott, D. W., 304--​5, 312 Winokur, M., 37 Winston, A., 93, 198, 245
Winter, D. A., 186--​87 Winter, L., 318 Winzelberg, A., 367 Wiprovnick,
A. E., 175 Wise, E. H., 93 Wise, J. C., 359 Wiser, S. L., 44--​45, 230,
285--​86 Wislocki, A. P., 70--​71 Wittchen, H. U., 357--​58 Wittman, L., 39
Wogan, M., 13, 15--​16, 18 Wolf, A. W., 50, 147--​48, 239, 477--​78 Wolf,
E., 32 Wolfe, B. E., 41, 46, 48, 147, 433, 466 Wolitzky-​Taylor, K.,
74--​75 Wollburg, E., 76 Wolpe, J., 126

Woodcock, E., 279 Woods, S. M., 37 Woodworth, R. S., 30 Woody, E., 198
Woody, R. H., 33 Woolfolk, R. L., 41 Worell, J., 329 Worthington, E. L.
Jr., 96--​97 Wosket, M., 458 Wright, H., 399 Wright, J. H., 363 Xiao, H.,
viii, 244, 441--​42, 477, 478 Xiao, Z., 450--​51 Yahne, C. E., 299 Yalom,
I., 388 Yamasaki, A. S., 231, 285 Yasinski, C., 245--​46 Yeh, C. J., 332
Yeo, L. S., 453 Yi, J., 368--​69 Yorkston, N. J., 35 Yost, E., 153 Youn,
S. J., 244, 440--​42 Young, C., 14t Young, D., 450--​51 Young, J. E., 245,
346, 478--​79 Youngren, M. A., 364 Yu, H., 261--​62 Yue, D.-​M., 48, 450
Yuen, S., 451 Yulish, N. E., 69--​71, 74--​76 Zack, S. E., 244, 435, 437
Zalecki, C. A., 437 Zeiss, A., 364 Zhang, H., 450--​51 Zhang, Y., 450--​51
Zhao, S., 357--​58 Zilboorg, G., 29 Zilcha-​Mano, S., 18, 198, 223
Zimmermann, J., 245--​46 Zinman, B., 178--​79 Zobel, I., 318, 319
Zoffness, R. J., 14t, 441 Zuckerman, E. L., 358--​59 Zuellig, A. R., 231
Zuelling, A., 243

Subject Index

abstraction, 479 acceptance. See Zen, DBT applications of acceptance and
commitment therapy (ACT), 134, 186--​87 Achenbach System of Empirically
Based Assessment, 347 Ackerman Institute for the Family, 465 action
stage, 146, 163, 165, 166, 172 actual vs. desired outcome/​situational
analysis, 313, 316 addictive disorders, self-​help effectiveness,
359--​60, 362, 366. See also substance abuse treatment ADDRESSING
mnemonic, 327 ADHD,  442 affect, 90 After the Turn On, What?, 33 aged
patients, 261--​62, 333, 451 agoraphobia, 36 Aiglé Foundation, 437, 465
aikido, 272 Ajase complex, 452 ALAPSI, 466 Albany Anxiety Disorder
Interview Schedule -​IV (ADIS), 232 Alcoholics Anonymous (AA), 105--​6,
359--​60, 362, 366, 367 alcoholism, 177, 359, 362, 366 American Indian
clients, 332 antidepressants, placebo effect and, 74 anxiety/​depression
case studies, 219--​22, 335 anxiety disorders breathing exercises for, 76
cognitive therapy, 237

early cue detection, 235 extinction, 187, 191, 194 interventions,
active, 187 multimodal therapy, 32 relaxation methods, 236 self-​control
desensitization, 236 self-​help books, 364 self-​monitoring, 235 stimulus
control methods, 236 APA Code of Ethics, 150 APIRE PRN, 442 applied
relaxation, 236 artificial intelligence in DBT, 279 assertiveness
training, 90--​92, 128 assimilative integration assimilative
psychodynamic model as, 11--​12, 207 children's therapy, 345--​46
cognitive-​behavior assimilative therapy as, 11--​12, 229 history of
integration, 11 interpersonal assimilative therapy, 11--​12 movement,
directions in, 482 systematic treatment selection as, 12, 141
traditional Chinese medicine/​Western psychotherapy, 453--​54
training/​supervision, 383--​84 assimilative psychodynamic model
applicability, 211 assessment/​formulation, 209 as assimilative
integration, 11--​12, 207 case studies, 219--​22 change processes, 212,
215 contraindications, 211, 214 diversity considerations, 218

509

510

Subject Index

assimilative psychodynamic model (cont.) exploratory work in, 212, 213,
215 intervention, , 209, 210, 215--​16, 217--​18, 221 methods/​techniques,
213--​14, 215--​16 outcome research, 223 patient autonomy in, 218
patient's resistance to, 217--​18 patient success factors, 214, 216--​17
relapse prevention, 218 therapeutic relationship, 214 three-​tiered
theory, 208--​10 transference/​countertransference, 215, 216, 217
attachment CBT treatment of, 243--​44 expectancy, self-​fulfilling
prophecies and, 196 focus on, in CBT, 229--​30 GAD as problem in, 231
mother--​child attunement, 197 mutual influence/​mother--​child attunement,
197 rational-​emotive behavior therapy, 437 attachment-​focused
developmental psychotherapy, 346 Australian Centre for Integrative
Studies, 450 Austrian Society of Integrative Therapy, 457 autonomy in
assimilative psychodynamic model, 218 MI + CBT, 287, 288, 289, 292,
296--​97 self-​liberation, 165 systematic treatment selection, 148--​49
avoidance behavior extinction, 89 avoidance patterns, cyclical
psychodynamic theory. See cyclical psychodynamic theory avoidant
personality disorders, 310 BASIC I.D. assessment, 126--​27 assessment,
second-​order, 128 change processes, 132 Becoming Orgasmic
(Heiman/​LoPiccolo), 364 behavioral chain analysis, 268, 269--​70
Behavioral Psychotherapy (Fensterheim/​Glazer), 38 Behavior Assessment
System for Children, 3/​e, 347 Behavior Therapy, 32--​33, 39 Behavior
Therapy and Beyond (Lazarus), 33 benefits of the status quo, 287,
294--​96 Beyond Carl Rogers (Brazier), 45 bibliotherapy. See self-​help
materials bidirectional influence, mother--​child attunement, 197 binge
eating disorder, 261 biosocial model, 263, 274 bipolar disorder, 261--​62
borderline personality disorders, 41--​42, 211, 245, 310 Boston Change
Process Study Group, 197--​98 breathing, diaphragmatic, 130, 236

breathing techniques, 76, 99--​100, 296, 351 bridging, multimodal
therapy, 129 Brief Relational Therapy (BRT), 245 British Association for
Counseling and Psychotherapy (BACP), 459 British Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 459 Buddhism, 449, 455, 456 bulimia nervosa,
261 bullying/​violence, 178 Casebook of Eclectic Psychotherapy
(Norcross), 40 case studies adjustment disorder, 335 alcoholism, 105--​6
anger management, 219--​22 anxiety/​depression, 219--​22, 335 anxiety
extinction, 191, 194 assimilative psychodynamic model, 219--​22
borderline personality disorder, 275 breathing techniques, 99--​100, 296
CBASP, 315 children's therapy, 350 cognitive-​behavior assimilative
therapy, 241 contextual model, 78 cross-​culturalism, 335 cyclical
psychodynamic theory, 191, 194 depression, major, 315 dialectical
behavior therapy, 275 divorce/​couples therapy, 173 eclecticism,
technical, 344 feedback informed treatment, 113, 115f, 117f GAD, 241,
293 heart transplant/​loss of soul, 79 interpersonal/​emotional
processing, 241 major depressive disorder, 78 MI + CBT, 293 mindfulness
practice, 99--​100 multimodal therapy, 135 polysubstance
abuse/​depression, 151 religion/​spirituality, 335 sensation, sensory
complaints, 135 social support, 335 STAIRCaSE, 97 substance abuse, 113,
115f, 117f sudden deterioration, 78 systematic desensitization, 191, 194
systematic treatment selection, 151 transtheoretical model, 173
catharsis, 329--​30 CBASP actual vs. desired outcome/​situational
analysis, 313, 316 applicability, 308, 310

Subject Index assessment/​formulation, 306 case studies, 315 change
processes, 310 described, 303--​4 disciplined personal involvement, 303,
304, 305, 312 diversity considerations, 315 dyadic safety, 303--​4, 307,
314 historical origins, 305 IDE, 305, 307, 314, 317 Impact Message
Inventory, 314 internal mechanisms in dysfunction, 307 interpersonal
skill deficits, 312 interpersonal style assessment, 310, 314, 316
learning content, 305, 307 methods/​techniques, 312 objective
countertransference, 304--​5 outcome research, 318--​19 PDD diagnosis,
308, 309f perceived functionality, 303--​4, 306 reciprocal interaction,
306 remediation phase/​situational analysis, 313 sessions required,
310--​11 significant other, 309, 313, 314, 315--​16, 317 situational
analysis, 306, 307, 310, 312, 316--​17 therapeutic relationship, 312
transference hypothesis, 309--​10, 313, 315--​16, 317 treatment goals,
307, 308f Center for Collegiate Mental Health (CCMH), 441--​42 Center for
Scientific Psychological Development, 465--​66 chain analysis, 268,
269--​70 change processes assimilative psychodynamic model, 212, 215
CBASP, 310 children's therapy, 348 cognitive-​behavior assimilative
therapy, 233 contextual model, 71, 72f cross-​culturalism, 173, 329
dialectical behavior therapy, 272 exposure/​avoidance, 146 feedback
informed treatment, 111 history of integration, 31, 32, 34, 36, 41, 43
integrative approach to, 7--​8, 11 MI + CBT, 285 multimodal therapy, 132
STAIRCaSE, 92 systematic treatment selection, 145, 479 transtheoretical
model, 162, 172, 173 Child and Adolescent Needs and Strengths (CANS),
347 Child Outcome Rating Scale (CORS), 109 child parent relationship
therapy, 345

511

children's therapy. See also attachment adoptive children, 346 affective
change processes, 348 assessment/​formulation, 346 assimilative
integration, 345--​46 background, 341--​42 case studies, 350 change
processes, 348 common factors approach, 346 development, treatment and,
341--​42, 346, 347 diversity considerations, 350 history of integration,
47 integrated trauma treatment, 343 integrative therapies, 343--​44
interpersonal change processes, 348 methods/​techniques, 349 multiple
causation model, 343, 346 outcome research, 352 parent--​child
interaction patterns, 345, 346--​47 parent--​child interaction therapy,
345 parent management therapy, 8 play therapy, 345, 346, 347, 348, 350
principles of, 342 systematic treatment selection, 344 therapeutic
relationship, 349 transtheoretical model, 345 trauma-​focused cognitive
behavior therapy, 344--​45 trauma-​focused integrative play therapy,
344--​45 treatment effects, 341 Child Session Rating Scale (CSRS), 109
Chilean Institute of Integrative Psychotherapy, 466 Chinese Taoist
cognitive psychotherapy, 451 chronicity, 144, 145--​46, 148, 151--​52, 188
C-​I-​S-​B firing order, 129 Client-​Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy
in the Nineties (Lietaer/​Rombauts/​VanBalen), 42 client-​centered therapy,
215, 456 Client Resistance Code (CRC), 287 clients. See also therapeutic
relationship American Indian, 332 autonomy of, 287, 288, 289, 292,
296--​97 expectations, creation of, 233 in-​session language, 287 lying to
therapist, 111 maladaptive patterns in relapse, 35 misconceptions,
changing, 34--​35 motivation, enhancing, 266 resistance, 285, 286, 287,
289, 291, 295--​96, 297 self-​regulation systems, 173 worldview,
cross-​culturalism awareness of, 333 Clinical Behavior Therapy
(Goldfried/​Davison), 35, 45 clinical feedback, 434. See also feedback
informed treatment

512

Subject Index

clinical strategy/​change principle focus, 11 clinical training. See
training/​supervision cognitive-​analytic therapy, 208, 459 cognitive
behavioral analysis system of psychotherapy. See CBASP cognitive
behavioral play therapy, 345 cognitive-​behavior assimilative therapy
applicability, 230 assessment/​formulation, 232 as assimilative
integration, 11--​12, 229 background, 228--​29 case studies, 241 change,
principles of, 229 client expectations, creation of, 233 cognitive
therapy, 237 continued testing with reality, 234, 237 corrective
experiences, 234, 238--​39, 241 diversity considerations, 241 emotional
deepening via, 230, 240, 242 history of integration, 46, 231
interpersonal/​emotional processing, 231--​32, 233--​34, 235, 237--​38, 240,
241, 243, 245 interpersonal focus of, 229, 233 interpersonal therapy
within, 231 methods/​techniques, 235 mindfulness in, 239
modeling/​problem-​solving skills, 234 new perspective provision, 234
outcome research, 243 schema concept in, 230, 239 stimulus control
methods, 236 therapeutic relationship, 234 worry as avoidance of affect,
231 cognitive-​behavior therapy. See also MI + CBT; multimodal therapy
corrective experiences, encouraging, 89 credible explanations benefits
in, 76 DBT vs., clinical trial, 278 history of integration, 36, 37,
42--​43, 45, 46, 47 insight emphasis, 186 Internet-​based, 367
interpersonal theory in, 42 outcomes research, 223 panic disorder, 76
practices effectiveness, 436--​37 prevalence of integration in, 13, 15
psychotropic medications, 41 rational-​emotive behavior therapy, 437
cognitive bibliotherapy, 359. See also self-​help materials
cognitive-​narrative therapy, 21--​22, 134, 143, 479 Cognitive Therapy and
Research, 37 commonalities/​change processes. See change processes

common factors/​contextual model, 69, 71, 76 community center PRNs, 440
complementary role utilization, 334 Complexity of the Self (Guidano), 40
Comprehensive Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration (Stricker/​Gold), 44
conformity as cultural value, 327--​28 Confucianism, 450--​51, 454, 455
conjoint/​couples therapy assimilative psychodynamic model, 211 cyclical
psychodynamic theory, 190--​91 dialectical behavior therapy case study,
275 divorce case studies, 173 history of integration, 36 prevalence of
integration in, 15 substance abuse case studies, 113, 115f, 117f
therapist effects in, 8 transtheoretical model case studies, 173
web/​mobile apps, 361 Connors Comprehensive Rating Scales, 347
consciousness-​raising, 329 consequence, 90, 91, 100 contemplation stage,
146, 163, 164, 164t, 165, 166, 170, 171--​72 Contemporary Schools of
Psychology (Woodworth), 30 context-​responsive psychotherapy integration
(CRPI), 51--​52, 101--​2, 481 contextual model. See also therapeutic
relationship applicability, 77 assessment/​case formulation, 77 case
studies, 78 change processes, 71, 72f common factors, 69, 71, 76
development/​refinement of, 80--​81 diversity considerations, 78
expectation, creation of, 74 integrative approach, 70
methods/​techniques, 78 outcome research, 80 psychotherapy outcomes
meta-​analysis, 70--​71 specific ingredients, 70--​71, 75 therapeutic
relationship roles in, 71, 73, 80 continuous professional improvement,
108 Control Your Depression (Lewinsohn et al), 364 Converging Themes in
Psychotherapy (Goldfried), 38 Coping with Panic (Clum), 364 corrective
experiences CBT, encouraging via, 94, 98, 99 cognitive-​behavior
assimilative therapy, 234, 238--​39, 241 fear-​related activities, 36--​37
MI + CBT, 285 STAIRCaSE, 94, 98, 99

Subject Index unassertiveness, 90--​92 Counseling the Culturally
Different (Sue), 332 counterconditioning, 165 countertransference,
41--​42 Courage to Heal, The (Bass/​Davis), 365 crisis intervention, 265,
277 cross-​culturalism applicability, 328 assessment/​formulation, 327
assimilative psychodynamic model, 218 case studies, 335 CBASP, 315
change processes, 173, 329 children's therapy, 350 cognitive-​behavior
assimilative therapy, 241 contextual model, 78 cultural barriers, 327
cultural competency, 326--​27 cultural humility, 172 cultural
norms/​belief systems, 173 cyclical psychodynamic theory, 191 dialectical
behavior therapy, 274 evidence-​based treatments, cultural adaptations
of, 332, 336--​37 feedback informed treatment, 112 feminist therapy, 329
gender-​aware therapy, 329 group-​specific recommendations, 332 history of
integration, 42, 43, 46--​47 identity development, 326, 327, 334
ideographic approaches, 331--​32, 333 individualistic vs. collectivist
cultures, 172 as integrative approach, 325 LGBT identity, 328, 329
methods/​techniques, 331 MI + CBT, 293 multimodal therapy, 135
multitheoretical psychotherapy, 326f, 326 nomothetic approaches, 331,
336--​37 outcome research, 336 people with disabilities identity, 328,
330 psychotherapy integration of, 12--​13 racial identity, 326, 327--​28
racism/​discrimination, 329 self-​help materials, 365--​66 societal
structures/​values, responding to, 334 STAIRCaSE, 96 systematic treatment
selection, 150, 153 therapeutic relationship, 326--​27, 328--​29, 330, 333
transgender-​affirming therapy, 329 transtheoretical model, 172 cultural
adaptation, 452 Cultural Assessment of Risk for Suicide, 151

513

cultural factors. See cross-​culturalism culture of feedback, 111
cyclical psychodynamic theory accomplices identification, 189 anxiety
theory/​Freud, 187 applicability, 190, 199, 208 assessment/​formulation,
188 case studies, 191, 194 change as synergistic process, 185 diversity
considerations, 191 early experiences emphasis, 186
experiential/​emotion-​focused approaches in, 198--​99 exposure, 185
insight emphasis, 186 as integrative approach, 185 internal structures,
184--​85, 193 interpretations, 185, 194 interventions, , 187, 195 patient
goals in, 194 principles of, 184--​85 procedural dimension in, 198--​99
processes, developmental studies of, 197 research foundations, 195
schemas/​cognitive processes, 184--​85 self-​fulfilling prophecy, 196
social skills role, 187 strengths emphasis, 190 therapeutic
relationship, 191 therapist's use of language in, 195, 199 vicious
circle identification, 189, 194--​95 Dang-​ki, 453--​54 deliberate
practice, 481 demoralization, 72, 92 dependent personality disorders,
310 depression acceptance and commitment therapy, 134, 186--​87 APIRE
PRN, 442 case studies, 78, 315 CBT of, 244--​45 dialectical behavior
therapy, 261 major depressive disorder, 78, 178 pros/​cons of changing,
166 transtheoretical model, 178 desensitization. See EMDR; extinction;
systematic desensitization deterioration problem, 435 developmentally
based psychotherapy, 344 Devereaux Behavior Rating Scale, 347
dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) applicability, 261 assessment, 262
aversive contingencies, 270

514

Subject Index

dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) (cont.) behavioral chain analysis,
268, 269--​70 biosocial model, 263, 274 case formulation, 263 case
studies, 275 change principle, 260, 272 client motivation, enhancing,
266 consultation teams, 267 convergences in, 186--​87 described, 257--​58
development of, 258, 279 dialectical strategies, 272 diversity
considerations, 274 emotional vulnerability/​regulation, 263--​64
environment, structuring, 266 fallibility agreement, 267 generalization,
ensuring, 266 history of integration, 41--​42 as integrative approach,
245 invalidating environment, 263--​64 methods/​techniques, 268 opposition
principle, 260 outcome research, 277, 279 principles of, 259
problem-​solving strategies, 268 solution analysis, 269 stylistic
strategies, 271 systemic dysregulation, 259--​60 target hierarchy, 262
therapeutic relationship, 258, 261, 273 therapy-​interfering behaviors,
274 training, 279--​80 traumatic invalidation, 264--​65 treatment tasks,
265 validation strategies, 270 diaphragmatic breathing, 236 differential
efficacy as challenge in integration, 21 differential referrals, 378
differential therapeutics, 348--​49, 393 direct experiential learning,
198--​99 directive behavior, 89 disciplined personal involvement, 303,
304, 305, 312 dissonance in cultural values, 328 diversity
considerations. See cross-​culturalism divorce case studies, 173 Dodo
Bird verdict, 71 dose--​effect association, 435 double depression,
310--​11 dramatic relief, 164 Drinker's Check-​Up, 366 drug abuse. See
substance abuse treatment Dysfunctional Attitude Scale, 232--​33

eating disordered patients, 7, 131, 132, 134, 261, 277 eclecticism
concepts, terminology, 17--​18 history of integration, 45 humanistic, 454
integration vs., 10t, 41, 127 as integrative, 3--​4, 7, 9, 10
psychotherapists using, 15 therapeutic activities, 18 eclecticism,
technical case studies, 344 described, 344 four paths, 383 history of
integration, 32, 35--​36, 42, 46 Eclecticism and Integration in
Counseling and Psychotherapy (Dryden/​Norcross), 42 Eclectic
Psychotherapy (Beutler), 38 ecological systems theory, 333 ecosystemic
play therapy, 345 elderly patients, 261--​62, 333, 451 elicitation
phase/​situational analysis, 313 EMDR, 134, 451, 479 emotional arousal,
164 emotional deepening, 230, 240, 242 emotion-​focused therapy, 451
Emotion in Psychotherapy (Greenberg/​Safran), 40 emotion regulation
cross-​culturalism, 173 DBT applications, 263--​64 systemic dysregulation,
259--​60 transtheoretical model, 173 empathy patient's inability to
generate, 311 in therapeutic relationship, 73 empirically supported
treatment, 46, 50, 119, 433 environmental reevaluation, 164
evidence-​based apps, 361 Evidence-​Based Psychotherapy Relationships and
Responsiveness, 50--​51 evidence-​based treatments, 332, 478--​79
exhaustion theory of integration, 6 expectancy, self-​fulfilling
prophecies and, 196 expectations client's, regarding therapy, 133
creation of, 74, 233 positive, fostering, 92 STAIRCaSE, 92 experiential
family therapy, 271--​72 exposure-​based cognitive therapy (EBCT),
245--​46, 479 extending technique, 272 externalizers, 150

Subject Index extinction anxiety disorders, 187 avoidance behavior, 89
case studies, 191, 194 eye movement desensitization and reprocessing.
See EMDR family therapy, 44, 47, 271--​72 fearful behavior reduction, 89
fear reduction. See extinction; systematic desensitization fear-​related
activities, corrective experiences, 36--​37 feedback informed treatment.
See also Outcome Rating Scale (ORS); Session Rating Scale (SRS)
adolescents, 109, 110 applicability, 110 assessment/​formulation, 108
background, 105--​6, 119 case studies, 113, 115f, 117f change patterns,
112 change processes, 111 clinical cutoffs, 110 computerized systems,
109--​10 core competencies, 108 described, 107 diversity considerations,
112 implementation barriers, 118 as integrative approach, 106
methods/​techniques, 111 outcome research, 117 principles of, 107
therapeutic alliance as predictive of outcome, 107 therapist factors in
outcomes, 119 therapy relationship, 111 feedback systems, 478 Feeling
Good (Burns), 364 Feng-​shui, 453--​54 firing order tracking, 129 FIT. See
feedback informed treatment flexibly sequential play therapy, 345
focused expressive psychotherapy, 153 focusing technique, Wolfe's, 46
From Cognitive-​Behavior Therapy to Psychotherapy Integration
(Goldfried), 46 functional impairment, 51, 143, 144, 145--​46, 148,
151--​52, 333, 369, 481 gay identity, 328, 329 generalized anxiety
disorders (GAD). See anxiety disorders; cognitive-​behavior assimilative
therapy; MI + CBT gestalt therapists, integration among, 20 group
designs, 33, 37--​38, 138

515

group session rating scale (GSRS), 109 guided imagery, 236 Handbook of
Psychotherapy Integration 1e (Norcross/​ Goldfried), 44 health
maintenance organization (HMO) study, 7 helpful/​hindering events
studies, 439--​40 helplessness, 97, 312--​13 history of integration
abstraction in comparative analysis, 36--​37 action-​/​insight-​oriented
approaches, 37 behavior/​psychodynamic approaches, 30, 32--​35, 40, 45--​46
biological/​psychological approaches, 38--​39 children's therapy, 47
client-​centered therapy, 34, 42 client misconceptions, changing, 34--​35
client's maladaptive patterns in relapse, 35 cognitive procedures
development, 32--​33, 36 cognitive social psychology, 38 collaboration
in, 50 common change processes, 31, 32, 34, 36, 41, 43 conceptual
developments, 51 consensus/​convergence in, 29--​30 cross-​culturalism, 42,
43, 46--​47 desegregation research, 43 dialectical behavior therapy,
41--​42 eclecticism, technical, 32, 35--​36, 42, 46 empiricism, 9, 12,
30--​31, 32, 33, 35, 37, 41, 44--​45 gestalt therapy methods, 35, 37, 46
global interest in, 40, 48, 52 goals of, 45, 47 group experiences, 33,
37--​38 learning theory, 30, 31 modeling procedures, 30 multimodal
therapy, 29, 32, 35--​36, 37, 43 1960s, 31 1970s, 32 1980s, 36 1990s, 42
outcomes research, 47--​48 overview, 28--​29 performance-​based methods, 34
professional networking, 38, 41, 48 psychoanalysis/​Pavlovian
conditioning similarities, 29 psychotropic medications, 41
rational-​emotive behavior therapy, 46 science--​practice gulf, 50 single
orientations, limitations of, 31--​32, 40, 46 strategic family therapy,
44, 47 systematic desensitization treatment, 32--​33 theoretical hybrids,
38, 44

516

Subject Index

history of integration (cont.) theoretical language, 40--​41, 45, 47, 476
therapeutic rapprochement, 34 therapeutic relationship, 33, 34--​35,
41--​42, 50--​51 therapy process, 41 training, 40, 43, 46 21st century, 49
universal factors in, 31, 42 History of Psychotherapy: A Century of
Change (Freedheim), 43 HIV/​AIDs, 455 home theory, 346 How and Why Are
Some Therapists Better Than Others? (Castonguay/​Hill), 51 Humana Center,
467 Humanism and Behaviorism (Wandersman, Poppen, & Ricks), 35
humanistic treatment, 77--​78 I-​C-​B-​S firing order, 129 identity
development, 326, 327, 334, 335. See also schemas disequilibrium,
sources of, 390 LGBT, 328, 329 ideographic approaches, 331--​32, 333
imagery, guided, 236 Impact Message Inventory, 314 implementation
competency, 108 InnerLife STS, 393--​94 In Session, 49 Insight and Action
(Wachtel), 40 Insight in Psychotherapy (Castonguay/​Hill), 51 Institute
of Psychotherapy Integration, 452 integration. See history of
integration; psychotherapy integration Integration in Psychotherapy
Congress, 465--​66 Integration of Psychotherapies, The (Mahrer), 42
integrative awareness in cultural values, 328 integrative gestalt
therapy (Austria), 457 integrative multicultural psychotherapy. See
cross-​culturalism Integrative Problem-​Centered Therapy (Pinsof), 46
Integrative Psychiatry, 49 Integrative System of Psychotherapy (Instep),
457 integrative theory, directions in, 475 Integrative Therapist, The,
49 intention, 90 Interface Between the Psychodynamic and Behavioral
Therapies, The (Marmor/​Woods), 37 internal working models, 197
International Journal of Eclectic Psychotherapy, 39--​40 international
therapy programs, 15, 448--​49, 468--​69 Interpersonal Discrimination
Exercise (IDE), 305, 307, 314, 317

interpersonal/​emotional processing in CBT, 231--​32, 233--​34, 235,
237--​38, 240, 241, 243, 245 Interpersonal Process in Cognitive Therapy
(Safran/​ Segal), 42 introspection in cultural values, 328 Inventory of
Interpersonal Problems, 232--​33 irreverent communication, 271--​72
Journal of Integrative and Eclectic Psychotherapy, 39--​41 Journal of
Psychotherapy Integration, 4, 20, 43, 44, 47, 49, 50, 125--​26, 208, 459,
466 Journal of Unified Psychotherapy and Clinical Science, 51 Kansai
Institute of Eclectic Psychotherapy (KIEP), 452 language, 20--​21,
40--​41, 45, 47, 476 Lausanne University, 462 learning theory, 30, 31
Leeds Alliance in Supervision Scale, 394 Level of Attribution and Change
(LAC) Scale, 169--​70 LGBT identity, 328, 329 liberation of
consciousness, 329 liberation psychology, 330 Linehan Risk Assessment
and Management Protocol, 265 listening. See therapeutic relationship
live observation, 391 Magna Charta Universitatum, 399 maintenance stage,
146, 163, 165, 166, 170, 172 major depressive disorder, 78, 178 mandala
drawing, 456 marital therapy. See conjoint/​couples therapy Marital
Therapy (Segraves), 38 massive open online interventions (MOOIs), 369
Mastery of Your Anxiety and Panic (Craske/​ Barlow), 364 maximum impact
strategy, 167, 168t measurement/​reporting competency, 108 meditation
techniques, 236 mental health disorders, 178. See also specific
disorders meta-​messages, 199 metaphor technique, 272 MI + CBT action
behaviors implementation, 296--​97 ambivalence, working with, 289, 291,
295--​96 applicability, 288 assessment/​formulation, 286, 298 case
studies, 293 change processes, 285 client autonomy, 287, 288, 289, 292,
296--​97

Subject Index client resistance, 285, 286, 287, 289, 291, 295--​96, 297
corrective experiences, 285 described, 284--​86 diversity considerations,
293 evocation, 291 homework noncompliance, 292 methods/​techniques, 291
MI spirit, 286, 288, 292 outcome research, 297 responsive behaviors,
285--​86 suggestion/​psychoeducation integration, 292 therapeutic
relationship, 290 training, 298--​99 microaggressions, 97, 330--​31
microinvalidations, 331 mindfulness, 457 DBT applications of, 258--​59,
266, 269--​70, 274 practice, case study, 99--​100 mindfulness-​based
cognitive therapy (MBCT), 318 mindfulness based stress management
(MBSR), 134 Minority Stress Scale, 151 Misunderstandings of the Self
(Raimy), 34--​35 mobile apps, 358, 360, 361--​62, 365, 366, 368--​69
Modality Profile, 128, 131, 136 Modes and Morals of Psychotherapy, The
(London), 31 mood disorders, 261 Morita therapy, 451--​52 mother--​child
attunement, 197 motivational interviewing, 70, 93, 245. See also MI +
CBT Motivational Interviewing Skills Code (MISC), 287 Multimodal
Behavior Therapy (Lazarus), 35--​36 Multimodal Life History Inventory
(MLHI), 128, 133 multimodal therapy affective reactions, 127, 135, 136
applicability, 131, 344 assessment/​formulation, 127 BASIC I.D.
assessment, 126--​27, 128 biological health, 128, 130--​31, 135--​36
bridging, 129 case studies, 135 change processes, 132 cognitions,
127--​28, 135 diversity considerations, 135 firing order tracking, 129
history of integration, 29, 32, 35--​36, 37, 43, 126, 458 images, 127,
130, 135 as integrative approach, 9, 125--​26 interpersonal interactions,
128, 130--​31, 135 methods/​techniques, 133 MLHI, 128, 133 Modality
Profile, 128, 131, 136

517

outcome research, 137 outcomes, factors affecting, 128 problems,
assigning to modality, 131 relapse, 137--​38 sensation, sensory
complaints, 127, 129, 130, 135 SPI, 130 spirituality, 131 theoretical
integration vs. eclecticism, 127 therapeutic relationship, 133, 138
training in, 388 unimodal therapy vs., 127 multiple causation model,
343, 346 Multitheoretical List of Therapeutic Intervention, 440
multitheoretical psychotherapy, 326f, 326. See also cross-​culturalism
mutual influence/​mother--​child attunement, 197 Naikan therapy, 451--​52
narcissistic disorders, 211 Narcotics Anonymous (NA), 278, 362 narrative
therapy, 21--​22, 134, 143, 479 National Drug Abuse Treatment Clinical
Trials Network, 442--​43 nefazodone, 318 New Sex Therapy, The (Kaplan),
34 NIDA PRN, 442--​43 nomothetic approaches, 331, 336--​37 not-​thinking,
187 obsessive-​compulsive disorder, 34, 310 older patients, 261--​62, 333,
451 online support groups, 360, 362 open-​hidden paradigm, 74 Opening Up
by Writing It Down (Pennebaker), 364 oppositional behavior, 148--​49,
259, 272, 392, 398--​99 organic disorders, 211 organismic-​developmental
theory, 18 OurRelationship app, 361 outcome-​informed clinical work. See
evidence-​based treatments; practice-​oriented research outcome
monitoring, 434, 439 Outcome Questionnaire 45 (OQ-​45), 109, 393--​94, 478
Outcome Rating Scale (ORS) change patterns, 112 clinical cutoffs, 110
described, 108--​9 diversity considerations, 112 effective practitioners,
111 frequency of administration, 112 Overcoming Binge Eating (Fairburn),
364 ownership of ideas, 20

518

Subject Index

panic attacks breathing techniques, 76, 99--​100 firing order tracking,
129--​30 self-​help books, 364 self-​help materials for, 363 Paradigmatic
Complementarity Lab, 460 parent--​child interaction therapy, 345, 364
Parent Effectiveness Training (Gordon), 364 parent management therapy, 8
Parkinson's disease, 74 patient-​focused research, 434 Patient
Performance Rating Form (PPRF), 307 Patient's Manual for CBASP
(McCullough), 310 pediatrics. See children's therapy people with
disabilities identity, 328, 330 persistent depressive disorder,
dysthymia (PDD). See CBASP personality, integrative approaches to, 45
Personality and Psychotherapy (Dollard/​Miller), 30 personality
disorders, 211, 214, 245, 261, 310 personality-​in-​context dynamics
assimilative psychodynamic model, 187 cyclical psychodynamic theory, 188
personal therapeutic approach (Czech Republic), 457 Persuasion and
Healing (Frank), 11, 31, 43 placebo effect, 74 playing devil's advocate
technique, 272 play therapy, 345, 346, 347, 348, 350 pluralistic
psychotherapy, 12, 459, 476 Positive Activity Jackpot, 365 posttraumatic
stress disorder. See PTSD power dimension assessment, 314--​15 Practice
of Multimodal Therapy, The (Lazarus), 42 practice-​oriented research
background, 432--​33, 478 community center PRNs, 440 definitions, 433
history of integration, 50 practice--​research network, 438
practitioner/​researcher partnerships, 443 private practice PRNs, 439
professional organizations PRNs, 442 training clinic PRNs, 438 types of,
434 university counseling center PRNs, 441 Practice & Research:
Advancing Collaboration (PRAC), 440--​41 practice--​research networks
(PRNs) community center, 440 described, 438 private practice, 439
professional organizations, 442 training clinic, 438

practice effectiveness studies, 436--​37 Practice Wise, 346 pragmatic
case study method, 480 Pragmatic Psychotherapy (Driscoll), 39
precontemplation stage, 146, 163--​64, 164t, 165, 166 preparation stage,
146, 147, 163, 164 prescriptive matching benefits, 9--​10 principle-​based
integration, 101--​2 private practice PRNs, 439 problem-​solving
strategies aversive contingencies, 270 behavioral chain analysis, 268,
269--​70 cognitive-​behavior assimilative therapy, 234 dialectical
behavior therapy, 268 solution analysis, 269 validation strategies, 270
Processes of Change Scales, 169 professional organizations PRNs, 442
progressive muscle relaxation, 236 Project MATCH, 177, 359--​60
psychiatry, history of integration, 46 Psychoanalysis, Behavior Therapy,
and the Relational World (Wachtel), 35, 47--​48
psychoanalytic-​behavioral-​relational integration, 345 Psychoanalytic
Therapy and Behavior Therapy: Is Integration Possible?
(Arkowitz/​Messer), 39 psychodrama therapists, integration among, 20
psychodynamic-​interpersonal therapy, 18, 51, 229, 436--​37, 459
psychological treatments, psychotherapy vs., 70 psychopathology,
cognitive-​affective balance in, 45 Psychotherapedia, 51 Psychotherapy: A
Cognitive Integration of Theory and Practice (Ryle), 38 Psychotherapy:
An Eclectic Approach (Garfield), 37 Psychotherapy and Counseling
Federation of Australia, 450 psychotherapy integration assimilative
integration, 11 common factors/​change processes role, 7--​8, 11
consensus/​convergence in, 4, 29--​30, 474--​75 developmental stages of, 18
eclecticism (see eclecticism) frequency trends in, 5f, 5 goal of
integration, 4, 22 integrative practices, 16, 18t integrative
psychotherapy/​psychotherapists, 5--​6, 14--​15 maturation of, 4
methodological efficacy, 6--​7 movement, directions in, 482 obstacles to,
20 parameters, defining, 12

Subject Index pre-​paradigmatic crisis, 3 prevalence of, 13, 14t
professional network development in, 8 pure-​form therapies in, 8, 19
research-​based treatments in, 8 routes to, 8 short-​term therapy, 7
single model inadequacies, 6 specialized clinics, 7 theoretical
integration, 10, 10t, 127, 345, 383--​84 theoretical orientation
combinations in, 16--​18, 18t therapy effectiveness/​outcomes, 7--​8,
9--​10, 21 timing of, 5f, 5 treatment manuals, 7, 18, 46 treatment
selection, 479--​80 Psychotherapy Relationships that Work (Norcross),
50--​51, 80 psychotic disorders, 211 PTSD APIRE PRN, 442 dialectical
behavior therapy, 261 self-​help materials, 361, 362, 368--​69 treatment,
contextual model of, 75 treatment selection, 479 PTSD Coach, 361, 362
Racial/​Cultural Identity Development model, 327--​28 racial identity,
326, 327--​28 Rapprochement and Integration in Psychotherapy
(LeCompte/​Castonguay), 40 rational-​emotive therapy, 271--​72, 437
reactance, 148--​49 reality testing, ongoing, 95, 100 reality therapy,
456 reciprocal communication, 271 reciprocal inhibition principle, 30
reciprocity, dyadic, 197 referrals, differential, 378 reinforcement
management, 165 rejection sensitivity, 197 relationships of choice, 133
relaxation methods, 236 religion/​spirituality, 131, 335 remediation
phase/​situational analysis, 313 repression, 187 residential treatment
effectiveness studies, 437 resistance by clients, 285, 286, 287, 289,
291, 295--​96, 297 systematic treatment selection, 144--​45, 146, 148
Resistance (Wachtel), 38 resistance/​immersion in cultural values, 328
response, 90, 91, 100

519

response-​produced cues, 187 responsiveness, 482 role induction, 92--​93
routine outcome monitoring, 106, 478 SAMHSA National Registry of
Evidence-​Based Programs and Practices, 117 satitherapy, 457 schemas in
cognitive-​behavior assimilative therapy, 230, 239 in cyclical
psychodynamic theory, 184--​85 therapy, 245, 457, 478--​79 schizophrenia,
211, 442 selective inattention, 187 self-​control desensitization, 234,
236 self-​evaluation stage, 90, 91, 95, 100, 164 self-​evaluative split,
240 self-​fulfilling prophecy, 196 self-​help materials benefits of, 362
books, 364 client experiences, assessment of, 363 common concerns, 366
defined, 358 diversity considerations, 365--​66 effectiveness of, 359
films, 362 groups, 359--​60, 362, 364 guided self-​help, 358 harm,
possibility of, 367 life transitions, 366 MOOIs, 369 online support
groups, 360, 362 outcome prediction, 369 prevalence of, 357, 358t
progress monitoring, 368 psychotherapy integration into, 12--​13, 357,
360, 368--​69 research-​supported, 364 resources, recommending, 358, 358t,
362, 364, 365 security/​privacy issues, 367--​68 stages of change, 366
therapist support of, 361, 364 training, 358--​59 treatment/​medication
combined with, 367 treatment philosophy incompatibility, 367 types of,
361 waiting periods/​maintenance, 366 web/​mobile apps, 358, 360, 361--​62,
365, 366, 367--​69 Self-​Help That Works (Norcross), 365 self-​liberation,
165. See also autonomy; liberation of consciousness

520

Subject Index

self-​psychology, 215 services effectiveness studies, 436--​37, 439
Session Rating Scale (SRS), 393--​94 alliance measures, 110 change
patterns, 112 clinical cutoffs, 110 diversity considerations, 112
effective practitioners, 111 frequently of administration, 112 sexual
abuse, self-​help materials, 365 Sheffield Psychotherapy Project, 458
shifting levels strategy, 167, 168t S-​I-​C-​B firing order, 129 Singapore,
453 situation, 90 situational analysis, 306, 307, 310, 312, 313, 316--​17
Skilled Helper model, 458 Skills Training Manual for Treating Borderline
Personality Disorder (Linehan), 364 smoking cessation, 165, 177--​78, 359
social healing practices, 71 social liberation/​social justice, 330
social phobia, social-​evaluative fears, 231 social skills role, 187
Society for the Exploration of Psychotherapy Integration (SEPI), 4, 8,
13, 39, 43, 47, 48, 125--​ 26, 207--​8, 457, 459, 464, 468, 477 Society of
Psychotherapy Research (SPR), 14--​15, 43 solution analysis, 269
spirituality/​religion, 131, 335 stages of change assessment/​formulation,
169 self-​help materials, 366 systematic treatment selection, 146--​47,
150, 151 therapeutic relationship, 171 transtheoretical model, 161--​62,
163, 164t, 476, 480--​81 Stages of Change Questionnaire, 169 STAIRCaSE
applicability, 92 assessment/​formulation, 89, 94 case studies, 97 change
processes, 92 corrective experiences, encouraging, 94, 98, 99 diversity
considerations, 96 hope, fostering, 92, 97 as integrative approach, 88
motivation, fostering, 92, 97 outcome research, 100 patient
awareness/​insight, increasing, 94, 99, 100 positive expectations,
fostering, 92, 97 principles of, 89 reality testing, ongoing, 95, 100

representative techniques, 92 therapeutic alliance facilitation, 93, 97
therapy relationship, 96 status quo, benefits of, 287, 294--​96 stepped
care, 368 stimulus control, 165 Strategies for Change (Lindquist), 397
Structural Profile Inventory (SPI), 130 Structure of Individual
Psychotherapy, The (Beitman), 40 STS. See systematic treatment selection
STS/​innerlife, 143, 151 substance abuse treatment assimilative
psychodynamic psychotherapy, 211 conjoint/​couples therapy case studies,
115f DBT, 261, 278 NIDA PRN, 442--​43 patient-​focused research, 435
self-​help materials, 362, 366, 367 stages/​processes of change studies,
177 suicide crisis intervention, 265 supervision. See
training/​supervision Supervisory Alliance Inventory (SWAI), 394
syncretism, 9 systematic desensitization case studies, 191, 194
cognitive-​behavior assimilative therapy, 236 history of integration,
32--​33 systematic treatment selection applicability, 143, 344
assessment/​formulation, 142 as assimilative integration, 12, 141
cardinal assumptions, 142 case studies, 151 challenges in integration,
21 change processes, 145 coping styles, 144, 145, 146, 149, 151
diversity considerations, 150, 153 as eclecticism, 9 efficacy of, 154
externalization, 150 functional impairment, 143, 144, 148 history of
integration, 51 internalization, 149--​50 methods/​techniques, 148,
154--​55 outcome research, 153 patient's emotional distress, 146
reactance, 148--​49 readiness, 144, 145, 146, 150 resistance, 144--​45,
146, 148 stages of change, 146--​47, 150, 151 therapeutic relationship,
143--​44, 147 training in, 154, 155, 384--​85, 393

Subject Index treatment fit, 143, 151 treatment intensity, 148, 152
validation of, 154 Systematic Treatment Selection-​Clinician Rating Form
(STS-​CRF), 142--​43 Systems of Psychotherapy: A Transtheoretical Analysis
(Prochaska/​Norcross), 161 Taoism, 450--​51, 455 technical eclecticism.
See eclecticism, technical termination, 146 theoretical integration, 10,
10t, 127, 345, 383--​84 theoretical language, 40--​41, 45, 47, 476
therapeutic relationship. See also clients. alliance as predictive of
outcome, 107, 290 alliance facilitation, 93, 96, 97, 211, 219 alliance
ruptures in, 93--​94, 97, 147--​48, 235, 239, 244, 290, 331 assimilative
psychodynamic model, 214 CBASP, 312 children's therapy, 349 client's
lying to therapist, 111 client's problem focus, 76 cognitive-​behavior
assimilative therapy, 234 complementary role utilization, 334 contextual
model, 71, 80 corrective experiences, encouraging, 94, 98, 99
cross-​culturalism, 326--​27, 328--​29, 330, 333 cultural competency,
326--​27, 336--​37 culturally sensitive, 333 cyclical psychodynamic
theory, 191 dialectical behavior therapy, 258, 261, 273 disarming
technique, 239 early experiences emphasis, 186 empathy in, 73
expectation, creation of, 74 feedback informed treatment, 111 focus on,
in CBT, 229--​30 history of integration, 33, 34--​35, 41--​42, 50--​51
information processing in, 72--​73 insight emphasis, 186 integrative
practitioners in, 477 interpersonal skills in, 81 invalidation,
perceived, 258 as mediator of change, 96 meta-​communication, 238--​39
MI + CBT, 290 multimodal therapy, 133, 138 outcome/​alliance
correlations, 75 outcomes, therapeutic ritual in, 76 practice-​based
research, 435 realistic perceptions in, 73 reality testing, ongoing, 95,
100

real relationship, 71, 73, 77--​78, 80, 96 responsiveness, 482 societal
structures/​values, responding to, 334 specific ingredients, 75 stages of
change, 171 strengths emphasis, 190 systematic treatment selection,
143--​44, 147 therapeutic styles, 37 therapist effectiveness, 482
therapists, integration among, 20 therapists effects, 8, 119, 133, 215,
244, 290--​91, 436--​37 therapy-​interfering behaviors, 274
transference-​free genuine relationship, 73 transtheoretical model, 163,
168--​69, 171 trust/​attachment in, 72, 73, 79, 93, 330 Theravada
Buddhism, 455 thought, 90, 95 time-​limited dynamic psychotherapy, 211
training clinic PRNs, 438 training/​supervision assimilative integration,
383--​84 as challenge in integration, 20 common factors/​processes, 384
competency as goal, 399 context-​responsive integration, 481 cultural
identities in, 392 deliberate practice, 382, 481 dialectical behavior
therapy, 279--​80 differential referrals, 378 discordant supervision
relationships, 394 disruptive innovations, 396--​97 feedback monitoring
systems, 393 four paths model, 383 history of integration, 40, 43, 46,
377--​78 IICP College case study, 385 individualized supervision plan,
391 integrative, 378, 398--​99 integrative, directions in, 480
integrative child therapy, 352--​53 integrative psychotherapy, 380, 386
integrative supervision, 389, 390--​91 integrative training sequence, 381
interpersonal skills, 381 MI + CBT, 298--​99 migration influences on, 469
models, 383 modules in, 398--​99 in multimodal therapy, 388
organizational context of, 396 personal therapy, 387 pluralistic
training, 385, 398 practica/​clinical work, 382, 396

521

522

Subject Index

training/​supervision (cont.) practice-​based research, 437 pragmatic
flexibility modeling, 394 principle-​based, 480--​81 principle-​based
integration, 101--​2 professional certification, 387 reflective practice,
382 research training, 387 scientific orientation in, 389 self-​help
materials, 358--​59 supervisor behaviors affecting outcomes, 396 syllabi
samples, 382 systematic treatment selection, 384--​85, 393 in systematic
treatment selection, 154, 155 systems exploration, 381 technology in,
481 theoretical integration, 383--​84 trainees' biases/​anxieties, 389
transdiagnostic adaptations, 9--​10 transference, 37, 38, 197
transference-​free genuine relationship, 73 transference hypothesis,
309--​10, 313, 315--​16, 317 transtheoretical model applicability, 170
assessment/​formulation, 168 case studies, 173 change, levels of, 166,
169 change processes, 162, 172, 173 change processes assessment tools,
169--​70 client consciousness raising, 163 client self-​regulation
systems, 173 contraindications, 170 diversity considerations, 172 expert
systems in, 177--​78 goal of therapy, 170--​71 history of integration, 36,
51 as integrative approach, 162 key level strategy, 167, 168t maximum
impact strategy, 167, 168t outcome research, 177 patient motivation in,
92 relapse, predictive factors, 170--​71 shifting levels strategy, 167,
168t

stage-​matching, 21, 171 stages of change, 161--​62, 163, 164t, 476,
480--​81 stepped care approach, 179 therapeutic relationship, 163,
168--​69, 171 TTM-​t ailored interventions, 178--​79 trauma disorder
therapy, therapist effects on, 8, 479--​80 trauma-​focused cognitive
behavior therapy, 344--​45 trauma-​focused integrative play therapy,
344--​45 traumatic invalidation, 264--​65 treatment manuals, 7, 18, 46
treatment selection, 384--​85, 393 12-​step groups, 364 two-​chair
technique, 99, 240, 242, 335--​36 Two-​Way Bridge initiative, 50, 433,
477--​78 unassertiveness, 90--​92 unconscious incompetence, 94, 95
unfinished business markers, 240 unified psychotherapy, 10, 476--​77
Unified Psychotherapy Project, 51 uniformity myth, 13 university
counseling center PRNs, 441 URICA questionnaire, 169 validation
strategies, 270 Vanderbilt II project, 387 vicious circle
identification, 189, 194--​95 videotape, 7, 18, 46 , 391 Virtual Hope
Box, 361 web/​mobile apps, 358, 360, 361--​62, 365, 366, 367--​69 What
Makes Behavior Change Possible? (Burton), 35 worldview, client's
awareness of, 333 Worry Outcome Diary, 237 Young Child Outcome Rating
Scale (YCORS), 109 Young Child Session Rating Scale (YCSRS), 109 Your
Perfect Right (Alberti/​Emmons), 364 zeitgeist, 28, 162 Zen, DBT
applications of, 258--​59, 260--​61, 263, 271--​72, 273


