![](images/cover.jpg)

[]{#cover.xhtml}

::: coverpage
![cover](images/cover.jpg)
:::

[]{#pre.xhtml}

::: forward
# Person-Centred Therapy

The person-centred approach is one of the most popular, enduring and
respected approaches to psychotherapy and counselling. *Person-Centred
Therapy* returns to its original formulations to define it as radically
different from other self-oriented therapies.

Keith Tudor and Mike Worrall draw on a wealth of experience as
practitioners, a deep knowledge of the approach and its history, and a
broad and inclusive awareness of other approaches. This significant
contribution to the advancement of person-centred therapy:

- Examines the roots of person-centred thinking in existential,
  phenomenological and organismic philosophy.
- Locates the approach in the context of other approaches to
  psychotherapy and counselling.
- Shows how recent research in areas such as neuroscience supports the
  philosophical premises of person-centred therapy.
- Challenges person-centred therapists to examine their practice in the
  light of the history and philosophical principles of the approach.

*Person-Centred Therapy* offers new and exciting perspectives on the
process and practice of therapy, and will encourage person-centred
practitioners to think about their work in deeper and more sophisticated
ways.

**Keith Tudor** is a Director of Temenos and its Postgraduate
Diploma/MSc in Person-Centred Psychotherapy & Counselling. He is also an
Honorary Lecturer in the School of Health, Liverpool John Moores
University.

**Mike Worrall** is a person-centred counsellor and supervisor in
independent practice in Oxford.
:::

[]{#pre1.xhtml}

::: forward
# Advancing Theory in Therapy

### Series Editor: Keith Tudor

Most books covering individual therapeutic approaches are aimed at the
trainee/student market. This series, however, is concerned with
*advanced* and *advancing* theory, offering the reader comparative and
comparable coverage of a number of therapeutic approaches.

Aimed at professionals and postgraduates, *Advancing Theory in Therapy*
will cover an impressive range of individual theories. With full
reference to case studies throughout, each title will

- Present cutting-edge research findings.
- Locate each theory and its application within its cultural context.
- Develop a critical view of theory and practice.

*Titles in the series*

**Body Psychotherapy**

*Edited by Tree Staunton*

\

**Transactional Analysis: A Relational Perspective**

*Helena Hargaden and Charlotte Sills*

\

**Adlerian Psychotherapy: An Advanced Approach to Individual
Psychology**

*Ursula E. Oberst and Alan E. Stewart*

\

**Rational Emotive Behaviour Therapy: Theoretical Developments**

*Edited by Windy Dryden*

\

**Co-Counselling: The Theory and Practice of Re-evaluation Counselling**

*Katie Kauffman and Caroline New*

\

**Analytical Psychology: Contemporary Perspectives in Jungian Analysis**

*Edited by Joe Cambray and Linda Carter*

\

**Person-Centred Therapy: A Clinical Philosophy**

*Keith Tudor and Mike Worrall*

\

Person-Centred Therapy

A clinical philosophy

Keith Tudor and Mike Worrall
:::

[]{#title.xhtml}

:::: titlepage
# Person-Centered Therapy {.title}

\
\

# A Clinical philosophy {.subtitle}

\
\
\

## Keith Tudor and Mike Worrall {.author}

\
\
\
\

::: image
![title](images/title.jpg)
:::
::::

[]{#copyright.xhtml}

::: copyright
First published 2006\
by Routledge\
27 Church Road, Hove, East Sussex BN3 2FA

Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada\
by Routledge\
270 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016

*Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group*

Copyright Â© 2006 Keith Tudor & Mike Worrall

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2006.

"To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or
Routledge's collection of thousands of eBooks please go to
[www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk](http://www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk)."

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other
means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and
recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.

This publication has been produced with paper manufactured to strict
environmental standards and with pulp derived from sustainable forests.

*British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data*\
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library

*Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data*\
Tudor, Keith, 1955--\
Person-centred therapy : a clinical philosophy / Keith Tudor and Mike
Worrall.\
p. cm. -- (Advancing theory in therapy)\
Includes bibliographical references and index.\
ISBN 1-58391-123-5 (hbk) -- ISBN 1-58391-124-3 (pbk)\
1. Client-centered psychotherapy. I. Worrall, Mike. II. Title. III.
Series.\
RC481.T83 2006\
616.89'14--dc22\
[2005025560]{.right}

ISBN10: 1-58391-123-5 (hbk)\
ISBN10: 1-58391-124-3 (pbk)

ISBN13: 9-78-1-58391-123-5 (hbk)\
ISBN13: 9-78-1-58391-124-3 (pbk)
:::

[]{#pre2.xhtml}

::: forward
'This work is a unique contribution to person-centred inquiry and
thought. It is a particularly timely and "deepening" addition to the
burgeoning person-centred literature. It's a refreshing, original
exploration that places the approach in context with major, related,
historical and contemporary thought systems. Key aspects of
person-centred theory are critically examined in ways that enlarge their
meaning, challenge some features, and offer refinement and support to
other elements. The book is often evocative in its ideas and is fresh in
its information.'

\

Goff Barrett-Lennard, PhD, Honorary Fellow, Murdoch University, Perth,
Australia

\

'This impressively mature book adds much analytical backbone to this
centrally important therapeutic approach. With its appearance, no longer
will person-centred praxis be open to the charge (albeit unwarranted) of
theoretical flakiness. For what we find here is philosophy at its best:
practically relevant to real-world concerns, passionate, committed - and
with a quite breathtaking panorama of philosophical ideas weaved into
the text. It is a particular delight to see Alfred North Whitehead's
much-neglected philosophy given just prominence. With the acute analytic
sensibility which they bring to their subject matter, and being unafraid
to challenge sacred cows where they find it to be necessary, Tudor and
Worrall have provided us with an excellent model of the richly fertile
way in which therapy and philosophy can illuminate and inform each
other. Person-centred praxis is substantially advanced with the
appearance of this seminal *tour de force*,'

\

Richard House, PhD, Senior Lecturer in Psychotherapy and Counselling,
Roehampton University

\

'As clinicians, Keith Tudor and Mike Worrall have spent years pursuing
in-depth study of Carl Rogers' philosophy, methods and applications.
Their intellectual curiosity and dedication to understanding the meaning
of Carl's works and expanding the concepts is brought forth in this
book. For theorists and clinicians alike, this book will be
illuminating.'

\

Natalie Rogers, PhD, Professor (Adjunct), California Institute of\
Integral Studies, Institute of Transpersonal Psychology, and\
Distinguished Consulting Faculty at Saybrook Graduate School

\
:::

[]{#series.xhtml}

::: chapter
# Series preface

This series focuses on advanced and advancing theory in psychotherapy.
Its aims are: to present theory and practice within a specific
theoretical orientation or approach at an advanced, postgraduate level;
to advance theory by presenting and evaluating new ideas and their
relation to the approach; to locate the orientation and its applications
within cultural contexts both historically in terms of the origins of
the approach, and contemporaneously in terms of current debates about
philosophy, theory, society and therapy; and, finally, to present and
develop a critical view of theory and practice, especially in the
context of debates about power, organisation and the increasing
professionalisation of therapy.

As both the co-author of this book and the editor of the series in which
it appears, it is perhaps a little invidious for me to introduce this
particular volume. Dealing with the dual role involved in this task I am
reminded of Gilbert and Sullivan's Lord Chancellor when, faced with
being both judge and advocate, he sings: 'Said I to myself, said I'!
Taking inspiration from this to differentiate myself in a similar way,
as series editor I am delighted to introduce this volume on advancing
person-centred therapy. It appears shortly after the anniversary of the
birth of the approach sixty-five years ago, when Carl Rogers first
presented his 'newer psychotherapy' which he described as a
'relationship therapy', a term which, currently, is increasingly being
used across the theoretical spectrum of psychotherapy. In this book, the
authors emphasise this relational perspective to the various subjects
under discussion: the nature of the human organism and its tendency to
actualise, the development of self and personhood, as well as the ways
in which, as human beings, we become alienated from others, ourselves
and our environment, and how, as therapists, we may work. This is
particularly relevant and topical in a world in which governments and
people appear to express their differences with others in increasingly
conflictual ways, which further alienate relationships and co-create
further alienation. Although widespread as a core model for many
counselling courses, person-centred therapy has not always been taken
seriously as a psychotherapy, in part perhaps because it does not
distinguish between the two activities. In this volume the authors take
on the broader task of advancing person-centred therapy as a
well-founded and researched psychotherapy which embodies particular
philosophical principles - in effect, a philosophy for and in
therapeutic or clinical practice.

Keith Tudor
:::

[]{#ack.xhtml}

::: forward
# Acknowledgements

In this book we argue that the human organism cannot be understood
outside of its environment, and that relationships are both inevitable
and necessary for survival, enhancement and creativity. We want to
acknowledge the personal and professional relationships which have
sustained us especially over the past seven years of this book's
gestation. We owe particular thanks to Louise Embleton Tudor, Natalie
Rogers, Charlotte Sills, and Brian Thorne for their long-standing
encouragement and support. Goff Barrett-Lennard, Yvonne Bates, Louise
Embleton Tudor, Helena Hargaden, Dr Fiona MacKenzie, Briony Nicholls,
Janet Radcliffe-Richards, Peter Schmid and Harry Van Belle read portions
of and made specific comments on early drafts of the text. We are
grateful to all of them for their close and exact reading. We remain, of
course, entirely responsible for any deficits or inconsistencies. We
thank the British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy for
permission to reproduce Figure 7.1 and some associated text from an
article which first appeared in *Counselling* in February 2000. Keith
acknowledges especially the first cohort of the Temenos MSc group for
their willingness to wrestle with many of the ideas that find fruition
in these pages. Mike thanks Anisha Mehta, Carole Shadbolt, and Geraldine
Thomson for consistent love, kindness, and cheerfulness.

Kathi Murphy introduced us to one another in 1991. We dedicate this book
to her with great appreciation, affection and respect.
:::

[]{#intro.xhtml}

::::::::: forward
# Introduction

::: cite
One couldn't carry on life comfortably without a little blindness to the
fact that everything has been said better than we can put it ourselves.

George Eliot[^1^](#intro.xhtml_ft1){#intro.xhtml_fn1}

The English are incurious as to theory, take fundamentals for granted
and are more interested in the state of the roads than in their place on
the map.

R.H. Tawney

First there is experiencing, then there is a theory.

Carl Rogers and John K. Wood
:::

Person-centred therapy is based on an organismic psychology which
describes the innate and unforced tendency of human beings, given a
conducive environment, to actualise their potential. Person-centred
therapists work simply to support this tendency by co-creating as
conducive an environment as possible.

Rogers dates the beginning of person-centred therapy from 11 December
1940 when he delivered a paper on 'A Newer Psychotherapy' at the
University of Minnesota (see Rogers, 1959b, 1961/67b; Rogers & Russell,
2002). Over the years that Rogers wrote, he and others referred to this
activity in different ways:

- 'Non-directive therapy' -- in which terms, influenced by Jessie Taft,
  Frederick Allen and Virginia Axline, Rogers (1939) describes his
  therapeutic work with children.
- 'Relationship therapy' -- a term with which Rogers (1942), influenced
  by Otto Rank and Taft, first describes his 'newer psychotherapy', one
  which began to emphasise the significance of the therapeutic
  relationship over and above particular therapeutic techniques.
- 'Client-centred therapy' -the first major exposition of which is in a
  book of the same name (Rogers, 1951) including, significantly, a view
  of the therapeutic relationship as experienced by the client.
- 'Person-centred therapy' -- which offers a wider view of the client as
  person and implies the presence of the therapist also as person. Ivey,
  Ivey and Simek-Morgan (1993) date this last shift of terminology from
  1961 and the publication of *On Becoming a Person,* and suggest that
  it reflects a therapy characterised by the increased personal
  involvement of the therapist, and a greater emphasis on relational
  issues.
- 'The person-centred approach' -- which refers generally to the
  approach as it informs practice in fields other than therapy, such as
  education and training, groupwork, conflict resolution, and
  organisational consultancy. For a contemporary exposition of this see
  Embleton Tudor *et al.* (2004).

In our view these developments unfold one out of the other, and each
enhances rather than replaces what went before. The different
nomenclatures represent different emphases which still inform the theory
and practice of person-centred therapy, and reflect particular strands
of thinking and practice which we represent and develop throughout this
book. As with other theoretical orientations, different personalities,
interests and perspectives have made of the person-centred approach a
broad church with a number of different wings or traditions. Sanders
(2004) identifies five 'tribes' of the person-centred nation: classical,
focusing, experiential, integrative and existential. To these, we would
add two further tribes: the expressive therapy of Natalie Rogers
(1993/2000) and pre-therapy as developed by Gary Prouty (1994) and
others.

In the third decade since Rogers' death, we hope that this present work
contributes to the continuing development of the approach to therapy he
founded. Other sources of theoretical interest, development and support
are to be found in the published papers from international
person-centred and experiential conferences (Lietaer *et al.,* 1990;
Hutterer *et al.,* 1996; Marques-Teixeira & Antones, 2000; Watson *et
al.,* 2002) and in the international journal *Person-Centered &
Experiential Psychotherapies.*

In our reading and research we have drawn on and cited publications
written in or translated into the English language. There is also a
significant and growing person-centred literature in Dutch, German,
Japanese, Portuguese and Spanish, for details of which see the websites
of Lietaer ([www.pce-world.org](http://www.pce-world.org)) and Schmid
([www.pca-online.net](http://www.pca-online.net)). A collection of
person-centred literature may also be found in the International
Archives of the Person-Centered Approach at the Universidad
Iberoamericana in Mexico
([www.aiep.bib.uia.mx/aiep](http://www.aiep.bib.uia.mx/aiep)). We are
concerned to address an international audience and aim to write so as to
address diversity of experience. Where we refer to something
specifically to do with the United Kingdom (UK) we tend to signpost this
as such, partly to acknowledge specific experience or local examples in
areas such as legislation, and partly to invite you to draw or reflect
on your own experience, situation, context, and equivalence.

From its beginnings, and largely because Rogers himself was a
psychologist, person-centred therapy has been extensively researched:
see, for example, Rogers (1942), Cartwright (1957), Rogers *et al.*
(1967), Truax and Mitchell (1971) and Watson (1984). More recently,
research compares the efficacy of person-centred therapy favorably with
other approaches: see Friedli *et al.* (1997) and King *et al.* (2000).
Despite such research and a resurgence of interest in the person-centred
approach, represented by the number of counselling courses which espouse
its principles, and the publication of more than fifty books on the
subject in the past ten years, some critics still see the approach as
overly positive or optimistic, naÃ¯ve, lacking in theory and rigour, and
overly reliant on certain attitudes of the therapist. Tudor and Merry
(2002) and Thorne (2003) address some of these criticisms. Part of our
motivation for writing this book in the context of this series is,
precisely, to advance a more robust view of person-centred therapy,
acknowledging, for example, that it offers theoretical and practical
insights into working with people who are severely 'disturbed'. A second
motivation, which also fulfils the brief of the series, is to advance
the theory, to take it further. We do this in a number of ways, and
specifically by reclaiming the centrality of the organism in the theory
and its practice.

\

## Person-centred therapy: Location, relation and integration {#intro.xhtml_clnk1}

Most writers place person-centred therapy within the humanistic
movement. Mearns and Thorne, however, (2000, p. 27) argue that 'it does
not in fact have much in common with the other established humanistic
therapies'. They continue: 'The governing feature of person-centred
therapy (PCT) is not its "humanistic" orientation but its forsaking of
mystique and other "powerful" behaviours of therapists. In this regard
many humanistic therapies are as different from PCT as psychoanalysis.'
Others, including Ellingham (1995, 1997), argue that the person-centred
approach differs from other approaches in its most fundamental
assumptions. It is precisely these fundamental assumptions which we
examine and advance in this book. In doing so, we think that the
traditional division into three or, now, four 'forces' or 'schools' of
psychology -- the analytic, the behavioural, the humanistic and the
existential -- is becoming redundant. Rather than locating
person-centred therapy, or ourselves for that matter, within some
school, we are more interested in locating person-centred therapy with
regard to other theoretical approaches on the basis of principles,
values and meta-theoretical considerations. Warner's (2000) 'levels of
interventiveness', for example, based on the degree to which
practitioners intervene in their clients' processes, provides one
framework for understanding, comparing and analysing different theories
and practices.

In general the person-centred approach as a whole has tended to stand
alone, and has not developed easy or significant relationships with
other theories. The history of the approach shows Rogers developing its
theory and practice, initially on his own, and then supported by
like-minded colleagues and research students. Although he read widely,
and although what he read informed his thinking and practice, he seems
to have had little or no contact with contemporaries like Fritz Perls
and Eric Berne, both of whom lived in California at the same time as
Rogers, and with both of whom he shares significant philosophical ground
(see O'Hara, 1984, and Tudor, 1999, respectively). We might even say
that Rogers developed his thinking not only in isolation from
sympathetic contemporaries, but in opposition to colleagues, like
Skinner, whose thinking was largely inimical to his own. Of the public
dialogues he had (see Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990a), he had none with
psychologists or psychotherapists other than Skinner. We think that this
isolation is due to a number of reasons which are:

- In part autobiographical -- Rogers (1967) himself reports being
  'socially shy'.
- In part theoretical -- Rogers developed a view of the person as
  autonomous and free-standing, rather than relational and
  interdependent. We think that, to a certain extent, this also
  describes the theory itself.
- In part political -- pioneers setting out to develop their own ideas
  or establish their own school of therapy often look inwards rather
  than outwards.

Against a background of a number of 'forces', schools and traditions,
the *zeitgeist* now is one of integration. We think that person-centred
therapy offers individual practitioners opportunity to integrate that
which is personally and idiosyncratically important to them. Some may
want to focus especially on the body, for instance; others may be
interested in particularly cognitive or spiritual processes. These areas
of interest are not exclusive to any one particular theoretical
orientation. Person-centred philosophy emphasises holism and integrity,
and demands of practitioners who want to integrate theories, concepts or
methods from other psychological approaches that they make such
integration personal. We take up this discussion in [Chapter
9](#c9.xhtml).

\

## The nature, place and use of theory {#intro.xhtml_clnk2}

Our aim, as we've said, is to advance the theory and practice of the
person-centred approach. Perhaps we need to define what we mean by
theory. Bohm (1980/83, p. 3) offers this:

<div>

The word 'theory' derives from the Greek 'theoria', which has the same
root as 'theatre', in a word meaning 'to view' or 'to make a spectacle'.
Thus, it might be said that a theory is primarily a form of insight,
i.e. a way of looking at the world, and not a form of knowledge of how
the world is.

</div>

This catches the provisional nature of theory both as we understand it
and as we want to advance it. Any particular theory is simply one way of
looking at and making sense of what seem to be the facts of our
experiences. 'The facts' says Rogers (1953/67b, p. 25) 'are friendly',
and theory is an attempt (1951, p. 481) to 'contain and explain the
observed facts'. The more adequately and comprehensively a theory does
that, the more helpful it is. If we want to keep the theories we hold
helpful and relevant, we must also be willing to amend them in the light
of our changing experiences.

Although Rogers is known as a theorist, he says of himself that he saw
experience, rather than theory, as primary. That is to say, he worked as
a therapist, had the experiences that that entailed, and then looked for
whatever sense and order seemed naturally to emerge from those
experiences. The various elements of person-centred theory, then, are
tentative descriptions of that emerging sense and order. If theory is
'to be profitable' he says (1951, p. 440), it 'must follow experience,
not precede it'. Some years later (1959, p. 191) he describes theory as
'a fallible, changing attempt to construct a network of gossamer threads
which will contain the solid facts'. More than fifty years on from this
statement, and reading it with a postmodern scepticism, we may doubt the
presence or viability of 'solid facts'. With that proviso, however,
Rogers' description of theory as both fallible and changing locates
theory in an appropriately humble relationship to experience. It seems
to us both inevitable and desirable that we should evolve and amend
whatever theories we hold so that they keep up with our evolving
experiences and perspectives. Rogers (1959b, p. 190) endorses this view:
'Unless we regard the discovery of truth as a closed and finished book,
then there will be new discoveries which will contradict the best
theories which we can now construct.' This is similar to Karl Popper's
point that science progresses through a process of conjectures and
refutations. Rogers' theories and hypotheses are just that: theories and
hypotheses to be tested against experience. Popper was a contemporary of
Rogers, and Rogers cites his views of the 'open society' (Rogers,
1961/67c, p. 399). This book is our attempt, on the basis of our
experiences as therapists, to contradict person-centred theory, and
therefore to further its evolution.

Kurt Lewin is alleged to have said that there is nothing as practical as
good theory. We've alluded to one of its uses above: that it allows us
to see whatever orderliness there may be in our experience. This in turn
affords us an opportunity to ask new questions of our experience, and in
doing so to advance what we know. Angyal (1941, p. 7) puts it this way:

<div>

The utility of a theory consists essentially in that it serves as a
guide, as a point of reference, for empirical studies, which otherwise
are likely to result in an utterly chaotic and incoherent mass of data.
The utility of a good theory is twofold: it allows us to question nature
intelligently and offers a background for the interpretation of
empirical data.

</div>

Theory, however, is not specifically predictive. We've argued that it
arises out of experience, and can therefore make sense only of what has
already happened. It is, says Phillips (1994, p. 154), 'by definition,
what we already know'. Mearns (1997, p. 146) recognises that it does not
'predict the behavior of an individual client'. In so far, though, as it
provides a way of thinking about our experiences, it helps us examine
what we know and develop curiosity about what we don't. Another way of
saying this is that theory, at its best, helps us move from experience
to discovery, from what we know to what we don't know yet.

This book is one of a series which focuses on advancing *theory.* We
recognise that once ideas and suggestions are in print they can carry
more authority than their authors intended. We don't want to be seen to
be offering guidance about how to *do* person-centred therapy, and for
this reason we are not necessarily going to spell out the implications
of our thinking for your practice. We want rather to invite you, the
reader and practitioner, to think about your own experiences, to
recognise with Rogers (1953/67b, p. 25) that the facts of your
experience are 'friendly', and to advance the theory in the light of
those experiences.

We are also reluctant to give too many examples from our practice,
partly because of our desire to honour confidentiality, and partly
because we think that in a book of this sort their qualities of
particularity and locality will fix thinking rather than free it. They
are likely to distract rather than illustrate. We could, of course,
invent examples, as Bryant-Jefferies does in a recent and continuing
series of books (published by Radcliffe Medical Press). We have
reservations about this approach. Reviewing one of Bryant-Jeffries'
books, Schlebusch (2004. p. 71) says both that 'it gives us a deep
insight into what actually happens between Dave (the client) and Alan
(the therapist) in 12 completely transcribed therapy sessions' *and
'*that the book is not a transcription of a real therapy'! We agree with
Spinelli (1997, p. 3) that case-studies and case-examples, even if drawn
from life, 'are highly selective "fictions" usually told from the
perspective of one, highly biased participant in a shared experience
whose "meaning" is open-ended and likely to change significantly over
time'. Our objection to Bryant-Jeffries' methodology is that he tells
the story as if from the perspective of three of the participants:
client, counsellor and supervisor. This means that his books are more
novels than case-studies, and although we value novels, and learn much
from good ones, we question the moral and aesthetic integrity of novels
written expressly to convey particular learnings. We do not see how
transcriptions of a relationship that is itself fictional give us any
insight at all into what 'actually' happens. So we compromise. We write
mainly in the abstract, and will offer limited case-examples only where
they seem to us to illustrate particular points that need particular
illustration.

\

## Back to the future {#intro.xhtml_clnk3}

As we've written together, we notice that we've been looking backwards
in order to advance. By this we mean that in order to take
person-centred theory forward we've been looking back at the roots and
root principles of the approach. This has seemed fruitful for a number
of reasons. In the first place it has reminded us that person-centred
ideas pre-date Rogers by millennia, even if no one at the time called
them person-centred. Aristotle (384--322 BCE), for instance, prefigures
Rogers' notion of an actualising tendency: 'The productions of nature
have an innate tendency in the direction of the best condition of which
they are capable' (1955, p. 44). Notions of this tendency and of the
organism which it characterises appear in many psychological,
philosophical and spiritual traditions, as well as in different health
disciplines, such as acupuncture, homoeopathy and naturopathy. Polonius'
advice to Laertes in Act 1 Scene 3 of Shakespeare's *Hamlet* is a lovely
description of congruence, integrity and reliability:

<div>

This above all: to thine own self be true,

And it must follow, as the night the day,

Thou canst not then be false to any man.

</div>

Marcus Aurelius (121--180 ACE) gave simple advice on what we might now
call empathic listening: 'Accustom yourself to give careful attention to
what others are saying, and try your best to enter into the mind of the
speaker' (1964, p. 104).

These are simply a sample of some of the ideas we've come across. We
don't intend them to be systematic or comprehensive, nor to suggest that
Rogers was familiar with these particular authors. We mean only to point
out that the ideas that Rogers brought together under one umbrella have
a long pedigree in their own right, and are not exclusively
person-centred. Whilst much ancient wisdom is still relevant, two tasks
fall to each generation: to rediscover and review ancient wisdom; and to
set it alongside more recent and current developments. Rogers did this
in his own time, and we are offering to do something similar here.

Rogers himself acknowledges his debt to, and borrowing from, earlier
writers and philosophers, such as Lao Tzu, the author of the *Tao Te
Ching,* whom he quotes on leadership (Rogers, 1983), and SÃ¸ren
Kierkegaard, to whom he owes the title of [chapter 8](#c8.xhtml) of *On
Becoming A Person* (1961/67b). In the same book he acknowledges his
borrowing of the term 'personal construct' from George Kelly, the
founder of personal construct psychology. He adopts the phrase 'I-Thou'
from his near contemporary Martin Buber, with whom he dialogued in 1957
(see Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990; Anderson & Cissna, 1997), and
reports (1963/78) his pleasure and surprise that almost identical ideas
about holism are to be found in the work of Smuts. Kramer (1995) has
traced Rogers' debt to Otto Rank and Jessie Taft, a debt which puts
Rogers only two handshakes away from Sigmund Freud.

Rogers also imports significant terms from other disciplines. The word
'congruence', for instance, has a mathematical provenance; and both the
word 'proposition', and the term 'necessary and sufficient', come from
the language of philosophy, and in particular from the field of logic.

Rogers was not original as to the content of some of his ideas. He did,
however, appropriate ideas from a wide range of sources, synthesise them
into a (mostly) coherent and relevant philosophy, and use them as the
basis for a new and radical form of psychotherapy. His research
methodology was also radical. Listening to taped counselling sessions
and drawing deductions about therapeutic conditions was, literally,
client-centred. We use the word 'radical' deliberately here to connote a
way of thinking that differs at its very roots from other contemporary
ways of thinking.

Chesterton (1910/94) said that one of the troubles with Christianity was
not that it had been tried and found wanting; but that it had been found
too difficult, and therefore never fully tried. As with Christianity, so
with the person-centred approach. In our view, the radical implications
of Rogers' original formulations are still too little examined at the
extremes. We intend to examine them, remembering that Rogers (1960/67a,
p. 244) saw the theory of the approach not as dogma, doctrine or creed,
but 'as a statement of hypotheses' to be tested and investigated.

\

## The thesis of the book: Clinical philosophy {#intro.xhtml_clnk4}

The person-centred approach is 'a way of being' (see Rogers, 1980a).
That is to say it is a set of ideas which constitute a philosophy of
life. Rogers (1986/90, p. 138) describes the person-centred approach as
'a basic philosophy'. He goes on: 'When this philosophy is lived, it
helps the person expand the development of his or her own capacities'
and 'stimulates constructive change in others'. As Rogers articulated
them, these ideas arose out of and apply most immediately to the
relationship between therapist and client and, in this sense,
person-centred therapy is a *clinical* philosophy: a way of being,
underpinned by certain philosophical principles, embodied by the
therapist, in a clinical setting. We use 'clinical' to refer to the
field that is the clinic or the consulting room. It does not necessarily
carry, for us, cold, medical or impersonal connotations.

This is a similar perspective to that of Frank Lake, the author of a
volume on *Clinical Theology* (Lake, 1966, p. xxiv):

<div>

The psychiatrist ... must discourse on the meaning of pain and make
sense of chronic suffering. He must communicate some of his own courage
and share his personal philosophy for dealing with hard times ... He is
neither a professional philosopher nor a professional theologian. But he
must attempt, as an amateur, to be both.

</div>

He continues (ibid., p. xxiv):

<div>

If professional philosophers were so sure of the validity and
effectiveness of their philosophies as to run clinics, this is the point
at which the patient could suitably be referred to a professional
philosopher, for a new style of wisdom appropriate to living in pain.

</div>

Person-centred practice is based on certain philosophical assumptions
about human nature and the person, and emphasises the therapist's way of
being and attitudes. Person-centred therapy, then, is an applied
philosophy; and, in our view and at best, person-centred therapists are
applied or clinical philosophers. Two implications follow from this. The
first is that the practitioner needs to examine and be familiar with his
or her own personal philosophy (see Tudor & Worrall, 2004b), not least
to see to what degree it fits or is congruent with the philosophical
assumptions that underlie the approach. The second is that the
practitioner needs to understand both the assumptions of the approach,
and the implications of those assumptions for practice. In this sense we
want to advance person-centred theory by examining its philosophical
assumptions from a clinical (rather than an abstract) perspective. Our
thesis parallels Wittgenstein's notion of a 'therapeutic' philosophy, by
which he refers to the practice of dissolving philosophical problems by
showing what the terms of reference they depend on actually *mean* in
their particular fields. Of course, this also parallels therapy in that
therapists help clients to dissolve or resolve problems by understanding
the various meanings they give to them.

Both implications, noted above, represent something of our own personal
and professional journeys. If all theory is autobiographical, this is
not surprising. The book itself is one of the fruits of our professional
collaboration over fifteen years. Between us, we have been involved in a
quartet of books which reflect our interest in defining person-centred
psychology (Tudor & Merry, 2002), the approach as an *approach*
(Embleton Tudor *et al.,* 2004), person-centred approaches to
supervision (Tudor & Worrall, 2004a) and, in this present work,
advancing theory.

As we review the person-centred and, for us, *present-centred* approach
to therapy, we advance a number of propositions which we hope will
assert, question and further the approach. We propose, amongst other
things, that:

- The organism is central to the philosophy, theory and practice of the
  approach.
- Person-centred therapy is an environmental therapy.
- The human organism tends towards both autonomy and homonomy or
  belonging.
- The person and his behaviour are inseparable.
- Rogers' therapeutic conditions are neither necessary nor sufficient.
- The therapeutic condition of 'psychological contact' between therapist
  and client is best elaborated in terms of empathic understanding and
  unconditional positive regard.
- The client's experience and perception of 'being received' by the
  therapist is the one essential condition of therapy.
- Fluidity, creativity and the exercise of personal power are intrinsic
  qualities of the organism and observable outcomes of effective
  therapy.
- Person-centred literature and practice consistently undervalue the
  role of the client in the process of effective therapy.
- Effective psychotherapy depends upon active therapeutic relating and
  is therefore dialogic and co-created.

\

## Structure of the book {#intro.xhtml_clnk5}

The organisation of the book follows our concern to place philosophy at
the centre of our understanding of person-centred therapy. In [Chapter
1](#c1.xhtml) we examine the inevitability and importance of philosophy
and, from that, a number of philosophical traditions which influence
person-centred theory and practice. For us, the organism lies at the
heart of the person-centred approach to therapy. In [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml), therefore, we reclaim the tradition of organismic
psychology and consider its implications. The organism cannot be
understood apart from its tendencies and these are the subject of
[Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml). [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml) on self and [Chapter
5](#c5.xhtml) on person represent developing and developed aspects of
the organism in its environment, relating to others. In both chapters
there is, again, a sense of reclaiming and relocating person-centred
therapy, especially in the context of self psychology and debates about
personhood. At this point, our focus on the clinical application of the
person-centred approach becomes most apparent. A book on the *approach*
would consider a number of applications and implications, as does Rogers
(1959b) in his major formulation of the client-centred framework:
relationships, groups, community, organisation and learning. For further
discussions of these areas of application see Embleton Tudor *et al.*
(2004). Here, following our reclamation of the reality of the organism
at the heart of person-centred psychology and therapy, and having
differentiated between the organism, self and person, we turn our
attention to their respective organisation and disorganisation as a way
of understanding psychopathology in terms of authenticity and alienation
([Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)). We then focus on the theory and practice of
person-centred therapy, through discussions of the conditions of therapy
([Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml)) and the process of therapy ([Chapter
8](#c8.xhtml)). In [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml) we review changing
formulations and ideas about Rogers' therapeutic conditions. In [Chapter
8](#c8.xhtml), under the general title of process, we review the process
and outcomes of therapy, the nature of the therapeutic relationship and
the person of the therapist. In our own clinical practices we are
concerned to hold the concept and actuality of the active exchange
between organism and environment as central to an understanding of both.
So in [Chapter 9](#c9.xhtml) we look at the environments person-centred
therapy itself inhabits: intellectual, professional and ethical. We
conclude with a discussion of person-centred therapy as an integrative
or integrating therapy, and some final reflections on person-centred
therapy.

We assume a high level of familiarity with the basic texts of the
approach and a willingness to grapple with the ideas they offer. We see
no difference between the activities of counselling and psychotherapy
and thus use the terms interchangeably or, more commonly, use the
generic term 'therapy'. To avoid the clumsy constructions 's/he', 'he or
she', or 'they', we use personal pronouns alternately.

In a work of this nature and size, there are, inevitably, gaps. Some of
these we have intended, and some not. Clearly we have chosen to advance
our own particular view of person-centred therapy. We have not sought to
represent the views of others more associated with particular 'tribes'.
Sanders (2004) represents some of these traditions and, most recently,
Purton (2004) introduces and advances the theory of 'focusing-oriented
psychotherapy'. We have chosen also to focus mainly on the work of
individual therapists with individual clients. We have not, therefore,
addressed therapeutic groups, or the process of learning. The
person-centred approach has contributed much to the theory of groups and
their facilitation, beginning with Rogers' (1970/73) own work, developed
by Barrett-Lennard (1979) and Wood (1984, 1999) and, more recently, by a
collection of authors in a volume edited by Lago and MacMillan (1999).
We have not discussed the implications of the theory of person-centred
therapy for learning. Again, this is one of Rogers' major contributions
to the wider field of education, learning and training (Rogers, 1969,
1983; Rogers & Freiberg, 1994). Others have discussed the implications
of person-centred theory with regard to the training of person-centred
therapists (Mearns, 1997) and we have discussed this elsewhere with
regard to education (Embleton Tudor *et al.,* 2004), and the supervision
of therapists (Tudor & Worrall, 2004b).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1^](#intro.xhtml_fn1){#intro.xhtml_ft1} References for all the
epigrams in this book can be found in [Appendix 1](#app1.xhtml).
:::::::::

[]{#c1.xhtml}

::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 1 Philosophy

::: cite
Philosophy does not initiate interpretations. Its search for a
rationalistic scheme is the search for more adequate criticism, and for
more adequate justification, of the interpretations which we perforce
employ.

Alfred North Whitehead

The attainment of biological knowledge we are seeking is essentially
akin to this phenomenon -- to the capacity of the organism to become
adequate to its environmental conditions.

Kurt Goldstein

One cannot engage in psychotherapy without giving operational evidence
of an underlying value orientation and view of human nature. It is
definitely preferable, in my estimation, that such underlying views be
open and explicit, rather than covert and implicit.

Carl Rogers

To do philosophy is to explore one's own temperament, and yet at the
same time to attempt to discover the truth.

Iris Murdoch
:::

'Philosophy' says Howard (2000, p. xiv) 'underpins therapy as a means to
healing, identity, direction and meaning. It deserves more attention.'
We want to begin this book by according philosophy some of that
attention. Specifically, we want to look in this chapter at some of the
ways in which philosophical principles underpin the practice of therapy,
and especially the practice of person-centred therapy.

Before we do that we need to define what we mean by philosophy. 'Most
definitions of philosophy' says Quinton (1995, p. 666) 'are fairly
controversial, particularly if they aim to to be at all interesting or
profound.' For our purposes we are taking philosophy to mean the
underlying principles on which or out of which a person builds a life
and chooses how to behave. This is a deliberately limited definition, in
keeping with our conviction that the person-centred approach constitutes
a functional, rather than an abstract, philosophy.

As we argue in the Introduction, we think that philosophy can help us
understand ourselves, others and the world, and that we may ground many
of the ideas and much of the practice of person-centred therapy in
philosophical ideas. Wittgenstein (1921/2001, pp. 29--30) makes a number
of points about philosophy:

- It is not a body of doctrine but an activity.
- It is a meta-activity, and not of the same order of things as the
  natural sciences.
- It results in the clarification rather than the creation of
  propositions.
- Its task is to make thoughts clear and to give them sharp boundaries.

We are citing Wittgenstein for a number of reasons. He is one of the
most important philosophers of the twentieth century, and his work has
influenced different schools of philosophy, including logical positivism
and analytic philosophy. Some of his later work is compatible with
radical hermeneutics and more postmodern perspectives. Although there is
no immediate evidence that Rogers read his work, Wittgenstein was
pro-foundly concerned with meaning in language and with symbolism, both
of which underpin Rogers' work. Biographically they share a background
in empirical sciences -- Rogers in scientific agriculture, Wittgenstein
in engineering and mathematics -- which is reflected in their subsequent
fields of psychology and philosophy. Wittgenstein's view of philosophy
as a practice aimed not at solving problems but at resolving them
through a better understanding of language supports our current interest
in advancing person-centred theory and practice. In his last work
(published in 1953, two years after his death) Wittgenstein compares
philosophy with therapeutic practice, and a number of writers in the
field of therapy have drawn on his work (see, for example, Lynch, 1997;
Stige, 1998).

We suggest that the points Wittgenstein makes about philosophy are
analogous to the practice of psychotherapy.

- Psychotherapy is not a body of doctrine but an activity.

  From the beginning Rogers was interested in what worked. He took a
  pragmatic approach to his work, and grew the theory initially out of
  his observations and reflections. He saw, too, that descriptive
  theories could easily become prescriptive and doctrinal, leading to
  followers arguing about what therapists should or should not do in
  order to be effective. Writing appreciatively (1959, p. 191) about the
  way Freud showed 'more respect for the facts he observed than for the
  theories he had built', Rogers saw that 'insecure disciples' had taken
  Freud's 'gossamer threads' of theory and made of them 'iron chains of
  dogma'. He suggested 'that every formulation of a theory contains this
  same risk and that, at the time a theory is constructed, some
  precautions should be taken to prevent it from becoming dogma'. It's
  perhaps inevitable that any activity sustained purposefully over time
  will generate ideas that some practitioners will begin to hold as
  doctrine or dogma. 'Disciples are' after all, says Phillips (1994, p.
  62), 'the people who haven't got the joke.' Wittgenstein and Rogers
  between them remind us of two things: that the activity comes first;
  and that, humourless disciples notwithstanding, theory need not, and
  probably should not, become doctrine.

- Psychotherapy is a meta-activity, and not of the same order of things
  as the natural sciences.

  If the natural sciences describe and explore what *is,* philosophy and
  psychotherapy are meta-activities in that they offer opportunities to
  reflect upon the nature of what is. They sit, as Wittgenstein says of
  philosophy (1921/2001, p. 29), 'above or below the natural sciences,
  not beside them'. Clearly, psychotherapy as a process can often do
  little to change what is. The most effective bereavement therapist
  cannot bring a client's mother or lover back to life. Effective
  therapists can, however, offer their clients a space for them to
  reflect on what is, and, perhaps more significantly, to reflect on and
  amend their relationship with what is.

- Psychotherapy results in the clarification rather than the creation of
  propositions.

  Wittgenstein (1921/2001, p. 23) describes a proposition as 'a picture
  of reality' and as 'a model of reality as we imagine it'. Philosophy,
  then, is primarily about articulating more clearly the propositions
  that currently are. Given this, we can read his statement as another
  way of describing congruence. Put into Rogers' terms, we can say that
  the process of therapy is not primarily about creating new
  propositions, or pictures of reality, although new propositions often
  do emerge. It is, rather, about symbolising and accepting the presence
  of the propositions we currently live by, and then, by implication,
  exploring and questioning their validity, accuracy, completeness and
  usefulness. This clarification, acceptance and examination of our own
  internal propositions or pictures of reality allows us to experience
  more clearly and therefore promotes a greater congruence between
  experience and awareness.

- The task of psychotherapy is to make thoughts clear and to give them
  sharp boundaries.

This point is implicit in the point above. Its two parts -- *to make
thoughts clear* and *to give them sharp boundaries -* signify two
important elements in Rogers' thinking about psychotherapy. Saying that
the task of therapy is to make thoughts clear is another way of saying
that its task is to allow clients an opportunity to symbolise their
experiences accurately. By this we mean it's a space within which they
may find for themselves the words or other symbols that most accurately
and completely describe their internal experiencing. Zimring (1995)
suggests that this is exactly what is helpful about therapy. Saying that
the task of therapy is to give those thoughts sharp boundaries is
another way of describing one aspect of differentiation. Writing about
the process of therapy, Rogers suggests that clients move gradually from
thinking that is bound by rigid structures to thinking that is
increasingly responsive to immediate experiencing, and that is therefore
more discriminating of differences between past and present, self and
other, fact and construct. One sentence from Rogers catches both of
these elements. Writing about one of the seven stages of process
(1958/67a, p. 138) he says that clients at this stage tend to show 'an
increased differentiation of feelings, constructs, personal meanings,
with some tendency toward seeking exactness of symbolization'.

A further reason for examining philosophical principles is that Rogers
sees a significant relationship between private beliefs, or philosophy,
and public behaviours, a notion which has immediate roots in Angyal
(1941, p. 165):

::: cite
Any sample of behavior may be regarded as the manifestation of an
attitude. Attitudes may be traced back successively to more and more
general ones. In so doing one arrives at a limited number of very
general attitudes which are unquestionable, axiomatic for a given
person. These have been called axioms of behavior. When such axioms are
intellectually elaborated we may speak of maxims of behavior. The axioms
of behavior form a system of personal axioms. The system of maxims may
be called a philosophy of life.
:::

In Angyal's terms, then, a philosophy of life is a set of intellectually
elaborated or articulated attitudes towards oneself and others,
attitudes which show in the way we live. Rogers picks up both Angyal's
idea that a person's behaviour is an outward showing of his philosophy
of life, and his process of working back inferentially from observed
behaviour to personal philosophy. Doing so he enshrines (1951, p. 19) a
therapist's personal philosophy as an important variable in the process
of therapy:

::: cite
In any psychotherapy, the therapist himself is a highly important part
of the human equation. What he does, the attitude he holds, his basic
concept of his role, all influence therapy to a marked degree.
:::

Further to this, Rogers suggests (1951, p. 20) that an individual's
personal philosophy of life helps determine the ease and speed with
which he becomes a therapist:

::: cite
Our experience in training counselors would indicate that the basic
operational philosophy of the individual (which may or may not resemble
his verbalized philosophy) determines, to a considerable extent, the
time it will take him to become a skillful counselor.
:::

In other words, a student whose personal philosophy sits easily with the
philosophical values of the person-centred approach will become a
person-centred therapist more easily and more quickly than one whose
philosophy does not.

Rogers' allusion to a possible discrepancy between 'operational' and
'verbalized' philosophy suggests that what we say we believe, or think
we believe, or would like to think we believe, may differ from what our
behaviour shows about what we believe. This gives us a way of expanding
our thinking about congruence. As Rogers formulates it in the context of
a theory of therapy (see [Chapters 7](#c7.xhtml) and [8](#c8.xhtml)),
congruence describes a relationship of consistency between a person's
experience, awareness and communication. We expand that definition so
that it also describes a relationship between a therapist's verbalised
philosophy and his behaviour; and further between both of those and the
philosophical values of the approach to which he subscribes (see [Figure
1.1](#c1.xhtml_fig1.1)). Swildens articulates (2004, p. 17) 'one of the
fundamentals of psychotherapy as a trade: that there should be a basic
connection between a working hypothesis and therapeutic practice'. We
suggest that this area of congruence precedes the congruence Rogers
believed was necessary for therapeutic work. It is, as it were, a
background congruence, out of which or against which emerges the more
acute and immediate congruence of a therapist's experiencing in the
moment as she works with her client.

::: image
![0017_001](images/0017_001.jpg)

[Figure 1.1 Philosophical Congruence]{#c1.xhtml_fig1.1}
:::

Rogers also asserts that philosophical values, however accurately
articulated or intrinsically therapeutic, are not enough in and of
themselves. Values are helpful only in so far as they manifest in the
lived reality of the relationship between therapist and client. It is,
for instance, little use a therapist believing, even genuinely, in the
importance of empathic understanding if he has no way of implementing
that belief in the moment as he sits with his client. This suggests that
effective therapists develop fluid and creative ways of living or
implementing their philosophy of life, so that what they believe at the
philosophical level becomes a genuine, specific and perceptible way of
being in particular lived relationships.

\

## Rogers' use of philosophical terms {#c1.xhtml_clnk1}

At critical points in his writings Rogers appropriates from the language
of philosophy terms which have precise meanings within their original
sphere. The phrase 'necessary and sufficient' is perhaps the most
striking example of this, and suggests that Rogers was at least familiar
with philosophical discourse. We think it's appropriate therefore to
examine his work as if it were a philosophy, albeit functional rather
than abstract, pure or academic.

Rogers' theory of therapy (1957, 1959b) depends on what he called the
*necessary* and *sufficient* conditions of personality change. From his
own experience with clients, from the experiences of his colleagues, and
from relevant research, he draws out (1957, p. 95) the conditions which
seem to him 'to be *necessary* to initiate constructive personality
change, and which, taken together, appear to be *sufficient* to
inaugurate that process'. His formulation is of an 'if-then' variety:
'if these six conditions exist, and continue over a period of time, this
is sufficient. The process of constructive personality change will
follow' (ibid., p. 96). In another paper he asserts that 'for therapy to
occur it is necessary that these conditions exist' (1959, p. 213). The
sense he makes, then, is that the six conditions are both *necessary*
for personal growth, in that they need to occur; and that they are
*sufficient* for personal growth to begin, in that no other conditions
need to occur. He uses the words, we think, in their ordinary, everyday
senses to describe a causal relation rather than a logical one.

In philosophical discourse, the meaning of the words 'necessary' and
'sufficient', and of the phrase 'necessary and sufficient', differs from
the meaning those words carry in everyday use, and therefore also from
the meaning they have come to have in person-centred thinking, writing
and practice. Wittingly or unwittingly Rogers has used terms with a
precise meaning in one area to mean something subtly different in his
own. This may or may not be a problem. At the very least, however, it
offers us another way of looking at Rogers' formulation.

In philosophical logic necessity and sufficiency are used in two ways.
The most common way is to describe logical relationships between
propositional variables, as in 'if p then q', where p is a necessary
condition of the truth of q. The second use, which is the one that we
draw on, is to describe two aspects of the relationship between
conditions and events. As Hospers has it (1967, p. 293) necessary
conditions are 'conditions in the absence of which the event never
occurs'; and sufficient conditions are 'conditions in the presence of
which the event always occurs'. One event *(x)* is said to be a
necessary condition of another ( *y)* if *x* always has to occur in
order for *y* to occur. Oxygen is a necessary condition of fire in that
a fire cannot happen without it. This is not a causal relationship:
oxygen does not cause fire. It's just that oxygen has to be present in
order for there to be fire. Oxygen can, of course, also occur without
there being a fire. One event (x) is said to be a sufficient condition
of another *( y)* if *x* always occurs in the presence of *y.* In this
formulation, *x* will never happen without the occurrence of *y,*
although *y* can occur without *x* happening. Wind, for instance, is a
sufficient condition of a tree's movement, in that whenever the wind
blows, the branches of the tree move. The tree, of course, can move for
other reasons, and so wind is not a *necessary* condition for its
movement. To sum up: oxygen is a necessary condition of fire because
fire never occurs in its absence; wind is a sufficient condition of a
tree's movement because a tree always moves in its presence. In this
formulation, says Hospers (ibid., p. 292), 'necessary condition and
sufficient condition are the reverse of each other'.

Taken individually, the terms 'necessary' and 'sufficient', then, have
both ordinary and specialised meanings. The phrase 'necessary and
sufficient' has a more exclusively precise meaning within the field of
logic, where to describe conditions as 'necessary and sufficient' is to
say that something happens *if and only if* those conditions are
present: both *if* those conditions, and *only if* those conditions are
present. This has profound implications for person-centred practice. If
Rogers is arguing that the six conditions are, strictly, 'necessary and
sufficient' then he is saying that therapeutic growth can occur if and
only if those conditions are present: that therapeutic change never
occurs in their absence, and always occurs in their presence. A
statement from the 1959 paper suggests that this is indeed what he
meant. He writes (1959b, p. 213) that the process of therapy 'often
commences with only these minimal conditions, and it is hypothesized
that it never commences *without* these conditions being met'. This is a
staggering hypothesis. It rules out the possibility of anyone growing or
developing or changing through reading a book, or watching a sunset, or
hearing a piece of music, or learning to juggle, or watching a film. It
rules out the possibility of anyone feeling better on anti-depressants,
or after a brush with death that helps her see her current troubles in a
different perspective. It also asserts that therapeutic change will,
always and inevitably, follow the six conditions. Given that Rogers
developed an approach to therapy that values fluidity, responsiveness
and a tentative attitude to experience, we think it's ironic that he
should have couched his thinking at this point in such absolute, all or
nothing terms.

We'll suggest later when we look at the history of each of the six
conditions in more detail that Rogers may have been moving away from
this position towards the end of his life. Subsequent theorists too have
questioned the necessity and sufficiency of the conditions, particularly
in the light of the part clients themselves play in effective therapy.
Rodgers, for instance (2003), reviews some of the qualitative studies of
clients' experiences, and suggests (p. 20) that 'it is the client's
involvement in therapy that is found to be of key importance'. Bohart
(2004) agrees that most descriptions of the process of therapy are (p.
103) 'therapist-centric' in that they privilege the therapist's
intentions and behaviour, and discount or minimise the role the client
himself plays in his own therapy. There is also, Bohart says (p. 106),
'evidence that many individuals with problems recover or solve them
without our help as all-seeing benevolent therapists'. Schmid (2004, p.
49) echoes this. 'Therapy' he says 'is more than a matter of therapist
variables; it is a matter of the client's self-healing capacities.'
Moreover, in perhaps the most extensive piece of research conducted into
person-centred therapy, in this case with schizophrenics (Rogers *et
al.,* 1967), the report concludes (Kiesler, Mathieu & Klein, 1967, p.
310): 'that the results of this study have not been interpreted as
supporting our theoretical specifications of a *causal* relationship
between therapist conditions and patient process movement' (our
emphasis). Instead, they conclude that patient factors and therapist
attitudes create a mutually interactive process and thus (p. 309) 'it
seems most appropriate to conceive of therapy outcome as a complex
function of their dynamic interaction'.

What do we get if we look at the six conditions through this framework?
We argue that the six conditions prove to be neither necessary nor
sufficient, in this strict, philosophical sense of the words.

Look at necessity first. We agree that the conditions are intrinsically
helpful and often implicated in therapeutic growth. The question,
though, is whether they must *necessarily* be present in order for
growth to occur. Put another way, can therapeutic growth ever occur
independently of the six conditions? Our experience is that it can and
does. People do make therapeutic changes on their own, in the gym,
walking on a mountain, reading a book or listening to music. The changes
may have roots in moments of relationship. A person's perceived or
subceived experience of being understood and accepted may precipitate
therapeutic change. But often the moments of change themselves take
place in solitude, out of any psychological contact with another human
being, and therefore out of any immediate experiencing of empathic
understanding or unconditional positive regard.

If the conditions are sufficient for therapeutic change, then
therapeutic change happens inevitably in their presence. Barrett-Lennard
(2002, p. 146) questions this: 'If there is one feature within the
theory that is basically unconvincing, it resides in the notion of
'\"sufficiency" of the conditions.' Our experience supports this, and
suggests that change depends upon many more conditions than the six
Rogers describes. Outcome research too seems to bear this out. Reviewing
the literature, Bozarth (1998, p. 19) sums up:

::: cite
The most clear research evidence is that effective psychotherapy results
from the resources of the client (extra-therapeutic variables) and from
the person-to-person relationship of the therapist and client. The
specificity and systematizing of these variables remain somewhat murky,
although they do include Rogers' hypothesized variables of the
attitudinal qualities.
:::

At best, then, Rogers' hypothesis covers the most that therapist and
client can bring to bear for the time that they are together. The
hypothesis is limited to the immediacy of the therapeutic relationship
and says nothing about the inner resources of the client, or the outer
realities of the client's life, both of which may have profound
implications for whatever changes individual clients are able to make at
particular points in their lives. We cannot say that the six conditions
are sufficient for therapeutic change if, even when they occur, a
client's lack of inner resources or the intractable realities of her
life in society can prevent that change.

Cain (1990, p. 359) argues that there may be 'no definitive answer' in
the debate about whether the conditions are really necessary and
sufficient. He suggests that the particular skills and styles of
particular therapists, and the individual needs of individual clients
'must be factored into the equation of what contributes to the
effectiveness' of the therapeutic relationship. We would add an
individual client's inner resources and outer situation to that
equation. And, writing about the conditions as attitudes, Bozarth (1993,
p. 100) suggests that it is 'theoretically consistent and functionally
true that people do improve therapeutically without being in
relationship with therapists who consistently hold these attitudes'. We
think, then, that the conditions are, broadly, 'necessary', using the
word in its everyday sense. At the very least, they're often implicated
in the process of therapeutic change. Given the significance of
extra-therapeutic variables, we cannot agree that the conditions are
'sufficient', even in that word's everyday meaning. We see, too, that
therapeutic growth happens in all sorts of ways, in and out of
psychological contact, in and out of relationship, and that therefore
the conditions are not, in the strict philosophical sense, either
'necessary' or 'sufficient', and certainly not 'necessary and
sufficient'.

We noted at the start of this section that Rogers states his hypothesis
as an if-then proposition: *if* certain conditions pertain, *then*
therapeutic change will follow. Although Rogers stated his case
dogmatically, we suspect that he offered his formulation more as a
description of what he'd observed in his work, and as a hypothesis to be
tested, than as a statement of fact. However, the tone in which he
offers it, and the nature of if-then propositions themselves, both make
it easy for description to become prescription. By this, we mean that
the descriptive statement 'if *x* occurs, *y* will then follow' can
easily become 'if you want *y* to happen, then you have to do *x'.* We
believe that this is behind recent insistence on the significance of the
conditions, and particularly the so-called 'core' conditions, in current
training and literature. In effect, therapists are coming to believe
that if they want clients to change they have to 'offer' the 'core'
conditions. This reverses the emphasis of Rogers' original formulation,
which abstracted from experience, described a process, and invited
continuous testing and reassessment. It also allows for a skills
approach to the training of therapists and the practice of therapy, on
the assumption that if a therapist can but learn the skills to
communicate empathic understanding and unconditional positive regard,
then this will suffice to initiate a process of change. Along with
others, we contest this notion.

These ideas carry implications for theory and practice. In theoretical
terms, our relegation of the conditions to a less central position
allows us to see instead a trust in the organism's tendency to actualise
as central to the therapeutic process. In relation to practice this
allows us to work in whatever ways honour and manifest that trust given
our own individual way of being in the world and the demands of our
individual client. This both echoes Bozarth's notion (1984) of
idiosyncratic empathic responses, and expands it beyond empathic
responses and into the whole range of therapist responses. Bozarth
suggests (1984, p. 59) that if we're to avoid making empathic responses
which are merely technical, we need to let them emerge as 'idiosyncratic
to the therapist, to the client, and to their experiencing of each
other'. In other words, genuinely empathic responses emerge as a
function of the person of the therapist, the person of the client, and
the quality of the relationship between them in the immediate moment. We
suggest that this notion of the idiosyncratic response can hold true for
any of a therapist's responses, as long as she is working from and
acting out of a profound and unconditional trust in her client's
tendency to actualise.

\

## Philosophical influences on Rogers {#c1.xhtml_clnk2}

Wood (1996, p. 168) declares that the person-centred approach is not a
philosophy, even though 'many have noted "existential" positions in its
attitudes and others have referred to "phenemenologic" perspectives in
its intentions'. From time to time, however, even though he says
(1961/1967a, p. 199) that he 'was not a student of existential
philosophy', Rogers aligns himself and his ideas with both
existentialism and phenomenology. He contributed, for instance, to a
volume on existential psychology (May, 1961a) and to another on
behaviourism and phenomenology (Wann, 1964), and held public dialogues
with existential theologians Martin Buber (1957) and Paul Tillich
(1965). Showing an interest in broader philosophical matters, he also
spoke in public with philosophers of science Michael Polanyi (1966) and
Gregory Bateson (1975). Kirschenbaum and Henderson (1990) collect these
dialogues and others in one volume, while Anderson and Cissna (1997)
offer a new transcript of and commentary on Rogers' dialogue with Buber.
Van Belle (in press, 2005) views the origins of the person-centred
approach as a therapy movement in continental (European) rationalism
(encompassing thinkers such as Descartes, Leibnitz and Kant), one of the
central beliefs of which was that human beings could perfect themselves
through self-reflection.

For these reasons, we think it's important to look at the relationships
between person-centred thinking as it evolved and other philosophical
systems to which Rogers was exposed and by which he was informed. We
begin with Christianity, which we see as a philosophy in the sense that
it offers a framework of beliefs by which to live and act. We then look
at empiricism, humanism, phenomenology and existentialism.

\

### Christianity

\

Rogers grew up in a devout, hard-working and evangelical Protestant
family. He described his mother (1967, p. 344) as 'a person with strong
religious convictions, whose views became increasingly fundamentalist as
she matured'. He considered a career in the Christian ministry and
travelled to China as a delegate in an evangelical mission in 1922. It's
ironic that this trip to China opened his eyes and stretched his
thinking to the point where he questioned the most basic tenets of the
faith he'd grown up in. Describing his journey home after six months
away, he reports (1967, p. 351):

::: cite
It struck me one night in my cabin that perhaps Jesus was a man like
other men -- not divine! As the idea formed and took root, it became
obvious to me that I could never in any emotional sense return home.
This proved to be true.
:::

By the time he returned from China, then, Rogers had broken, 'with a
minimum of pain', what he called (ibid., p. 351) 'the intellectual and
religious ties' with his parents.

The remaining traces of Rogers' early Christianity in his later thinking
and practice as a psychologist and psychotherapist are less explored.
Interviewed by Russell shortly before he died (Rogers & Russell, 2002,
pp. 51--2), Rogers says that he is embarrassed by his early commitment
to Christianity and that his embarrassment may be 'due to the fact that
possibly I hold similar convictions now, but they're not religious'. One
way of understanding this is to say that Rogers divorced himself from
the formal trappings of the Christian church as an organised religion
while staying committed to the essence of some of the principles it
enshrined. 'His deconversion from theological orthodoxy did not' as
Fuller puts it (1984, p. 364) 'diminish his spiritual sensibilities'. In
this deconversion Rogers is prefiguring a more widespread societal drift
away from what he described (1975/81, p. 158) as 'highly structured,
inflexible, bureaucratic institutions' like the church, the
universities, marriage and the armed forces. He saw this movement
(ibid., p. 158) as typical of the emerging person of the latter half of
the twentieth century, who would 'leave an institution rather than give
in to what to him are meaningless dictates'. This is consistent with
Rogers' insistence on the validity and authority of his own personal
experience, even or especially against the weight of the established
authority vested in institutions like the church.

We see in Rogers' thinking at least two strands which have roots in
Christianity and which carry some of its essences stripped of its
organised trappings: salvation and teleology.

*Salvation*

Reviewing the work of the earlier theologians Oden and Browning, Fuller
(1984, p. 358) suggests that 'client-centered therapy could be argued to
be the anthropological correlate or expression of the Christian scheme
of salvation'. By this he means that a therapist's unconditional
acceptance of a client is both healing in itself and also a human
expression or analogue of God's unconditional love and acceptance.

*Teleology*

Christianity is teleological in that it carries within it a vision of
ends, both individual and universal. Individual Christians who live this
life according to God's will expect to live in God eternally when this
life ends. Christian scriptures describe a planned end to humanity, an
end to which life on earth is tending. We suggest that these two ends --
individual and universal -- have possible correlates in person-centred
thinking: the actualising tendency and the formative tendency. A
teleological reading suggests -- or at least leaves room for -- an
intelligent creator who has chosen the *telos,* or end. Given what we
know of Rogers' upbringing, this might be an attraction for him in that
it allows him to maintain a belief in the meaning, purpose and
orderliness of life without using overtly religious terms.

Brodley (1999, p. 109) suggests that the actualising tendency is indeed
teleological, and that the particular *telos* or end towards which it
works is the survival of the organism. The idea is not new. 'Nature'
says Aurelius (1964, p. 125), writing in the second century after
Christ, 'always has an end in view.' Although this is credible, we may
also see the actualising tendency as a tendency to express, to manifest,
to realise potential -- as a movement, then, from within to without.
That doesn't necessarily make it teleological. The actualisation of
potential is a push from within. A teleological process requires a goal
for that push, or a pull from without.

Rogers (1979, p. 106) describes the formative tendency as 'an
evolutionary tendency toward greater order, greater complexity, greater
inter-relatedness'. Van Belle (1990, p. 49) describes it as a 'total
evolutionary process of becoming' which 'has its own ends in view and
its own organizational principle within itself'. We think that this
notion of a formative tendency is problematical for a number of reasons.
The first is that it presupposes a *telos* to which the universe tends.
This raises questions of what and who: What *telos* and who chose it or
sets it? The second is that it enshrines the idea of progress, which
Gray (2002/03, p. xiii) calls 'a secular version of the Christian belief
in providence'. We explore the implications of these ideas further in
[Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml).

Thorne (1991a) has explored the legacy of Christianity in Rogers'
thinking through the notion of original sin. Christianity holds, or has
come to hold, the view that men and women are born in sin and redeemed
only through the suffering and death of Jesus Christ. Person-centred
thinking holds that men and women are born whole and pristine, are
shaped and mis-shaped in and through their relationships with others,
and can be redeemed to their original pristine congruence through the
loving and authentic acceptance of another man or woman, who may or may
not be a therapist. The two bodies of thought start from radically
different views of humanity. Thorne describes introducing Rogers to the
pre-Augustinian doctrine of original righteousness. Although Rogers
seems not to have heard of this, Thorne describes him (ibid., p. 131) as
'one of the chief secular exponents of precisely this doctrine in the
twentieth century'. Thorne is adamant (ibid., p. 132) that he is not
trying 'to claim Carl Rogers for the Christian fold posthumously'. He
is, however, one of a number of writers who find in Rogers elements of
thinking that, even if not explicitly Christian, stand in friendly
relation to some elements of Christian thought.

Perhaps the most obvious way to read this aspect of Rogers' biography is
as a move from theology to psychology, from Christianity to humanism,
and as part of a wider cultural trend towards what Fuller (1984, p. 365)
has called the 'secularization of theology'. However, Fuller suggests
(ibid., p. 365) that what Rogers offered was, rather, a
'spiritualization of psychology'. This is consistent with what we know
of Rogers' increasing interest, towards the end of his life, in
mystical, spiritual and paranormal phenomena.

\

### Empiricism

\

'I like myself best' says Rogers (O'Hara, 1995, p. 143) 'as a pure
scientist and realize that each departure from that has been a bit
disappointing.' Rogers grew up on a farm and learned early in his life
what he called 'the essential elements of science' (Kirschenbaum, 1979,
p. 14). Kirschenbaum (ibid., p. 14) notes 'the beginning of a scientific
inclination toward careful observation, collection and organization of
objective data'. And Rogers says (ibid., p. 14):

::: cite
The design of a suitable experiment, the rationale of control groups,
the control of all variables but one, the statistical analysis of
results -- all of these concepts were unknowingly absorbed through my
reading at the age of 13 to 16.
:::

This empirical and scientific frame of mind shows in a number of ways in
Rogers' subsequent thinking and practice. It shows first in his
pragmatic approach to therapy. He describes (1967, p. 358) working with
children in Rochester: 'There was only one criterion in regard to any
method of dealing with these children and their parents, and that was
"Does it work? Is it effective?" ' As he began to evolve his own way of
working and thinking about his work, he wanted to articulate his
thinking as precisely and objectively as possible, and to validate what
he did empirically. His desire to articulate his ideas led ultimately to
his chapter in Koch (1959), which stands as a vigorous and rigorous
attempt to couch his ideas in the orthodox scientific language of his
day. His desire to validate what he was doing empirically led to dozens
of funded research projects, some of which are reported in Rogers and
Dymond (1954) and Rogers *et al.* (1967). It also led to Rogers and his
colleagues recording and transcribing therapy sessions so that they
could look collaboratively at what seemed to be happening between
individual therapists and clients.

\

### Humanism

\

If Rogers grew up believing in the centrality of God, he spent most of
his adult life believing in the central importance of individual men and
women. It's in this loose sense that we can call him a humanist: he
sought meaning, purpose and satisfaction in his relationships with
individual men and women, rather than in his relationship with God.
Fuller, though, (1984, p. 365) says that 'the humanistic psychology for
which he has been the preeminent spokesman has never been humanistic in
the strictest sense'. He goes on to make the point (ibid., p. 365) that
the idea of 'a preconscious, biologically-based actualising tendency'
allows Rogers to see the personal as an expression or manifestation of
the universal, and that this renders his approach (ibid., p. 366) 'a
metaphysical doctrine', and therefore not strictly humanist.

Gray (2002/03, p. 31) goes further, and describes humanism itself as 'a
secular religion thrown together from decaying scraps of Christian
myth'. These critiques allow us to ask whether, even in his apparent
humanism, Rogers held on to some aspects of Christian philosophy, albeit
without overtly religious language and trappings. We touched on this
idea above in the section on Christianity.

\

### Phenomenology and existentialism

\

Although Rogers identified himself at times with both phenomenology and
existentialism, we think he was, strictly speaking, neither a
phenomenologist nor an existentialist. Van Belle (1980, p. 190) notes
that Rogers confirmed to him in a letter 'that there were no direct
contacts with any existential or phenomenological thinking until he was
teaching at the University of Chicago', a post he took up towards the
end of 1945. The person-centred approach, however, shares some of the
assumptions and values of both philosophies, and draws freely on the
ideas they provide. For this reason we think it's worthwhile looking
briefly at each.

'Phenomenology' says May (1961b, p. 26) 'is the endeavor to take the
phenomena as given.' Writing specifically about its use in therapy, he
goes on:

::: cite
It is the disciplined effort to clear one's mind of the presuppositions
that so often cause us to see in the patient only our own theories or
the dogmas of our own systems, the effort to experience instead the
phenomena in their full reality as they present themselves. It is the
attitude of openness and readiness to hear -- aspects of the art of
listening in psychotherapy that are generally taken for granted and
sound so easy but are exceedingly difficult.
:::

Although phenomenology, as a philosophy and as a practice, is more
complex than May's definition suggests, it's an accurate and adequate
definition for our purposes. Phenomenology takes as one of its
assumptions that we bring our own individual biases to our experience of
the world, and experience the world through the filter of those biases.
It recognises, therefore, the inviolable subjectivity of individual
experience: two people will bring different filters to the same
phenomena and therefore experience them differently. It offers, also, a
method by which we can, if we're interested, begin to recognise some of
our own filters and approach the phenomena of our lives more
immediately. Briefly, this method involves three steps or rules
(Spinelli, 1989):

1.  That we *bracket* anything and everything we think we know about
    whatever it is we're experiencing.
2.  That in our own thinking and articulating we *describe* what we
    experience as simply as possible.
3.  That we approach the different aspects of whatever phenomena we're
    experiencing *equally,* and allow for the possibility that any one
    aspect of what we're experiencing may be as important as any one
    other. We resist, therefore, any temptation to give those aspects a
    differential or hierarchical significance.

Spinelli (1989, p. 148) says that 'most textbook accounts of Rogers'
client-centred therapy fail to reveal his obvious indebtedness to the
phenomenological method'. Although we think that Rogers drew from
phenomenological *principles* rather than from the phenomenological
*method,* we agree with Spinelli's point. Since he wrote, some writers,
including Brazier (1993, p. 87), have acknowledged Rogers' debt. The
first three of the nineteen propositions, for instance, (Rogers, 1951,
pp. 481--533) articulate a thoroughly phenomenological perspective,
sceptical of the notion of an objective reality, enshrining the
importance of the subjective and describing the relationship between
what we perceive and how we behave. And, writing in 1974, Rogers asked
(1978/80, p. 104) whether we still needed, or could indeed afford, one
agreed reality:

::: cite
Can we today afford the luxury of having 'a' reality? Can we still
preserve the belief that there is a 'real world' upon whose definition
we all agree? I am convinced that this is a luxury we cannot afford, a
myth we dare not maintain.
:::

The phenomenological aspect of Rogers' work is significant at least in
part because it justifies the centrality of empathic understanding in
the theory and practice of the approach. If the first of the nineteen
propositions is true, and if we each of us live at the centre of our own
'continually changing world of experience' (Rogers, 1951, p. 483), then
the only understanding that can possibly be meaningful is an empathic
one. Anything else at best assumes a shared reality, or asserts a
reality and insists that it be shared.

Existentialism is a development of phenomenology. The phenomenological
insistence on the primacy of the subjective grows into a recognition
that we are all isolated one from another, that one subjective being
never has access to another's subjective world, that we each have to
make our own sense of the world around us, that we must each choose for
ourselves what to believe and what to do, and that we will all,
eventually, die alone. In terms which Rogers himself could have used,
Tillich (1952, p. 125) describes existentialism as 'the expression of
the most radical form of the courage to be oneself'.

In this original European formulation existentialism is a stark and
bracing philosophy, not immediately attractive to American humanistic
psychologists. Allport, for instance (1961, p. 94), suggested that most
Americans found European writing and theorising on the existential
approach 'turgid, verbalistic, and reckless', and the Europeans
themselves (ibid., p. 97) 'too preoccupied with dread, anguish, despair,
and "nausea" '. Interviewing Rogers, Evans (1975/81, p. 70) suggests
that 'much of the French existentialism has been beset by a kind of
cynicism', and that American existentialism 'seems to be a good deal
more optimistic'. Rogers agrees with both points. Recognising that it
emphasises 'the more discomforting aspects of life', Cooper (2004, p.
106) suggests also that it does so only as 'part of an attempt to help
people live life more fully and intensely'.

Kirschenbaum (1979, p. 29) says that as early as the 1920s Rogers was
'developing an "existential" slant in religion and morality', even if he
wouldn't have used that term himself to describe it. Specifying what he
means by this, Kirschenbaum offers the following (ibid., p. 29):

::: cite
A person is a Christian not on the basis of her words or beliefs, but in
her actions. He came to believe that good works were more important than
ritual or doctrine in Christianity. One must take responsibility for
one's actions.
:::

To this, we would add another comment from Rogers himself. Writing a
paper on Martin Luther shortly after his return from China he formed the
idea (1967, p. 351) 'that man's ultimate reliance is upon his own
experience'. He adds that this 'has been a theme which has stayed with
me'. Whether or not Rogers had come across existentialist thinking this
early in his life, his recognition of the importance of action,
responsibility and individual experience clearly prefigures existential
concerns. If Rogers was indeed thinking in this way he would have found
ready affinity with some aspects of existential philosophy as soon as he
met it.

Rogers says (Kirschenbaum, 1979, p. 231) that he was encouraged to read
the existential writers Kierkegaard and Buber in the early 1950s by some
of his theological students at Chicago. He described them both (Evans,
1971/85, p. 70) as 'friends of mine that I never knew I had', and took
especially to Kierkegaard. Writing a later introduction to one of the
papers he wrote at about this time, he says (1967b, p. 273): 'I am sure
that his honest willingness to call a spade a spade influenced me more
than I realized.'

It's easy to see why some strands of existential thinking should have
appealed to Rogers. Its recognition of individual freedom, its emphasis
on action and its insistence on authenticity are all elements that echo
through-out Rogers and his contemporaries. It seems to us that those
Americans, including Rogers, who identified with existential thinking
took selectively from the European tradition, and rendered it both more
optimistic and more pragmatic than it had been in Europe. They adopted
the existential recognition of individual freedom, and its emphasis on
action and authenticity, and used those concepts to support their own
optimistic notions of individuality and actualisation. They overlooked
or chose to ignore the European recognition that if we are free we are
also responsible, and that, in an isolated and meaning-free life that
ends necessarily in death, responsibility is, potentially, as
distressing as the idea of freedom is exhilarating.

\

## Reading Rogers from contemporary viewpoints {#c1.xhtml_clnk3}

In this part we consider the relevance of a number of contemporary
influences on person-centred theory and therapy. We think that this is
important for a number of reasons:

- Ideas do not exist outside a social context. It is nearly fifty years
  since Rogers (1957, 1959b) originally formulated his theory of
  therapy. As the social context changes, so too does the lens through
  which we view his ideas.
- Rogers (1959b) himself views theory as fallible, temporary, fluid and,
  at best, stimulating.
- Intellectual and scientific developments in a numbers of fields both
  during Rogers' lifetime and since his death confirm, support,
  challenge, question and contradict his original ideas. In our view it
  behoves anyone who identifies with person-centred therapy as
  practitioner, trainer or supervisor to take both person-centred
  psychology and these developments seriously by addressing rather than
  avoiding them.

We look first at structural perspectives, postmodernism, and
constructivism.

\

### Structural perspectives

\

This title encompasses a variety of structural critiques of individual
and individualising psychotherapy. These critiques have often been
forged in the crucible of struggles against inequalities and for access,
on picket lines and demonstrations, in consciousness-raising groups,
marches and direct action more than in the study, library, seminar or
training group. Essentially such critiques, from feminist, cultural,
class, disability and gay perspectives, argue that the world is
organised through the influences of, respectively, gender, race, class,
disability, and sexuality; that environmental pressures affect or even
determine our identity in terms of these divisions; and that, therefore,
they shape our behaviour. Historically, economically and socially, men,
white people, the ruling class and so on have held power and maintained
this by oppressing others.

To take an example from psychology: feminists argue that men and women
are not the same and that they develop differently because of history,
environment, socialisation and expectations. Men tend to view the world
in terms of power, competition and hierarchy; women through relationship
with and connection to others. Applying this in the fields of psychology
and psychotherapy, we have many hierarchical, structural theories of
personality which not only do not account for women's experience, but
also further marginalise and pathologise women. This, in effect, has led
pioneers such as Karen Horney (1939) and, in more recent times, Juliet
Mitchell (1975), to criticise a patriarchal psychoanalysis and to
develop a feminist theory and practice. Being oppressed leads to
alienation. Marx's concept of alienation has resonances in Kierkegaard's
notion of 'losing one's own self', which Rogers (1973) takes up in his
discussion of a disintegrating marriage. These perspectives share a
critique of the individual focus and individualising effect of
psychotherapy. In the words of Hillman and Ventura (1992) and the title
of their book: *We've had a Hundred Years of Psychotherapy and the World
's Getting Worse.* In her feminist critique Waterhouse (1993, p. 68)
argues that 'in failing to politicize personal life, the Rogerian
approach can be naÃ¯ve and even, at times, harmful'. We think this
criticism is inaccurate, as Rogers and others who followed do precisely
politicise personal life and promote social change.

These different structural critiques have something in common,
especially when they are experienced by an individual person, a
situation which is well discussed and illustrated by Moodley (2003) in a
chapter entitled 'Double, triple, multiple jeopardy'. Of course, there
are also differences of emphasis between these structural critiques. We
summarise these with regard to psychotherapy:

- Feminism -- has contributed to a focus on the relational both
  theoretically and in therapeutic practice. In their discussion of the
  person-centred and feminist approaches, Proctor and Napier
  (2004a, p. 5) suggest that '... the biggest point of conflict between
  the two approaches is the focus of study'. They view these as,
  respectively, the individual and gender dynamics.
- Culture -- critiques from cultural perspectives often focus on the
  monocultural roots of white, western/northern psychology. This has
  been levelled against humanistic psychology by Spinelli (1989), and
  against person-centred psychology by, amongst others, Holdstock
  (1990, 1993) and Laungani (1999).
- Class and disability -- analysis from these viewpoints tends to focus
  on issues of access and segregation. In the therapeutic field, this
  manifests as a critique of the inaccessibility and exclusivity of
  psychotherapy in terms of cost and language, as well as physical
  barriers such as steps and stairs. This covers a range of concerns
  with regard to affording a psychotherapist in the private sector or
  getting to see one in any reasonable length of time in the public
  sector, let alone affording to train as one (see Kearney, 1997). The
  issue of language centres on the inaccessibility of therapeutic jargon
  and theory. Disabled activists, therapists and clients are still
  having to educate professionals about disability and especially about
  those disabilities which are invisible or not apparent (see Corker,
  2003).
- Gay -- 'queer analysis' offers a critique of psychotherapy's
  monosexual roots, and the pathologising and mistreatment of gay,
  lesbian, bisexual and transgender (glbt) clients. Psychoanalysis, in
  particular, has a history of discrimination against glbt clients (see
  O'Connor & Ryan, 1993). Glbt therapists have also developed 'gay
  affirmative therapy' (see Maylon, 1982; Davies & Neal, 1996, 2000).

How does Rogers stand up to critiques from these perspectives? In his
later years Rogers wrote a number of books about people in wider
contexts in which he acknowledges both some of his own limitations and
the changing context of relationships and society.

- In *Becoming Partners: Marriage and Its Alternatives* Rogers (1973)
  tries to get inside the experience of partnership. In doing so he
  acknowledges some of the limitations of the sample studied, and
  identifies a number of themes, which Embleton Tudor *et al.* (2004)
  elaborate and bring up to date. Specifically he acknowledges
  (1973, p. 18) that a relationship will have *permanence '*only to the
  degree to which it satisfies the emotional, psychological,
  intellectual and physical needs of the partners'. He also predicts
  that (in the year 2000) 'partners will be demanding more of the
  relationship than they do today'. Elsewhere in the book he reflects
  candidly on his own shortcomings as a husband.
- In *On Personal Power* Rogers (1978) talks about oppression, citing
  approvingly the work of the Brazilian educator and revolutionary,
  Paulo Freire (1921--1997). He acknowledges the impact of changing
  culture and discusses the revolution in marriage and relationships,
  and how people deal with jealousy. He refers (1978, p. 45) to the
  Women's Liberation Movement as '... one of the most rapid and
  effective "quiet revolutions" of our time'. In other papers he talks
  about 'cultural conditioning' and discusses working with intercultural
  tensions and their resolution, and refers to the emergence of a 'new
  political figure' or 'emerging person'.
- In *A Way of Being* Rogers and others write about the political impact
  of the person-centred approach, especially in and through large
  community groups. He acknowledges (Rogers 1980b, p. xvii) the
  influence of his daughter and other friends with feminist leanings on
  his greater sensitivity to 'the linguistic inequality between the
  sexes'.

Notwithstanding his general openness to criticism and his own
willingness to change, Rogers did not account theoretically for the
kinds of critiques from the structural perspectives under discussion. It
has been left to others to consider the relationship between
person-centred therapy and specific concerns from these social
movements. Three edited books, recently published and written largely
from person-centred perspectives, have contributed to the development of
a more sophisticated understanding of these relationships: Fairhurst
(1999); Moodley, Lago and Talahite (2004); and Proctor and Napier
(2004). We consider some theoretical implications.

*Person and context, person-in-context*

A number of writers comment on the view amongst person-centred
therapists that focusing on the uniqueness of the individual client
means that we cannot comment on any analysis of social factors unless
the client mentions it (see, for instance, Proctor & Napier, 2004). We
disagree. From an organismic perspective, we cannot understand an
individual outside of her environmental context. Even referring to
someone as 'her' is a social construct. In a similar vein, Wilkins
(2003, p. 16) cautions against the separation of person-centred therapy
from the broader person-centred approach: 'To entirely separate
person-centred therapy from the context of the person-centred approach
means that any consideration of it is incomplete.' The implication is
that a person-centred *approach* to therapy is a wider, contextual and
more permissive activity than 'person-centred therapy'. Whilst we
appreciate the subtlety of the word-play we think that reclaiming the
centrality of the organism, as we do in this present work, offers us a
way of working therapeutically with the person-in-context.

*The development of theory*

Wilkins (2003) addresses and, in our view, largely repudiates the
argument that person-centred therapy is monocultural. It is an easy and
strangely personal, individualistic jibe. As we observe, particularly in
this chapter and throughout the book, the roots of much of Rogers'
thinking derive from Ancient Greek philosophy, via European and North
American existentialists. Many people all over the world find Rogers'
ideas compatible with their own. There is a large interest in the
person-centred approach in Japan, and Wilkins (2003) reports on a
gathering in South Africa at which Zulu participants were pointing out
similarities between person-centred concepts and the practice of their
'folk medicine'. A number of people have written about the
person-centred approach and its relationship to Buddhism, Taoism, Sufi,
Soto Zen, and Christianity, for references to which see Tudor and Merry
(2002) and Wilkins (2003). As we acknowledge in the Introduction, a part
of our interest in writing this book is to reclaim the diversity of
sources for an organismic, person-centred psychology.

*The theory of human development*

The criticism stands that person-centred theory does not sufficiently
account for gender or cultural differences. Addressing the first point,
Wolter-Gustafson (1999, p. 208) argues that Rogers' theory offers 'a
sophisticated and substantial approach to understanding human
development primarily because of his insistence on starting with the
schema as it is apprehended by the person'. This, of course, includes
apprehending discrimination and oppression. Wolter-Gustafson is critical
of how human development theory continues to split people along gendered
lines, and holds that Rogers' organismic psychology, with its emphasis
on the internal valuing process, and its redistribution of
epistemological authority from the (external) expert to the person, is a
radical and empowering psychology (see Wolter-Gustafson, 2004). Further,
given that the organism differentiates (for discussion of which see
[Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and [4](#c4.xhtml)), the precise nature,
phenomenological and social reality of such differentiation (woman/man,
black/white, gay/straight/transgender) is personal, contextual and
constructed.

The challenge to person-centred psychology of critiques from different
cultural perspectives centres on the issue of whether it is an
individualistic psychology, reflecting dominant 'me cultures', rather
than a collectivist psychology more associated with 'we cultures'.
Taking Stark's (2000) taxonomy of one person (traditional
psychoanalytic), one and a half person (object relations), and two
person (relational) psychologies, person-centred therapy definitely
falls into the last model. Furthermore, if our therapeutic practice is
based on engagement in relationship, as distinct from the enhancement of
knowledge or the provision of experience, then therapist and client must
both appreciate the inevitability and impact of relationships and
context outside of the consulting room. Adding to Stark's taxonomy, this
may allow us to describe person-centred psychology as a 'two person in
context' psychology.

Person-centred therapy emphasises present-centred human development, as
distinct from past-centred child development. We do not have to ask
clients questions about their past, as they experience and express the
impact of their past in the present. The view that psychotherapy is a
present-centred process of learning and healing reduces the danger of
infantilising adult clients and trainees, which happens when 'growth' or
development is defined within the framework of an expert therapist and
an inexpert client.

*The social/political world in the consulting room*

Those who are familiar with the philosophy and principles of the
person-centred *approach* to life may be used to taking concepts and
theories drawn originally from therapy and applying them more widely, as
Rogers did. It is less common to draw ideas and practice from the
external, social world and apply them to the therapeutic encounter and
process. A rare example of this is Keys (1999) who discusses how key
concepts of the *Universal Declaration of Human Rights* (United Nations,
1948) underpin the work she does with clients in a counselling service
operating within a drop-in project in London. To us this is an example
of viewing both person (persons) and therapeutic practice in a wider,
social, environmental context, and one which accounts for the
organisational context of therapy. That therapists are willing to engage
actively with their clients is not a departure from person-centred
principles, but an embodiment of them. This is perhaps most challenging
with regard to the person-centred principle of being 'non-directive', a
discussion we take up in [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml). Analysing Rogers'
counselling interview with a black client in 1984, Lago and Clark (2004,
p. 149) suggest that it 'clearly demonstrates Rogers' increasing
capacity to recognise, acknowledge and address explicitly the societal
conditions of discrimination and racism that affect minority group
members'.

*Language*

Language can be both liberating and oppressive. Consistent with Rogers'
(1959b) provisional and fluid conception of theory is an open, critical
approach to the changing use of language and the need for language to
change. Rogers' (1980b) own observation about sexist language is one
example of this. Writing about anti-disabling practice, Corker (2003)
points out the importance of the root metaphors in therapy and cites an
example from Freud who refers to the ego as wearing 'an auditory lobe'.
We discuss the impact of language and metaphor further below (pp.
40--4). More generally, Warner (1999) criticises the use of compacted
language in which psychological phenomena such as 'boundaries',
'confidentiality' and 'safety' are objectified. She argues for a
descriptive and action-oriented language which is clearer and,
psychologically, more personal and accurate. Thus:

- 'Fred enters or allows others to enter areas of body space that are
  private, without consent', rather than 'Fred's boundaries are
  inappropriate.'
- 'I'll trust you to maintain my confidence', rather than
  'Confidentiality is an important rule in this group.'
- 'I don't feel safe here right now', rather than 'Safety is important.
  Why aren't you (the therapist) providing it?'

*Education and learning as therapists*

The implications of many of these structuralist critiques for the
education and 'training' of therapists are framed in terms of an
increased curriculum (to include input on discrimination, oppression,
anti-oppressive practice, and so on), or a particular focus, say on
gender studies. Such additions can detract from the experiential and
phenomenological integrity of the person-centred approach to student-led
and process-led learning. Discussing the 'desirable preparation' for a
person in training as a therapist, Rogers (1951, p. 437) says:

::: cite
It seems desirable that the student should have a broad experiential
knowledge of the human being in his cultural setting ... Such knowledge
needs to be supplemented by experiences of living with or dealing with
individuals who have been the product of cultural influences very
different from those which have molded the student.
:::

Rogers wrote a lot about learning (Rogers, 1969, 1974/80), and Mearns
(1997) has written specifically about *Person-Centred Counselling
Training.* Cornelius-White and Godfrey (2004) take up the challenge of
integrating feminist critical pedagogies and the person-centred approach
to education, concluding (p. 174) that, whilst there is a need for an
explicit openness to different ideas of theory, self, subjectivity,
helping or therapeutic relationships and so on, it is only 'through
empathy and compassion \[that\] students can more likely liberate and
accept themselves and others'. We adopt a similar approach in this
present work, drawing on a variety of sources, in order to discuss and
develop the theory and practice of person-centred therapy.

\

### Postmodernism

\

Brazier (1993, p. 11) says that Rogers 'was brought up in the "modern\"
world but was able to open the door for us to a "post-modern" universe'.
O'Hara (1999, p. 63) suggests that Rogers 'started out as a logical
positivist and ended up as a post-modern romantic'. Schmid (2004, p. 37)
says that he 'came to view every individual as a unique being' and stood
therefore, 'in the tradition of phenomenology, existentialism,
hermeneutics and constructivism'. We wouldn't go so far as to say that
Rogers opened a door for us to a postmodern universe. At best, we think,
he saw that there was a door and looked through it himself. We agree,
though, the general point that Rogers straddled the divide between
modern and postmodern. In some ways this is a product of chronology. He
was born at the beginning of the twentieth century, and grew up a
modernist. He was confident that empirical and scientific methods were,
or could lead to, adequate tools with which to examine and measure the
subtleties of therapeutic processes. He saw progress as desirable and
inevitable, and he cherished the notion of truths and principles that
were universally true. Yet by the time he died postmodernism was on the
rise, sceptical of science, interested in local, subjective, individual
and therefore relative truths, and dismissive of the plausibility or
possibility of universal ones.

This leaves a dissonance in much of what Rogers wrote. He wrote about
processes which he saw as organic, holistic, phenomenological, and even
mystical; and yet he sought increasingly objective ways of measuring and
articulating them, and wrote about them often in linear, rationalist,
scientific language. He admits as much himself (1967b, p. 200): 'I have
felt an increasing discomfort at the distance between the rigorous
objectivity of myself as scientist and the almost mystical subjectivity
of myself as therapist.' He's so at the cusp of the change from modern
to postmodern that he has only, or largely, modern language with which
to describe increasingly postmodern experiences. This is ironic. Rogers
argued that congruence, integration and fullness of function come as a
result of having or developing the capacity to symbolise experience
accurately in awareness. The irony is that Rogers probably never had the
language, the conceptual vocabulary, with which to symbolise to himself,
accurately and adequately, the depth and breadth of his professional
experience. As a therapist and as a theorist, then, Rogers was
incongruent. Born when he was, he simply did not have the words for his
experience. We can see his writings perhaps as a striving for
increasingly full symbolising of his experiences. This may explain why
he wrote so much about so little. He wrote all that he wrote around a
small cluster of ideas, as if he had the experience early and spent the
rest of his life seeking to articulate it. This would explain too the
attraction Rogers came to feel for mystical and spiritual philosophers
such as Lao Tzu, Kierkegaard and Buber, as though he knew that their
language was more likely than his own to be adequate for what he wanted
to say.

Writers since Rogers have examined his thinking in the light of
postmodernism. Others have used person-centred principles to critique
postmodern assumptions. Postmodernists dismiss the possibility of
universal truths or theories, and hold that truths are local,
individual, subjective and relative. Jones (1996, p. 20) argues,
therefore, that postmodern thinking 'stands in direct opposition to the
kind of universal claims that Rogers makes for his theories'. Postmodern
thinkers don't question the claims themselves, so much as the *nature*
of the claims, the fact that Rogers asserts them to be *universally*
true. From their perspective, his assertion (1979, p. 106) of a
formative tendency, for instance, that 'can be traced and observed in
stellar space, in crystals, in micro-organisms, in organic life, in
human beings' is clearly out of date and untenable. Ellingham, though
(1997, 1998, 1999), critiques postmodern thinking as bleak and
nihilistic, and argues, with Rogers, that the formative tendency is an
idea fertile enough to generate a paradigm which will unify the practice
of counselling and psychotherapy. The search for a paradigm is, in
itself, inimical to postmodern thought. The idea that there is or can be
one grand explanation of a whole field of endeavour is simply
inconsistent with its insistence that there are only local and
individual truths.

Ellingham's description of postmodern thinking as bleak and nihilistic
recognises that its extremes render theory irrelevant, and allow
therapists to champion any behaviour as legitimate. If all truths are
local, who can say what's true and what's not, or what's therapeutic and
what's not? Jones, too, who is more willing than Ellingham to embrace
postmodern thinking, considers, and ultimately decides against, the
possibility of abandoning theory, and (1996, p. 23) of working 'without
the support of any explanatory theoretical discourses'. He argues that
postmodern thinking need not mean an end to person-centred theory, but
held lightly may be a practical way (ibid. p. 25) for us 'to remain
uncertain to its "truth" '. It may, in other words, help us see it as
one possible truth among others, a truth that came from and may be more
relevant to a particular race, culture and class. We find Jones'
argument attractive. It allows us to hold person-centred theory as
relatively true, or true in the particular fields to which it is
relevant, and also therefore to acknowledge the possibility of fields
where more local truths have more to offer. Ironically, one recent book
on the subject of psychotherapy and postmodernism (Frie, 2003)
summarises Rogers' emphasis in its title: *Understanding Experience.*

\

### Social constructivism

\

Anderson (1990) tells (or retells) an old joke about baseball umpires
which explains some of the complexity of constructivism, social
constructivism and radical constructivism.

::: cite
One says, 'There's balls and there's strikes, and I call them the way
they are.' Another says, 'There's balls and there's strikes, and I call
'em the way I see 'em.' The third says, 'There's balls and there's
strikes, and they ain't nothin' until I call 'em.'
:::

Commenting on this joke, Allen and Allen (1997, p. 89) says that it
shows 'an objectivist and two kinds of constructionists, the last umpire
the more radical'.

In his dialogue with Rogers, Skinner tells a story about a time Rogers
went out duck hunting. After a long cold morning in the blind sighting
no ducks, a lone duck came by and Rogers shot at it. At the same time a
few hundred yards away another man shot at the same duck. In the
dialogue, Rogers clarifies both the story and the punch line, which was
that when Rogers and the other man met over the body of the duck, they
flipped a coin, the result of which, reports Rogers, 'proved that I had
shot the duck' (Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990a, p. 92). Calling it in a
similar vein to the baseball umpire, this clearly shows Rogers as a
radical constructivist!

'Constructivism holds that the structure of our nervous systems dictates
that we can never know what is "really" out there' (Hoffman, 1993, p.
34). All we can ever know about anything is our construction or
construing of people, events, phenomena and 'reality'. In this sense the
truth is not 'out there' but 'in here'. We construct or co-construct the
meaning of these truths in our encounters with each other. This view of
the world may be traced back, philosophically, to the tradition of
European rationalism which held that the mind is active, not passive,
and that it constructs 'reality', rather than being informed by it. This
perspective will be familiar to personal construct psychologists, whose
work derives from George Kelly, and whose core theory is based on the
notion of construing reality. Rogers (1958/67a) acknowledges Kelly in
his borrowing and use of the term 'personal constructs'.

Social constructivism, which is closely aligned with the postmodern
tradition, understands that everybody has equally valid perspectives and
that there are no 'transcendent criteria of the correct' (Gergen, 1991,
p. 111). That truth is local and subjective supports the importance of
Rogers' sixth condition: that the client perceives (or subceives) the
therapist's positive regard and empathy. No matter how empathic or
accepting a therapist is or construes himself to be, his client's
experience of him is more important. We discuss this further in
[Chapters 7](#c7.xhtml) and [8](#c8.xhtml).

A number of points follow from these perspectives:

- Knowledge within a culture is embedded in language. Thus, he (sic) who
  has the language has the knowledge has the power (see p. 35). Language
  and images are provided by experts, sanctioned by what Becker
  (1967, p. 241) refers to as 'superordinate groups in the society'. The
  media provide daily examples of this. One recent example was of a
  report of a murdered teacher 'and his wife' which, in later editions,
  was changed to 'two schoolteachers'. The first edition defined the
  woman in terms of her relationship to her husband. The second
  identified her as a professional in her own right.
- Science, in the modernist tradition, seeks to reduce rather than
  enhance thinking and seeks 'monocrop' rather than diversity. This
  critique informs John Taylor Gatto's thinking on education and
  schooling which, he argues, seeks to 'dumb down' children (for more on
  which see Embleton Tudor *et al.,* 2004).
- Language is not so much a device for reporting one's experience, but a
  denning framework for it. If we agree that perception *is* reality
  (Rogers, 1951, 1959b), then the language we use to describe that
  perception is also reality (see Whitehead, 1929/78, 1933). This also
  means that a change in language connotes a change in experience. If I
  say of myself that I'm untidy, lazy and just made that way, I'm
  expressing a history of internalised external evaluations. If I say
  that I know where to find my things, I'm making a self-referential
  statement which reframes, deconstructs and reconstructs both my
  perception and my experience.
- Language socialises people into a way of thinking about themselves.
  White and Epstein (1990, p. 74) suggest that all human science
  disciplines in the modernist tradition 'characterize, classify,
  specialize; they distribute along a scale, around a norm, hierarchize
  individuals in relation to one another, and if necessary disqualify
  and invalidate'. It is not surprising that social constructivists are
  critical, for instance, of diagnostic categories such as those
  promoted by the American Psychiatric Association in its *Diagnostic
  and Statistical Manual (DSM)* (now in its fourth revised edition).
  This critique was prefigured both by Rogers (1951) in his objections
  to the external nature of diagnosis, and by Steiner (1971, p. 5) who
  said that 'everything diagnosed psychiatrically, unless *clearly*
  organic in origin, is a form of alienation'.
- The principal way to think about our lives (from a constructionist
  perspective) is through stories or narratives which are a set of
  explanatory concepts that explain our relationship with others and the
  world. Change the language, change the story; change the story, change
  the experience.

Summers and Tudor (2000, p. 24) summarise the principles of
constructivism which are particularly relevant to and inform therapy:

- That meaning constantly evolves through dialogue.
- That discourse creates systems (such as particular understandings of
  personality), and not the other way around.
- That therapy is the co-creation, in dialogue, of new narratives which
  provide new possibilities.
- That the therapist is a participant-observer in this dialogue.

These are all compatible with and embodied by person-centred therapy.

\

## Language and metaphor {#c1.xhtml_clnk4}

As we observe, one of the defining characteristics of recent philosophy
is a particular interest in language. Postmodernism (Norris, 1995, p.
708) is specifically interested in language 'as the object of its own
scrutiny', an interest which can lead to a 'dizzying rhetorical regress'
in which nothing seems to make any sense. At the same time postmodernism
and constructivism have challenged and sharpened our appreciation of the
impact of language in therapy. In concluding this chapter we consider
the significance of the language we use to describe therapeutic
processes.

We're interested especially in metaphor, which is a condensed,
economical and therefore powerful way of describing one thing in terms
of another. In strict rhetorical terms, a metaphor (Rogers was a
pioneer) is a more concentrated or elliptical form of a simile (Rogers
was like a pioneer). For our purposes, and consistent with one of the
original meanings of the word, we're using metaphor in a wider sense to
mean any figure of speech that works by associating or comparing one
thing with another.

Psychological accounts of brain functioning, consciousness, motivation,
personality, the therapeutic relationship and so on are shaped by the
metaphors used, a subject explored in Leary's (1990) major work on
*Metaphors in the History of Psychology.* Also, it's not just that some
us are more interested in language than others; our capacity for
metaphor may have a neurophysiological basis. Synaesthesia is a
phenomenon whereby looking at numbers or listening to tones for some
people evokes the experience of a particular colour. Based on his
research in this field, Ramachandran (2003) suggests that this reflects
the functioning of the angular gyrus, the part of the brain where the
occipital, parietal and temporal lobes meet and which is responsible for
cross-modal synthesis. He goes further to suggest that the angular gyrus
may have evolved precisely so that the ability to engage in cross-modal
abstraction could allow the emergence of other, more abstract functions
such as the construction and use of metaphors. This provides a
neurological basis and location for cross-modal symbolisation which,
from a person-centred perspective, is a necessary process in the
understanding of experience and experiencing (see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)).

'Language' says Keen (1983, p. 233) 'governs perception.' He goes on:
'The metaphors we use limit what we can see and experience. The category
into which we place a thing determines how we will deal with it. An
entire logic and philosophy is smuggled into seemingly innocent words.'

We would add that 'seemingly innocent words' then smuggle that 'logic
and philosophy' into any discourse or conversation of which they are a
part. Given this, we think it's important to attend to the words we use
to describe the work we do. We've already pointed out that Rogers uses
mainly linear, scientific and modern language to describe experiences
and processes that are, rather, dynamic, organismic and postmodern.
Making the same point on a larger scale, Ellingham notes (2001, p. 96)
that the person-centred approach is 'a mix of concepts deriving from two
disparate "paradigms," two fundamentally different guiding visions of
the world'. He identifies one as deriving from Descartes and Newton, and
as underpinning 'our contemporary common-sense understanding of
reality'; and one as still emerging, and characterised by such terms as
holistic, organismic and process. Our current interest in this is that
Ellingham identifies the root metaphor of the first paradigm as a
machine, and the root metaphor of the second as a living organism. Both
metaphors make statements about the way we see the work we do, and carry
implications for the way we think about our work. They also, therefore,
inform how we work. We contend that metaphors are freighted with meaning
and implications, and that it's important to use metaphors that are
consistent with the root metaphor and therefore with the nature of the
work we do. If sensitive dependence on initial conditions applies, the
metaphors we choose to describe aspects of therapy carry powerful
messages and unforeseeable implications.

In our view, person-centred practice is, in its nature, organic rather
than mechanical, seminal rather than technical. If they're to be
helpful, the metaphors we use to describe the work, and to further the
development of practice and theory, need to reflect this nature. The
approach begins with natural images. Rogers (1979, p. 100) uses organic
images to describe different aspects of the approach: potatoes in a
cellar (1979, p. 100) describe an organism's tendency to actualise;
seaweed on a rocky outcrop (1963, pp. 1--2) illustrates an organism's
resilience in the face of an inhospitable environment; white blood
corpuscles dealing with an infection describe (1970/73, p. 50) a group's
capacity to deal with 'unhealthy elements in its process'. Given what
Van Belle (1990, p. 47) calls Rogers' 'almost religious reverence for
growth', the metaphors he uses to carry his thinking can only be natural
ones. Compare Rogers' images with this from Freud (1926/62, p. 142):

::: cite
we picture the unknown apparatus which serves the activities of the mind
as being really like an instrument constructed of several parts (which
we speak of as 'agencies'), each of which performs a particular function
and which have a fixed spatial relation to one another.
:::

Freud's image is mechanical rather than seminal, lifeless rather than
vital, man-made rather than natural. His metaphor comes from and is
symbolic of a different paradigm, and is neither meant to carry nor
capable of carrying the idea of inherent growth or actualisation.

More recent writers have used particular images to describe aspects of
their work and thinking. From a person-centred perspective, Mearns
(1994) writes about the 'dance' of psychotherapy. Whilst this has some
merit, as a metaphor it is too general. Is the dance a slow waltz, an
enticing tango, a disco dance, or what?

Brazier (1995, p. 27) describes therapy as surgery, and the therapist as
surgeon. He makes the point that the therapist, like the surgeon, must
be scrupulously clean so as not to introduce any infective or
contaminating material into an open wound. Although we might disagree
with this, it's a legitimate point of view and the metaphor carries the
idea vividly and persuasively. Push the metaphor a little further,
though, and its limitations become clear. The patient, or client, is not
in a position to effect his own change, and puts himself passive,
prostrate and anaesthetised, into the hands and under the knife of an
expert technician who acts upon him. The surgeon, or therapist, must not
introduce anything of her own into the surgical field for fear of
infecting the wound and compromising the health and recovery of her
patient. Even if we recognise that Brazier is using this metaphor for
limited ends, to make a particular point, we suggest that its
implications are at odds with the spirit of the approach and therefore
problematical. Rogers, for instance, (1959b, p. 221) says that
'psychotherapy is the releasing of an already existing capacity in a
potentially competent individual, not the expert manipulation of a more
or less passive personality'.

Wyatt (2001) describes congruence as a diamond. Like Brazier, she's
making a local and legitimate point: that the practice of congruence has
many facets. Outside of its locality, though, the metaphor becomes
unhelpful. Although diamonds are originally organic, by the time they
become diamonds they are fixed, hard, impermeable and not living at all.
We suggest that this metaphor risks encouraging a belief in congruence
as a fixed attitude, desirable and expensive, as diamonds are, and
difficult to attain.

Other metaphors in the generic field of therapy define and dominate
discourse. A major example of this is the term 'depth psychology', from
the German *Tiefenpsychologie,* originally coined by Eugen Bleuler. This
term generally refers to those psychotherapies which are based on
notions of the unconscious. The topographical metaphor indicates a
geological and archeological structure to the personality (see [Chapter
5](#c5.xhtml)). It is also exclusive in that it implies that those
psychotherapies which don't place the unconscious at their centre or
bottom are shallow and irrelevant. Within person-centred therapy Mearns
(1996) talks about working at 'relational depth' with clients. This
metaphor carries the same risks, we think, as the term depth psychology.

We deconstruct these metaphors simply to endorse the truth of Keen's
point above, that 'seemingly innocent words' can carry unforeseen and
unhelpful implications. Ellingham (2002) suggests that the
person-centred approach may be sufficiently supple and comprehensive to
provide the conceptual vocabulary for a new paradigm which will unify
the current variety of psychotherapies. If that is to happen, we think
it's important to pay close attention not only to the images and
metaphors we use, but also to the ways in which those metaphors and
their secondary implications cohere with the root characteristics of the
approach, which are organic, holistic and vital. 'Of course,' says
Sontag (1989, p. 5) 'one cannot think without metaphors. But that does
not mean there aren't some metaphors we might well abstain from or try
to retire.' In terms of their use in therapy, both Gordon (1978) and
Barker (1996) discuss the practical manifestations and applications of
metaphors, including the use of anecdotes and short stories, analogies
and similes, and relationship metaphors.

The person-centred approach draws philosophically from several streams:
Christianity, empiricism, humanism, phenomenology and existentialism.
The assumptions contained in each of those streams carry implications
for the language we use. Learning the discipline of the language may be
a way into more congruent and therefore more effective practice. Having
laid out the philosophical ground of our enquiry, we now turn to the
heart of organismic psychology: the organism.
:::::::::::::::::

[]{#c2.xhtml}

:::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 2 Organism

::: cite
Biological knowledge is continued creative activity, by which the idea
of the organism comes increasingly within reach of our experience.

Kurt Goldstein

No organism is self-sufficient. It requires the world for the
gratification of its needs ... there is always an inter-dependency of
the organism and its environment.

Fritz Perls

We must recognize that the human organism is not an isolated entity,
sufficient unto itself. Every individual is born, lives, and dies
inseparably from the larger contexts of physical, social, political, and
spiritual influences. The laws governing the physical universe are not
separate from those governing the functions of living organisms ... we
must begin by comprehending clearly the setting in which the human being
is found, how it influences him, and in turn how he affects it.

George Vithoulkas

The person comes to be what he is, as clients so frequently say in
therapy. What this seems to mean is that the individual comes to be --
in awareness -- what he is -- in experience. He is, in other words, a
complete and fully-functioning human organism.

Carl Rogers
:::

At the heart of the person-centred approach and the theory and practice
of person-centred therapy lies the organism, a pulsing biological entity
and a significant and enduring image. Spielhofer (2003, p. 80) clarifies
Rogers' use of the term: 'Rogers does not see "organism" either as a
metaphor used to present and explain our experiencing and acting, or as
a theoretical construct like the self, but rather as a real, given
entity.'

Rogers' use of the concept signifies both a unified concept of human
motivation and a focus on all organisms, and in this sense it may be
more accurate to talk about a *people*-centred or even *species*-centred
approach to life and to therapy. The use of the concept 'organism' means
that our approach to working therapeutically with people emphasises the
nature of the human organism, and the integration of the person and
personality, more than it does notions of the self. As Rogers (1953/67a,
p. 80) himself put it:

::: cite
... one of the fundamental directions taken by the process of therapy is
the free experiencing of the actual sensory and visceral reactions of
the organism without too much of an attempt to relate these experiences
to the self. This is usually accompanied by the conviction that this
material does not belong to, and cannot be organized into, the self. The
end point of this process is that the client discovers that he can be
his experience, with all of its variety and surface contradiction; that
he can formulate himself out of his experience, instead of trying to
impose a formulation of self upon his experiences, denying to awareness
those elements which do not fit.
:::

This also addresses the traditional and mainly Western separation of
mind from body. We think that Rogers' point is a particularly important
one as, in our view, both person-centred psychology and practice, and
generic theoretical and meta-perspectives on the fields of
psychoanalysis, psychotherapy and psychology, have tended to sideline
the organism in favour of the more popular concept of the self. For
instance, in his work on psychology and psychoanalysis, Pine (1988,
1990) identifies four conceptual domains: drive, ego, object and self.
He omits organism and organismic psychology. Even within the
person-centred approach and person-centred therapy few books list
'organism' in their index, let alone as a central consideration. To date
(in addition to our own work), we have found only five: Rogers (1939,
1969), Barrett-Lennard (1998), Thorne and Lambers (1998) and Wilkins
(2003). In four of these 'organism' is only a one-line entry. In their
major work on *Theories of Personality,* Hall and Lindzey (1970)
acknowledge Rogers as adopting an 'organismic orientation', although
they do not categorise him as an organismic theorist as such. In the
third edition of their work they revise this significantly. 'It is clear
from his recent writings' they say (Hall & Lindzey, 1978, p. 279) 'that
the emphasis should fall on the organism, not the self.'

Hall and Lindzey acknowledge, alongside Rogers, a number of other
psychologists who have also expounded organismic theory: Kantor (1924),
Wheeler (1940), Murphy (1947) and Werner (1948), to which we would add
Brunswik in his early work (Tolman & Brunswik, 1935). More recently,
Brown (1990) writes about organismic psychotherapy from the perspective
of neo-Reichian body psychotherapy and, on the basis of the centrality
given to organismic experience, Fernald (2000) claims Rogers as a
body-centred counsellor.

We too view person-centred therapy as based on an organismic psychology,
as distinct from a self psychology, an assertion we discuss both here
and in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml). Whilst Rogers' contribution to the
development of self theory may be better known, we view his contribution
to organismic theory and psychology as more significant in that it marks
person-centred psychology as one which consistently views the organism
*as a whole,* and as the source of subjective experience. In this it
differs, for instance, from early gestalt psychology, as developed by
Wertheimer, Koffka and Kohler, which tended to restrict its attention to
the phenomena of conscious awareness, a discussion developed in [Chapter
3](#c3.xhtml).

Organismic psychology also emphasises the indissolubility of organism
and environment and, therefore, the inevitability of interpersonal
relationships. The organism cannot be understood outside of its
environment. Angyal (1941) makes this point strongly throughout his
work. 'Any attempt' he says (p. 89) 'to make a morphological separation
of organism and environment fails and necessarily leads to endless
hair-splitting dialectic.'

\

## History, knowledge and philosophy {#c2.xhtml_clnk1}

The notion of the organism is central to person-centred psychology, to
the person-centred approach, and to the nature of the knowledge it
represents and promotes. As the neurologist Goldstein (1934/95, pp.
307--8) puts it: 'the attainment of biological knowledge we are seeking
is essentially akin to this phenomenon -- to the capacity of the
organism to become adequate to its environmental conditions'. Asserting
his view of the tendency and striving of the human species, Rogers
(1951) acknowledges his debt to Goldstein who, in 1934, had published
his major work entitled *The Organism,* and to Angyal's *Foundations for
a Science of Personality* (1941). We have gone back to these original
influences in order to familiarise ourselves with them, and have found
not only a wealth of research and detail about the nature and properties
of the organism, but also significant links between the ideas contained
in these early works and more recent studies in neuroscience on the
brain and emotions. An early definition of the term comes from Angyal
(1941, p. 99): 'The term itself, "organism\" (organ = tool) means a
system in which the parts are the instruments, the tools, of the whole.'
Feldenkreis (1981, pp. 21--2), the founder of a form and method of
bodywork, defined it, almost casually, as consisting of 'the skeleton,
the muscles, the nervous system, and all that goes to nourish, warm,
activate, and rest the whole of it'. In his foreword to the
re-publication of Goldstein's work, Sacks (1995) traces a brief history
of neurology, seeing Goldstein and others, including gestalt
psychologists, as important in rebutting more modular views of neural
organisation and the human organism. These people, Sacks says (p. 8):

::: cite
... were intensely conscious of the plasticity of the nervous system,
the organism's powers of coming to terms and adapting, and the general
powers of symbolization, of conceptual thought, of perspective and
consciousness, so developed in humans, which seemed to be irreducible to
mere elementary or modular capacities.
:::

Damasio (1994/96, p. 87) also defines living organisms as 'changing
continuously, assuming a succession of "states," each defined by varied
patterns of ongoing activity in all its components'.

Together these ideas, based on developments in research and clinical
practice in a number of fields over nearly a century and in different
continents, can provide us with a more robust person-centred theory and
clinical practice centred on a psychology of the organism. A number of
these early works, such as Goldstein (1934/95) and Angyal (1941), refer
to gestalt psychology. This is in part because Goldstein himself was
closely identified with gestalt psychology through his work with Gelb on
figure-ground relationships in visual perception (Gelb & Goldstein,
1920), and in part because, historically, gestalt psychology as such is
older than what was originally 'client-centred', now person-centred,
psychology and therapy. We see a number of similarities and links
between these two psychological traditions, which we refer to and
explore throughout this book. Part of our intention in this chapter is
to reclaim this history for the theory and practice of person-centred
therapy. Moreover, this enterprise is itself organismic, as there is a
direct link between the nature of knowledge and the nature of the
organism. As Goldstein (1934/95, p. 22) puts it: 'Biological knowledge
is possible because of the similarity between human nature and human
knowledge. It is an expression of human nature.' Our desire for
knowledge of the organism is, in itself, organismic, and crucial
therefore for our understanding of what it is to be human and to be
knowledgeable.

In keeping with the theme of the book, we discuss first the philosophy
of the organism. We recognise the impossibility of separating the
organism from its inherent tendencies (which we consider in the next
chapter) and, at the same time, the need to make such artificial
separations in a linear, literary format. That said, we focus in the
second part of this chapter on the nature and qualities of the
experiencing organism, and elaborate ensuing implications for clinical
practice. In the shorter third and final part, we reflect on the broader
implications of organismic psychology for person-centred theory and
practice. We agree throughout with Angyal that any morphological
separation of organism and environment is unhelpful. He goes on (1941,
p. 89) to make the point that:

::: cite
It will, however, be useful to go into this dialectic to some extent,
not because one might expect positive results, but because it will
demonstrate that the consideration of organism and environment as
structures in space is not a workable point of view.
:::

We consider the psychopathology or, more properly, the disorganisation
of the organism, along with the psychopathology of the self and the
person together in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml).

\

## Process philosophy and the philosophy of the organism {#c2.xhtml_clnk2}

Alfred North Whitehead (1861--1947), mathematician and philosopher,
founded a movement called 'process philosophy', although he himself did
not use the term. The antecedents of this movement can be traced back to
Heraclitus (540--480 BCE) and David Hume (1711--1776). Other influences
include William James (1842--1910) and John Dewey (1859--1952). We find
no evidence that Rogers ever read Whitehead's major work on the
philosophy of the organism (Whitehead, 1929/78), although he does make
one secondary reference (1963/80) to Prigogine citing Whitehead.
Nonetheless, we see *Process and Reality* as the *philosophical* ground
for organismic psychology and for the theory and practice of
person-centred therapy. Although complex and dense, it gives
philosophical weight to the importance in person-centred therapy of
experience, process and perception.

Process philosophy holds that the central task of philosophy is to
develop a metaphysical cosmology that is adequate to all experienced
facts. To be adequate, these facts or 'actual entities' must give equal
weight to all intuitions grounded in human experience, such as the
aesthetic, ethical and religious or spiritual, as well as to those of
the natural sciences. In this Whitehead anticipates modern and
postmodern concerns about holistic thinking, interconnectedness, and
interdisciplinarity, and provides the philosophical base for enquiry
into the nature of the organism in a number of disciplines (see, for
instance, Lewontin, 2000). In order to integrate experience and science,
process philosophy is equally critical of what it views as the
exaggerations of science, such as 'scientific materialism' and the
'sensationalist' doctrine of perception; and of religion, principally
the notion of divine omnipotence.

Some of these terms warrant brief explication. Scientific materialism
describes the view that everything, including human experience, can be
explained in terms of the movement of matter, which has no spontaneity,
internal process or intrinsic value. The alternative is to conceive the
basic units of the world as processes. The 'sensationalist' doctrine of
perception posits that we perceive of things only by means of our
physical sensory organs, a doctrine Whitehead rejects in favour of a
view that experience can be confirmed by subjective evaluation. In a
rare reference to the (then) modern psychology, Whitehead (1929/78, p.
141) bemoans its limitations: 'one difficulty in appealing to modern
psychology, for the purpose of a preliminary survey of the nature of
experience, is that so much of that science is based upon the
presupposition of the sensationalist mythology.'

In promoting the value of common-sense beliefs, such as the intuitive
knowledge that humans can think and feel at the same time, and that
thoughts and actions are not wholly determined by antecedent causes,
Whitehead and other process philosophers are adopting the pragmatic
maxim of James that, if an idea cannot be lived in practice, it should
not be affirmed in theory.

The key points of process philosophy are:

- A concern with what Whitehead (1929/78, p. xiii) calls 'the becoming,
  the being, and the relatedness of "actual entities'\". This prefigures
  both Allport (1955/83) and Rogers (1961/67b), for more on which see
  pp. 63--7 and [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml).
- That experience or feeling is the hallmark of human existence, rather
  than abstract thinking or metaphysics. In this Whitehead's work offers
  a critique of most modern(ist) philosophy, in particular positivism,
  and has inspired more recent work examining organic life as subjective
  activity (see Diefenbeck, 1995), and the making of consciousness
  (Damasio, 1999, who cites Whitehead).
- That the task of philosophy is to make our immediate experience
  intelligible so that we can discover how we can experience the actual
  world. In this Whitehead is reaching back to Plato and Aristotle. In
  the preface to *Process and Reality* Whitehead (1929/78, p. xi) said
  that 'the writer who most fully anticipated the main positions of the
  philosophy of organism is John Locke', and like Locke, Whitehead is
  certainly an empiricist. Although working independently, Whitehead's
  concerns parallel those of Martin Heidegger, and there is a sense in
  which we may see Whitehead as a phenomenological empiricist.
- That 'the reality is the process' (Whitehead, 1925/67, p. 72). In a
  subsequent book *Adventures of Ideas* (1933, p. 355), one which
  Whitehead said he most wanted to write, he summarises the process of
  what happens between the time an external experience impinges on body,
  spinal column and brain, and the time it is uttered forth: '*The
  process is itself the actuality.'* This echoes Goethe's view of nature
  as a dynamic, process-based phenomenon, a view which has, in turn,
  inspired a movement called 'process theology' (see, for example,
  Griffin, 1976), and which prefigures quantum physics and its dynamic
  understanding of particles and waves.
- That 'prehension' is more fundamental than sensory perception
  (Whitehead, 1925/67). This refers to a more primitive mode of
  perceptual experience, which may or may not be conscious, and
  represents the concrete fact of relatedness. In a previous work, *The
  Concept of Nature,* Whitehead (1920) had constructed a powerful
  phenomenology of perception based on the rejection of the 'bifurcation
  of nature', arguing that disjunction between subject and object, *res
  cogitans* and *res extensa,* renders the world of life and the world
  of science incompatible. We see a similarity between Whitehead's
  concept of prehension and Rogers' (1959b) reference to 'subception', a
  term he adopted from McCleary and Lazarus (1949) to mean
  discrimination without awareness.
- That mind and body are one. This is based on the 'nondualistic
  inter-actionism' of process philosophy which avoids the problems of
  both dualism and materialism. 'The philosophy of organism' writes
  Whitehead (1929/78, p. 219) 'is a cell-theory of actuality. Each
  ultimate unit of fact is a cell-complex, not analysable into
  components with equivalent completeness of actuality.' In a passage
  which prefigures current research in neuroscience, Hartshorne
  (1962, p. 229) says that 'cells can influence our human experiences
  because they have feelings that we can feel. To deal with the
  influences of human experience on cells, one turns this around. We
  have feelings that cells can feel.'

Having given something of the philosophical background to the organism,
we turn to an elaboration of its nature and qualities.

\

## The nature and qualities of the organism {#c2.xhtml_clnk3}

As formulated in his theory of personality and behaviour, Rogers (1951,
p. 487) asserts that the human species, as with other species, has one
basic tendency and striving: 'to actualize, maintain, and enhance the
experiencing organism'. Angyal (1941) sees the organism as having two
related tendencies: one towards increased *autonomy,* and one towards
*homonomy,* He defines the organism (p. 23) as autonomous in the sense
that it is 'to a large extent, a *self-governing* entity', and
homonomous (p. 172) in the sense that it longs 'to be in harmony with
superindividual units, the social group, nature, God, ethical world
order, or whatever the person's formulation of it may be'. Angyal also
acknowledges (p. 33) the notion of *heteronomy: '*The organism lives in
a world in which things happen according to laws which are heteronomous
from the point of view of the organism.' Human beings live autonomously
and homonomously in a world that is heteronomous or other (see [Figure
2.1](#c2.xhtml_fig2.1)).

Angyal uses the term biosphere (from the German *Lebenskreis),* meaning
the realm or sphere of life, to convey the concept of a holistic entity
which includes both individual and environment (p. 100): 'not as
interacting parts, not as constituents which have independent existence,
but as aspects of a single reality which can be separated only by
abstraction'. Thus (p. 101): *'The subject-matter of our considerations
are not organic processes and environmental influences, but biospheric
occurrences in their integral reality.'* In addition to this basic
tendency, or tendencies, Barrett-Lennard (1998, pp. 75--6) identifies
five properties of the organism. We think that the term 'property' has
mechanistic, empirical and prescriptive connotations. We prefer instead
to use the term 'quality' which we think describes the fluidity of the
organism more accurately.

::: image
![0017_001](images/0017_001.jpg)

[Figure 2.1 The organism's tendencies to autonomy and
homonomy.]{#c2.xhtml_fig2.1}
:::

1.  The organism functions as an organised whole, responding to its own,
    moving perceptual field.
2.  The human organism interacts with perceived 'outer' and 'inner'
    reality
3.  in the service of the actualising tendency.
4.  Human beings engage in an organismic valuing process.
5.  Differentiation is an important effect of the actualising tendency.
6.  The organism is always in motion.

Drawing on the literature regarding the philosophy and psychology of the
organism, and process philosophy, we take these qualities as a starting
point for our own elaboration. Out of this we describe a number of other
qualities in the hope that such an elaboration will deepen our
understanding of person-centred psychology, theory and practice. We
don't intend this list to be exhaustive.

'The organism' says Rogers (1951, p. 484) 'reacts to the field as it is
experienced and perceived. This perceptual field is, for the individual,
\"reality\".' Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 75) describes the organism as 'a
purposeful, open system, in particularly active interchange with its
environment'. From these two brief quotes, we see that the organism:

- is holistic,
- is experiential,
- is concrescent, and
- construes reality according to its perception.

\

### Holism

\

We have discussed holism as a philosophical stance in [Chapter
1](#c1.xhtml). Goldstein (1934/95, p. 99) describes the organismic
wholeness of our experience:

::: cite
The pattern of the excitation that occurs in the system as the result of
a stimulus cannot be sufficiently characterized by noting merely the
state of excitation in the 'near part.' The rest of the system, the
'distant part,' as we shall call it, is also in a very definite state of
excitation. Each movement of one part of the body is accompanied by a
definite change in the posture of the rest of the body.
:::

We can most easily see this in babies and infants when they are excited,
sad, angry or scared. Whatever state they are in, they are in it
wholeheartedly, unless they have taken in or learned to interrupt such
whole field experiencing. Even in the infant's 'turning to' reaction,
which is in the foreground at a particular phase of development due to
the fact that other reactions are not yet possible, we can observe her
trying to move her *whole* body towards the stimulus. In adults we may
see more of the ways in which we interrupt this excited process or
compartmentalise our movement. For example, the middle-aged woman,
sitting upright and 'properly', and who talks quietly about her love of
opera, is showing only some 'part' of her excitement.

Goldstein was concerned about the 'whole' and wholeness of the organism,
devoting an entire chapter of *The Organism* to this concept: 'Certain
essential characteristics of the organism in the light of the holistic
approach' (pp. 229--83). At the same time, as he stood firmly in the
empirical scientific tradition, he argues (p. 67) that the only way of
ascertaining knowledge of and about the whole was 'the scientific or
*analytic,* "*anatomizing"* method'. However, from his studies of
investigations into reflex reactions, and his observations of the
behaviour of patients with brain lesions, he concludes (p. 173) that
these 'have repeatedly taught us one thing: the relationship of each
individual performance to the whole organism'. He goes on to explain (p.
182) that 'every reaction is a "Gestalt reaction" of the whole in the
form of a figure-ground configuration.' Everything relates, and thus,
from an organismic perspective, reactions cannot be compartmentalised or
made into parts (p. 182): 'the process in the rest of the organism is,
by nature, part of the individual, apparently isolated performance'. A
therapist may respond to the person described above with empathy: at the
same time he is reacting or responding to 'middle-aged', 'woman',
'sitting upright', 'properly', her way of talking, her love of opera,
his own love of certain operas and composers, his dislike of others, and
her suppressed excitement. Goldstein refers to this as the 'holistic
relation of performances' (ibid., p. 183). Although holism is more
associated with gestalt psychology and, in particular with the work of
Smuts (1926/87), it is, as we shall see, also central to an
understanding of the organism. Sanders (2000), for instance, views it as
one of the secondary principles of the person-centred approach. Recent
research in neurology, neuroscience and developmental psychology
supports the holistic nature of the organism. Damasio (1994/96, pp.
xviii-xiv) anchors this in a series of statements:

::: cite
The human brain and the rest of the body constitute an indissociable
organism, integrated by means of mutually interactive biochemical and
neural regulatory circuits ... (2) The organism interacts with the
environment as an ensemble: the interaction is neither of the body alone
nor of the brain alone; (3) The physiological operations we call mind
are derived from the structural and functional ensemble.
:::

\

### Experientiality

\

Based on the view of the experiencing organism, person-centred
psychology views experience as present, constructed and reciprocal.

In some ways the emphasis on the experiential is in contrast to
Goldstein's ontological view that there is an 'essence' of the organism.
Sacks (1995) sees in Goldstein's work and his focus on the actual
*experiences* and 'life-worlds' of his patients, a move towards an
existential neurology. However, Sacks (p. 12) also suggests that
Goldstein, influenced by Kantian idealism, shrank away from a completely
existential viewpoint or, at least, that 'he felt it necessary to
propose a more general ontological viewpoint as a necessary *antecedent*
to any personal one'. Kant (1781/2005) argues that we have a subjective
representation of things that we are able to conceive like God,
friendship or love, without the real *intuition* that we have of
physical objects, and refers to this as 'transcendental idealism'. We
are not convinced of the need for a general ontology, of an 'essence' of
what it is to be human, before we explore or understand a particular
person's sense of herself.

The priority and authority of experience, which Rogers emphasises
throughout his work, also challenges philosophical views *of a priori*
knowledge which, by definition, is prior to and does not depend on
experience. The value of experience is confirmed by the work of
neurobiologists such as Schore (1994, p. 33): 'the core of the self lies
in the patterns of affect regulation that integrate a sense of self...
thereby allowing for a continuity of inner experience'. As Knox (2004)
puts it, reviewing this field: 'There is no suggestion of a
pre-experiential self that guides this development.' We think that
Aristotle's view of ontology helps us here. He distinguishes between two
categories of 'things':

- 'Universals' -- things in a number of particular substances which we
  grasp through symbolising 'thisness', e.g. whiteness, cat, anxiety.
- 'Particulars' -- those things of which we have *direct* experience and
  which give us a sense and understanding of the quality of the
  particular 'thisness', i.e. *this* white paper, *this* cat, *this*
  (my) anxiety. For Stern (1985) we make sense of such particulars
  through representations of interactions which are generalised, for
  further discussion of which see [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml).

The therapeutic emphasis on experience and experiencing has led to some
within person-centred psychology, notably Eugene Gendlin (1961, 1981),
to focus on this as a therapeutic method.

It is through our experiencing that we make sense of the world. As
Bronson (2000, p. 2) puts it, in the context of a discussion about
self-regulation in early childhood: '"Experience" includes support and
guidance from other people and from the mental and material tool kit
provided by culture.' In his autobiography, the actor Sidney Poitier
(2000, p. 6) puts this well:

::: cite
... our minds are actually constructed by these thousands of tiny
interactions during the first few years of life. We aren't just what's
directed by our genes, and we certainly aren't just what we're taught.
It's what we experience during those early years -- a smile here, a
jarring sound there -- that creates the pathways and connections of the
brain.
:::

In their description of the development of the brain and, specifically,
the prefrontal lobes, Solms and Turnbull (2002, p. 282) describe this
more technically:

::: cite
The experiences that shape the activity of these executive mechanisms in
the earliest years of life will determine their individual structure.
The application of their inherent (neurochemical) inhibitory capacities
is, accordingly, literally sculpted by the parental (and other
authority) figures who guide this aspect of the child's development
during the critical early years. This 'sculpting' process appears to be
governed by at least two things: first, by what parents do; second, by
what they say.
:::

In the field of psychology this view derives largely from the work of
Kelly (1955) who founded and developed personal construct psychology,
which posits that we are constantly trying to make sense of our worlds
through interpretation, anticipation and experimentation. Rogers was
critical of Kelly's work, and in 1956 had written a review of Kelly's
*Personal Construct Psychology* under the title 'Intellectualized
Psychotherapy'. He nevertheless borrowed '*Kelly's helpful term'*
(1958/67a, p. 132), 'personal constructs', to describe a person's
'cognitive maps of experience' (p. 157). This borrowing links Rogers
directly to constructivism (see [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml)).

\

### Concrescent

\

We describe the nature of the organism as concrescent rather than
integrative. Deriving from the Latin *concrescere,* to grow together,
Whitehead (1929/78) used this concept to carry the sense of many
diversities growing together into a new unity. He describes becoming (p.
45) as a dipolar process, 'constituted by the influx of external objects
into a novel determinateness of feeling which absorbs the actual world
into a novel actuality'. This concrescence is based on prehension (see
pp. 50--1) and symbolisation (p. 108): 'The integration of the physical
and mental side into a unity of experience is a self-formation which is
a process of concrescence.' Integration implies, and in our view
requires, an organising principle to such growth. The basis of a
perceptual theory of integration can be traced back to Aristotelian
philosophy. In his *Metaphysics* Aristotle emphasises perceptual
integration, a process which itself is not sensory. In other words, in
order to process and make sense of what we experience and perceive, we
need to abstract it. When we work with a client, we are aware through
our senses of many things, but our *experience* is not of separate
attributes. There is, literally, a common sense *(koine aisthesis)*
which 'is not to be taken as itself a sense but as some process common
to all the senses, by which experiences are forged out of the separate
contributions from the different sense organs' (Robinson, 1995, pp.
48--9). This is important as it asserts that the process of assimilation
or integration is situated in all our senses and cells. If this process
is seen as separate, as a 'sixth' sense, as it were, then we have to
conceptualise a 'higher', 'integrating self' (for more on which, see
[Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)). For Whitehead (1929/78) life is in the millions
of individual cells of the organism. As Emmet (1932/66, p. 186) puts it:
'there is no "life of the whole" as an entelechy over and above this.
But there is co-ordinated and organised activity, so that a plan of the
body as a whole is served by this particular type of organisation of its
millions of centres of life.' She goes on (p. 186) to make an important
point about the nature of theory and difficulties of language:

::: cite
So if we are to try to formulate a thoroughgoing organic theory of
nature something like this view of the integrated subjective aims of the
individual actual occasions will be necessary; and the apparent pathetic
fallacy or anthropomorphisms it at present involves may be due to the
difficulties of expressing these things in a language which is not
misleading.
:::

Thus, the language of 'self' is itself (no pun intended) a distracting
and literal anthropomorphism of the metaphors of organic life and
organism -- which is why we think the rediscovery, reclaiming and use of
language is so important. Campos (1980) acknowledges this in the title
of an article: ' "Cure" as finding the right metaphor'. This echoes
Rogers' (1951) view that diagnosis is a process whereby a client finds
the words or the metaphors for his own distress.

In the field of psychotherapy and counselling in general, and in
humanistic psychology in particular, the theme of integration is an
important one. Our tendency to integrate or seek integration has,
perhaps unsurprisingly, found root and form in the training and
organisation of psychotherapy, in which 'integration' is of the
*zeitgeist,* a trend we critique in [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml).

\

### Construction of reality

\

In the second proposition of his theory of personality and behaviour
Rogers (1951, p. 484) states that '*The organism reacts to the field as
it is experienced and perceived. This perceptual field is, for the
individual, "reality.\"'* Rogers goes on to argue that it seems
unnecessary (to him) to posit or try to explain any concept of 'true'
reality. Indeed, in another paper (Rogers, 1978/80), he wonders whether
we need 'a' reality. Continuing with his theory of personality, Rogers
then makes a point (ibid., p. 485) which is both interesting and crucial
for practice: 'We live by a perceptual "map" which is never reality
itself. This is a useful concept to keep in mind, for it may help to
convey the nature of the world in which the individual lives.' A
therapist listens to a client. He wants to understand his client
empathically, by which Rogers (1959b, p. 210) means 'to perceive the
internal frame of reference of another with accuracy, and with the
emotional components and meanings which pertain thereto, as if one were
the other person, but without ever losing the "as if" condition'. This
both distinguishes empathic understanding from the technique of
reflective listening, with which it is sometimes confused and equated,
and emphasises the attempt on the part of the therapist to understand
the client's *perceptual 'map'* or frame of reference, rather than his
'essence'. A person-centred therapist is interested in how her client
sees, experiences and makes sense of his world rather than in who he is
any fundamental or apparently objective way.

Gestalt psychology has contributed to our understanding of perception a
view of how perception is organised, that is, by a certain form,
*Gestalt* (plural: *Gestalten),* or quality of the whole,
*Gestaltqualitat,* The Gestalt laws of organisation include:

- Continuation -- whereby, for example, a diamond is seen as such and
  not as two incomplete triangles.
- Closure -- whereby the observer attempts to complete an unfinished
  image.
- Proximity or grouping -- the perceptual putting together of lines or
  figures.
- Similarity -- whereby figures that are similar to each other are seen
  as belonging together.

These laws or principles of organisation have been famously represented
by pictures which may be perceived as representing either a young or an
old woman, a face or a vase. The incompleteness of a particular form,
figure or quality, including a breakdown in communication or
relationship may, in this sense, be referred to as an 'incomplete
gestalt'. Aristotle is alleged to have said that Nature abhors a vacuum,
and the organism proves this in seeking wholeness and completeness. As
Robinson (1995, p. 356) puts it: 'It is by virtue of this filtering and
transforming of stimulus elements that the organism is able to deal with
the demands of the environment in an economical and orderly way.' This
also gives us a certain constancy of experience, even when perceiving
things from a different angle: we see this book when closed as oblong
irrespective of the angle of regard.

\

### Differentiation

\

Rogers (1959b, p. 223) states that 'a portion of the individual's
*experience* becomes differentiated and *symbolized* in an *awareness*
of being, *awareness* of functioning'. 'Such awareness' he says 'may be
described as *self-experience,'* Some psychologists have criticised what
they perceive to be a cultural and a male bias towards emphasising
differentiation as a primary process in development (see, for example,
Nobles, 1973, and Gilligan, 1982, respectively). A close reading of
Rogers, however, reveals symbolisation as an equally important and
integrating process. Kegan (1982, pp. 5--6) asks an important question
about this: 'Is it possible to evolve a model of personality development
which takes account not only of both sides of this tension but of the
tension itself?' In this section whilst we are examining
differentiation, we do so in the context of the inevitable tension
between differentiation and integration, which resembles that between
autonomy and homonomy. Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 76) puts the importance
of differentiation more directly: '*Differentiation is an important
effect of the actualising tendency.' '*At both extremes of existence,
the microscopic and the human,' says Zohar (1991, p. 94), 'individuals
are the focal points of events and differentiations.' Again we pick up
the implications of this process in the following chapters on tendencies
and self. Whilst Rogers emphasised differentiation in awareness, we also
consider the organism's ability to differentiate out of awareness or at
a level of 'subception', a term Rogers (1957) himself adopted from
McCleary and Lazarus (1949) precisely to signify discrimination without
awareness. Rogers' use of the term pre-figures more contemporary
references to pre-symbolic, pre-verbal, intuitive 'knowing'.

The concept of differentiation is not unique to person-centred theory or
to Rogers. Indeed, two other contributors to the volume (Koch, 1959) to
which Rogers contributed his seminal paper also describe differentiation
as an important principle of psychoanalytic theory (Rapaport, 1959) and
of a theory of action (Parsons, 1959). It is also a central concept in
Piaget's (1937/54) theory of physical-cognitive development and
neo-Piagetian theories of development (see Kohlberg, 1976; Kegan, 1982).
Macmurray (1957/91, p. 33) argues that 'the full form of the organic is
represented as a dynamic equilibrium of functions maintained through a
progressive differentiation of elements within the whole'.
Notwithstanding its application in different theories, the choice of the
word is significant. Lewin (1951/64, p. 72) comments: 'A shift from the
theory of association or conditioned reflex to a theory of
differentiation ... means a change from a physical analogy (namely that
of links in a chain) to a more biological approach.' Recent research in
the fields of neuroscience, infant development and human communication
points to the fact that infants are capable of differentiating
themselves, their bodies, faces and hands from those of their mothers
and, therefore, knowing themselves.

Angyal makes a further point about differentiation. He acknowledges that
the process of differentiation always involves a risk of disintegration,
and that it is also inherently destabilising. 'A whole' he says (1941,
p. 322) 'may differentiate into so many specialized parts that their
unification and their control may present a serious problem for the
organism.' This makes sense to us. Differentiation is another word for
change or growth, and to change or grow is, inevitably, to go beyond
where we are, where we know and where we feel comfortable. To go too far
beyond where we know, or to go too quickly, or in too many directions,
is to risk the kind of instability we see in some artists, writers,
philosophers and scientists, whose process of differentiation leaves
them simultaneously creative and unstable.

Here we discuss the significance of the organism's capacity to
differentiate through three discussions on:

- figure and ground,
- the dialogic nature of the organism, and
- becoming.

*Figure and ground*

The concept of figure and ground is key to understanding the structure
of the organism. As Hall and Lindzey (1978) put it: 'the primary
organization of organismic functioning is that of figure and ground ...
In terms of action, the figure is the principal, ongoing activity of the
organism ... The background is continuous; it not only surrounds the
figure but extends behind it' (pp. 246--7). Goldstein (op. cit., pp.
123--4) elaborates:

::: cite
... a certain ground process accompanies each figure process. In
performances of the normal organism, the total organism forms the
background against which the figure process, taking place in a certain
circumscribed area, stands out. But the entire organism does not form
the background in a homogeneous way. In the execution of a movement the
'ground process,' in the rest of the motorium, is probably more closely
related to the figure process than the rest of the processes at large.
But the whole system always participates to some extent.
:::

Pally (2000, p. 25) echoes this: 'Perception is very sensitive to the
sensory context in which a stimulus is encountered. This means that a
stimulus can be perceived differently depending on what other
environmental stimuli are close by.'

As we have seen, differentiation is an important effect of the
actualising tendency, such differentiation of the organism's experience
being symbolised in an awareness of being, or 'self-experience'. Hall
and Lindzey (1978, p. 246) observe that 'the organism consists of
differentiated members which are articulated together'. The emergence of
a figure from the total background of the organism 'is determined by the
task which the nature of the organism at the time requires' (ibid., p.
247), a 'task' which is often expressed in terms of needs (see pp.
72--6). Goldstein (op. cit., p. 100) regards the foreground-background
relation, the configuration of excitement, as 'the basic form of the
functioning of the nervous system'. This echoes Aristotle's doctrine of
form, which describes the organisation of a certain structure to serve a
certain end: the structure of the organism is the way in which the
organism organises in order to become itself. The centrality of the
figure-ground concept also gives a present and future orientation to our
understanding of organismic needs and development -- what Whitehead
(1929/78) refers to as 'appetition' (see pp. 83--4), and to our
therapeutic responses to them, as distinct from focusing on the past in
order to understand need, motive and drive (see [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)).
Arriving at this idea by another route, Bohart *et al.* (1993, p. 13)
view 'persons as ongoing purposive future-oriented organisms'. They
suggest (p. 20) that Rogers' own responses to clients were often
'future-oriented' and that as therapists we may usefully choose to
respond empathically to whatever is future-oriented in our clients'
experience.

The concept of figure and ground derives from field theory (Lewin, 1951/
64), which Rogers (1951, p. 491) draws on implicitly when he refers to
the organism seeking to satisfy its needs as experienced '*in the field
as perceived ',* In considering and working with the organism and
notions of the self and, for that matter, ego, we find the idea of
figure and field or ground useful. As Goldstein (op. cit., p. 123) puts
it: 'in performances of the normal organism, the total organism forms
the background against which the figure process, taking place in a
circumscribed area, stands out'. Thus, we view 'self' and 'ego' as more
or less useful concepts in elaborating a portion of the perceptual field
in which the total organism stands for the total human being.

*Dialogic*

The human organism behaves as an organised whole. This is most clearly
seen in infants. The organism, however, is not isolated. Unlike the
young of some other mammals, human babies are born before they are
independently viable, largely because otherwise their heads would be too
big to pass through the birth canal. As Goldstein (op. cit., p. 19) puts
it: 'The infant is able to live because the people around him,
particularly the mother, organize his world in such a way that he is
exposed as little as possible to demands that he cannot fulfill.' In
mammals the mother regulates the body physiology of the infant until the
infant brain matures enough to provide 'self'-regulation, and the brain
grows after birth (see Pally, 2000). Goldstein (op. cit.) continues:

::: cite
Thus the behavior of the infant is not at all an expression of his
concrete capacity alone but also of the abstract attitude of someone
else. Thus normal behavior in infancy becomes comprehensible as the
result of the activity of two persons. \[Our emphasis.\]
:::

We have emphasised this as it highlights the dialogic nature of what can
be seen as individual behaviour. Behaviour cannot be understood without
being symbolised and, at least initially, a baby cannot symbolise on its
own.

She needs the 'abstract', empathic and symbolising attitude of an other.
Warner (1997, p. 135) describes exactly such a moment with her
3-year-old nephew:

::: cite
His mother had left the room to pay attention to his younger brother,
and he had begun throwing his toys. I said, 'You feel angry.' He looked
at me with a sense of surprise and discovery and tried on the words 'I
feel angry.' He threw his toys a few more times, saying the words with
greater conviction each time. Then he went into the kitchen to tell his
mother about his new discovery, that he felt 'angry'.
:::

Person-centred therapy values mutuality (see [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml)). In
this sense we can say that all affect regulation is co-regulation: the
mother or primary carer regulates the baby, *and* the baby regulates the
mother (see Putnam, Spritz & Stifter, 2002).

Also, in order to be valuable, symbols must have some 'intersection', as
Emmet (1932/66) puts it, with the symbolised: 'the process of
abstraction ... is not a purely arbitrary one'. In the clinical context,
this refers to and supports the importance therapists give to checking
that they have understood what meanings their clients' words, phrases
and metaphors carry.

Behaviour cannot be understood outside of the context in which it is
expressed, and that context, whether in the home, on the street or in a
clinical setting, is the result of two or more people's activity. In a
recent article about a course promoting emotional literacy in schools,
Naysmith (2003, p. 4) reports that teachers are encouraged 'to ask
themselves whether their own inability to form relationships with pupils
could be partly responsible for misbehaviour in the classroom'. It does
indeed take two to tango -- and two to teach!

The other on whom we are initially dependent, not least for help with
symbolising, and others with whom we later symbolise and dialogue, are
crucially important. In psychology, the school of object relations has
emphasised the importance of the emotional bonds between oneself and
another, and, like the person-centred approach, has placed relationship
at the heart of what it is to be human. As Gomez (1997, p. 1) points out
'the term "object" does not refer to an inanimate thing, but is a
carry-over from the Freudian idea of the target, or object, of the
instinct... it is used in the philosophical sense of a distinction
between subject and object'. Gomez (ibid., p. 34) summarises Klein's
contribution:

::: cite
She envisages the person as subjective agent within a subjective world
of relationship, conflict and change. The outer world is experienced
through the medium of this subjective world; the outer world also
reaches into the inner world, influencing its nature and structure.
:::

Compare this with Emmet (1932/66, pp. 93--4):

::: cite
Since an actual entity arises by objectifying aspects of other actual
entities in its own nature, it has an immediate feeling of every part of
its own subjective experience as involving other actual entities ...
Every actual entity emerges from the background of the world which it
feels, and its own nature might be described as the way in which it
organises its perspectives of the rest of the world.
:::

Whilst the use of 'object' in object relations makes some sense,
especially when applied to abstract others such as a blanket, a house,
art or Rome, it also literally objectifies the other. Furthermore, it
discourages viewing the human other as another subject and, thereby, as
another with whom to dialogue. For these reasons we prefer the notion of
'subject relations'. As Fernald (2000, p. 175) puts it: '... one does
not *have* an experience. Rather, trusting one's organism, one *is* the
experience. And accordingly, self is subject, not object.'
Interestingly, in discussing the work of Melanie Klein, Gomez (ibid., p.
34) uses this term: 'Klein's work is a theory of "subject relations"
which marks the beginning of the Object Relations school.'

*Becoming*

Along with being, the notion of becoming is present in Rogers' writings
and in person-centred literature. It refers to the process as distinct
from the outcome of human potentiality (see also [Chapter
5](#c5.xhtml)). Rogers (1967b/54) refers to the process of becoming as
one in which we get behind the mask or roles with which we face life,
and in which we experience feeling and discover unknown elements of
ourselves. He goes on to describe the characteristics of the person who
emerges from, and in, this process of becoming a person as: having an
openness to experience; having trust in one's organism; having an
internal locus of evaluation; and willingness to 'be a process'. In a
sense, as human *beings* we are in a continuous process of *becoming.*

We become who we are through differentiation. It is a fact of life that
as soon as we are conceived an embryonic, single-cell, human zygote with
46 chromosomes immediately produces specifically human proteins and
enzymes and genetically directs his or her growth and development. This
cell splits into two cells, four cells, eight cells and so on, and
multiple rounds of cell division result in a microscopic ball of cells
referred to, briefly at around 4 days, as a morula, until as an adult
our bodies comprise around one hundred trillion cells. The development
of the organism may be described essentially as becoming through
differentiation, at least from a person-centred perspective. This view
is supported by more recent studies in developmental psychology. Stern,
for instance, (1985, 2000) argues that differentiation between self and
other is in place and in process from almost the very beginning of life,
and that the infant's major developmental task is to create ties with or
attachment to others. Macmurray (1961/91, p. 91) argues that 'personal
individuality', his term for 'personality', 'is achieved through the
progressive differentiation of the original unity of the "You and I' ".
We develop these ideas further in discussions about homonomy in [Chapter
3](#c3.xhtml), the development of the self in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml) and
belonging in [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml). Psychological approaches to human
development from Freud onwards have started with consideration of the
neonate at birth. However, recent advances in both intellectual and
technological spheres have meant that the development of the foetus *in
utero* has become a focus of study, enquiry and conceptualisation (see,
notably, Piontelli, 1992). This is important from an experiential
perspective as, according to Northrup (1998, p. 359) 'Babies remember
their lives -- *all parts* of their lives -- and their experiences have
a potentially large effect on them. All of us retain the imprint of our
entire lives within our cells.' In his work, which complements
traditional developmental psychology with a transpersonal view of human
development, Wilber (1980) describes stages of 'self sense'. However, by
his own account (p. 7) 'neither the fetus in the womb nor the infant at
birth possesses a developed self sense'. We think that some of Wilber's
descriptions and detail are useful in describing the early development
of the organism; we find it more consistent with our present concern,
however, to refer to this sense of 'self' as organismic. Although he
states that he wishes to avoid 'intricate debate' about certain lines of
development, Wilber does speculate about cognitive, affective,
motivational and temporal lines or elements of the developing human.
Here we summarise the first three stages:

- The pleromatic self/organism -- 'which essentially means that the self
  and the material cosmos are undifferentiated ... The self is embedded
  in the *materia prima,* which is both the primal chaos of physical
  matter and the maternal matrix' (ibid., p. 7).

    ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------
    Cognitive style        Absolute adualism, objectless, spaceless, protoplasmic
    Affective atmosphere   Total oceanic, unconditional omnipotence, pleromatic paradise
    Motivational factors   Almost entirely absent
    Temporal mode          Timeless (pre-temporal)
    ---------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------

  This accords with Fordham's (1957) view of development *in utero,*
  although he too refers to an undifferentiated 'self'; and with the
  Taoist metaphor of chaos, which Hayashi and Kara (2002, p. 75)
  describe as denoting 'the initial state of the universe where nothing
  is differentiated'.

- The alimentary uroboric self/organism -- 'At this point, then, the
  infant's self no longer *is* the material chaos, for he is beginning
  to recognise something *outside* of himself... this global,
  undifferentiated, prepersonal environ we call the *uroboric other'*
  (Wilber, 1980, p. 9). The word uroboros refers to the mythical serpent
  which, eating its own tail or, at least, turning in on itself, forms a
  self-contained, pre-differentiated mass, rather like pictures of
  foetal scans. It is also referred to as alimentary as the organism is
  dominated by what Wilber refers to as 'visceral psychology', as a part
  of which he sees the beginning of reflex reactions.
    ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cognitive style        First subject--object differentiation, acausality, hallucinatory wish-fulfilment
    Affective atmosphere   Oceanic euphoria, primordial fear
    Motivational factors   Early urges to survival, psychological needs (hunger)
    Temporal mode          Pre-temporal
    ---------------------- ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

- The typhonic self/organism -- in which 'the infant's sense of self
  begins to shift from the pre-personal uroboros to the individual
  organism' (ibid., p. 12). Again drawing on archetypal images, Wilber
  views this as the realm of the typhon: half serpent, half human.
  Although he subdivides this sense of self, we summarise it as one.
    ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    Cognitive style        Feeling, sensorimotor, multivalent images
    Affective elements     Elementary emotions, later sustained emotions, wishes, rudimentary desires
    Motivational factors   Immediate survival, the pleasure-unpleasure principle, wish-fulfilment, anxiety reduction, prolonged survival and safety
    Temporal mode          Concrete, momentary, later extended present
    ---------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

We have given some details of Wilber's ideas here as, in our view, they
elaborate our early differentiation. Given that we retain the imprint of
our initial organismic development, this appears important for our
continuing development and, theoretically, supports us as therapists to
understand and support our clients' differentiation and direction: 'the
free experiencing of the actual sensory and visceral reactions of the
organism' (Rogers, 1953/67a, p. 80). We also find the concept of
differentiation more useful in understanding the development of a
variety of human behaviours (see Lewin, 1951/64) than stage theories
which attempt to link a child's behaviour with often pre-theorised views
of what is 'age appropriate', views which underpin much current
obsession with 'standards' and achievement in education. At the same
time, the infant's development through differentiation is not
homogeneous. Schore (1994, p. 13), for instance, suggests that:

::: cite
... a critical period of synaptic growth and differentiation of an
affect regulating limbic structure in the prefrontal cortex of the right
hemisphere commences at the end of the first year, and that this
developmental process is significantly influenced by the stimulation
embedded in the infant's socioaffective transactions with the primary
caregiver.
:::

In other words: the less stimulation from the environment, the more
reduced the infant's limbic structure. It used to be thought that
specific tissues (structures) are susceptible to particular
environmental influences at specific 'critical periods', at that time
and no other. The lack of stimulation and experience can lead to the
death of cells, and the 'use it or lose it' principle of brain
development. Schore (ibid., p. 76) says that 'the mother's emotionally
expressive facial displays provide a rich source of visual stimulation'
and that 'this acts as an imprinting stimulus for the continuing
development and differentiation of the infant's right hemisphere'. Other
studies suggest that neural pathways in the adult brain can be activated
and developed if the adult experiences an equivalent 'gaze'. As the
brain's development is an 'experience-dependent' process, this offers a
neurobiological argument for the impact and efficacy of unconditional
positive regard and empathy. The continuing plasticity of the brain, or
how open it is to further development throughout the lifespan, remains
an open question.

Sander (1982, p. 317) describes the organism gaining coherence 'as ever
new coordinations between organism and environment are created in new
combinations of action and function that serve to bridge the disparities
generated within and between systems'. Becoming inevitably requires
constant, and often subceived, adjustments in and adaptations to the
organism--environment system. These experiences are laid down as neural
pathways in the brain through right-hemisphere cognitive processing 'of
facial, prosodic, and bodily information embedded in emotional
communications, for attention, for empathy, and for human stress
response' (Schore, 2003, p. xv). He continues: 'These essential
processes -- central to both regulation of homeostasis and the capacity
to flexibly alter the internal environment to optimally cope with
external perturbations -- take place extremely rapidly, at levels
beneath conscious awareness' (ibid., p. xv). The significance of this as
regards person-centred therapeutic practice is that it provides further
research-based support for the client's capacity to respond to what he
may experience as the challenge of the therapist's positive regard and
empathic understanding. Schore and others suggest that the therapist
acts as an 'interactive affect regulator'. Whilst we are uneasy with the
language and metaphor of the therapist as a regulator, we concur with
the theory and research that supports the practice of right brain/left
brain interactions, and the efficacy of empathy. Neuroscientific
findings and developments also support the importance of the therapist's
contact reflections in pre-therapy work with clients, often operating at
a subceived level.

The becoming, directional human organism has parallels with Jung's
theory of the psyche which in some sense is teleological, in that it is
concerned with design and purpose and, specifically, that it relates to
ends or final causes. This gives a sense of directionality to the
unconscious mind as it operates developmentally towards maturity or what
Jung refers to as individuation. Also from an analytical psychological
perspective, Cambray and Carter (2004, p. 132) reaffirm the importance
of the relationship in response to incongruence and anxiety:

::: cite
Every living system must cope with uncertainty that places it in a state
somewhere between continuity and change ... In the therapeutic setting
fluctuations in relational certitude and doubt provide an emergent edge
through which the co-constructed third of the relationship becomes the
locus of the transcendent function.
:::

Barrett-Lennard (1998) describes the human organism as interacting with
perceived 'outer' and 'inner' reality in the service of the actualising
tendency. Bearing in mind that the organism's tendency to actualise is
the focus of [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml), and our general caveat about the
artificial separation of these subjects, we consider four further
aspects of the organism in response to these 'realities':

- that it is 'self'-regulating,
- that it behaves according to need,
- that it has a sphere of immediacy, and
- that it is interdependent with its environment.

\

### Regulation

\

This is more commonly referred to as 'self'-regulation. We think that
this term, like the unhelpful term 'organismic self', confuses two
concepts which person-centred psychologists and therapists need to
separate in order to clarify the distinctions between the two. This
confusion also prevails in the generic psychological literature. One
excellent book on *Self-Regulation in Early Childhood* (Bronson, 2000),
which is, in our view, predominantly about organismic regulation,
contains no discussion of the 'self', and no references to organism!
(For ease of reference and style, and to maintain historical accuracy,
however, in this section we maintain the original term used by the
various authors cited.) In addition to differentiation, which we discuss
above, we identify two characteristics of organismic regulation:

- excitation and balance, and
- antagonistic effects.

*Excitation and balance*

Goldstein (op. cit., p. 101) describes organismic regulation in the
context of a discussion about the distribution of excitation in the
organism:

::: cite
the organism can deal with the respective environmental demands and
actualize itself. The possibility of asserting itself in the world,
while preserving its character, hinges on a special kind of 'coming to
terms' of the organism with the environment. This has to take place in
such a fashion that each change of the organism, caused by environmental
stimuli, is equalized after a definite time, so that the organism
regains that 'average' state that corresponds with its nature, which is
'adequate' to it. Only under this condition can the organism maintain
its consistency and identity.
:::

Here, Goldstein is emphasising the homeostatic, balancing aspect of
organismic regulation, sometimes referred to as 'equalisation', a
process which is predominantly unconscious or, to use Stern's (2004)
more helpful term 'non-conscious' (for more on which see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)). Rogers (1968) refers to organic processes, such as the
regulation of body heat, as aspects of the organism's actualising
tendency. Goldstein also refers to research which discloses 'an
extraordinary number of facts that demonstrate a far-reaching
interaction between vegetative and mental processes'. Examples of this
range from anxiety to trauma, held in the body. Other writers,
especially in the Reichian and neo-Reichian tradition of body
psychotherapy refer to 'vegetative processes', based in and on the
vegetative or autonomic nervous system (see Reich, 1947/83; Boyeson &
Boyeson, 1981, 1982; Carroll, 2002), and to vegetotherapy, which Eiden
(2002, p. 42) describes as 'a free association through the body' which
'aims to release physical tension to free the mind, the mental belief
structure'. Therapists working in this way may work directly on a
client's muscular holding 'in order to free blocked energy, expressed
emotionally or physically through involuntary movements ... to free
physical mobility and breathing ... \[to\] lead to a capacity for more
intense emotional experience of self and other' (ibid., p. 35). Despite
its organismic, holistic and integrative approach to the person,
person-centred therapy has not engaged much with body therapies.
Exceptions to this are: Tophoff (1984); Gendlin (1986) from an
experiential/focusing perspective; a recent, special themed issue of
*Person-Centred Practice (PCP)* on 'Psyche and soma' (Embleton Tudor &
Tudor, 2002); and Natalie Rogers' expressive therapy in which she uses
movement and dance. Fernald (2000) writes of similarities between
Rogers' approach, based on organismic experiencing and Reich's
body-oriented psychotherapy. One of the papers in the special issue of
PCP by Geggus (2002, pp. 88-- 9) describes Zero Balancing, which the
author describes as person-centred bodywork or body-centred personwork:

::: cite
The basic premise of Zero Balancing is that holding a client's energy
body and physical body simultaneously and consciously in relationship,
using a specific kind of touch, can result in a more harmonious state of
balance between them. This balance is a dynamic state, reflecting and
responding to life in a way that can release old patterns of stress
within the body and inhibit the development of disease.
:::

Along with many others, we assert that mind and body are inseparable.
Our emotional processing is also integral and inseparable. From an
evolutionary perspective our emotions evolved to enhance survival. As
Pally (2000, p. 73) puts it: 'emotions organise an animal's sustained
responses to rewarding and aversive stimuli'. This echoes Rogers'
(1959b, p. 222) view that the human infant 'behaves with adience toward
positively valued *experiences* and with avoidance toward those
negatively valued'. Pally (ibid., p. 73) continues: 'The function of
emotion is to co-ordinate the mind and body. Emotion organises
perception, thought, memory, physiology, behaviour and social
interaction so as to provide an optimal means for coping with the
particular situation that is generating the emotion.' We believe, with
Pally, that understanding this is helpful in working with people with
regard to anxiety, psychosomatic conditions, attachment and non-verbal
communication (see also [Chapters 6](#c6.xhtml) and [7](#c7.xhtml)). A
major contribution in this field is Schore's (1994) work on the
neurobiology of emotional development: *Affect Regulation and the Origin
of the Self from* which we have quoted. In her work Pally (2000)
presents many of the ideas in the field of neuro-biology and
neuroscience in an accessible way. For example, she notes the changes in
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous systems: the 'fight or
flight' and 'rest and digest' responses to emotional processing of
stimuli. We discuss the relevance of this for psychotherapists
specifically with regard to perception and subception in [Chapter
7](#c7.xhtml).

The organism's tendency to what we refer to as 'homeostatic balance' is
not the act of a couch potato, seeking a 'giving up' or passive rest. It
is literally a dynamic balancing act. Macmurray (1957/91, p. 33)
conceives of the organism 'as a harmonious balancing of differences, and
in its pure form, a tension of opposites'. As we discuss in [Chapter
1](#c1.xhtml), the significance of balance, of harmony, of being 'at
one' with ourselves, others and the world, has its philosophical origins
in the Ancient Greek Stoic school, and theological echoes in the
Christian concept of atonement.

The two characteristics, organismic regulation and differentiation,
together form what Goldstein (op. cit., p. 224) refers to as 'the
natural situation':

::: cite
as long as no pathology exists, one finds, in the natural situation,
only unitary, total performances that are not caused through isolated
excitation of single apparatuses, but are formed through differential
configuration of the excitation course, in the various sectors of the
whole.
:::

In other words, the 'normal' or usual development of the organism is
based on excitation in response to stimulus, balance, and
differentiation. Bronson (2000) identifies four major issues in relation
to what she refers to as 'self-regulation' in young children:
definition, development, integration and support. These relate to our
discussion in this part of the chapter as follows:

- Definition: the definition of organismic regulation, especially with
  regard to balance (see above pp. 67--8).
- Development: the development of organismic regulation through
  differentiation (see below pp. 58ff.), and in response to antagonistic
  effects (see below).
- Integration: the tendency to integrate.
- Support: and the necessity of environmental support for the regulating
  organism (p. 73).

*Antagonistic effects*

The third characteristic of organismic regulation is in response to
antagonistic effects or stimuli. In some experiments which applied
contradictory or antagonistic stimuli to the right and left cerebellum,
Goldstein observed that the response of the patient's left arm (1) did
not deviate; or (2) stopped; or (3) staggered 'in the form of an
alternating horizontal wobbling to the right and left' (ibid., p. 225).
He goes on to reflect: 'Which one of the three reactions sets in depends
on the relationship of intensity of the left and right stimulus.' This
can equally be applied to psychological and/or social stimuli. Someone
who enjoys cheese and red wine may know that they are not good for him:
they are mucus forming and he wakes up the next morning feeling 'bunged
up'. He both wants to eat and drink and doesn't want to. *A client
reports feeling undermined by her mother's comments about her own
mothering. One example is that her mother refers to the client's son as
'a little monster'. Her instinct is to confront her mother. The comments
are hurtful both to her and her son. However, whilst the client wants to
confront her mother, she's sure that her mother will make a lot of it,
that she'll probably try and drag other family members into it, and that
she'll generally make her, the client, feel worse. She doesn't want to
ignore the problem or the hurt, and also doesn't want to suffer the
consequences of confronting her mother. One response to this might be
for the therapist to help the client make a decision about which course
of action to follow. Another is to accept her accepting that she has a
conflict.*

The latter is, in our view, the more subtle therapeutic response. It is
also one which acknowledges that we have a split perceptual system
(LeDoux, 1995, 1998), based on two survival mechanisms: one of which
gives us speedy responses (to detect food, foes and mates), the other of
which provides us with accuracy (to distinguish between edible and
inedible food, and between friends and foes). In the example above the
client's instinctive, non-conscious response is to respond and confront
her mother. It is non-conscious as the sensory stimuli involved in our
capacity for quick response bypasses the cortex and passes from the
sensory end organ, in this case the ear, through the thalamus and
directly to the amygdala. The slower response is more considered and
based on more detailed input from the environment, sensory stimuli from
which travel the longer route from the thalamus, to the sensory cortex,
the hippocampus, the amygdala and orbitofrontal cortex. It is,
therefore, a fuller or more comprehensive response. Goldstein (p. 225)
poses the more general problem of this antagonistic innervation: 'How
does the organism behave when it is exposed simultaneously to stimuli,
one of which would lead to the opposite reaction as compared with the
other?' This question is, in part, addressed by this split perceptual
system, which Pally (2000) refers to as 'the conflicted brain', and
which, in part, leads us to consider the behaviour and needs of the
organism.

\

### Behaviour according to need

\

Discussing the structure of the organism, Goldstein discusses
figure--ground differentiation and behaviour. He identifies three
different kinds of behaviour:

- performances -- voluntary, consciously experienced activities,
- attitudes -- feelings, moods and other inner experiences, and
- processes -- bodily functions, experienced only indirectly.

More broadly he distinguishes between concrete and abstract behaviour.
When an organism reacts to the stimulus automatically or directly, this
is viewed as concrete behaviour; when an organism reacts to the stimulus
after thinking about it, or acts upon the stimulus, this is
conceptualised as abstract behaviour.

Rogers (1951, p. 491) considers behaviour as '*basically the
goal-directed attempt of the organism to satisfy its needs as
experienced, in the field, as perceived '.* It is, in other words, goal
directed and needs driven. A number of implications follow from this
Proposition (V):

1.  Behaviour is inextricably linked to needs.
2.  Behaviour is a reaction to the field, *as perceived.*
3.  All behaviour is to meet a present need (although past experience
    modifies present meaning).
4.  All needs have what Rogers refers to as 'a basic relatedness'
    (ibid., p. 491), and spring from and refer to the organism's
    tendency to actualise.
5.  Needs are experienced, whether or not they are symbolised in
    awareness.
6.  The satisfaction of needs is designed to reduce tension and to
    maintain and enhance the organism.
7.  In pursuing this satisfaction, the organism *is* its behaviour at
    any one moment.

Rogers (1951) suggests that this proposition is somewhat modified by the
development of the self, a modification we discuss in [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml). Scheerer (1954, p. 123), a contemporary of Rogers, was
saying something similar about behaviour from the perspective of
cognitive theory: '... behavior may be conceptualized as being embedded
in a cognitive-emotional-motivational matrix in which no true separation
is possible. No matter how we slice behavior, the ingredients of
motivation-emotion-cognition are present in one order or another.'
Writing about evolutionary psychology, Evans and Zarate (1999, p. 160)
state that:

::: cite
Every kind of behaviour results from the way our minds interact with our
environment, and the mind results from the interaction of the
environment with our genes. Different environments will lead the mind to
develop differently and change the way in which the mind causes
behaviour.
:::

This provides further support for the importance of the interchange
between organism and environment and the inseparability of the holistic
mind/body organism/environment from its behaviour.

In a brief passage in his book on *The Clinical Treatment of the Problem
Child,* Rogers (1939) identifies two great classes of needs of the human
organism:

1.  *Affectional response* -- which includes recognition, affection and,
    in the mature (adult) human organism, sexual response. This is
    echoed by neurobiologists such as Schore (1994) who observe and
    discuss the importance of smiling and of positive, open expression
    between mother and baby.

2.  *Achievement* -- which consists, for Rogers, of accomplishment and
    self-esteem.

    Later (Rogers, 1951), he viewed these needs as physiological and,
    therefore, having a biological base. To this binary division, we
    would add:

3.  *Affiliative needs* -- which Allport (1955/83, p. 32) sees as 'the
    ground of becoming', on which more below. Affiliation also involves
    a sense of belonging, and therefore echoes Angyal's notion of
    homonomy.

In our view, however, the needs Rogers describes appear strangely
unidirectional, and not relational or interactive, let alone demanding
of the environment. Rogers (1939, pp. 487--8) continues: 'it seems
entirely possible that all organic and psychological needs may be
described as partial aspects of this one fundamental need ... the words
used are an attempt to describe the observed directional force in
organic life'. Murray (1938), writing about needs at the same time as
Rogers, took account of the impact of the environment. He defines a need
(p. 123) as:

::: cite
a construct (a convenient fiction or hypothetical concept) which stands
for a force ... in the brain region, a force which organizes perception,
apperception, intellection, conation and action in such a way as to
transform in a certain direction an existing, unsatisfying situation. A
need is sometimes provoked directly by internal processes of a certain
kind ... but more frequently (when in state of readiness) by the
occurrence of one of a few commonly effective press \[forces\] ... Thus,
it manifests itself by leading the organism to search for or to avoid
encountering.
:::

We discuss environmental 'press' further in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml).

This perspective on needs describes an outward-looking organism, seeking
security; homonomy (see Angyal, 1941); development (see Rogers, 1959b);
contact (see Fairbairn, 1952, and the first of Rogers' 1957, 1959b
therapeutic conditions); and, crucially, opportunities to express love
and affection (see Brazier, 1993, and Erskine, 1998, who identifies
eight *relational* needs).

Most people accept the view that children need love. It is less
understood that they also need to express love, and a nurturing
relational environment in which to do so. In this sense these relational
needs describe and expand Rogers' view of needs as expressing a basic
relatedness. One practical and clinical implication of this is the
consideration that as therapists it may be important to accept gifts
from clients (see, for instance, Stamatiadis, 1990). Of course, as with
any transaction, we need to understand the meaning and significance of
such a gesture in the context of the person, the situation and the
therapy, rather than refuse or reject it as a matter of course or
policy. Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 75) makes the point that 'Motivational
constructs in the form of a scheme of specific needs ... \[are\]
unnecessary and even heuristically unsound.' This is an important
caution against any prescriptive and fixed taxonomy of needs.

The points of implication (above, 5 and 6, p. 72) about needs being
*experienced* and *satisfied* elaborate the view of organismic
regulation as outlined earlier (pp. 67ff.). It is, however, the final
implication (point 7) noted above that is the most radical and
controversial. If behaviour is an organismic attempt to satisfy current
need, then I am that behaviour, whether that is loving/lovable,
hating/hateful, generous, jealous, aggressive or even violent. This has
huge implications, especially for those humanistic psychologists,
therapists and trainers who seek to separate the person from his
behaviour, so as to criticise the behaviour and not the person. From a
holistic and organismic perspective, this artificial separation is both
a nonsense and unrealistic. It is unhelpful and misses the point. Faced
with cruelty, oppression, nastiness, or evil in the world, the issue is
how to respond to, deal with and work with people who are, *at that
moment when they do something cruel,* themselves cruel. It is
unrealistic to suggest that, in some way, 'underneath', everyone is 'in
essence' simply 'good'. Human organisms are more complex and life more
complicated than that. Such liberalism about ontology is unhelpful in
that it sets up a false idealism about human nature and life itself.
Finally, the attempt to claim a comforting 'niceness' about an essence
of human nature does not allow for entropy, or disorder, alongside
syntropy, or unity. Take the example of smoking. Most people agree that
smoking is unhealthy. Taking the view that a person is not his
behaviour, we can love someone who smokes but not like the fact that he
smokes. We can give him a hard time about his 'filthy habit', how bad it
is for him and for us, whilst at the same time reassuring him that we
love him *as a person.* This is a pertinent example not only in the
personal and social sphere but also in the clinical setting. A number of
therapists take this 'separation' view and justify their interventions
with clients who smoke on the basis that they are confronting a death
wish, suicidal tendency or harmartic script. This approach misses a
number of things:

1.  That the vast majority of people who smoke know more about the
    effects of smoking than non-smokers, and that therefore any comments
    or advice along these lines are, at best, redundant and, at worst,
    patronising. Also, evaluative comments or exhortations work against
    what Rogers (1958/67b) says about wanting to free people from the
    threat of external evaluation.
2.  That the person who smokes will have his own complex feelings and
    thoughts about the fact that he smokes, as well as physical
    responses to nicotine, and possibly, pathological addiction. This is
    supported by the importance Rogers (1942) gives to the free
    expression of feelings, and also by his view (Rogers, 1951, p. 223)
    that therapy is complete when 'the client is able to make, to
    experience, and to accept the diagnosis of the psychogenic aspects
    of his maladjustment'.
3.  That friends, colleagues or therapists often reassure for their own
    sake. Such reassurance that a smoker is loveable anyway risks
    detracting and distracting him from reflecting on and exploring what
    he feels and believes about his smoking.
4.  That, when one person says that he loves another as a person despite
    the fact that the other smokes, he implies a love or acceptance of
    the whole person. In fact, and ironically, what he is saying, and
    often what the smoker hears and experiences, is that he loves him
    (only) as a part person -- the part that doesn't smoke! This is an
    atomistic rather than an holistic or organismic perspective.
5.  That there is a point and purpose to smoking which ranges from
    enjoyment to different forms of retroflection. Simply rehearsing the
    humanistic mantra that the behaviour is not the person separates the
    person from their smoking, encourages dissociation and passivity,
    misses the point about the 'positive intention' that a person has in
    smoking, and flies in the face of the importance of empathising with
    a person's internal frame of reference in its completeness and
    complexity.

We know several people who feel ashamed or embarrassed that they smoke
and have experienced negative and punitive responses from their
therapists. Several said that they hadn't even told their therapist that
they smoked. One person described smoking as 'a route to belonging', an
attitude which, in our experience, is common in both psychiatric and
penal systems where smoking is a ritual, and tobacco a form of exchange
value. Another saw it as 'an attempt to soothe painful feelings'.

This leads us to a final point on organismic behaviour which is
expressed by Goldstein's question about being exposed simultaneously to
two stimuli that invite mutually contradictory responses:

- Knowing that smoking is bad for my health, why do I smoke?
- Feeling loved by my partner, why am I reluctant to confide in him?
- Wanting to enjoy close relationships, why do I feel cold, detached and
  flat?
- Having studied biology, why do I think that my internal organs are
  dislocated?
- Knowing that I'm upsetting the neighbours, why do I play music so
  loud?
- Knowing that my therapist is reliable, why do I get so upset and feel
  abandoned when she takes a break?
- Knowing that I'm loved by my friends, why do I feel compelled to show
  off in social situations with them?
- Knowing that I'm respected by my colleagues, why am I always seeking
  to be more admired?
- Even though I know I could enjoy going out with a friend, why do I
  always make excuses and end up staying in on my own?
- Even though I often know what to do, why do I always have to seek
  advice and reassurance from others?
- Even when I'm taking a break, why do I always have to make lists and
  even lists of lists?

We can answer these questions in terms of reflex reactions in the
organism, and of the difference between two tendencies: our organismic
tendency to actualise, and the tendency to self-actualisation, both of
which we consider in the next chapter. As far as organismic reactions to
simultaneous stimuli are concerned, Goldstein (p. 225) concludes with a
'general law', that: 'the reaction that corresponds to the stronger
stimulus is more extensive and slower than the other; whereas the latter
reaction, which corresponds to the weaker stimulus, is less extensive
and faster'. Thus, in the above examples, which hint at each of the ten
personality disorders identified in *DSM-IV* (APA, 1994), the second
clauses of each question reflect the respective reactions to stronger
stimuli. From this and Goldstein's earlier observations, we discern a
number of factors that influence the organism's reaction and behaviour:

- the strength of the stimulus,
- the relationship of intensity between two stimuli, and
- the extensiveness, speed, and chronicity or acuteness of the reaction.

Thus, a child brought up with values based in the two different cultures
of home and school may well experience a strong stimulus from the school
environment to do something which contradicts the values she and her
family hold at home.

\

### Sphere of immediacy

\

Goldstein takes up the point about the relationship between organism,
other and the world and suggests that, in addition to our subjective
experience and the heteronomous world, there is another sphere by and in
which we know ourselves and the world more deeply and fully. He refers
to this as the 'sphere of immediacy', and compares this to the
'subject--object' world in which both the subject and the world are
considered from an isolated and isolating point of view: 'The experience
of immediacy cannot be reached by the discursive procedure or by any
kind of synthesis. It may achieved only by surrendering ourselves to the
world with which we come into contact without fearing to lose our
relation to the ordered world' (ibid., p. 21). What this means, and our
own experience supports this, is that we inhabit both the subjective
sphere and the sphere of immediacy, and that both are part of our human
nature. This sphere is, for us, akin and parallel to how Barrett-Lennard
(2005) sees community, as a 'zone' lying somewhere beyond the family but
'as a closer, more personal context of activity and configured meaning
than the pluralist nation state or other big systems in the modern
world'. That we are able to live in both or a number of spheres is due
to our capacity for the abstract attitude which, in turn, is based on
our ability to differentiate. Indeed, we would argue that this sense of
immediacy, between 'ourselves' and the world is necessary, for instance,
for the development of regard for and empathy with another, and for the
development of our capacity to receive acceptance and understanding. For
Goldstein (op. cit., p. 21) this sphere of immediacy 'creates a deeper
existence that affords not only the possibility of living in the static
condition of the abstract--concrete sphere but also of tolerating
uncertainty without losing our existence'. Allport (1955, p. 32) puts it
this way:

::: cite
Having known acceptance in an affectionate environment \[the child\]
learns more readily to accept himself, to tolerate the ways of the
world, and to handle the conflicts of later life in a mature manner ...
early affiliative needs (dependence, succorance, and attachment) are the
ground of becoming.
:::

This concept helps us to understand and support the fluid movement
between an individual and an other, an individual and his world: 'the
organism is part of the world, but it can also experience the world as
something apart from itself -- as something as real as itself' (Perls,
1969, p. 38).

\

### Interdependence

\

The interplay between organism and environment is characteristic of
Goldstein's work, of Angyal's, and of our own, present work. Angyal
(1941, p. 48) goes so far as to describe life as 'an autonomous dynamic
event which takes place between the organism and the environment'.
Although Rogers was alive to this interdependence he does not emphasise
it in his work. This lack of emphasis has, in turn, led to some
criticism of Rogers' lack of focus on the positive impact of social and
environmental conditions on the human organism. Holland (1977, p. 74),
for instance, criticises Rogers for making a false split between the
organismic and the social, 'projecting exclusively good qualities onto
the organismic level'. We agree with Holland that there is at times a
naÃ¯ve quality to some of Rogers' ideas, and an individualistic
conception of human action in his and others' approach to one-to-one
therapy. In this chapter (and book) we are concerned to advance
person-centred therapy as one which is as mindful of the impact of the
social/environmental context as it is focused on the nature of the
organism. As we discuss later (in [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)) it was
psychologists such as Henry Murray who combined and articulated an
appreciation of the individual complexity of the human organism with a
'field' orientation. We also examine such criticisms in [Chapter
9](#c9.xhtml) when we discuss the implications of organismic psychology
for person-centred theory and practice.

'Coming to terms' with the environment is one of the main dynamic
concepts presented by Goldstein (op. cit.). The environment provides
both the source of disturbance to which the organism has to respond, and
the source of supplies on which the organism can draw in order to
actualise. Perls (1947/69) examines what he refers to as the cycle of
the inter-dependency of organism and environment and offers a phased
formulation of it ([Box 2.1](#c2.xhtml_box2.1)).

Perls comments that this cycle or circle leads to the fact of
'organismic self-regulation', which, for Reich, Perls, others and us, is
very different from moral regulation (see [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml)).
Again, it is important to note that, in both examples, the organism does
not return to where it was before. In the first example, in response to
the 'disturbance' of an internal need, the subject sets the book aside,
and is open to the next sensation. In terms of the gestalt cycle of
awareness, this represents a movement from satisfaction to withdrawal.
In the second example, the return of organismic balance is characterised
by engagement with others.

Recent research on brain development also emphasises the importance of
the environment and the dynamic relationship between the mental
phenomena of the organism and environment (Damasio, 1994/96, p. xix):

::: cite
mental phenomena can be fully understood only in the context of an
organism's interacting in an environment. That the environment is, in
part, a product of the organism's activity itself, merely underscores
the complexity of interactions we must take into account.
:::

There seem to be, for example, a number of emotional systems which are
genetically determined or 'hard-wired' in the brain's subcortical
structures, regulating care, rough and tumble play, seeking, lust, fear,
rage, separation and distress. The activity in the subcortex which
produces fear, rage or distress is also influenced by 'higher
structures' in the cortex, particularly the frontal lobe, which can
inhibit subcortical activity and, therefore, the expression of emotions.
However, at birth, the subcortex of the human infant is not fully
connected to the cortex, so at this stage we are not wired up for
self-regulation -- and hence the importance of the regulating other.
This interdependence of organism and environment is the basis, in
organismic terms, of the significance of interpersonal relationships or,
as Trevarthen (1980/93) puts it, 'the foundations of intersubjectivity',
a subject we examine in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml). Thus (Pally, 2000, p.
1):

::: box
[*Box 2.1* The cycle of the interdependency of organism and environment
(Perls, 1947/69) with examples.]{#c2.xhtml_box2.1}

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  The cycle of the inter-dependency of organism and environment (Perls, 1947/69)                                   Example of internal disturbance cycle (from Perls, 1947/69)           Example of external disturbance cycle
  \(1\) The organism at rest.                                                                                      I am dozing on the settee.                                            I am lying on the settee, drifting in and out of consciounsess.
  \(2\) The disturbing factor, which may be                                                                                                                                              
  \(a\) An external disturber -- a demand put upon a person, or any interference that puts her on the defensive.                                                                         The children come in, throw their things down, run up and then down the stairs, and demand their tea.
  \(b\) Internal -- a need.                                                                                        The wish to read something interesting penetrates my consciousness.   
  Either of which requires:                                                                                                                                                              
  \(3\) The creation of an image or reality.                                                                       I remember a certain bookshop.                                        I become aware of this disturbance.
  \(4\) The answer to the situation, aiming at:                                                                    I go there, browse and buy a book.                                    I get annoyed.
  \(5\) A decrease of tension -- achievement of gratification or compliance with the demands, resulting in:        I am reading.                                                         One of them comes over and gives me a hug. I feel less annoyed. I wake up fully and prepare their tea.
  \(6\) The return of the organismic balance.                                                                      I have had enough. I put the book aside.                              I sit with them and we talk about our respective days.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

::: cite
old notions of dichotomy between mind versus brain, nature versus
nurture, have been supplanted by a rich web of synergistic relations
between mind and brain, nature and nurture. Specifically, according to
modern neuroscience, this means that all mental phenomena are assumed to
be the result of biological activity of neuronal circuits in the brain.
The development of these circuits relies in part on genetic programmes,
but is also heavily dependent on the individual's experiences within the
environment.
:::

One example of this is Sander's (2002) research in which he set up two
groups of babies. In one group, babies were fed on demand, and in the
other fed every four hours regardless of their state. Within a few days
babies in the demand-fed cohort began to show the emergence of one or
two longer sleep periods in each 24 hours and, after a few more days,
these longer sleep periods began to occur more frequently at night. This
was in contrast to the group of babies fed every four hours, who showed
no such changes. Sander concludes: 'The emergence of a new and
continuing 24-hour circadian rhythm in the demand-fed infant--caregiver
system can be seen as an emergent property of a system in a state of
stable regulation ... the infant becomes a system within a larger
system' (p. 24).

\

### Internal valuing process

\

Through healthy development, human beings engage in an *organismic
valuing process,* which Rogers (1959b, p. 210) defines as 'an ongoing
process in which values are never fixed or rigid, but experiences are
being accurately symbolized and continually and freshly valued'. Whilst
our tendency to actualise is the criterion for such evaluation, we do
not, of course, exist or operate outside of an environmental context:
'whether or not a reflex occurs, seems ... to depend partly on the
"value" of the stimulus -- on its functional significance for the whole
organism' (Goldstein, op. cit., pp. 72-- 3). 'This awareness of worth in
human beings' says Whitehead (1954, p. 295) 'develops very early. Most
attempts to formulate it in words fail.' Experiences which maintain or
enhance the organism are valued positively, and we move with *adience*
towards such experiences; we move away from, that is, we avoid,
negatively valued experiences. Stinckens, Lietaer and Leijssen (2002)
also emphasise the interrelationship between organism and environment
arguing (p. 48) that: 'Inborn, intuitive experiencing should enter into
a continuous dialectical relationship with the laws of social reality
for the valuing process to correspond with the social embeddedness of
the individual.' Whilst we agree with an emphasis on the dialectical, we
think that these authors make too much of their criticism of Rogers'
theory as too individualistic.

Recent research in neuroscience confirms these views about the
development of values. It confirms, for instance, that the whole brain
is involved in the process of evaluating the meaning of experience (e.g.
Cortina, 2003). The brain consists of groups or units of neural networks
which consist of between 50 and 10,000 neurons, and there are estimated
to be perhaps a hundred million such groups. 'Experience that proves to
be of value for the organism' says Cortina (2003), 'is "mapped" into
these neuronal networks.' Edelman (1992) talks about 'values' as the way
in which the developing organism selects a limited amount of stimuli
from an enormous and potentially bewildering array of possibilities. A
person being out of contact, withdrawing, 'cutting off', or even
disassociating, may thus be understood as discriminating their
environmental stimuli. We think that personality 'disorder' is more
usefully understood as personality *process,* a discussion we develop in
[Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml). In terms of therapeutic practice this research
supports the importance of understanding both the value the client
*himself* gives to a particular stimulus, and his own response from
within his frame of reference. We see no contradiction in holding this
attitude alongside an understanding of the correspondence between the
individual's internal frame of reference and external, societal values,
or the lack of correspondence between the two. To take an example: the
human infant is polymorphous, having a sexual temperament that moves
simply towards its own satisfaction. The phrase 'polymorphous
*perverse'* represents an external evaluation of that polymorphism. As
human beings we are polyvalent, having many values. An example of this
is when somebody says that she is feeling ambivalent, a common response
to which is to help her decide between the two values or positions. It
seems to us to be more consistent with the theory of person-centred
psychology to help the person to 'own' both or multiple values rather
than simply to 'sort it out'. For us, this reflects the acceptance of
difference and diversity, and is the theoretical and organismic basis
for working with diversity therapeutically within the individual,
between individuals and in and between groups.

Siegel (1999, p. 124) suggests that, in a matter of microseconds,
following an 'initial orienting response', the brain processes the
representations of the body and the external world. As this occurs,
'elaborative appraisal and arousal processes' begin which 'assess
whether a stimulus is "good" or \"bad\", and determine whether the
organism should move toward or away from the stimulus'. Furthermore,
'*Emotional processing prepares the brain and the rest of the body for
action.'* Thus, the infant needs a stimulating and responsive
environment in which need is valued and values are needed.

Holland (1977, p. 74) criticises what he sees as a split in Rogers'
conceptualisation between the organism and the social environment. He
argues that Rogers projects exclusively good qualities onto the
organismic level. 'On the social side of the split' he continues 'are
all those unfriendly, limiting and distorting influences, the
expectations of others and the social pressures to conform, against
which Rogers prefers to trust his organismic feelings.' Although Holland
acknowledges Rogers' (1951) view of the socialised nature of the
organism, he views this as a weak attempt to integrate the
organism/social split. We have some sympathy with aspects of Holland's
criticism of the emphasis on the individual, apparent especially in
Rogers' early work, and we appreciate his unusually close reading of
Rogers. We think, though, that his view of an organism/social split is a
distortion of the theory. Rogers (1951, p. 524) is clear about the
necessary adjustments an individual makes in the context of need and
socialisation, and the implications for a social system of values:

::: cite
It is in the outcome of this valuing of values that we strike the
possibility of very basic similarities in all human experience. For as
the individual tests such values, and arrives at his own personal
values, he appears to come to conclusions which can be formulated in a
generalized way: that the greatest values for the enhancement of the
organism accrue when all experiences and all attitudes are permitted
conscious symbolization, and when behavior becomes the meaningful and
balanced satisfaction of all needs, these needs being available to
consciousness. The behavior which thus ensues will satisfy the need for
social approval, the need to express positive affectional feelings, the
need for sexual expression, the need to avoid guilt and regret as well
as the need to express aggression. Thus, while the establishment of
values by each individual may seem to suggest a complete anarchy of
values by each individual, experience indicates that quite the opposite
is true. Since all individuals have basically the same needs ... \[there
results\] a high degree of commonality and a genuinely socialized system
of values.
:::

We think this addresses the criticisms levelled at Rogers by Stinckens
*et al.* (2002) and others.

Barrett-Lennard (1998) suggests that the organism is always in motion.
As Feldenkreis (1981, p. 23) puts it: 'Most of the organism ... is
pre-occupied with movement in our environment.' We explore two aspects
of organismic motion:

- direction, and
- appetition.

\

### Direction

\

For Goldstein (op. cit., p. 84) 'direction is what we actually find as
the outstanding characteristic in the performance of an organism'. He
suggests that this directionality is effected both through a specific
environment in which the organism lives and 'a certain determination and
force issuing from the organism itself', otherwise the organism would be
a static organic system of regulation and balance, in homeostasis but
not in action. The environment, too, is in motion. Our own planet spins
on its axis at 67,000 mph, and in circles at over 1,000 mph. The
organism does not live in its immediate environment alone but, in
Goldstein's words, 'in a world in which all possible sorts of stimuli
are present and act on it' (ibid., p. 85). He goes on to say that we
make some sort of continuous selection from all the events in the world
'from the point of view wherein events are, or are not, pertinent to
that organism' (ibid., p. 85). The point about multiple stimuli appears
to draw on force field analysis (Kohler, 1940) and is also reminiscent
of a (later) field theory perspective (Lewin, 1951/64); we know that in
his work Goldstein refers to Kohler, and that Lewin refers to both
Goldstein and KÃ¶hler.

It is precisely because of this innate directionality of the organism
and its tendency to actualise that the person-centred therapist has no
need to be directive and can, with specific regard to a client's
experience, embody a non-directive attitude.

\

### Appetition

\

'Appetition' according to Whitehead (1929/78, p. 32) 'is immediate
matter of fact including in itself a principle of unrest, involving what
is not and what may be.' The statement 'I'm hungry' implies unrest and
describes both what is (hunger) and what may be (satisfaction).
Furthermore, he argues (ibid., p. 32): 'All physical experience is
accompanied by an appetite for, or against, its continuance.' Sharing
the same etymological root as the word 'appetite', appetition carries
the meaning of seeking after something, only with a stronger sense of
desire and direction towards an object or purpose. It is a concept found
in Leibniz's philosophical work, and has echoes of the broader meaning
which the gestalt psychologists, Perls, Hefferline and Goodman (1951/73,
pp. 100--1), give to the word aggression, which they say 'includes
everything that an organism does to initiate contact with its
environment'. However, importantly for Whitehead (1958/71) and for us,
appetition also carries a sense of the future: it describes 'an urge
towards the future based on an appetite in the present'. This is
particularly significant as it gives an organismic basis for future
focus and direction, based on a sense both of what is *and of what may
be.* Whitehead uses the example of thirst to argue this point. Thirst is
and represents an appetite towards difference, towards something
relevant in the sense that its future satisfaction *will* meet a present
need or desire. Part of our 'unity of satisfaction' is our ability to
evaluate both our own needs and those external objects which, in this
case, will satisfy our thirst. For Whitehead (1929/ 78, p. 32)
appetition has an immediate and a broader relevance: 'This is the
ultimate, basic adjustment of the togetherness of external objects on
which creative order depends. It is the conceptual adjustment of all
appetites in the form of aversions and adversions. It constitutes the
meaning of relevance.'

Appetition has a neurobiological basis in the seeking system, the source
cells of which are located in the ventral tegmental area (see Solms &
Turnbull, 2002). Solms and Turnbull talk about appetitive states such as
hunger, thirst and craving and also curiosity, interest and expectancy.
Their location is relevant as the command neurotransmitter of this
system is dopamine. When this seeking system is damaged people lose
interest in objects in the world, and stop dreaming; together with these
symptoms there is a decrease in psychotic symptoms such as
hallucinations and delusions. Conversely, when the system is stimulated,
for instance, through medication, energy levels and dreaming increase --
as does the likelihood of psychosis.

As we have indicated throughout this chapter, one major implication of
organismic psychology is the differentiation of the 'self', a
differentiation which we elaborate in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml). As a
preface to that discussion, we turn our attention to the organism's
tendency to actualise and to the formative tendency.
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::

[]{#c3.xhtml}

::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 3 Tendencies

::: cite
Always think of the universe as one living organism, with a single
substance and a single soul; and observe how all things are submitted to
the single perceptivity of this one whole, all are moved by its single
impulse, and all play their part in the causation of every event that
happens. Remark the intricacy of the skein, the complexity of the web.

Marcus Aurelius

It's never too late to support nature in its tendency to cure.

Alfred Vogel

The human organism is active, actualizing, and directional. This is the
basis for all of my thinking.

Carl Rogers
:::

Taken together, says Rogers (1979, p. 98), the actualising and formative
tendencies constitute 'the foundation blocks of the person-centered
approach'. That is to say they are, at the level of philosophical
belief, assumptions without which the approach does not make sense, and
the basis for everything a therapist says or does while she is working.

Rogers describes the formative tendency as universal and evolutionary,
and says that it tends towards greater order, complexity and
interrelatedness in the universe. The actualising tendency is a
localised manifestation of the formative tendency, and tends towards
maintaining and enhancing the health and well-being of the experiencing
organism. Articulating the relationship between the tendencies, Van
Kalmthout (1998, p. 8) says that the formative tendency is 'the cosmic
source of the actualizing tendency, which is at work within the
individual'.

In our view we can speak of the formative tendency and the actualising
tendency only as matters of faith that are not yet empirically
verifiable. Writing specifically about the actualising tendency, Brodley
(1999, p. 109) allows that it is a hypothesis that 'cannot be
conclusively proved or disproved'. We choose, therefore, to believe in
the tendencies or not in the light of our own convictions, experiences
and temperament.

In our discussion of the tendencies we follow the chronology of Rogers'
thinking and begin with the tendency to actualise. In the second part of
the chapter we discuss an important manifestation of this tendency: that
of self-actualisation. In the third part of the chapter we discuss from
a person-centred perspective questions raised by other viewpoints
regarding motivation and drive, and consciousness. In the fourth and
final part of the chapter we discuss the formative tendency.

\

## The organism's tendency to actualise {#c3.xhtml_clnk1}

Rogers (1959b, p. 196) describes the actualising tendency as 'the
inherent tendency of the organism to develop all its capacities in ways
which serve to maintain or enhance the organism'. He later (1979, p .98)
describes it as 'a characteristic of organic life'. He holds that the
organism's tendency to actualise is dependable; that it can be the basis
of therapeutic endeavour; that a therapist can rely on an individual
client's organismic tendency to actualise; and that her only role is to
facilitate that tendency by attending to the relational conditions that
are most conducive to it. Brodley (1999, p. 109) says that it 'functions
as an assumption that influences the way the therapist proceeds as a
helper'. The non-directive attitude, for instance (see [Chapter
8](#c8.xhtml)), follows from this belief in the organism's tendency to
actualise.

The idea of an actualising tendency is neither new nor unique to Rogers.
Writers from antiquity onwards have noticed a natural tendency in living
organisms to preserve, renew and enhance themselves:

- 'The productions of nature' says Aristotle (1955, p. 44) 'have an
  innate tendency in the direction of the best condition of which they
  are capable.'
- 'At length' says Lucretius (1951, p. 93) 'everything is brought to its
  utmost limit of growth by nature, the creatress and perfectress.'
- 'No one' writes Spinoza (1677/1993, p. 154) 'unless he is overcome by
  external causes and those contrary to his nature, neglects to seek
  what is useful to himself, *i.e.,* to preserve his being.'
- Ferenczi (1932/95) writes about *orpha* or an organising drive.
  Stanton (1990, p. 198) states that this term derives from spiritualist
  terminology where it denotes 'creative destiny': 'it indicates the
  unconscious, vital, organizing instincts that nourish people and
  prevent them from falling apart during moments of severe crisis'.
- Taft (1933, p. 13) notes that living beings, including human beings,
  'are geared to movement and growth, to achieving something new,
  leaving the outworn behind and going on to a next stage'.
- Berne (1947/71, p. 98) writes about *physis* as 'the force of Nature,
  which eternally strives to make things grow and to make growing things
  more perfect', and cites Zeno the Semite as having thought much about
  physis in connection with the growth and development of living things.
  Ferenczi (1932/95) refers *to physis* as '*determined* by the past, to
  which it is bound' (p. 40); Edwards (1967) sees physis in the works of
  the Stoics and the Epicureans; and Clarkson (1992) quotes Heraclitus
  and Aristotle on the subject.
- Merry (2003, p. 83) describes it as 'the non-conscious and inherent
  property of living organisms to become whatever they are capable of
  becoming'.

Rogers grew up on a farm, surrounded by examples of natural growth, and
at the University of Wisconsin initially studied agriculture. It's
understandable that he should base his work as a therapist on a
principle of natural growth. As a metaphor, the actualising tendency is
organic and natural, and stands against the earlier inorganic or
mechanical metaphors of Freud and Skinner.

It's important to recognise that the actualising tendency isn't a thing
or an entity, that how we talk about it is significant, and that there's
a difference between 'is' and 'has'. An organism doesn't *have* a
tendency to actualise, or even have *an* actualising tendency, in the
same way that we might say it has an arm or an ulcer or a raging
headache. We think it's more accurate and more useful to say that the
organism *is* a tendency to actualise. The actualising tendency is then
functionally synonymous with life: an organism that is alive is
necessarily tending to actualise; an organism that is not tending to
actualise is dead. Rogers (1978, p. 239) puts it this way:

::: cite
This tendency is operative at all times, in all organisms. Indeed it is
only the presence or absence of this total directional process that
enables us to tell whether a given organism is alive or dead.
:::

In this sense, a therapist's role is simply to facilitate the life of
the individual organism, where to facilitate means to make the unfolding
of life easy or easier.

An organism tends to actualise, to grow, to develop, to realise its
potential. Its tendency to actualise is simply one of its properties. As
such it's of the same order as weight in relation to gravity. If we step
off a ladder we fall. We don't need to think about it. Given the
environment we live in, once we've made the choice to step, the fall is
inevitable. If we were on the moon or at the bottom of the ocean, we'd
be in a different environment, gravity would operate differently and the
fall would be different. Similarly with the actualising tendency. If the
environment is conducive, actualisation is inevitable. In different
environments, different degrees of actualisation are possible. We could
go further and say that the organism is always actualising to the extent
that its environment is conducive.

Fowles (1964/81, p. 160) says of sex that it is 'like all great forces:
simply a force. We may judge this or that manifestation or situation of
the force as moral or immoral; but not the force itself.' We think the
same is true of the actualising tendency: it is simply a force, an
expression of nature, and in itself neither moral nor immoral. We may
judge individual manifestations of it, but the force itself is amoral.
Brodley agrees. She reminds us (1999, p. 116) that the actualising
tendency is 'a biological concept rather than an ethical one'.

It is also unselfconscious. That is to say, the process of actualisation
doesn't depend on an organism's conscious decision to make it happen.
Although consciousness allows human organisms to reflect upon their
environment and to make choices about what they do, the tendency to
actualise goes on independently of this consciousness. It may even be
the case that consciousness gets in the way of optimal actualisation, at
least in the short term. As a result of introjected ideas about what's
right and wrong, we may find ourselves torn between conscious desires or
prohibitions on the one hand, and organismic promptings towards
actualisation on the other. 'I have' says Rogers (1978, p. 247)
'gradually come to see this dissociation, rift, estrangement, as
something learned, a perverse channeling of some of the actualizing
tendency into behaviors that do not actualize.'

The actualising tendency is the ground of unconditional positive regard.
That is to say that a therapist's unconditional positive regard is the
minute-to-minute manifestation of his willingness to be non-directive,
and that that willingness is possible only if he believes in and relies
on the integrity and dependability of his client's organismic tendency
to actualise. It's this that we hold in unconditional positive regard:
not what a person does; nor even who he is; but his tendency to
actualise as fully as possible in any given environment. This way of
thinking supports from another angle our contention that it is
simplistic and naÃ¯ve to offer unconditional positive regard for the
person but not for her behaviour. In our view that constitutes an
untenable dichotomy, in that a person's behaviour is an intimate and
accurate expression of who she is as a person in the moment of her
behaving (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)). It makes more sense to us to say
that we hold unconditional positive regard for her tendency to
actualise, and to see that she is tending to actualise whatever she or
we or others may think of the behavioural manifestations of that
tendency.

This train of thought supports and sheds light on Proposition V of
Rogers' (1951) personality theory (p. 491): '*Behavior is basically the
goal-directed attempt of the organism to satisfy its needs as
experienced, in the field as perceived,'* In other words, a person's
behaviour, however bizarre, destructive or self-defeating it may seem to
us from the outside, is always both an expression of his tendency to
actualise, and as full an expression of it as is possible in the
environment as he experiences it. We may understand behaviour, then,
always, as the best a client can do in any given moment, given his
perception of his inner and outer environment.

Some have criticised the notion of the actualising tendency on a number
of counts: that it's naÃ¯ve; that it's overly optimistic; and that it
accounts for neither the complexity of life nor the prevalence of evil.
Rogers (1979, p. 101) notes himself that there are those who 'regard it
as too optimistic, not dealing adequately with the negative element, the
evil in persons'. Land too (1996, p. 69) says that 'reports of
humanity's essential goodness are premature. Any openminded observation
of human behavior must validate innate destructiveness as at least an
equal possibility.' A more substantial critique, again based on the
assertion that it's overly optimistic, is that the actualising tendency
both supposes and enshrines the notion of progress, a more or less
continuous process of improvement and betterment. This belief in
progress may be a particularly American notion, or an expression perhaps
of the spirit of the time in which Rogers was writing (see
Barrett-Lennard, 1998). Rogers and some of the other writers we have
cited talk about the tendency to actualise and the formative tendency as
explicitly positive tendencies towards the maintenance and enhancement
of the organism. They don't talk much about the organism's inevitable
death, destruction and recycling. Paglia, though, recognises that
everything that's created must eventually die. 'Organicism' she says
(1994, p. 20) 'is the true deconstruction.' As she puts it in a
subsequent online discussion forum (1995): 'from the perspective of the
cosmos, society is very artificial and frail. Society is nothing
compared to the vastness of outer space. The cosmic perspective is the
real instrument of deconstruction.'

While valid, these critiques overlook three things:

1.  that the actualising tendency is, as Brodley puts it (1999, p. 113),
    a *'tendency'* towards growth rather than '*a guarantee* of full
    health',
2.  that it depends, at least in part, on external circumstances, and
3.  that it is in itself neither moral nor immoral.

\

## Self-actualisation {#c3.xhtml_clnk2}

We noted earlier Rogers' comment (1978, p. 247) that an organism's
tendency to actualise might occasionally result in 'behaviors that do
not actualize'. To examine and make sense of this we need to look at
Rogers' ideas about the development of the self, which he sees as a
differentiated aspect of the organism.

Rogers' view is that we are born an unselfconscious organism, and that
we develop a self-picture in response to the sense we make of the way
those around us behave towards us. There is, inevitably, some degree of
difference or incongruence between our original organismic integrity and
the self-picture we develop. The greater this incongruence, the greater
the likelihood of emotional and psychological distress.

Given a conceptual map that includes organism and self, or self-picture,
we can say that the organism tends to actualise, and that a part of that
process of actualisation involves us actualising in ways that are more
immediately and obviously consistent with our self-picture than with our
organism. Rogers calls this second process a process of
self-actualisation. It follows that the greater the incongruence between
organism and self, the greater the likelihood that actualisation and
self-actualisation will manifest in different and incompatible
behaviours.

We notice two misunderstandings of this. The first is that some
practitioners and writers use actualisation and self-actualisation as if
they refer to the same process. This confusion is especially
understandable when Rogers himself, at least until the mid-1950s, uses
the terms as synonyms. Rogers (1951) uses 'self-actualisation' to
describe the move towards optimal psychological functioning. By 1959 he
prefers the term 'actualisation' and uses 'self-actualisation' to
describe more specifically the actualisation of the self. The confusion
is compounded when some person-centred writers and therapists, and many
from other traditions, use the term 'self-actualisation' consistently to
refer to the kind of growth and development for which Rogers reserves
the term 'actualisation'. We think that this misunderstanding is simply
that -- a misunderstanding of the theory that we can clarify by a more
disciplined use of terms.

The second misunderstanding is that some practitioners see actualisation
as, broadly, good and healthy, and self-actualisation as bad and
unhealthy. Tolan (2002, p. 144) describes practitioners who act 'as
though they had received the "message" from their reading and training
that their clients' organismic experiencing was the only valuable and
trustworthy aspect of the client's personality'. We think that this is a
more serious misunderstanding, and that the relationship between the two
processes is too complex to reduce to that kind of dialectic. We have
reservations about Tolan's use of the term 'self-structure' to mean a
person's construing of his world, but agree with her recognition (ibid.,
p. 144) that 'it would run counter to the whole philosophical base of
client-centred theory to believe that *any* part of the personality had
no purpose'. She describes a number of ways in which what she calls the
self-structure serves the organismic tendency to actualise:

- it helps us organise and evaluate our experience,
- it helps us stay acceptable within our family or society,
- it 'enables us' (ibid., p. 147) 'to predict the world and, in
  particular, to anticipate how people will respond to us', and
- ultimately (ibid., p. 147), it 'helps us to balance our own organismic
  needs with the needs of others' so that we can 'live in a world
  peopled with others rather than in an isolated world of our own'.

Addressing the same misunderstanding Merry (2003, p. 87) asks a number
of questions:

::: cite
How can a 'tendency' be in conflict with a 'part' or 'subsystem' of
itself? If the actualising tendency is the only source of motivation,
how can it give rise to a part of itself that provides a second (and
conflicting) motivation? Finally, if the actualising tendency is
constructively directional, trustworthy and moving always in the
direction of maturation, how does it create a secondary system that can
sabotage it?
:::

Merry answers those questions by suggesting that the organism's primary
need is to survive, and that in order to do so it will adapt and 'close
down some potentials if the alternative threatens survival'.

Both Tolan and Merry offer us a way to see all of a person's behaviour
as a manifestation of her tendency to actualise. In this way, they help
the theory itself become both more parsimonious and more holistic.

\

## Questions raised by other viewpoints {#c3.xhtml_clnk3}

In this part we discuss the implications of the theory of the organism's
tendency to actualise for the concepts of motivation, drive and
consciousness. In doing so we are echoing the title of a chapter by
Rogers (1951) in which he addresses the questions of transference,
diagnosis and the applicability of client-centred therapy. We want to do
something similar here. It's not that person-centred psychology ignores
these phenomena, or that its practitioners don't believe in them. It's
simply that we view and work with them differently. Although these
concepts derive from other approaches, we think it's useful to
understand them and elaborate them from a person-centred perspective.

\

### Motivation

\

The question of motivation arises in practice when therapists talk about
'unmotivated' clients or, indeed, when clients themselves feel
unmotivated. This seems to imply that there is a lack of movement,
inducement, desire, or response to influence. Much psychological
literature reflects this and refers to motivation in a number of forms:
primary drives, need systems, incentives, as an energiser of behaviour,
and so on. Nearly fifty years ago Littman (1958) identifed fifty-two
motivation terms. However, to ascribe particular motivations to people,
and then to value those motivations as good, poor, high or low, both
asserts a hierarchy and posits a person of separated parts. In their
review of (then) contemporary schools of psychology, Woodworth with
Sheehan (1931/65, p. 334) reflect that the 'problem of motivation takes
on special significance when emphasis is laid upon the wholeness of the
organism'. Distinct from most other schools, organismic psychology
offers a unitary view of motivation: the actualising tendency. This
concept, originally influenced by Goldstein's (1939) work is, as we
discuss in the first part of this chapter, a first principle of
person-centred psychology and, as Brodley (1999, p. 109) puts it, is 'a
meta-motivation that subsumes all specific motivations'. Thus the
question or debate is between those who view human beings as having a
number of motivations (Freud, Jung, Klein, Maslow); those who think in
terms of a sole motivating tendency (Adler, Goldstein, Angyal, Lecky,
Combs and Snygg, Rogers); and, perhaps most radically, those who find it
unhelpful, like Kelly (1962, pp. 83--4), who calls it 'an invented
construct' for which he has 'no use'. Patterson (1964/2000a, p. 16) puts
it pithily: 'There's no such thing as a lack of or absence of
motivation. To be alive is to be motivated, to be unmotivated is to be
dead. Thus we cannot say that a client is unmotivated.'

One problem with suggesting a number of motivations, such as Maslow's
(1954) hierarchy of needs, is that they need organising. The most
serious objection to the unitary theory of motivation appears to be
whether maintenance and enhancement imply a dualism in the organism's
tendency to actualise. Angyal (1941, p. 218) sees no problem with this:
'Human behavior, as a rule, is multiply motivated: a given activity may
express more than one tendency at the same time.' Patterson too
(1964/2000a, p. 16) addresses this point, arguing that 'preservation or
maintenance, and enhancement or actualization may be seen as two aspects
of the same motive, operating in different situations' and links this to
pathology (see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)).

Traditional theories of motivation from Freud onwards tend towards
tension reduction. This, in turn, is based on a negative or problematic
view of tension, such as a tension between autonomy and homonomy, or
between actualisation and self-actualisation (see pp. 89--91). Organisms
tend rather to maintain than reduce tensions. Allport (1955) attempts to
bridge these two perspectives by borrowing Maslow's (1954) distinction
between *deficit* and *growth* motives. Allport suggests that, whilst
growth motives maintain tensions, motives based on deficit attempt to
reduce tension. This makes sense to us if we link these distinctions to
the distinction between actualisation and self-actualisation. In other
words, tension is a normal part of the organism's maintenance and
growth. This view is backed up by neuro-scientific research which, for
instance, explains the observation that it is the affective state that
underlies and motivates attachment behaviour. Through the affective
relationship with her child, a mother can, in effect, 'kick start' the
psychic energy that activates the child's attachment and, in Schore's
terms (1994, p. 104), her 'exploratory motivational systems'. At the
same time, when we are more concerned with self-actualisation, we will
attempt to meet the deficit caused by our differentiation along those
lines. So, developing Schore's example, a child who is concerned to
please her mother will anticipate her mother's need, say, for
attachment, or will attempt to fill the deficit of a lack of
stimulation.

\

### Drive

\

A drive is generally viewed as a motivational state produced either by
deprivation of a needed substance (to be desired), or the presence of
something noxious or undesirable (to be avoided). This is echoed in
Rogers' view of the organism's movement towards adience or avoidance. In
the same years as Rogers published his paper on motivation, Butler and
Rice (1963), also exploring this issue from a person-centred
perspective, presented their findings on drive reduction theory and came
up with the concept of 'adient motivation', which they refer to as
stimulus hunger, a term also used by Berne (1964/68). Commenting on
this, Browning (1966) suggests that the concept of stimulus hunger gives
the actualisation concept clearer empirical specificity, while
sacrificing none of its original meaning. As with motivation there is a
similar debate as to whether human beings have a number of drives, such
as sex and aggression, or whether there is only one, as Goldstein
(1934/95) suggests. We can summarise as follows:

1.  Drives are conceptualised as releasing tension.
2.  The healthy organism is in a state of tension.
3.  Therefore, drives are a pathological phenomenon.
4.  The tendency of the sick or pathological organism to discharge
    tension is the only means of actualising itself
    (self-actualisation). This represents a drive for self-preservation.
5.  The concept of different, separate drives is based on research
    conducted under experimental conditions on young children and
    animals, and represents an atomistic or decentred view of the
    organism.
6.  Therefore there is only one *drive,* that of self-actualisation.

Rogers (1951, pp. 487--8), who refers to Goldstein, puts it organically:
'it seems entirely possible that all organic and psychological needs may
be described as partial aspects of this one fundamental need ... the
words used are an attempt to describe the observed directional force in
organic life'. Fromm (1971, p. 67) puts this in more relational terms:

::: cite
Man's 'drives' ... are an expression of a fundamental and specifically
human need, the need to be related to man and nature, and of confirming
himself in this relatedness ... The need for self-realization in man is
the root of the specifically human dynamism.
:::

We see connections here between the person-centred approach's emphasis
on organismic experiencing and the vegetative processes of Reichian and
neo-Reichian theory and body therapies (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)).
Reich moves beyond Freud's libidinous drive theory, and reclaims sexual
expression as essential to health. His concept of 'orgastic potency'
(1922/83, p. 102) is clearly organismic: 'Orgastic potency is the
capacity to surrender to the flow of biological energy, free of any
inhibition; the capacity to discharge completely the dammed-up sexual
excitation through involuntary, pleasurable convulsions of the body.'
Notwithstanding the common slip of the tongue between the two words,
there is a real sense in which orgasm is itself a manifestation of
organismic vitality.

\

### Consciousness

Rogers sees consciousness as a potential impediment to the full and
free-flowing functioning of the organism. He concludes his view of 'the
good life' and 'the fully functioning person' (1957/67, pp. 194--5) with
the following lines, which describe a tension between organismic
functioning and consciousness:

::: cite
Man's behavior is exquisitely rational, moving with subtle and ordered
complexity toward the goals his organism is endeavoring to achieve. The
tragedy for most of us is that our defenses keep us from being aware of
this rationality, so that consciously we are moving in one direction,
while organismically we are moving in another.
:::

Consciousness is, basically, a state of awareness. Beyond that it is
notoriously difficult to define. Psychoanalysis emerged out of Freud's
neuropsychological studies of consciousness and cognition and thus
consciousness holds a central place in the history of psychotherapy.
However, whilst we may define consciousness as an electrochemical
function of the nervous system, no amount of 'scientific' description
can convey a subjective grasp of conscious experience, or what it means
and feels like to have consciousness. When asked about consciousness
(Evans, 1975/81), Rogers talked in terms of a range of phenomena: from
those in sharp focus in awareness, which he refers to as 'the height of
consciousness'; through a range of material which could be called into
consciousness, but which is not figural; to phenomena which are more
dimly connected with awareness, which some person-centred practitioners
refer to as sitting on the 'edge of awareness'.

From a perspective based on organism, tendency and *process,* it's
problematic to conceive of consciousness as a *domain* of the mind or as
a *structure* of the psyche. Nonetheless, such topographical or
structural views of consciousness are implicit in some person-centred
thinking on the subject. For example, the 'edge of awareness' sounds
similar to the notion of the preconscious, and suggests a reified view
of consciousness that emphasises structure and topography rather than
process. The same applies when we talk about *the* conscious, *the*
preconscious, *the* subconscious, *the* unconscious, what is 'in
awareness', and what is outside awareness. Another problem with
traditional perspectives regarding the unconscious (or dynamic
unconscious) is that it is viewed as a domain of the psyche which
encompasses repressed functions and desires, primitive impulses, and
memories, images and wishes which are too anxiety-provoking to be
admitted into consciousness, or which have been, as it were, exiled to
the unconscious.

By contrast, Rogers (1951, p. 483) says that 'consciousness consists of
the symbolization of some of our experiences' and acknowledges Angyal's
(1941) influence in his thinking about this. This, in turn, has its
roots in James' view of consciousness not as a thing but as a process.
Rogers continues:

::: cite
only a portion of that experience, and probably a very small portion of
that experience, is consciously experienced. Many of our sensory and
visceral sensations are not symbolized. It is also true, however, that a
large portion of this world of experience is available to consciousness,
and may become conscious if the need of the individual causes certain
sensations to come into focus because they are associated with the
satisfaction of a need.
:::

As Whitehead (1929/78, p. 53) puts it: 'consciousness presupposes
experience, and not experience consciousness'.

It is clear from this that we focus on or attend to particular elements
of our perceptual field according to what we need. Panksepp (1998, p.
310) views this 'primary-process consciousness' as '*that ineffable
feeling of experiencing oneself as an active agent in the perceived
events of the world ',* and argues that this consciousness is rooted in
low-level brain circuits 'that first represented the body as an
intrinsic and coherent whole'. From a person-centred perspective,
Brodley (1999) sees the capacity for such selfawareness or reflective
consciousness as a salient human channel of the actualising tendency.
Solms and Turnbull (2002) view consciousness as intrinsically
introspective and intrinsically evaluative, which again gives a
biological basis for the organism's internal valuing process. In our
view this active focus or attention offers a theoretical basis for the
practice of focusing (Gendlin, 1961, 1981, 1986), which demands an
attention that is more active, directed and effortful than simple
awareness.

Rogers distinguishes what is consciously or *explicitly* known from what
is unknown or *implicitly* known, and potentially available to
consciousness.

This distinction has been elaborated in more recent work by
neuroscientists and neuropsychologists. When we remember, say, a
connection between what we do now and our past, our conscious memory
system is mediated by the hippocampus and related cortical areas. These
areas help us to retain facts, concepts and ideas and, importantly, are
involved in assessing the emotional significance of a stimulus and the
meaning we attach to it, and in formulating our response. Another type
of implicit, emotional memory system involves the amygdala and related
structures which respond more quickly, albeit by less than a quarter of
a second, through what LeDoux (1998) refers to as 'the quick and dirty
route'. *A therapist informs his client that he is taking a break.
Almost before he has finished his sentence, his client says angrily: 'I
knew I was too much for you.' Both client and therapist know that she
has been and has felt abandoned by men but hitherto they have talked
about this mainly in cognitive terms, even about her fear. The client's
immediate reaction to the prospect of a break in contact bypassed her
usual, considered response.*

In order to understand this, we don't have to conceptualise an area
called the unconscious which is full of repressed material about
abandonment, or develop therapeutic techniques for 'getting to' or
'breaking through' this. We simply have to work with what becomes
explicit and present, however it emerges (see Rogers, 1961/80; Gendlin,
1986; Jennings, 1986; Finke, 1990; Vossen, 1990). This is the sense of
the presenting past (see Jacobs, 1998; Edelman & Tononi, 2000; Stern,
2004). In the field of psychology there has been considerable debate as
to whether experience is a present phenomenon or whether it is an
amalgam of past experiences. James (1890) argues that each moment of
consciousness appropriates each previous moment and, furthermore, that
the knower is embedded in what is known. Drawing on quantum physics,
Zohar (1991, p. 104) argues that both past and present form our memory
and sense of self:

::: cite
This weaving of the self moment by moment as the wave functions of past
selves overlap with the wave functions of the present self is what I
mean by quantum memory. It is a necessary, definitive link between our
past, present and future selves, and gives us the mechanism by which we
have a personal identity that abides across time. I am, in part, the
person that I was yesterday because that person is woven into the fabric
of my being. In quantum mechanical terms, the past has entered a 'phase
relationship' with the present -- because both past and present produce
wave functions on the ground state of consciousness.
:::

Although we say 'simply' (above), the provision of a therapeutic
environment in which the client may react quickly rather than respond in
a more considered way is no easy task (see [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml)). It
requires the therapist to know herself and, by implication, to have
space (such as supervision and/or personal therapy) in which she can
process her own implicit memories, drawn from the field of her
experience.

Rogers (1954/67b, p. 119) comments on the practical implications of this
approach to experience and consciousness:

::: cite
In general then, it appears to be true that when a client is open to his
experience, he comes to find his organism more trustworthy. He feels
less fear of the emotional reactions which he has. There is a gradual
growth of trust in, and even affection for the complex, rich, varied
assortment of feelings and tendencies which exist in him at the organic
level. Consciousness, instead of being the watchman over a dangerous and
unpredictable lot of impulses, of which few can be permitted to see the
light of day, becomes the comfortable inhabitant of a society of
impulses and feelings and thoughts, which are discovered to be very
satisfactorily self-governing when not fearfully guarded.
:::

In their recent work on consciousness Edelman and Tononi (2000, p. 147)
discuss the general properties of conscious experience, including
consciousness as a differentiated process, arguing that 'the number of
conscious states that we can discriminate within a fraction of a second
is exceedingly large'. They go on to relate 'the extraordinary
differentiation of conscious experience' to other properties such as
informativeness, global access and flexibility. Again, we see in these
ideas an elaboration entirely consistent with organismic psychology.

Equally, what is unconscious or not known, then, is not necessarily
problematic or pathological. As Rogers acknowledges, organic processes,
such as the regulation of body heat, are unconscious. Indeed, as Solms
and Turnbull (2002) remind us, an entire hemisphere, or about half of
the forebrain, can function unconsciously. In the same spirit, Stern
(2004) distinguishes between aspects of implicit relationship that are
neither conscious nor defensive nor pathological. He terms these aspects
'nonconscious', and reserves the term 'unconscious' for dynamically
repressed material and, therefore, defended aspects of self.

\

## The formative tendency {#c3.xhtml_clnk4}

According to O'Hara (1999, p. 64):

::: cite
Rogers held the metaphysical belief that the inborn capacities for
self-healing and creative agency are reflections of a formative tendency
in the universe impelling all of nature -- from molecules to galaxies --
to evolve towards greater complexity and expanded levels of
consciousness.
:::

On these grounds, she calls Rogers a Romantic (1995, p. 134; 1999, p.
63). Finke (2002) makes the same point. Rogers' optimism about human
nature, and his love of the natural world support this assertion. We can
also see both the actualising tendency and, especially, the formative
tendency as manifestations of nature or spirit, a typically Romantic
notion. This, for instance, is Wordsworth, from Book 1 of the 1850
edition of *The Prelude*(ll. 401--4):

::: cite
Wisdom and Spirit of the universe!\
Thou Soul that art the eternity of thought,\
That givest to forms and images a breath\
And everlasting motion ...
:::

There are other precedents and parallels. In a sense, any cosmogony that
posits a purpose or destiny to which the world is tending prefigures the
formative tendency. So too does any mythical, theological or political
system that assumes or asserts an order in the universe. 'All things'
says Aurelius (1964, p. 106) 'are interwoven with one another; a sacred
bond unites them; there is scarcely one thing that is isolated from
another. Everything is coordinated; everything works together in giving
form to the one universe.' Bohm (1980/83, p. xii) echoes this when he
describes reality as 'a set of forms in an underlying universal movement
or process'.

Whereas the actualising tendency is a universal tendency located in
individual organisms, the formative tendency is assumed to animate the
whole universe, organic and inorganic, sentient and non-sentient, alive
and inert. Whereas the actualising tendency tends towards complexity and
differentiation in the service of an individual organism's continuing
health and well-being, the formative tendency tends towards form and
order throughout the whole universe. Rogers (1979, p. 103) defines it as
'the everoperating trend toward increased order and inter-related
complexity evident at both the inorganic and the organic level'.

As with the organism's tendency to actualise, the language we use is
significant. The universe does not *have* a formative tendency. It *is*
a tendency to form, or it tends to form. Here 'form' can be verb or
noun. Where form is a verb, we may say that the universe tends to form
itself in an orderly or coherent way. This supposes an intelligent
universe, capable of choosing order over disorder, and coherence over
incoherence. Where form is a noun, we may say that the universe tends
towards form, or that it tends to be orderly or coherent. This supposes
a set of universal laws which result in order rather than disorder, and
coherence rather than incoherence. Rogers believed in an orderly
universe from early in his life, and spent much of his life seeking the
order that he believed was there beneath, behind or beyond the
apparently unruly.

Rogers defines in detail neither the quality of the order he believes
the universe to manifest, nor the end or purpose to which he believes
the world is tending. He does, however, assert (1979, p. 107) that there
is both order and purpose, and suggests that 'perhaps we are touching
the cutting edge of our ability to transcend ourselves, to create new
and more spiritual directions in human evolution'.

We know that Rogers was influenced by Angyal. Rogers' 1959 paper in
particular shows many traces of Angyal's thinking. We suspect that
Rogers' notion of the formative tendency may be informed by Angyal's
notion of homonomy, which is an idea that Rogers doesn't really make
much of in any other way. Briefly, Angyal sees that human beings tend
towards homonomy, which he describes (1941, p. 172) as 'a trend to be in
harmony with superindividual units, the social group, nature, God,
ethical world order, or whatever the person's formulation of it may be'.
He also suggests (1941, p. 170) that in their 'religious attitude' men
and women experience themselves as members 'of a meaningful cosmic
order'. We've argued in an earlier chapter that even at his most
apparently humanistic or existential, Rogers maintained a 'religious
attitude' towards life. Angyal's formulation of an organismic tendency
towards homonomy allows Rogers a place for that religious attitude. We
can see the formative tendency as a development of the trend towards
homonomy. If Angyal is right, and human beings tend to want to belong to
something larger than themselves, then a formative tendency of which
they are a part both expresses and satisfies that tendency.

Whatever view we each take of the formative tendency, it poses questions
even within Rogers' own system of thinking. We've seen, for instance,
that he professed some affinity with existential beliefs. It's hard to
square these beliefs -- in contingency, isolation and a meaningless
universe -- with the notion of a formative tendency, with all that that
implies of order, meaning, purpose and interconnectedness. We're not
saying that Rogers has to be consistent. He wrote a great deal over many
years, and we'd be foolish to expect a complete consistency. We're
acknowledging, though, that there are inconsistencies internal to the
approach, and that those inconsistencies give each of us the
opportunity, and perhaps the responsibility, to think about where we
stand in relation to the approach, and in relation to the formative
tendency in particular. Van Kalmthout, for instance, questions the
validity of the concept. In the context of the Holocaust, and of a more
recent history characterised by wars, genocides, violence and abuse, he
sees (2002, p. 129) that any 'philosophy of life based on the assumption
that the cosmos and the history of man have some purpose and that human
nature is basically good quickly gives rise to an impression of
naivete'. Ellingham (2002, pp. 16--7) takes a different view. He
suggests that the formative tendency, like Newton's idea of gravity or
Darwin's idea of evolution, might serve as the central and unifying idea
around which the field of psychology can unify and become a bona fide
science.

These questions matter not only for us as individual practitioners, but
for the approach as a whole, and perhaps for the practice of therapy
more widely.

Having discussed the organism in the previous chapter and its tendency
to actualise in this chapter, we now turn to the major differentiation
of the organism: the self.
:::::::::::::

[]{#c4.xhtml}

:::::::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 4 Self

::: cite
Perhaps one explanation of therapy is that the inconsistencies in self
are recognized, faced, re-examined, and the self is altered in ways
which bring about consistency.

Carl Rogers

\[T\]he self is self only because it has a world, a structured universe,
to which it belongs and from which it is separated at the same time.

Paul Tillich

The paradigm instance of the self is, of course, indisputably, the
organism -- from primitive amoeba to highest mammal.

Freya Mathews
:::

Not many people think about themselves in terms of organism or
tendencies. Some of us, however, think about and are fascinated by
ourselves -- literally, our *selves.* Arguably, no subject is more
personal or interesting to us than our 'self' or selves. From ancient
times, philosophers have studied and debated what it means to be human
and attempted to define the concept of the self, which seems to describe
the core of what it means to be 'I' or 'we'. Our use of the plural
pronoun in this context refers to a collective self-concept, as distinct
from the individualised self-concept prevalent in narcissistic 'me'
cultures (for a critique of which see Lasch, 1979), and acknowledges an
awareness of an historical and cultural reference group (see Nobles,
1973). In modern times, psychologists since William James (1842--1910)
have also been studying this most personal of subjects, although, as
Robinson (1976/95) points out, 'self-awareness', 'self-actualisation'
and related expressions of self-concern, are directly attributable to
the German philosopher Georg Hegel (1770--1831) and neo-Hegelian
idealists. As a background to some of the debates about self in the
field of psychology, we summarise a number of contributions to
understanding this subject ([Appendix 2](#app2.xhtml)). These derive
predominantly from philosophy but also include ideas from spiritual
traditions, anthropology and physics.

The way in which we experience ourselves as multi-dimensional is
matched, appropriately enough, by a multiplicity of theories and models
of 'self' and 'the Self' in the fields of psychology and psychotherapy
and within person-centred theory.

However, the capitalisation of the 'Self' implies a core, more important
or higher 'Self' or, in keeping with some theories, a kind of divine
presence within human beings. It tends to reify the idea and, as Van
Kalmthout (1998, pp. 58--9) puts it, 'can very easily lead to abstract
theoretical speculation about the characteristics of the Self, and take
us far from the actual experiencing of ourselves'. From a philosophical
view, Macmurray (1961/ 91, p. 17) argues that any conceptualisation of
the 'Self' as 'the Thinker', 'the Knower', 'the Subject' or a reflective
spectator is itself a 'mere idea': 'It is more illuminating to recognize
it frankly as a solipsism; and to accept this solipsism for what it is
-- a *reduction ad absurdum* of the theoretical standpoint.' This
solipsism has, nevertheless, taken hold of the imagination of
psychologists, psychotherapists and lay people alike, and is somewhat
less easy to dislodge than philosophers such as Macmurray and Murdoch
would like. We write from a sceptical perspective, and consider in this
chapter the usefulness of various definitions, concepts and constructs
of self.

There is no one agreed definition or meaning of the word 'self'. In his
theory of personality and behaviour, Rogers (1951, p. 497) acknowledges
that 'there are many puzzling and unanswered questions in regard to the
dawning concept of the self'. Winnicott (1960/65) describes the 'true
self' in organismic terms: 'The true self comes from the aliveness of
the body tissues and the working of body functions, including the
heart's action and breathing.' Even Heinz Kohut (1913--1983), whose work
led to and inspired the tradition of self psychology (see pp. 116ff.),
said of his work (1977, pp. 310--11) that 'it never assigns an
inflexible meaning to the term self, it never explains how the essence
of the self should be defined ... The self... is not knowable in its
essence ... only its introspectively or empathically perceived
manifestations are open to us.'

Despite its origins in organismic psychology, within person-centred
psychology in general much more has been written about the self than the
organism. The *Dictionary of Person-Centred Psychology* (Tudor & Merry,
2002) reflects this in its thirty entries on 'self'-related words.
Rogers wrote about the self (1951, 1959b, 1963); and one recent
development in person-centred theory advances it as a therapy addressing
configurations of self (Mearns, 1999). A number of writers view Rogers'
theory as a 'self theory', including: Combs (1948); Hall and Lindzey
(1957), although, as we noted in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml), in the third
edition of their work, published in 1978, they acknowledge that the
emphasis should fall on the organism; Beck (1963); and Patterson (1965).
From an organismic perspective, it is interesting that Fujio Tomoda, who
was one of the main proponents of client-centred therapy in Japan, and
who translated much of Rogers' work, translated 'self' as 'a living
organism commonly equated with "I" ' (quoted in Hayashi *et al.,* 1994,
p. 4).[^1^](#c4.xhtml_ft1){#c4.xhtml_fn1}

One of the problems with the concept of self is the fact that the same
word is used to describe different aspects of the human being and her
experience. In his theory of personality and behaviour, Rogers (1951, p.
497) suggests that: 'A portion of the total perceptual field gradually
becomes differentiated as the self.' In this chapter, based on and
grounded in the ideas about the organism and its tendency to actualise
that we explored in the previous two chapters, we differentiate the
concept of self. We do this first by reviewing Rogers' concept of self
(including his own self-concept). We then set these in context by means
of a brief history of self, which includes a comparison between self
psychology and person-centred psychology. We then review more recent
developments in person-centred literature, which encompass social,
personal and reflective selves, self in social context, and pluralist
conceptions of self. We conclude this chapter by returning to our theme
of organism and environment.

Focusing on the self, personally, clinically and theoretically, carries
a certain danger of being accused of being too selfish, too
self-obsessed. This selfish self has been critiqued by, amongst others,
Schwartz (1986). The self is seen as synonymous with the individual and
individualism. Etymologically, the origins of the English word 'self'
lie in the Anglo Saxon *selbha* which, Ryce-Menuhin (1988, p. 4)
suggests, contains within its root 'the symbolic union of separation and
belonging' or, from an organismic perspective, the tendency to autonomy
*and* to homonomy. This is echoed in Jung's (1944/67, para 104) view
that: 'Natural man is not a self -- he is the mass and a particle in the
mass, collective to such a degree that he is not even sure of his own
ego.' From his study of the etymological roots of the word 'self' in a
number of languages, Ryce-Menuhin (ibid., p. 5) concludes that:

Two striking motifs emerge in the etymology of the self concept \[i.e.
the concept of self \]: one, that of belonging to a clan but, associated
with this, the notion of freedom and individuality; the other that of
omnipotence of the individual self.

These motifs are reflected in the philosophy and psychology of the self
and, indeed, the modern history of the study of this subject. The
American philosopher and social psychologist George Herbert Mead
(1863--1931), a younger contemporary of James who preceded Rogers at the
University of Chicago, emphasised the emergence of self-consciousness in
a human being through interaction with others. Since this interaction
depends on the existence of language or symbol systems, his work is
referred to as 'symbolic interactionism'. Although we have no evidence
that Rogers ever read Mead, the influence of symbolic interactionism may
be seen in Rogers' writing such as his (1959b) theory of personality.
Given our emphasis on the active interchange between organism and
environment (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)), we place an equal emphasis in
this chapter on understanding self in the context of its cultural and
social environment.

\

## Rogers' concept of self {#c4.xhtml_clnk1}

The word self is used in person-centred writing in at least two ways,
and it is important to distinguish between them if we are to avoid
confusion. The first usage is reflexive, and carries the meaning: I did
it myself. When Rogers asserts that the organism maintains itself, he
means that the organism both initiates and benefits from the process of
maintenance. It works, as it were, for its own good. The second usage
derives from the use of the word self as a noun. Thus, when Rogers
writes about self-actualisation he means the actualisation of the self.
One implication of this is that the term self-actualisation can mean one
of two things in any one context. It can mean:

1.  that the organism self-actualises, or actualises itself; or
2.  that the organism actualises its 'self', which is a conceptual
    element within the organism.

On the subject of the self, Rogers drew on the work of Angyal (1941),
Raimy (1943, 1948), Lecky (1945) and Standal (1954), influences he
acknowledges in his own work (Rogers, 1951, 1959b, 1963) and later in an
interview published after his death (Rogers & Russell,
2002).[^2^](#c4.xhtml_ft2){#c4.xhtml_fn2} Rogers (1959b, p. 200)
disclaims any early interest in the notion of the self, viewing it as 'a
vague, ambiguous scientifically meaningless term which had gone out of
the psychologist's vocabulary with the departure of the
introspectionists'. However Barrett-Lennard (1998) points out that
Rogers' (1931) early work includes the development of a test for
children approximating the concepts of actual and ideal self. In a
dialogue with Rogers, Evans (1975/81, p. 16) acknowledges that Rogers
was among the earliest group of individuals in psychology to emphasise
the self. Rogers responds with a definition of the self. He says that it
'includes all of the individual's perceptions of his organism, of his
experience, and of the way in which those perceptions are related to
other perceptions and objects in his environment and to the whole
exterior world'.

Significantly, this quote emphasises the unified picture of self which
Rogers favoured. Whilst he acknowledges that some person-centred
theorists have developed the notion of different selves, a development
which has, wittingly or unwittingly, influenced some person-centred
practitioners since, the notion of different selves did not have much
meaning for Rogers himself. Despite Evans' acknowledgement, some texts
on the self in American psychology omit Rogers even from discussions
about the development of self psychology and the centrality of empathy.
We discuss self psychology, including Rogers' own comments on the
differences and similarities between his work and that of Kohut, below
(pp. 116--23). In reviewing and advancing the concept of self in
person-centred theory we aim to bring some clarity to theory and
practice.

Rogers develops his theory of self in three key papers:

1.  In the context of a number of propositions about personality and
    behaviour (Rogers, 1951), in which he views the self in the context
    of the *organism.*
2.  In his major formulation (Rogers, 1959b), in which he defines *self
    and* related constructs and offers a fuller account and illustration
    of the history of these constructs.
3.  In a paper on the *actualising tendency* (Rogers, 1963), in which he
    reiterates its unitary nature.

In 1951 Rogers (p. 497) describes the self as emerging from a portion of
the *'total perceptual field '* and says that it is, specifically (p.
498), 'the awareness of being, of functioning':

::: cite
As a result of interaction with the environment, and particularly as a
result of evaluational interaction with others, the structure of self is
formed -- an organized, fluid but consistent conceptual pattern of
perceptions of characteristics and relationships of the 'I' or the 'me',
together with the values attached to these concepts.
:::

This definition and conceptualisation of self is based in the organism,
and is highly interactive. Rogers' description of infant development in
the pages following this proposition (IX) prefigures the intersubjective
view of self and developmental psychologists, notably Stern (1985), by
over thirty years.

Angyal (1941, p. 113) says that the self 'is symbolically elaborated by
the organism and then appears as self-awareness or consciousness of
self'. Our self-awareness, he suggests, extends to objects outside our
bodies such as clothes and property. Furthermore, the greater my
governance of an object, the greater my sense of that object belonging
to me. Thus, I have more self-awareness of 'my hands' than 'my shirt',
and more awareness of 'my shirt' after I have bought it than before when
it was on a rack in a clothes shop. This is also true in the learning of
skills or the rediscovery of lost skills: 'we ascribe a given factor to
ourselves or the external world, respectively, on the basis of whether
it is prevalently under autonomous or heteronymous government' (ibid.,
p. 114). In this we can see the psychological significance of political
autonomy, self-government and independence. In his first formulation of
a theory of the self, Rogers (1951, p. 497) echoes Angyal on this point:
'Whether or not an object or experience is regarded as part of the self
depends to a considerable extent on whether or not it is perceived as
within the control of the self.'

In the seminal paper in which he outlines his theory of therapy,
personality and interpersonal relationships, Rogers (1959b) acknowledges
that Raimy (1943) produced a careful and searching definition of the
self-concept based on the categorising of self-attitudes. Generally, the
self-concept is seen as the *mental* notion a person has about her
*physical, psychological* and *social* attributes as well as her
*attitudes, beliefs* and *ideas.* It comprises the image we have of
ourselves, and how we value ourselves (self-esteem). Raimy (op. cit., p.
154) defines the self-concept as: '... the more or less organized
perceptual object resulting from present and past self-observation'.
Raimy's was the first objective study of change in the self-concept, and
he is widely acknowledged as an innovative researcher and thinker in
this field. He went on to introduce measures of self-concept in
counselling interviews (Raimy, 1948), arguing that psychotherapy is
basically a process of altering the ways that individuals see themselves
and, some years later, he published a book on *Misconceptions of the
Self* (Raimy, 1975). From Raimy's work Rogers (1959b, p. 201) took the
following:

1.  That self-referrent attitudes alter significantly in therapy, from a
    predominantly negative evaluation of the self to a predominantly
    positive one.
2.  That 'violent fluctuation' in the client's concept of self is not
    uncommon, even within one session.
3.  That this picture of self (or 'product') was a gestalt, or
    configuration.

Lecky's (1945) work informed Rogers and may also be a source of
confusion between concepts of organism and self. As Lecky himself (p.
75) puts it: 'There is a coherence in the behaviour of any single
organism which argues against explanation in terms of chance
combinations of determiners and points to an *organized dynamic
subsystem* which tends toward self-determination' \[our emphasis\].

Rogers (1959b, p. 200) defines the self, which he equates with concept
of self and self-structure, as:

::: cite
the organized, consistent conceptual gestalt composed of perceptions of
the characteristics of the 'I' or 'me' and the perceptions of the
characteristics of the 'I' or 'me' to others and to various aspects of
life, together with the values attached to these perceptions. It is a
gestalt which is available to awareness though not necessarily in
awareness.
:::

This both echoes and elaborates his 1951 proposition. A number of points
follow from this:

1.  The self is a concept.
2.  The self is a gestalt. It is thus inherently moving between figures
    or what Mearns (1999) refers to as configurations (see p. 130). It
    is fluid, not fixed, and is constantly changing in the light of new
    experiences.
3.  The self is also consistent. No matter how much change occurs, there
    remains within individuals a constant internal sense that they are
    still the same person at any given moment. Lecky (1945) contributed
    the notion that self-consistency is a primary motivating force in
    human behaviour; and, in his review, Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 77)
    suggests that it is the organism that 'applies a criterion of
    consistency in organizing experience as part of the self'.
    Discussing the impact of time on identity, Davies (1995, p. 16)
    argues that 'the very concept of selfhood hinges on the preservation
    of personal identity through time'. The self, then, is, at any given
    moment, a specific entity which is definable in operational terms by
    means of research methods such as a 'Q sort' (see Dymond, 1954;
    Vargas, 1954; Rogers, 1955/67; Cartwright & Graham, 1984).
4.  The self is itself perceptual. 'The self' says Murdoch
    (1970/85, p. 93) 'the place where we live, is a place of illusion.'
    This perspective echoes Macmurray's (1961/91) sceptical view of the
    'Self' (see p. 127). The notion of 'I' or 'me' also carries an
    implicit reference to Mead's famous distinction between these two
    aspects of self (see p. 113).

Like a number of theoreticians in this field, Rogers was not the most
rigorous or consistent in his use of language. This has given rise to
confusions, interpretations and debates, and to a certain amount of
textual analysis. For instance, in a paper on creativity (written in
1954), he refers to the 'real self' emerging, in response to empathic
understanding and acceptance. A few years later, he wrote a paper on a
therapist's view of personal goals (Rogers, 1960/67b) in which he takes
his title from the existential philosopher Kierkegaard: 'To be that self
which one truly is'. Although this implies that there is a true or real
self, this was not the particular focus of Rogers' paper. Rogers
describes his view of personal goals and purpose in terms of directions:

- away from facades (from behind which people face life); from 'oughts';
  from meeting expectations; from pleasing others, and
- towards self-direction; being process; being complexity; openness to
  experience; acceptance of others; and trust of self.

Two aspects of this are both interesting and problematic. The first is
that Rogers frames such directionality in terms of personal 'goals',
implying an achieved end rather than a continuous process. Second, he
mixes references to self, such as 'self-direction' and trust of 'self',
as distinct from organismic direction and a trust in the organism, with
references to more fluid concepts, such as 'being process' and 'being
complexity'. Others have taken this as permission to think in terms of a
'real' self as distinct from a 'false' self, conditioned in response to
external conditions of worth; or a 'core' self, as distinct from more
peripheral selves. One term applied to this is that of the 'organismic
self', a term coined by Seeman (1983), which he equates with a core
sense of self, and taken up by others, including Mearns and Thorne
(1998). We find this particularly unhelpful as it confuses and conflates
two distinct concepts which Rogers, amongst others, strove to
distinguish from each other. One implication of this conflation is, as
Tolan (2002) points out, that it makes Rogers' (1951) concept of the
self-structure redundant.

The other, related term which Raimy, Rogers and other researchers used
at that time was the 'ideal self' or 'ideal self-concept'. Again, this
is not to be confused with Maslow's concept of self-actualisation, that
is, the achievement of an ideal state. According to Butler and Haigh
(1954, p. 56), who conducted research into the relationship between
self-concepts and ideal concepts consequent upon client-centred
counselling, the ideal self-concept is:

::: cite
the organized conceptual pattern of characteristics and emotional states
which the individual consciously holds as desirable (and non desirable)
for himself. The assumption is that the individual is able to order his
self-perceptions along a continuum of value from 'what I would most like
to be' to 'what I would least like to be' or, more briefly, from 'like
my ideal' to 'unlike my ideal'.
:::

In other words the ideal self = self-concept + added value.

Rogers' third major paper on the self, 'The actualizing tendency in
relation to "motives" and to consciousness', was written in 1963. Mearns
(2002, p. 15) views this paper as 'extremely important for students of
the approach in that it documents the qualitative change of emphasis in
Rogers' thinking that heralded his forsaking of the university sector
and the move to California'. In it Rogers (1963, pp. 19--20)
characterises the actualising tendency as purely positive and
acknowledges that his thinking has changed:

::: cite
Ten years ago I was endeavoring to explain the rift between self and
experience, between conscious goals and organismic directions, as
something natural and necessary, albeit unfortunate. Now I believe that
individuals are culturally conditioned, rewarded, reinforced, for
behaviors which are in fact perversions of the natural directions of the
unitary actualizing tendency.
:::

In other words estrangement and dissociation are learned, and are the
basis for all psychological and social pathology. Bifurcated systems and
theoretical concepts (conscious, unconscious; self, experiencing
process) are also the result of particular social learning and, as it
were, constitute theoretical pathology. Although he does not say this
directly, as far as the theory of self is concerned, this paper
constitutes a reassertion of his organismic view whereby self is the
awareness of being organism and of the functioning organism.

\

### Rogers' theory of development

\

One purpose of any theory of self is in what it has to say about our
development: literally, our self-development. For Rogers (1951, p. 498),
the self is 'the awareness of being, of functioning' and is thus
synonymous with self-awareness and self-experience (see also [Chapter
3](#c3.xhtml) regarding consciousness). As self is a differentiated
portion of the perceptual field (Rogers, 1951, 1959b), our sense of self
is born out of differentiation: 'This is my arm ... when I lift my arm
to my face I feel my skin ... I am my arm ... my arm is part of me.'
Stern (1991) describes this well in his *Diary of a Baby,* his inventive
version of his earlier theoretical work (Stern, 1985) (see pp. 123ff.).

Rogers (1959b, p. 223) continues: 'This representation in *awareness* of
being and functioning, becomes elaborated, through interaction with the
environment, particularly the environment composed of significant
others, into a *concept of self,* a perceptual object in \[the
individual's\] *experiential field.'* With regard to human development,
Rogers did not greatly elaborate this. In his 1959 paper he devoted just
over a page to 'Postulated Characteristics of the Human Infant'.
Nevertheless, his idea of representations prefigures the work of
neuroscientists and self psychologists. Compare, for example, Siegel
(1999, p. 167):

::: cite
These complex conceptual representations are an important part of the
information processing of the mind. They ... are created by the
computations of the mind in its interactions with the world and other
people within it. In this sense, sensory-perceptual representations
attempt to symbolize the mind's creation of ideas and of the mind
itself.
:::

For an infant, non-verbal experiencing initially comprises a relatively
undifferentiated totality of sensations and perceptions that constitute
reality for that infant. At 6 weeks a sighted baby can see well and is
aware of different colours, shapes and intensities. Later, interaction
with significant others results in part of the infant's experiencing
becoming differentiated into a 'self' or 'self-concept'. Later still,
perceptions become discriminated as being related to 'me' or 'I',
perceptions which Rogers termed 'self-experiences'. The development of
self is based on differentiation and the elaboration of the individual's
being and functioning, through interaction with their environment and
especially their significant others. We consider that Stern's (1985)
work, based as it is on the infant's interpersonal interactions with her
environment, with its reference to 'representations of interactions
which are generalised' (RIGs), is an elaboration of the development of
self, consistent with Rogers' theory. Interestingly, from our present
perspective, in the second, revised edition of his work, Stern (2000)
echoes Rogers when he refers to RIGs as 'ways-of-being-with'.

Following his postulated characteristics of the human infant and
comments on the development of the self, Rogers (1959b) describes the
conditions required for the development of personality. This theory may
be viewed as an unfolding cycle of self-development, which we elaborate
with some commentary:

The awareness of self emerges.

â The individual develops a need for positive regard ...

Rogers views the need for positive regard as universal in humans, and
pervasive and persistent in individuals. Standal (1954), who developed
the concept, argues that this need is learned. For Rogers whether it is
inherent or learned is irrelevant to theory of its satisfaction.

â... which is reciprocal (â) ... and potent.

Its potency is based on Rogers' (ibid., p. 224) view that 'the *positive
regard* of any social other is communicated to the total *regard
complex* which the individual associates with that social other'. He
goes on to suggest that this can become more compelling than the
organism's internal valuing process, with the result that the individual
can become more adient to the positive regard of others. This is why, as
therapists, it is more important to focus on the value the client gives
to the emotion, than on the emotion itself (see also Keil, 1996).

â The individual comes to experience positive regard independently as
self-regard ...

â ... which develops out of the association of self-experiences with the
need for positive regard.

â Thus the individual experiences positive regard and its loss
independently of transactions with social others.

Rogers (ibid., p. 224) states that, in this regard, 'The individual
becomes in a sense his own significant social other. This is similar to
the notion in object relations theory of the internalised self-object.'

â Rogers (ibid., p. 224) continues: 'When *self-experiences* are
discriminated by significant others as being more or less worthy of
*positive regard,* then *self-regard* becomes similarly selective' ...

â ... and when an experience is avoided or sought solely on this basis,
then the individual acquires a 'condition of worth'.

We consider the effect of such conditions on the development of self
disorders in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml). Rogers (ibid., p. 224) concludes
this section of his theoretical outline of self-development with a
comment that if no conditions of worth developed then '*self-regard*
would never be at variance with *organismic evaluation'.*

\

### Rogers' self-concept

\

Before leaving Rogers' view of self and self-concept, we want to comment
briefly on his own self-concept. The notion that 'all theory is
auto-biographical' is not new. Indeed in the field of psychology, there
was a series of volumes published between 1930 and 1967 under the title
*A History of Psychology in Autobiography,* to volume five of which
(Boring & Lindzey, 1967), Rogers (1967) contributed a chapter. He
describes himself (p. 343) as:

::: cite
fundamentally positive in my approach to life; somewhat of a lone wolf
in my professional activities; socially rather shy but enjoying close
relationships; capable of a deep sensitivity in human interaction though
not always achieving this; often a poor judge of people, tending to
overestimate them; possessed of a capacity for setting other people
free, in a psychological sense; capable of a dogged determinism in
getting work done or in winning a fight; eager to have an influence on
others but with very little desire to exercise power or authority over
them.
:::

In a critical reflection on Rogers' life and major work, Holland (1977,
p. 70) suggests that 'client-centred therapy is modelled precisely on
the man himself: its goal a continuous process of movement away from the
expectations and values of others toward self-determining,
self-respecting (actualising) choice'. Examining Rogers' own
self-concept, Holland (ibid., 1977, p. 71) observes that throughout his
life: 'There is a clear direction here of retreat from external and
religious principles into the self. "The theme of retreat" he is saying,
"is a constant one." ' Elsewhere, Rogers (1980a) describes certain
qualities of the 'person of tomorrow', including: having a scepticism
regarding science and technology; having a closeness to and a caring for
nature; having authority within; being anti-institutional; and being
fundamentally indifferent to material things. These qualities reflect
something of Rogers' own personality, and have informed and influenced
the development of person-centred thinking. We take issue with some of
the consequences of this. We don't, for instance, believe that
person-centred therapy is necessarily sceptical of science and
technology. As therapists, we need to deal with science, new science,
technology and the industrial, even post-industrial world; with external
authority; and with materialism. Just as in art it is necessary to kill
your father, so in psychology it is necessary to 'kill' the euhemerus or
dead primal leader in order to revitalise and enhance his theory.

Before turning our attention to other developments on self within the
person-centred approach, we offer a brief history of the self in order
to place these developments in their intellectual and environmental
context.

\

## A brief history of self {#c4.xhtml_clnk2}

\

### Me, myself, I [^3^](#c4.xhtml_ft3){#c4.xhtml_fn3}

\

James discriminates two aspects of the self: the self as known (the
empirical self or ego, or 'me') and the self as knower (the pure ego, or
'I'), a distinction which Zimring (1988) echoes and explores within
person-centred psychology (see pp. 125--6). Mead (1934) also
distinguishes between these words, but on the basis of different
arguments. James suggests that the known self comprises:

- The material me -- body, clothes, our immediate family, home, and
  property.
- The social me -- based on the recognition we get from others:
  'Properly speaking, *a man has as many social selves as there are
  individuals who recognize him,* and carry an image of him in their
  mind' (James, 1892/ 1999, p. 70). The centrality of recognition has
  echoes in the work of Eric Berne (1910--1970), the founder of
  transactional analysis, who suggests that recognition is, alongside
  our need for stimulus (contact and sex), structure and incident, one
  of a number of inherent 'human hungers'.
- The spiritual me -- the entire collection of my states of
  consciousness, which, in James' description, is close to our present
  understanding of the organism.

For Mead (1934, p. 175), 'The "I" is the response of the organism to the
attitudes of the others; the "me" is the organized set of attitudes of
others which one himself assumes.' Thus, the 'me' part of the self
comprises all those incoming messages and attitudes that are carried and
presented by significant others in the context of our interactions with
them. We necessarily introject these messages and attitudes, and thus
the 'me' cannot be anything but conformist. It is the way in which
social institutions and cultural mores 'get inside' us.

James (ibid., p. 74) describes the self as knower as 'that which at any
given moment *is* conscious ... In other words, it is the *Thinker.*'
Martel (1996, p. 2) catches this well:

::: cite
I became aware of a voice inside my head. What is this, I wondered. Who
are you, voice? When will you shut up? I remember a feeling of fright.
It was only later that I realized that this voice was my own thinking,
that this moment of anguish was my first inkling that I was a ceaseless
monologue trapped within myself.
:::

This sense of self-consciousness derives from the consciousness we have
about what we often refer to as our 'self'. Despite his differentiation
of a 'self as knower' James (1890) concludes that there is not a
substantive self which is distinct from the sum total of experiences.
'Each moment of consciousness' he says, 'appropriates each previous
moment, and the knower is thus somehow embedded in what is known: the
thoughts themselves are the thinker.'

Along with other critics of James, we consider his argument
inconsistent. Passing thoughts cannot regard themselves. The logic of
James' analysis of self and, indeed, of other philosophers who predate
James, such as Kant, who introduces the term 'transcendental Ego', is
that the self as knower is a synthesising or integrating part of the
self: a self of selves. Famously, the term 'ego' is used by Freud to
describe one of three systems of the personality (the others being the
id and the superego), which fulfils an executive function, based on the
'reality principle'; and which identifies the appropriate satisfaction
of needs, by means of the 'secondary process' of realistic thinking. In
his critique of the concept of self, Allport (1955, p. 55), who frames
his discussion in the language of personality (see [Chapter
5](#c5.xhtml)), concludes that 'what is unnecessary and inadmissable is
a self (or soul) that is said to perform acts, to solve problems, to
steer conduct, in a transpsychological manner, inaccessible to
psychological analysis'.

\

### Theories of knowledge

\

This debate about the self has its origins in debates about what is
known, what can be known and how we know things, in other words:
epistemology or the theory of knowledge. The epistemological debate
between rationalism and empiricism (see [Table 4.1](#c4.xhtml_tbl4_1))
concerns the extent to which senses contribute to knowledge.
Rationalism, which dates back to the work of Plato, does not trust
senses because they can be deceptive; argues that reason alone provides
real knowledge, and that mathematics is the paradigm of real knowledge;
and asserts that there are innate ideas. Empiricism, the origins of
which may be traced back to the work of Aristotle, argues, on the other
hand, that senses are the primary or only source of knowledge, and that
mathematics deals only with the relation of ideas; and that there are no
innate ideas. In his work, which brought together ideas from both
traditions, Kant (1781/2005) argues:

- That both rationalism and empiricism are wrong when they claim that we
  can know things *per se,* that is, in themselves. Kant demonstrates
  that the mind constructs our experience, and thus may be viewed as the
  forerunner of modern and postmodern constructivism (see [Chapter
  1](#c1.xhtml)).
- That rationalists are wrong not to trust senses. In the phenomenal
  world senses are all we have.
- That rationalists are right about innate ideas. Kant distinguishes
  between the *phenomenal* world (the world for the agent), and the
  *noumenal* world (the world in itself, outside consciousness).
- That both traditions overlook the fact that the human mind is limited
  by *a priori* constraints of location in space, time, causality and
  identity.

James' idea of 'self as knower' appears consistent with Kant's reworking
of the rationalist view of innate ideas. When people refer to the 'real
self', they are wittingly or unwittingly, drawing on the rationalist
tradition of philosophy. Furthermore, this 'real' self, as part of the
noumenal world, is itself outside consciousness. On this basis, when we
realise or 'discover' something about ourselves, we bring it into
consciousness, and thus it becomes part of our phenomenal world.
Whenever someone says 'I never thought of it like that' they are
bringing something new into their phenomenal field. We place the word
'discover' in inverted commas to highlight the view that, in this
context, what is discovered is, in some way, created. Columbus did not
'discover' the New World. He set foot on land that was known to those
who lived there, and unknown to others. Furthermore, 'the New World' is
a construction. Freud did not 'discover' the unconscious. It is a theory
and does not exist as land does. Also, in the sentence 'I never thought
of it like that', 'I' is the subject, the knower and claimant of the new
thought or perception. However, this promotes a somewhat hierarchical
model whereby 'I' is, to use von Broembsen's (1999) phrase, 'the
sovereign self', and one which leaves the 'I' 'self as knower/organiser'
itself as unknown and, therefore, an innate idea. Later, existential
philosophy counters this abstract universal Self with the notion of
authenticity, which, precisely because of existential objections to
objective and objectifying language, resists positive definition (see
Golomb, 1995).

\

### Different concepts of self

\

What these ideas and theories describe is the sense we attempt to make
of our daily experience of ourselves in a number of ways.

- 'I feel great: alive and whole' -- This describes a view of a 'whole
  self' akin to Masterson's (1985, p. 15) concept of the self: 'The sum
  total of self representations in intimate connection with the sum
  total of object relations.'
- 'You know, I feel more myself when I'm with you' -- This describes a
  sense of self which is inextricably and interdependent on an other
  and, from a developmental point of view, necessarily so: 'I am because
  we are.' On an individual level, this is the self of object relations:
  a self which is only developed interpersonally, initially with
  undifferentiated part-objects such as the mother's nipple (or 'nibble'
  as one child put it!). On a wider level, we relate this to cultural
  perspectives on social psychology which emphasise a 'we'-concept (see,
  for instance, Nobles, 1973).
- 'I like myself in this: it's the new me' -- This implies a changing,
  moving sense of self or selves. Implied in this notion is the view,
  and the phenomenological experience, that we can 'cathect' or put
  energy into different aspects of our personality (see Federn, 1952;
  Berne, 1961/75). Rogers' (1951) model of the total personality is one
  of way of describing such shifts of energy; Berne's ego state model is
  another.

These examples reflect three of Clarkson and Lapworth's (1992)
interrelated concepts of self: whole, interpersonally developed, and
moving. We refer to the others in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml). In their
conceptualisation, they also view the self as the organising principle
of physis, which we view as the organismic tendency to actualise, as
distinct from self-actualisation (see [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)).

\

### Self psychology

\

In general terms, 'self psychology' describes any approach to psychology
which places the self as the central concept of its theory. More
specifically, it refers to a development in psychology which has its
roots in psychoanalysis, but which places empathy rather than
interpretation at the centre of its method and practice. In this way,
self psychology has helped reclaim and relocate the curative role of
empathy in the wider fields of psychoanalysis and psychotherapy. From a
person-centred perspective this is a welcome development and, indeed,
much of the writing in this field echoes Rogers' own writings and even
phrases. This is not without its irony, however, as the contribution of
Rogers and other person-centred psychologists to the understanding and
development of empathy goes entirely unacknowledged by Kohut himself,
and is rarely acknowledged or referenced by other self psychologists.
Tobin (1991) reminds us that Rogers and Kohut were both at the
University of Chicago between 1945 and 1957 and whilst there is no
record of or reference to the fact that the two men themselves ever met,
Elizabeth Kohut, a psychologist and Kohut's wife, did have some contact
with Rogers. Tobin also observes that in his work Kohut refers to few
other writers who influenced him, so his lack of acknowledgement of
Rogers may not have been a specific lapse or slight. Less understandable
is the continued lack of cross-referencing amongst more recent self
psychologists. In one volume edited by Jackson (1991), only one
contributor (Donner, 1991) quotes Rogers (once) on empathy. We are not
claiming that Rogers 'discovered' empathy since, as a concept, it is to
be found in the work of Freud (1912/58), Jacobson (1964), Winnicott
(1965) and others. From a personal perspective, Rogers (1986) comments
on some similarities he sees between himself and Kohut; and a number of
other writers have commented on similarities and differences between the
two psychologies (Stolorow, 1976; Graf, 1984; Kahn, 1985, 1989a, 1989b,
1996; Bohart, 1991; Tobin, 1991; Warner, 1997, 2000; Kahn & Rachman,
2000; Stumm, 2002). Generally, Kohut's work is seen as offering a bridge
between psychoanalysis and humanistic psychology. Here we summarise the
key concepts of self psychology, acknowledging that, as a field, this
too is changing, and compare them with a person-centred theory of
therapy.

Originally developed by Kohut, self psychology breaks from Freudian
theory in arguing that archaic narcissism is not transformed into
object-love but rather is a developmental driving force. Kohut
postulates that if parents and/or significant others are empathically
responsive or attuned to the infant, then the child transforms
necessarily narcissistic needs, and narcissistic experiences, into a
cohesive and dynamic self-structure including healthy self-love. This is
akin to Rogers' (1959b) description of the development of positive
self-regard (see pp. 110--11). In this sense self psychology puts the
self, rather than instinctual drives, ego or object relations, at the
centre of psychological concerns, theory and method, and is thus viewed
by Pine (1988, 1990) as a fourth psychology of psychoanalysis.

Rogers acknowledges that he shares with Kohut a view of human nature as
a constructive, assertive whole. Kohut's healthy re-reading and
reclaiming of rage as a response to narcissistic injury, rather than as
an untamed aggressive drive, also finds resonance in Rogers' positive
motivational psychology.

In self psychology the self is viewed as a psychic 'self-structure' at
the core of the personality which is 'experience-near' (Kohut, 1984), or
close to a person's experiencing. This compares with Rogers' (1951)
theory of personality with its self-structure based on the symbolisation
of experience. Masterson's (1988, p. 23, original emphasis) definition
of the real self, from a perspective which integrates object relations
and self psychology, is striking in its echo of a person-centred
understanding of self: 'the real self... is made up of *the sum of the
intrapsychic images of the self and of significant others, as well as
the feelings associated with those images, along with the capacities for
action in the environment guided by those images'.*

In terms of human development and personality, Kohut proposes three
'sectors' or constituents of the self-structure, together with their
corresponding sets of needs: the grandiose-exhibitionist; the twinship
or alterego; and the idealising. [Table 4.1](#c4.xhtml_tbl4_1)
summarises these sets of needs, the child's needs in these sectors, and
the maturational process.

Kohut refers to 'others' as 'selfobjects' because they function in an
internalised/symbolised way as part of the self. Thus a child needs (1)
to be able to internalise the qualities of a 'good enough' parent, and
(2) to be able to idealise material selfobjects in her world. This is
why an empathic parent or carer, and toys, are both important. The
parent or carer needs to respond to the needs of the child and to do so
empathically. What Kohut refers to as 'transmuting internalisation' on
the part of the child is based on the parent maintaining a relationship
of consistent 'empathic intuneness'. An empathic response is more
important than necessarily meeting the child's needs. It is neither
possible nor desirable to meet all a child's needs; sometimes we will
gratify them, sometimes we will frustrate them. This is a process
described by Kohut as one of 'optimal frustration', a phrase which has
echoes of Perls' notion of the 'safe emergency' of therapy. As Lynch
(1991, p. 19) puts it: 'This process of empathic attunement informs the
selfobject as to what kinds of responses may be in the child's interest;
it is empathy that guides which response is made.' Indeed, it is dealing
with the alternating combination of gratification and frustration of
needs that leads to mature self-development or becoming fully
functioning. On the other hand, someone experiencing persistent and
pervasive empathic failure as a child is likely to develop a disorder of
the self-structure, a subject which, together with the concept of
selfobject transferences, we discuss in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml). Kohut
believes that people never stop needing selfobjects and suggests (Kohut,
1984) that analysis cures people in so far as it helps us find and use
selfobjects that are appropriate. It follows from this that empathy is
the key therapeutic tool. Donner (1991, pp. 53--4) states that:

\

[*Table 4.1* Self-structure, needs and maturational processes in self
psychology](c4_tbl1.xhtml){#c4.xhtml_tbl4_1}

::: cite
In any therapy in which relationship serves as the crucible for change,
empathy is imperative, as it is the connection which sparks the
relationship. Without empathy there is no meaningful relationship and no
access to experiences and data by which the self becomes known. Only
empathy can offer a convincingly safe invitation to a meeting attended
by patient and therapist in which the subjective world of the patient
creatively unfolds. As such, empathy is a prerequisite for all other
therapeutic interventions.
:::

For her part, the child also needs to be able to idealise material
selfobjects in her world. This is facilitated initially through her
projection of qualities (good, bad and ugly!) onto her toys.

In [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml) we take up the issue of whether it is empathy
or contact that sparks the relationship. Ornstein (1986) sees empathetic
*(sic)* interpretations as comprising three components: acceptance,
understanding and explanation. Again, this is similar to Rogers' notion
of empathic *understanding* (as distinct from empathy) and his
distinction between empathy and emotional identification. This has been
developed further by Greenberg and Elliot (1997) who identify four forms
of empathic responding in addition to understanding: evocation,
exploration, conjecture and interpretation. Similarly, Stern (1985, p.
145) identifies four distinct and probably sequential cognitive
processes to empathy: '(1) the resonance of feeling state; (2) the
abstraction of empathic knowledge from the experience of emotional
resonance; (3) the integration of abstracted empathic knowledge into an
empathic response; and (4) a transient role identification'. He argues
that, whilst affect attunement shares with empathy the initial process
of emotional resonance, they are different processes in that attunements
occur largely out of awareness. Kohut's own views on empathy changed
from the date of his first essay on the subject (1959) to his last
address (published in 1981), for more on which see Maclsaac (1997) and
[Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml).

It also follows from this theory that empathic failures are important
opportunities for what Donner (1991, p. 66) refers to as 'optimal
responsiveness':

::: cite
The intensity of the response to something ... quite minor serves as a
clue that the selfobject tie has been disrupted and that the event has
evoked something psychically meaningful. This is an opportunity to
discover with readily available affect something very significant about
the self... \[and\] a patient's selfobject needs, which have suddenly
been pushed into awareness.
:::

Haule (1996) argues that therapy breaks down when empathy breaks down,
and that it's the second breakdown that is more important. A therapist's
misunderstanding of a client, although significant, and painful, may not
be crucial. A therapist who misunderstands that a client has previously
felt misunderstood risks compromising the relationship to the point of
break-down. To acknowledge such ruptures in the relationship is, often,
the therapy. Whilst it may be important for a therapist to apologise for
an apparent mistake, it may also be important not to apologise too
quickly, so as to allow a client time or space to feel whatever he feels
about the empathic failure or misattunement, and to reflect upon what it
might mean for him.

Beech and Brazier (1996, p. 338) argue something similar. On the basis
that the therapist's role is to help the client to see her world more
fully, they suggest that therapists do this most effectively by being
alongside but separate from the client, in effect offering 'a second
viewpoint on the client's world, giving a fuller experience than the
client has hitherto been able to achieve.' They continue: 'The slight
inaccuracies in the therapist's understanding of the client's world view
provide the second viewpoint which serves to increase the clarity of its
perception.'

Whilst Rogers himself acknowledged that he shared with Kohut many common
ideas about the self and the restructuring of the self through therapy,
he criticises Kohut for, as he views it, his lack of interest in the
testability of his theories. Specifically, Rogers cites Kohut's theory
of the 'grandiose self' and the 'idealised parent image' as examples of
this. Rogers argues that as we can never enter the infant's conceptual
world to verify this, such theory exists only in a speculative realm.
However, Graf (1984) suggests that Kohut's self psychology goes beyond
Rogers', especially in his notions of creativity and healthy creative
tension, and idealising conceptual processes which guide ideals and
values. Graf (p. 7) concludes that a synthesis of Rogers and Kohut would
'create a more comprehensive humanistic theory of healthy self
functioning'. Also comparing the two, Kahn (1985) argues that Kohut
provides more depth and complexity to our understanding of the self. In
two separate contributions Warner (1997, 2000) offers articulations
between person-centred therapy and self psychology with specific
reference to working with clients with 'fragile process', a theory which
has parallels in gestalt psychology and the work of Beaumont (1993) on
'fragile self process'. We discuss her elaborations of empathy in
[Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml). The similarities and differences between the
person-centred psychology of Rogers and the self psychology of Kohut and
others are summarised, respectively, in Tables 4.2 and 4.3.

Most of the commentators cited conclude that person-centred therapy has
something to gain from studying self psychology. We agree with this,
specifically regarding:

1.  A more detailed and robust understanding of self and self processes.
    In this sense many of Kohut's (1971, 1977, 1981) views may be taken
    as an elaboration which is consistent with Rogers' (1951, 1959b)
    outline of self and personality.

2.  The value of understanding the client's idealisation of the
    therapist in terms of a deep-seated need. This is consistent with
    Rogers' (1951) perspective on behaviour and needs (see also [Chapter
    2](#c2.xhtml)).

3.  The usefulness of the concept of narcissistic rage, which, as
    Stumm (2002) reminds us, does not diminish in its intensity when the
    present perceived threat is removed. As with other concepts, such as
    sexual undertones in the therapeutic relationship, or the extent of
    the therapist's own injured feelings, the usefulness of the concept
    or any theory is gauged against whether it enhances the therapist's
    empathy (see Mearns, 1997).\

    [*Table 4.2* Similarities between the person-centred psychology of
    Rogers and the self psychology of Kohut and
    others](c4_tbl2.xhtml){#c4.xhtml_tbl4_2}

4.  Its understanding and support for the disruption and restoration of
    the therapeutic relationship. Whilst this is outlined by Rogers
    (1959b), it is more elaborated in self psychology and by
    intersubjective theorists such as Stolorow (1976), Sapriel (1998)
    and Orange, Atwood and Stolorow (2001).\

    [*Table 4.3* Differences between the person-centred psychology of
    Rogers and the self psychology of Kohut and
    others](c4_tbl3.xhtml){#c4.xhtml_tbl4_3}

5.  The challenge of Kohut's emphasis on introspection and subjectivity
    for person-centred approaches to research.

\

### Intersubjective senses of self

\

Based on infant observation, and on theories from psychoanalytic self
psychology and developmental psychology, Stern (1985, 2000) suggests how
an individual's sense of self develops. He describes four ways in which
the self is experienced. The major contributions of Stern's work are:

1.  A layered, as distinct from a stage, model of development. For Stern
    (2000, p. xi), this 'assumes a progressive accumulation of senses of
    the self, socioaffective competencies, and ways-of-being-with-others
    ... \[which\] remain with us throughout the life span'. One
    implication of this, which supports much person-centred practice, is
    that we live and can access 'developmental issues' in the present
    and, therefore, do not need to do past-centred therapeutic work by
    means of techniques which encourage retrogression (a return to a
    type of behaviour characteristic of an earlier time in a person's
    development) or regression (a change to an earlier, younger
    behaviour, irrespective of whether the person has actually behaved
    like that, and opposite to development). The distinction between the
    two comes from Barker, Dembo and Lewin (1941) and suggests that what
    many psychotherapists refer to as 'regression' is, in their terms,
    'retrogression'.
2.  The view that self/other differentiation begins at birth. As we
    discussed in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml) this refocuses personal and
    professional interest on increasing relatedness which, again, is in
    line with our reading of Rogers and, before him, Angyal (1941). As
    for such process beginning at birth, we take this logic further and
    say that this differentiation begins at conception (see Tudor,
    2003), and that organism/other differentiation, and attachment and
    relatedness take place *in utero,* both literally and
    psychologically. Stern (2000, p. xiii) argues that this layered,
    process theory 'places more emphasis on strategies and problems in
    attachment when viewing pathology, and it minimizes, even does away
    with, the need to conceptualize phases of "normal autism,\"
    \"primary narcissism," and "symbiosis." ' Again, this supports the
    person-centred critique of the traditional medical/psychiatric and
    psychoanalytic models of diagnosis.
3.  The importance of the non-verbal. Stern (ibid., p. xiv) describes a
    natural tension, 'a sort of zone of turbulence', where the verbal
    and non-verbal meet. On the one hand, we know the impact of
    non-verbal communication: some studies put the non-verbal
    communication of the meaning of a message as high as 90% (see
    Fromkin & Rodman, 1983). On the other hand, most forms of
    psychotherapy, including person-centred therapy, are primarily
    'talking therapies'. On the one hand, units of human behaviour are
    miniscule: observers of babies have been working with smaller and
    smaller behavioural units, currently looking at fractions of
    seconds. Larger units of time often appear to be repetitions of
    these smaller units. On the other hand, psychotherapists tend to
    deal with the larger picture of patterns of behaviour over time and
    our reflection on and understanding of these. Talking is only one
    mode of communication and other forms of expression in therapy would
    appear an essential complement to talking if we are to facilitate
    pre-verbal and non-verbal experience and experiencing. 'What we
    cannot speak about' says Wittgenstein (1922/74, p. 89) 'we must pass
    over in silence.' Zuckerkandl (1973, p. 66), a musicologist,
    disagrees: 'Not at all: what we cannot speak of we can sing about.'
    Stern (2000) himself acknowledges the usefulness of non-verbal
    psychotherapies involving dance, music, body and movement. Natalie
    Rogers (1993/ 2000) brings the expressive arts to person-centred
    therapy, in what she refers to as *The Creative Connection.* We see
    this as an important development in encouraging the holistic
    expression of whole organisms.
4.  The emphasis on intersubjectivity. Based on observation and clinical
    practice, Stern (1985) presented evidence for the idea that internal
    objects are constructed from patterns which are interactive and
    inter-subjective. In 1985 he introduced the concept of
    'representations of interactions which are generalised' (RIGs) which
    (in 2000, p. xv) he subsequently refers to 'ways-of-being-with',
    thereby 'deemphasizing the process of formation in favor of
    describing the lived phenomenon in a more experience-near and
    clinically useful way'. The emphasis on 'experience-near' phenomena
    echoes Kohut directly and, as we have discussed above, Rogers
    indirectly. The emphasis on intersubjectivity represents a move from
    a focus on internalisations to interactive and co-created
    experiences (see Summers & Tudor, 2000).

From Stern's observation and experience, the child enjoying healthy
development has, by the age of two, a full, multi-faceted sense of
herself. Throughout life, relationships and experiences can either
enhance or impede the repair or further development of different aspects
of the sense of self. Stern proposes an account, based on an organising
principle which concerns the subjective sense of self in relation to
self-and-other, comprising four senses of self and domains of
relatedness which build one upon the other. Whilst he suggests (1985, p.
32) that there are formative phases in the development of self up to and
around fifteen months, 'once formed, the domains remain forever as
distinct forms of experiencing social life and the self. None are
*\[sic\]* lost to adult experience'.

\

## The self in person-centred literature {#c4.xhtml_clnk3}

Against this psychological history of self, in this part of the chapter
we consider, in chronological order, a number of different theoretical
views of self found in person-centred literature.

\

### Self-concept as a cognitive structure

\

Cartwright and Graham (1984) consider the self-concept as a structure of
cognitions about the self in which there is a hierarchy of categories
based on decreasing levels of generality. Thus, they argue, 'I am
different from others' is the highest category of generality. Other
beliefs such as 'I can't decide' or 'I don't face things' represent less
general categories. Each of these will be based on the evidence of
experience. A childhood experience of not being able to choose, for
example, might lead to the first of these beliefs, and an experience of
being allowed to stay off school when things were difficult might lead
to the second.

\

### *Social, personal -- and reflexive -- selves*

\

As we have seen, the notion that the self is essentially and
developmentally *social* has its origins in the work of James and Mead.
James first distinguished between 'I' (self as knower) and 'me' (self as
known). For Mead (1934) there are two aspects of the self: 'the "I" is
the response of the organism to the attitudes of others; the "me" is the
organized set of attitudes of others which one himself assumes' (p.
175). Broadly then, we may take 'me' as the *social self,* or *myself*
as others see me and as 'me' perceives, accommodates, assimilates and
integrates the perceptions of me of these 'significant others'.

In an article arguing that we attain mastery by shifting from 'me' to
'I', Zimring (1988) compares 'me' and 'I' modes of functioning (see
[Table 4.4](#c4.xhtml_tbl4_4)). Interestingly, mastery over one's
environment was one of Marie Jahoda's (1958) concepts and determinants
of positive mental health.

To complete the picture, we suggest that 'myself' is the *reflexive
self*, that is, the self as perceived and reflected upon by the
individual subject. In terms of linguistic and psychological development
these develop first as 'me', then 'myself' and, later, 'I'. As different
symbolisations of three aspects of self, it seems important that the
therapist supports the client's experiential and constantly developing
self-awareness: 'me' awareness, 'myself' awareness, and 'I' awareness.
When a client says anything beginning 'I ...', the therapist has at
least two choices: of reflecting that back as 'You ...' or echoing 'I
... ' as if he (the therapist) is that client. Thus, when a client says
'I'm feeling bad about not being kinder to my child', the response
'You're feeling bad ...' represents the client's social self ('me') as
reflected by the therapist saying 'You ...'. Echoing 'I'm feeling bad
...' represents the client's personal self. The difference between the
two is significant as is reflected in the exercise in [Box
4.1](#c4.xhtml_box4.1).

\

[*Table 4.4* Comparison of the 'me' and T modes of functioning (Zimring,
1988)](c4_tbl4.xhtml){#c4.xhtml_tbl4_4}

Our own experience of doing and facilitating this exercise is that
individuals experience various and often powerful reactions to the two
responses of reflection or echoing. In discussion, people often talk
about the relative comfort or discomfort they feel in owning their
various statements ('I'm feeling self-conscious', 'I'm feeling good
about myself', 'I'm scared', 'I'm a good mother/father', etc.). For
some, saying and hearing reflected *'I'm* a good father' (personal self
) is more difficult than hearing 'You're a good father' (social self )
which may be heard as an external affirmation. For others, to have an
element of their social self reflected back to them, e.g. 'You're a
confident woman', is harder to hear and to allow in than when they say
it themselves. Zimring (1988, p. 174) concludes: '\"I" and the \"me" are
important self-configurations with different degrees of mastery. The
attainment of mastery is the change from the self-configuration with
less mastery to the configuration with more.'

::: box
[*Box 4.1* Exercise regarding the social self and the personal
self]{#c4.xhtml_box4.1}

Exercise, in pairs, for two or three minutes each way. One person (A)
completes sentences beginning 'I am ...', the other (B) reflects back
accurately 'You are ...'. Then, for another two or three minutes, A
again completes sentences beginning 'lam ... '. This time B echoes
accurately 'I am ...'. The sentences may be the same as the previous
ones or may be varied. At the end of the time the two debrief, both
reflecting on how they experienced the two parts to the exercise. The
whole exercise may then be repeated with B taking the lead 'lam...',
etc. and A reflecting back.
:::

### Self in social context

\

This strand of thinking within person-centred psychology offers a
critique of narcissistic individualism, acknowledges that self is
constituted by social context, and informs a dialogic view of
self-in-relationship. This is supported by Macmurray's (1961/91, p. 17)
critique of the inherently abstract concept of 'Self':

::: cite
We may say ... that the Self only exists in dynamic relation with the
Other ... the Self is constituted by its relation to the Other ... it
has its being in relationship; and ... this relationship is necessarily
personal. Our main effort, therefore, must be directed towards
determining the formal characters of personal relationship.
:::

On the first point Rogers (1979, p. 12) expresses himself strongly: 'We
seem as a culture to have made a fetish out of complete individual
self-sufficiency, of not needing help, of being completely private
except in a very few selected relationships.' In the same year Lasch
(1979, p. 13) was making his criticism of *The Culture of Narcissism,*
including what he views as the narcissistic nature of therapy:

::: cite
Even when therapists speak of the need for 'meaning' and 'love,' they
define love and meaning simply as the fulfillment of the patient's
emotional requirements. It hardly occurs to them -- nor is there any
reason why it should, given the nature of the therapeutic enterprise --
to encourage the subject to subordinate his needs and interests to those
of others, to someone or some cause or tradition outside himself.
:::

Writing about the culture of narcissism from a gestalt perspective,
Philippson (2004a) argues that, in order for a child to support the
project of self-actualisation in the face or blank screen of an
unavailable parent, 'the infant must learn to deflect any sense data
which might contradict this image: this would include most real
emotional contact! So the infant develops a sense of self based on
retroflection rather than contact.' We discuss narcissistic processes in
[Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml) and the implications of this perspective for a
person-centred theory of contact in [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml). Here, it is
sufficient to acknowledge the necessity of an empathic other in order
for the infant to process experiences (see Stern, 1985, and [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)). In this sense it may be more useful to consider the
notion of a 'relational self', developing and known only through
dialogue. This fits with some criticisms of Rogers for promoting an
individualistic concept of self. We think this criticism of Rogerian and
person-centred theory is largely unjustified, especially when we
incorporate Angyal's (1941) concept of homonomy, although we accept this
critique of some individual and individualising therapeutic practice.
Writing about identity development in women, Josselson (1987, p. 170)
observes that: 'Boundaries of the self are never as rigid in girls as in
boys, and the basic female sense of self is connected, with a good deal
of fluidity, to the world.' From a developmental point of view, however,
this fluidity relies on the parent or carer being able to hold and
reflect back the child's sense of self, including her gender, in order
that she can 'take in' this sense of her self (see Stern, 1985;
Wolter-Gustafson, 1999). In self psychology this is the self-regulating
function of the self, and is akin to organismic regulation (see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)). Lapworth (2003) makes a similar point about the need
many lesbian, gay and bisexual clients have to receive empathic
attunement in a therapeutic relationship precisely because, in many
instances, this was specifically missing in their childhood regarding
their sexuality. He gives examples of working with unmet developmental
needs through mirroring, idealised and twinship introjective
transferences (see [Box 4.1](#c4.xhtml_box4.1) above).

If being relational is a way out of narcissism, psychological isolation
and impasse, then participation is the way out of social isolation and
passivity. Tillich (1952, pp. 90--1) puts it well:

::: cite
Self and world are correlated and so are individualization and
participation. For this is just what participation means: being a part
of something from which one is, at the same time, separated ... The
identity of participation is an identity in the power of being. In this
sense the power of being of the individual self is partly identical with
the power of being his world, and conversely.
:::

Within person-centred psychology, Holdstock (1990, 1993, 1996) has
represented the view that self cannot be understood outside its context
and, indeed, is constituted by its social context. He has argued
consistently for a revision of the concept of self in client-centred
theory and practice. In one article (Holdstock, 1993) he cites
references to sixteen different cultures in which self is seen in terms
of social context and not, as Miller (1988, p. 273) puts it, as 'an
individuated psychological core'. A number of person-centred theorists
and practitioners, in common with those from other theoretical
orientations, have questioned the monocultural roots of therapy and the
impact of this on concepts such as that of the self. See, for example,
Nobles (1973) on the 'we'-concept, and Moore's (1997) discussion of
Japanese responses to Rogers' self-theory.

One of the reasons for this internalised separation of self from context
is, according to Holdstock (1993), historical: whilst the 'self as
experienced' ('me') became theorised and understood as multi-faceted,
the 'self as experiencer' ('I') remained nuclear and somewhat
one-dimensional. Rogers (1959b) himself presents experiencing, a key
component of the self-concept, as a passive rather than an engaged and
relational process. Neither does he formulate his concept of self in
cognitive terms, although Wexler (1974) argues that experiencing is
created by actively processing available information. Although Rogers
(1958/67a) himself acknowledges his debt to George Kelly, the founder of
personal construct theory, Holdstock (1993) goes on to argue that
cognitive and constructionist perspectives have developed and
contributed to our understanding of these two selves, with more recent
constructivist thinking emphasising the dialogical nature of the self.
In this sense 'me' and 'I' -- and, for that matter, 'myself' -- become
multifaceted narrations of an evolving and fluid identity and life
story. Whilst Rogers' original hypothesis of conditions was
interactional, he did not emphasise either the intersubjective or the
dialogic, a perspective we develop in [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml). In an
article reclaiming three 'lost' conditions of therapy, Tudor (2000, p.
37, our emphasis) argues that 'viewing the conditions in the context of
person-centred personality theory also illustrates more clearly the
*dynamic* between the therapist ... and the client'.

\

### Pluralist conceptions of self

\

As in the field of psychology and psychotherapy in general, there are a
number of pluralist conceptions of self in person-centred psychology:
self conceptualised as a systemic process of interactions of 'inner
persons' (Keil, 1996); configurations of self (Mearns, 1999; Mearns &
Thorne, 2000); and the concept of multiple contextual selves (Hayashi &
Kara, 2002).

On the basis that the self is constantly evolving, and that one's
relationship with oneself is analogous to relationships with others,
Keil (1996) draws on communication theory and her experience of working
with families to describe a therapy of 'inner persons'. She argues
convincingly that the laws of communication (Watzlawick, Beavin &
Jackson, 1967) may apply equally to internal communication. Keil (1996,
p. 60) draws on Rogers' (1959b) view of self as a gestalt-like
configuration and suggests that, in response to inevitable failures in
parental attention, what we may refer to as failures in empathic
attunement and ruptures in relationship, the child responds by slipping
into a particular role:

::: cite
Since the environment is a very complex structure, one role is not
sufficient for all situations, so one develops many ... the network of
inner relations is built up between persons created in response to one's
environment and persons developed in reaction to persons already
developed.
:::

We find a number of problems with Keil's arguments:

1.  She makes an unsubstantiated and unnecessary conceptual leap from
    defence/s to role theory.
2.  She equates roles with persons. This, again, is unnecessary and,
    given person-centred theory of the person (see [Chapter
    5](#c5.xhtml)), somewhat confusing.
3.  By using the term 'inner relations' in this way, there is a danger
    of reifying a personal and subjective internal process. Generally we
    don't find this helpful unless the client himself talks in terms of
    inner relations, persons or characters, as some people do who are
    working with their own 'dissociative processes'.

As we have seen, the term configuration is found in Rogers (1959b)
referring to the changing gestalt-like nature of the self-concept. Both
Zimring (1998), in his use of the term 'self-configurations', and Keil
(1996) echo this. However, it is Mearns (1999, p. 126) who is most
associated with the term, which he uses to describe 'a number of
elements which form a coherent pattern generally reflective of a
dimension of existence within the Self'. In his writings, however,
Mearns consistently capitalises the 'Self' which seems to elevate and
reify the notion of self as organiser. We think that the concept of
configurations invites us to see a self of many parts, allows for
polarisations and hierarchies, and risks distracting us from viewing the
organism as a whole.

More recently, Mearns and Thorne (2000, p. 102) have expanded their
definition of a configuration: 'a hypothetical construct denoting a
coherent pattern of feelings, thoughts and preferred behavioural
responses symbolised or pre-symbolised by the person as reflective of a
dimension of existence within the "Self\". As Mearns (2002)
acknowledges, pluralist conceptions of self are not new and the concept
of 'configurations' has conceptual similarities with Jung's 'complexes';
the 'objects' and 'part objects' of object relations theory; ego states
in transactional analysis; 'subpersonalities' (Rowan, 1990); and other
psychological literature which refers to 'voices' and even 'parts'.
Nevertheless Mearns and Thorne's definition of configurations of self
has a particular resonance with Berne's (1961/75, p. 17) definition of
ego states: 'phenomenologically as a coherent system of feelings related
to a given subject, and operationally as a set of coherent behavior
patterns, or pragmatically, as a system of feelings which motivates a
related set of behavior patterns'. For a number of years Mearns has been
concerned to develop a person-centred perspective on self-pluralism and
'to lay down a distinctly person-centred and purely phenomenological
orientation to the work i.e. staying close to the clients'
symbolisation' (personal communication, 16 August 2004), thereby
avoiding an 'expert' orientation on the part of the therapist.

Mearns (1999, p. 126) has developed person-centred practice in working
with configurations of what he refers to as the client's 'existential
self' in ways which stay close to the client's own symbolisation --
'It's something to do with sadness', 'There's a part of me that is
dreadfully vulnerable' -- without trying to move the client on:

::: cite
Not changing the client's symbolisation of parts of his Self is
respectful but it is also functional. The symbolisation, however poorly
formed, expresses the closest which the client can get to its meaning in
his existential world at that time. The skill of the person-centred
therapist is to work without imposing external constructions.
:::

In one paper, which in our view is an overlooked and undervalued
contribution, Rogers (1958/67b) asks himself -- and us -- a number of
questions about creating a helping relationship, one of which is this:
'Can I free \[the client\] from the threat of external evaluation?' This
question seems highly pertinent with regard to the therapist's ability
to help the client with *internal* constructions about *herself* or
*himself* rather than imposing, however subtly, further external
constructions or configurations of the self. From a phenomenological
perspective, working this way with configurations of self demands that
the therapist observes the 'rule of horizontalisation', that is,
treating each configuration with equal empathic understanding.

Finally, Hayashi and Kara (2002), drawing on Taoist philosophy, refer to
multiple contextual selves as a way which is equally horizontal, and
abstinent or empty, but which goes further in challenging values. They
advocate (p. 73) 'an attitude of regarding *all things as equal* and
free from all values'. For us, this articulates the therapeutic
necessity of maintaining a radical neutrality about the organism's
internal valuing process.

Acknowledging the pluralities within, Keen (1983, p. 164) puts this
well:

::: cite
To love the self is not to come upon an unchangeable image or essence,
but to welcome all the diversity of experience into consciousness. To
love myself is to proclaim that I will live in a democratic rather than
a dictatorial relationship to the plurality within. I will allow all my
subpersonalities, contradictory impulses, alien wills, strange desires,
forbidden needs, to live together within the commonwealth of my
consciousness. Once my self-image has been shattered, I will always be
more than I can know. I will never wholly understand myself. The
complexities that have been interwoven to form me are equal to the
complexity of being itself. I can no more comprehend the width, height,
depth of myself than I can embrace the totality of the world. Thus,
knowing I will never be the all-knower, I learn to accept what I cannot
comprehend. Loving myself, I respect the mystery that I am. I open
myself to be more than I can ever know. It is in coming to respect the
unfathomable depths of myself that I discover that love ranks higher
than knowledge or action. Self-love is to the explorer of consciousness
what curiosity is to the pure scientist. I must agree to respect what is
the case before my quest for knowledge may begin.
:::

As we view the self in the context of the organism, we conclude this
chapter by drawing together our reflections on the relationship between
organism and self.

\

## Organism and self {#c4.xhtml_clnk4}

One issue raised by the emphasis on organism found in the work of
Whitehead (1929/78), Goldstein (1934/95), Angyal (1941), Raimy (1943),
Perls (1947/69) and Rogers (1951, 1959b) is the relation between
organism and self. It is relatively straightforward to argue that the
organism is and describes a 'natural' state or process, while the self
is and represents a self-conscious interruption to this blissful,
desired and desirable way of being. Such polarisation, however, does not
account for the dynamic relationship between organism and self. The self
is a function of the organism and, for instance, sometimes to actualise
the self is to enhance the organism.

Angyal (1941, pp. 116--17) talks about the relationship between organism
and environment, between which, there is at times 'a peculiar split':
'With the conscious elaboration of the biological subject--object
relationship, a peculiar split arises in the subject organization. It is
a remarkable fact that we exclude from our self-awareness certain
factors which are very important components of the subject.' He cites
two examples: one when we act under the influence of strong affects or
feelings, the other the state of inspiration. In both these examples, he
argues, we feel or believe that we are, in some way, out of control, and
passive. For Angyal, 'the expression "passion" has definite reference to
passivity' (ibid., p. 117). When someone looks back on a time when he
was passionate he might say 'I wasn't myself'. People use the expression
'I was beside myself with anger'. People who are violent may claim that
a 'red mist' came over them. Being inspired is another example. When
someone says 'I was inspired by such and such', although she is,
literally, the one doing the inspiring or breathing, and taking in
whatever it is she needs from the environment, she might say it in such
a way as represents her as a passive recipient of external inspiration.
In everyday life, the first example is used, often by men who are
violent, to minimise and deny responsibility for their violence. The
second example is, in our experience, often noted in the context of
learning, where the focus, traditionally, is on the inspiring teacher,
rather than the inspiring, breathing student. In his theories and
perspectives about learning, Rogers (1969, 1983; Rogers & Freiberg,
1994) reverses this tendency.

Given that affect and similar experiences are activities of the
organism, why do we not always experience them as such? We think there
are two answers, one which concerns the organism, the other, the
environment. The first is provided by Angyal (1941, pp. 117--18), who
states that:

::: cite
The important fact is that such processes -- although they are
determined by the autonomy of the organism -- are not governed by our
will. In order to clarify the meaning and origin of the concept of
'will' we should recall that the biological total process is
differentiated into an autonomous component or subject and a
heteronymous component or environment. In the psychological realm the
subject is elaborated symbolically as the consciousness of self ... it
is a highly significant fact that the conscious self, which is only a
part, namely the symbolic part of the biological subject, tends to
establish its own autonomous government. What we will call 'will '
represents the autonomous determination, the self-government of this
narrower conscious or symbolic self. The symbolic self becomes a state
within a state. Thus a split is created within the subject organisation.
:::

In other words, two crucial aspects of the differentiation of the
organism are:

1.  first, between a conscious self and ongoing, autonomic, unconscious
    processes (see Rogers, 1968), and,
2.  subsequently, between what we have some control over (ourselves) and
    what we have less control over (the environment).

The first differentiation leads us as human beings to develop a sense of
self and self-concept which is well symbolised but at the cost, at
times, of organismic experiencing, which is perhaps less well symbolised
and expressed. Over-differentiating can lead to over-valuing isolated
problems and losing contact with the human personality as a whole, which
is the basis of a person-centred perspective on personality disorders
(see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)). Perls (1947/69), for instance, is critical
of those analysts, such as Rank, who, in his view over-emphasise the
historical point of the birth trauma *ad absurdum.* (Perls is equally
critical of Jung's inflation of the concepts of the *libido* and the
unconscious such that they cover everything and explain nothing.) The
second differentiation leads to an artificial distinction between
organism and environment and a view that we only have dominion over
ourselves in the face of an alienating, hostile environment.

Thus, to pursue our examples above, a man who is violent to his partner
is, in some sense, expressing a need, to adopt Rogers' (1951, p. 491)
phrase, *'in the field as perceived '.* However, both the man and his
behaviour are more complex than the polarised and equally simplistic
reactions 'He's a nasty bastard' and 'Ah, but he's a lovely man when
he's not drinking'. In attempting to understand this complexity, we draw
on Rogers' (1951, p. 503) theory of personality and behaviour in which
he identifies one congruent or integrated response and three defensive
responses to experiences (Proposition XI):

::: cite
As experiences occur in the life of the individual, they are either (a)
symbolized, perceived, and organized into some relationship to the self,
(b) ignored because there is no perceived relationship to the
self-structure, (c) denied symbolization or given a distorted
symbolization because the experience is inconsistent with the structure
of the self.
:::

At the moment at which a man is violent, his is a limited field in which
he denies his awareness of different options with regard to
communicating in the relationship; furthermore, he distorts his
perceptions both of himself and, say, his partner as whole persons. In
this sense his violence is *a passive* behaviour (see Schiff *et al.,*
1975), and not the active behaviour of an organism interacting with his
environment in the service of his tendency to actualise. Rather,
violence is the behaviour of, in this instance, a self-seeking man,
actualising, if at all, in the service of a self-concept which is
supported by certain and fixed views of himself and of society about
being a man and being violent as an aspect of being a 'real' man, in
control, and laying down domestic law. Similarly, the passive student is
differentiating from an organismic valuing process by which she can
accurately assess her learning needs, perhaps in favour of an external
locus of evaluation.

We think there is a second answer to Angyal's question which is to do
with the environment, both psychological and social, which by and large
encourages the artificial splitting of 'the person' from his
'behaviour'. Elsewhere (Embleton Tudor *et al.,* 2004), we refer to the
injunction to criticise the person, not the behaviour as a humanistic
mantra which obfuscates rather than clarifies a person's behaviour in an
environmental context. As we suggest (in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)), from
an organismic perspective, a person *is* his behaviour. Let us take the
example of the violent man. To suggest that we simply separate the
person from his behaviour is naÃ¯ve in that it ignores all the
environmental influences on him, man and boy, to be violent. It ignores
the fact that many men see being violent as a part of what it means to
be a man. To attempt to separate a particular act of violence from an
individual man is to violate the integrity of the organism in the
context of its environment.

Having elaborated the concepts of organism (in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml))
and self in this chapter, we now turn to the third related conceptual
elaboration of the human organism: that of the person.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1^](#c4.xhtml_fn1){#c4.xhtml_ft1} Tomoda's work has not been
translated into English and hence the secondary source; see also Moore
(1997).

[^2^](#c4.xhtml_fn2){#c4.xhtml_ft2} This acknowledgement is important
as, in his presidential address to the American Psychological
Association in September 1947 (later published, Rogers, 1947), Rogers
drew heavily on Raimy's (1943) doctoral thesis, as he later put it
(Rogers & Russell, 2002, p. 130) 'without even being aware of that'. At
the time another student took him to task for this lack of
acknowledgement and Rogers reports feeling 'great humiliation' about
this (ibid., p. 130).

[^3^](#c4.xhtml_fn3){#c4.xhtml_ft3} This heading not only echoes the
title of a song by Joan Armatrading but also represents what Harre
(1998) refers to as an ontology of selfhood: self 3, self 2 and self 1,
respectively.
::::::::::::::::::::::

[]{#c5.xhtml}

::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 5 Person

::: cite
After this cold considerance, sentence me;\
And as you are a king, speak in your state\
What have I done that misbecame my place,\
My person, or my liege's sovereignty.

William Shakespeare

We are not organisms, but persons. The nexus of relations which unites
us in a human society is not organic but personal.

John Macmurray
:::

Despite its centrality in the person-centred approach, Rogers does not
define the term or concept 'person' in his writing. Schmid (1998, p. 47)
reports asking Rogers about his definitions of the terms 'organism',
'self' and 'person', a question to which Rogers replied:

::: cite
I use the term organism for the biological entity. The actualising
tendency exists in the biological human organism. I use the term self
when I am referring to the concept a person has of himself, the way he
views himself, his perceptions of his qualities and so on ... I use the
term person in a more general sense to indicate each individual.
:::

From this response, Schmid comments that, of these terms, 'person' is a
superordinate concept, superior in rank to the concepts of self and
organism. We disagree. It seems to us that Rogers is, simply, and
somewhat surprisingly, using the word person synonymously with the word
individual, although elsewhere (1958/67b, 1960/67b) he does distinguish
between individuals and persons. To argue that the person or individual
is super-ordinate is, in our view, to move away from an interconnected,
organismic perspective on the person as a whole individual and as an
individual-in-relation, in a whole, holistic context. We do, however,
agree with Schmid that the term 'person' is omnipresent in Rogers' work.
With its meaning largely assumed and undefined, it is also strangely
absent.

In this chapter we hope to make person and persons more known first by
exploring aspects of the person in a broader philosophical and
psychological context with specific reference to personalism and
personology. Woodworth with Sheehan (1965) places Rogers in the context
of his consideration of 'personalistic psychology'. In the second part
of the chapter we review Rogers' different conceptions of the person:
that is, the 'fully functioning person', and his various formulations of
the 'emerging person' or the person in process. For Schmid (1998), these
represent, respectively, the individualistic and the relationist
conceptions of the person. We elaborate these conceptions through
discussions of experience and relationship; and the existential concepts
of being, becoming and belonging. For some authors such as Strawson
(1959), Macmurray (1961/91) and Harre (1998), it is precisely the sense
of belonging that distinguishes persons from organisms. In the third
part of the chapter we consider the concept of personality itself with
reference to a structuralist, Marxist conception of personality. As with
the parallel chapters on organism ([Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)) and self
([Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)), we discuss the pathology of the personality,
that is, personality disorders, in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml).

\

## The philosophy and psychology of persons {#c5.xhtml_clnk1}

In the epigram above, from Shakespeare's *Henry IV Part 2,* the word
'person' carries a number of senses which reflect its usage in
philosophy, psychology and literature, as:

- agent,
- personage,
- actor, and
- physical body.

Person as agent may be traced back to the work of Aristotle on *orexis,*
the fundamental drive or appetite that defines life itself, and
*entelechy,* the end within, and of St Thomas Aquinas and the doctrine
of intention, according to which individuals learn about the world by
acting into it and change themselves in accordance with the consequences
of their own actions. Liebnitz views the person as the source of acts, a
perspective echoed in Macmurray's (1961/91) work, although he does not
cite Liebnitz. Allport (1955, p. 12), who does discuss the Liebnitzian
tradition, argues that this source is not to do with agitation or
stimulation, but rather that it is a result of a purposive person who is
oriented to the future: 'To understand what a person is, it is necessary
always to refer to what he may be in the future, for every state of the
person is pointed in the direction of future possibilities.' This is
particularly significant and perhaps challenging for person-centred
psychologists and therapists who are, by and large, present-centred in
their focus and therapeutic work. Bohart (Bohart *et al.,* 1993) is one
exception to this trend. He discusses the therapeutic possibilities of
attending to a person's orientation towards the future.

The person as personage carries a sense of standing and status, whether
standing out from the crowd or *hoi polloi* as distinctive in some way,
or in terms of social standing ('as you are a king'). Given the
egalitarianism of the person-centred approach, this sense of person has
only a negative connotation, for instance, in terms of a criticism of
the cult of the individual.

By contrast, the sense of the person as actor is present in Rogers'
(1960/ 67b) work. *The persona* was the mask that actors in the ancient
world wore on stage, and Rogers talks about people moving away from
hiding behind such a mask, or facade.

Rogers does not greatly emphasise the person as physical body in the
body of his own work. He sees the organism as visceral, and in his
description of the process of therapy (1958/67a) he noted bodily
relaxation as one of the indicators of change. The body is more present
in the expressive therapy work of Natalie Rogers (1993/2000). When we
say 'This is me', 'This is my body', 'This is my person' we are, in
effect, referring to our sense of embodied uniqueness which is
encapsulated in the particular physical shape and boundaries of our own
bodies. If the image of the organism is amoeba-like, the image of the
person is the personal body.

As Whitehead is the philosopher of the organism, so Macmurray is the
philosopher of persons. Indeed, the second volume of his Gifford
Lectures, delivered at the University of Glasgow during the spring term
of 1954, is entitled *Persons in Relation* (Macmurray, 1961/91). In the
previous year's Gifford Lectures, later published as *Self as Agent*
(Macmurray, 1957/91), he challenges (p. 12) the assumptions of a
theoretical and egocentric view of the Self: 'Against the assumption
that the self is an isolated individual, I have set the view that the
Self is a *person,* and that personal existence is *constituted* by the
relation of persons.' His logic is as follows:

::: cite
The idea of an isolated agent is self-contradictory. Any agent is
necessarily in relation to the Other. Apart from this essential relation
he does not exist. But, further, the Other in this constitutive relation
must itself be personal. Persons, therefore, are constituted by their
mutual relation to one another. 'I' exist only as one element in the
complex 'You and I'.
:::

In seeking the union of many into one, both Whitehead and Macmurray
articulate a feeling for community. There are some differences:
Macmurray uses the term 'action' instead of 'process', and the phrase
'persons in mutual relation' instead of organs, within an organismic
metaphor. 'Macmurray would argue' suggests Kirkpatrick (1991, p. xiv)
'that process thought has chosen the wrong initial controlling model
(organism) for understanding the unity of reality through agency.'

\

### Personalism

\

Another strand of thinking about the person derives from personalism,
which refers to the quality of being characterised by purely personal
modes of expression or behaviour, or idiosyncrasy. In philosophy it
refers to any of various theories of subjective idealism regarding
personality as the key to the interpretation of reality. According to
Gallagher (1998, p. 1): 'Personalism can be defined as the attempt to
place persons and personal relationships as the center of theory and
practice, and to explore the significance of personal categories across
a variety of disciplines and traditions.' He goes on to suggest that
personalism is a philosophical and theological approach with roots in
nineteenth-century thought, and cites Allport as a proponent in the
field of psychology. There are a number of implications of this
approach:

1.  Personality is seen as the supreme value (see, for example, Murray,
    1938; Allport, 1955).
2.  As a philosophy it asserts the primacy and irreducibility of
    personal categories of meaning. Kohak (1997) speaks about the
    significance of 'categories of meaning rather than cause, of respect
    rather than force, of moral value rather than efficacy, of
    understanding rather than explanation'. This is consistent with the
    interest and focus in person-centred therapy on meaning, respect,
    values and understanding.
3.  Disciplines need to be studied as if people mattered, and need to
    address issues which confront actual persons and not abstract
    categories. Personalism has impacted on and been developed in a
    number of fields such as philosophy and theology (Martin Buber,
    Teilhard de Chardin, John Macmurray, Emmanuel Levinas), psychology
    (William James, Mary Whiton Calkins, William Stern, Henry Murray,
    Gordon Allport), and economics (see Zuniga, 2001 and
    [www.acton.org](http://www.acton.org)). In its Christian humanist
    form it has inspired religious and political leaders such as the
    late Pope John Paul II and the current British Prime Minister Tony
    Blair. In this sense, Rogers' book, written with Barry Stevens
    (1967), *Person to Person: The Problem of Being Human,* may be
    viewed as a personalistic text.[^1^](#c5.xhtml_ft1){#c5.xhtml_fn1}
4.  Ultimate reality is personal, not impersonal, in terms of drives or
    gratification, or suprapersonal in terms of history or system;
    reality is a society of persons. These personalistic perspectives
    find echoes in Rogers' (1953/67b) emphasis on the authority of
    experience and in his argument (p. 26) that '*What is most personal
    is most general* '.
5.  The definition of 'personhood' remains open. Again this is
    consistent with person-centred process and theory.

We shall return to Murray's ideas later when we consider the concept and
nature of personality. For now it sets the scene for discussion of the
person in her perceived environmental context.

Schmid (1998, p. 43) sees personalism as the philosophy of dialogue and
the philosophical rationale, as it were, for encounter: 'This is why
ethics is the foundation of every philosophy and why responsibility --
Levinas calls it *\"diakonia* \[service\]" which precedes every
dia-logue -- is the fundamental category of being a person; from the
encounter arises the obligation to respond.' This argues for a therapy
that is more active, engaged and relational than person-centred therapy
is often thought to be or allowed to be, even by its proponents. We have
referred at several points to the criticisms of the individualistic,
even egocentric concepts of organism ([Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)) and of
self ([Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)). O'Hara (1989) advances a similar
criticism of Rogers' concept of personhood and Caspary (1991) makes a
distinction between Rogers' sense of personhood and Boyte's (1984) sense
of 'peoplehood'. O'Hara (1989, p. 17) contrasts Rogers' views with those
of the Brazilian educator, Paolo Freire: 'For Rogers a person is seen as
distinct from society, separate, individual ... Freire's view, in
contrast is more sociocentric. He considers a "person" both as an
individual center of consciousness and as a social reality.' Whilst we
share the critique of individualism offered by O'Hara and others, such
as Holdstock (1996a, 1996b), we think that there is, in our reading of
the philosophy and psychology of the organism, more of a relational
perspective inherent, if not explicit, in the theory of the person and
the practice, therapeutic or otherwise, between persons.

\

### Personology

Personology was first used in 1938 by the American psychologist Henry A.
Murray (1893--1988) to describe his own work and that of others in the
field of personalistic psychology, which emphasised a primary concern
with a full understanding of the 'complex whole' that is the individual.
Essentially, personology is the study, from different perspectives, of
single, complex, *lived* lives over time. This has led, for instance, to
a broad interest in psychobiography (see
[www.psychobiography.com](http://www.psychobiography.com)). In this
Murray was sympathetic with and close to organismic theory. He also
emphasised the environmental context of individual behaviour and in this
respect, at least in the person-centred community, he is the
unacknowledged inspiration for a more field-relational perspective on
the person and persons. As a counterweight to his theory of motivational
need, Murray (1938, p. 121) developed the notion of 'press', that is,
the impact of the environment on the subject, for further elaboration of
which see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml). His emphasis on the past or history of
the individual, and the importance attached to unconscious motivation,
however, places him closer to psychoanalysis than to the practice of
person-centred therapy. Hall and Lindzey (1978, pp. 236--7) summarise
Murray's contribution:

::: cite
his theory possesses the unique feature of a simultaneous emphasis upon
the importance of the past of the organism and the present context
within which behavior takes place ... His interest in the field or
environment within which behavior takes place led to the distinctive
system of press concepts that permits the investigator to represent the
perceived environment as well as the objective environment.
:::

\

## Rogers' concepts of the person {#c5.xhtml_clnk2}

In his writing Rogers describes two apparently different conceptions of
the person: on the one hand, the fully functioning person (Rogers,
1960/67b, 1969) and, on the other, the emerging person (Rogers, 1978),
the political person (Rogers, 1978) and the person of tomorrow (Rogers,
1980a). Schmid (1998) views these as reflecting different philosophical
conceptions of the person: the individualistic and the relationalist.

The fully functioning person is synonymous with optimal psychological
adjustment, complete congruence and extensionality, and is characterised
by: an openness to experience, the ability to live in the present and to
be attentive to each moment, and a trust in organismic experiencing. One
of the problems with the phrase 'fully functioning', however, is that it
sounds more complete and fixed than the theory or Rogers intends, more
akin to Maslow's (1954) notion of the self-actualised person than a
person in process. For Rogers the fully functioning person is the
outcome of therapy, a discussion we take up in [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml).

In his later writings Rogers uses a number of terms to describe a person
in process:

- The political person -- 'a new political figure' gaining influence and
  fostering an emerging culture (Rogers, 1978).
- The emerging person -- the characteristics of which are: openness to
  experience, a trust in one's organism, an internal locus of
  evaluation, and a willingness to be a process (rather than a product
  or a goal) (Rogers, 1980a).
- The person of tomorrow -- Rogers (1980a) describes twelve qualities of
  such a person: openness; caring; having a desire for authenticity, a
  scepticism regarding science and technology, a desire for wholeness,
  the wish for intimacy, a closeness to and caring for nature, an
  authority within, and a yearning for the spiritual; being process
  persons, antiinstitutional, and fundamentally indifferent to material
  things.

Although these persons and their qualities appear more open and fluid,
the descriptions of them are framed in individualistic language. All the
qualities or ascribed attributes somehow reside in the individual,
separately from others. Compare them with eight relational needs
identified by Erskine (1998): for security; to feel validated, affirmed
and significant; for acceptance by a stable, dependable and protective
other person; for confirmation of personal experience; for
self-definition; to have an impact on others; to have another initiate;
and to express love -- all of which imply and require relationship and
may be viewed as inter-human needs.

\

### Experience and relationship

\

Schmid (1998, p. 45) views experience and relationship as the two most
important principles of the person-centred image of the human being: 'we
live through *experience,* and we live in *relationships'.* We agree
with Schmid that there is an interdependence between these two
principles: we experience relationship, and relate experientially. One
cannot exist without the other. Indeed, we cannot exist without the
other. We emphasise this point as it seems to us somewhat lost in the
culture of narcissism and the reification of individuality which, for
Rank (1941), is linked to beliefs in personal immortality.

*One client, who herself was a counsellor, would regularly get cross
with her own therapist for, as she put it 'not trusting my experience'.
The client often missed appointments, came late to sessions, sometimes
forgot to pay, although she would always settle up at the next
appointment. The client genuinely felt that she was 'doing my best' in
difficult circumstances, and the therapist acknowledged this. The client
argued that the therapist should support her more by trusting her and
supporting her experience. The therapist disagreed, saying: 'I do
acknowledge your struggle. I also acknowledge your experience. However,
it's not for me to support your experience or to disagree with it.' The
client didn't accept this but continued to attend therapy. Some time
later she missed two consecutive sessions. When she arrived the
following week the therapist asked: 'What happened?' The client got
angry and critical of the therapist for asking her a question. Later in
the session the therapist said: 'You know, it seems like you expect me
to support your experience, but not my experience of our relationship.'
The client looked puzzled, paused for a while, and asked what she meant.
The therapist responded: 'You want me to support you unconditionally and
somehow separately, as if we're not relating to each other, and as if my
experience of you and our relationship doesn't matter.' The client went
very quiet. After some reflection she acknowledged that she was looking
for unconditional support from her therapist and perhaps seeing it
almost as a test of her therapist's trust in her. She hadn't seen
therapy as a place to relate.*

Here, the therapist is inviting the client to consider relationship, or
relating, alongside her experience. This way of working therapeutically
moves away from a somewhat linear and mechanistic model of
person-centred therapy whereby the client is vulnerable, the therapist
is loving and understanding, the client experiences this and feels
better. It also challenges individualistic and absolutist views of
experience, and invites, even challenges the client to reflect on and
engage with her experiencing in relationship. It is the logic of the
view that, as human persons, we can't not be in relationship; and that
we are and become persons only by being in relationship. Drawing on
philosophical and theological traditions, Schmid (ibid., p. 46) argues
that 'Man's primordial situation is a dialogical one. Therefore the
person can be considered a response in an act of communication into
which man was born.' In our experience as therapists and supervisors,
the struggle described above is not uncommon. It is exacerbated by, in
our view, an overemphasis on experience, often characterised by 'the
right to have my experience', and an underemphasis on relationship and
working with and within the therapeutic relationship (see [Chapter
8](#c8.xhtml)).

Exploring the range of human experience, Schmid (ibid., pp. 45--6)
acknowledges the experience of becoming or developing: 'we are and
become persons through the experience of and in the relationship --
through the experience we are having at the very moment (awareness in
the present) and biographical experience (the developmental aspect of
becoming a person)'. This connection between the developmental aspect of
becoming and being a person is an important one. Rogers' (1951) original
criticisms of the transference relationship, and Shlien's (1984)
countertheory of transference, have fostered in person-centred therapy
and therapists a healthy scepticism of the traditional psychoanalytic
emphasis on the childhood origin of all distress. However, some
person-centred therapists have, as it were, thrown the significance of
the baby and childhood development out with the bathwater of theoretical
invention and interpretation. That we are at least influenced by our
past is uncontentious; the significance of the past, and how we work
with the past in the present, is. Angyal (1941, p. 344) puts it this
way: 'Nobody questions the fact that the present state of the
personality is significantly determined by its past. The nature of
interconnection and the mode of influence upon the present, however, can
be conceived in various ways.' Rank (1941, p. 49) discusses his break
with Freud and his shift of emphasis from the individual's past to his
present self, 'respecting emotional expression as a positive will
manifestation without condemning it as "resistance" '. Existential
therapy too has contributed to our understanding of working with and in
the present, and, as we discuss in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml), process
theories, especially those of developmental psychology, notably Stern
(1985), have advanced the notion that development continues in the
present. As a result, there is more therapeutic interest in the
'presenting past', as Jacobs (1998) puts it; the implications for how we
might view the structure of a present-centred personality or *neopsyche*
(see Tudor, 2003); and on the psychotherapy of the present moment
(Stern, 2004). One client described his therapy as 'working in the
present whilst acknowledging the past':

*One example related to just one word: 'matter'. It became apparent that
I thought other people did 'matter' quite a lot, but that I didn't. The
phrase 'I matter' seems now to have at least two interpretations: that I
matter to other people, and that I (am) matter in the physical sense.
That insight is still echoing round my head two years later. The effect
was that of an unescapable truth. I am composed of matter; therefore I
can't deny that in some way 'I matter'. This insight, I believe, has
profoundly changed my view of myself, at what I might describe as
identity level.*

Interestingly, 'I matter, You matter, They matter' was coined by
Virginia Satir, a phrase which Berne (1972/75) later reformulated as
'I'm OK, You're OK -- and They're OK'.

In a sense, the word 'person' is *per se* somewhat fixed. Unlike the
metaphor and image of the organism, which is both amorphous (having no
determinate shape) and fluid, our image of the person is shaped by the
form and shape of our own body, by that of others and by the images of
bodies that surround us in the media. In order to develop a more fluid
image of the person, a fuller picture of a person in process, and a more
intersubjective picture of persons in relation, we now consider the
concepts of being, becoming and belonging.

\

### Being, becoming and belonging

\

The concepts of being, becoming and belonging derive from existential
philosophy, although the distinction between *being,* the quality of
enduring existence, and *becoming,* the quality of change in systems
such as an organism, may be traced back to Ancient Greek philosophy. As
a concept, being refers to the active existence and existing of
humankind, which leads to a focus on and acceptance of 'being' in the
present. Aristotle argues that the important distinction in metaphysics
is between the *potential* and the *actual:* all substances consist of
potentiality and actuality. According to Woodfin and Groves (2001, p.
73), the former represents 'a chaotic and characterless pool of
potentiality', the latter, the actual, or fully actualised, is the
Supreme Being or Supreme Cause to which humans aspire and which was, for
Aristotle, the determining force in human nature. This is the tradition
and sense in which Maslow (1954) developed his ideas about
self-actualisation and self-actualised persons. Organismic philosophy
and psychology take a different view, focusing more on process
(Whitehead, 1929/78; Rogers, 1958/67a) than on outcome, and more on the
'actuatising tendency' or the organism's tendency to actualise (Rogers,
1959b, 1963) than on self-actualisation. The philosophy and psychology
of the organism reverses Aristotle's teleology, anthropology and
theology: where Aristotle argues that being or actuality emerges from
becoming or potentiality, organismic psychology sees that becoming
emerges from being. Whitehead (1929/78, p. 22) summarises this: 'it
belongs to the nature of a "being" that it is a potential for every
"becoming." This is the "principle of relativity." '

Early existential philosophers such as Kierkegaard and Nietzsche
emphasise the aloneness and isolation of the individual. Later
philosophers, including Heidegger, emphasise *dasein* or
'being-in-the-world', which conveys, especially in its hyphenated form,
a sense of what Cooper (2003, p. 18) calls 'the indissoluble unity of
person and world'. This describes existence as *between* the person and
their world, and *daseinanalysis* (Ludwig Binswanger, Medard Boss)
provides the foundations for an existential therapy (see Cooper, 2003).

Becoming describes the *process,* as distinct from the outcome, of human
potentiality -- and, as such, stands in the same relation to 'be' as the
actualising tendency does to self-actualisation (see [Chapter
3](#c3.xhtml)). Rogers (1961/67d) refers to this process as one in which
people get behind the mask or roles with which they face life, in which
they experience feeling and discover unknown elements of self in
experience. The person who emerges from or, more accurately, is *in*
this process, is characterised as having: openness to experience; a
trust in his organism; an internal locus of evaluation; and a
willingness to be a process. These characteristics are undoubtedly more
concerned with process than outcome and Rogers' language and references
here are different from the somewhat ambiguous language and mixed
references to both organism and self in his chapter on personal goals
(Rogers, 1960/67b). Keen (1983, pp. 129--30) describes the existential
process of becoming more poetically:

::: cite
The decision to become an individual, to allow oneself to be moved by
the deepest impulses of the self rather than the social consensus, can
only be made with fear and trembling. It is, by definition, a lonely
decision. It necessarily involves anxiety and self-doubt. At first it
will seem awkward, embarrassing, unnatural, and will require a high
degree of painful self-consciousness. One will stumble and fall often.
Frequently the path will disappear into the brambles. The outlaw will
often wonder whether asserting the right to know, to taste, to
experience, to judge is not an act of arrogance. The individual's way
always is an unbeaten path.
:::

Whitehead's (1929/78, p. 45) description of the process of becoming
supports Rogers' description of the symbolisation of experience and
creativity: 'The process is constituted by the influx of external
objects into a novel determinateness of feeling which absorbs the actual
world into a novel actuality.' Compare this with Rogers' (1954/67a)
notion of the product of creativity being 'novel constructions' (see
[Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)).

In his essay 'What it means to become a person' Rogers (1954/67b) asks
two questions: 'Who am I?' which is about personhood, and 'How may I
become myself?' Schmid (1998, p. 51) suggests that:

::: cite
In these words he expresses the specifically person-centred contribution
to man's personhood: the question about the person is the question about
being a person and the question about becoming a person -- linked to the
question as to what sort of encounter must take place in order to bring
this 'becoming' about.
:::

We comment at various points in this book on a certain lack of emphasis
on relatedness in Rogers' work. This is, in some part, autobiographical.
Rogers (1967, p. 343) describes himself as 'somewhat of a lone wolf in
my professional activities; socially rather shy but enjoying close
relationships' (see Introduction and [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)).
Significantly, Whitehead (1929/78, p. viii) describes the philosophy of
the organism as concerned exclusively with 'the becoming, the being,
*and the relatedness* of actual entities' (our emphasis). This sense of
relatedness is encapsulated in the concept of belonging. If 'being'
emphasises a person's subjectivity, then belonging emphasises
inter-subjectivity between people, the relationship and encounter
between persons, or, as Atwood and Stolorow (1996) describe it,
'reciprocal mutual influence'. We link this to what Goldstein (1934/95,
p. 20) describes as the 'sphere of immediacy': 'the feeling of unity
comprising ourselves and the world in all respects and particularly our
relation to other human beings', and to what Barrett-Lennard (2005) says
about community (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)). Holdstock (1996b) argues
that, whilst Rogers' theory of the self focuses on individual autonomy,
his theory of therapy stresses unconditional positive regard and
empathy, thereby reflecting the importance of relatedness. We develop
this further when discussing the process of the therapeutic relationship
in [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml).

We discuss the implications of this for the person of the therapist in
[Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml).

\

## Personality {#c5.xhtml_clnk3}

Having discussed some of the philosophical and psychological influences
on a theory of the person, we now turn to the concept of personality.
Referring to the person in everyday life raises questions of and
distinctions between:

- Personality -- often referred to in terms of personality clash or
  personality disorder, implying that nothing can be done about it.

- Disposition -- which Allport (1955, p. 24) sees as 'the raw material
  for the development of personality'. He, in turn, identifies three
  factors which make up inborn dispositions:

  -- Survival tendencies, common to the species.

  -- Inheritance, which is linked to our genes.

  -- Latent or potential capacities which, for Allport, play a crucial
  role in becoming.

  Cartwright and Graham (1984, p. 110) suggest that a disposition refers
  to 'a tendency to behave in a certain way'.

- Habit *(habitus) -* an acquired disposition, according to William of
  Ockham (1300--1349).

- Temperament -- seen in medieval physiology, at least, in terms of the
  cardinal humours of the human condition: sanguine, choleric,
  phlegmatic or melancholic.

- Character -- viewed as being inherently good or bad, strong or weak.

- Characteristics -- which, according to Cartwright and Graham (1984, p.
  110), plurally are 'relatively stable and distinctive features of a
  person that are likely to be manifested in particular instances'.

- Trait -- as in a character trait like her mother's way of talking; a
  local, behavioural manifestation of character.

Often such distinctions or attributions imply 'natural' inherent
qualities, which are viewed as an inevitable aspect of our human nature,
about which it is often, though erroneously, argued that we can do
nothing. As we have discussed, views from organismic, developmental and
evolutionary psychology, and neuroscience, all suggest that our human
nature is based on the interrelation of organism and environment, and
that the environment directly and indirectly affects our development,
genes, brain and behaviour. In this part we explore what personality is
by discussing personality and theory, and by comparing a structuralist
(Marxist) conception of personality with aspects of person-centred
psychology. We conclude with a brief discussion of whether we need a
theory of personality.

\

### Personality and theory

\

Just as a person's personality *appears* to be given and fixed, so too
the concept of personality appears to describe a generalised aspect of
the person, common to all persons. We think that Rogers, amongst others,
contributes to a more fluid and individual understanding of personality
in relation to other understandings, and, not surprisingly, a more
organismic one. He says (1953/67a, p. 92) that 'the inner core of man's
personality is the organism itself, which is essentially both
self-preserving and social'. Rogers expounds his own view of personality
theory in *Client-Centered Therapy* (Rogers, 1951), and further
elaborates it in his main formulation of theory (Rogers, 1959b). Despite
his organismic inclination, however, Rogers uses the language of
structure to talk about personality, and his (1951) diagram of the
'total personality' implies a more fixed and topographical view of
personality, comprising certain areas, for further discussion of which
see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml). Elsewhere, we and others (Embleton Tudor *et
al.,* 2004) have reviewed Rogers' personality diagram, representing its
experiential basis. We agree with A. Rogers (2001, p. 41) who considers
Rogers' personality theory to be '*one of many* potentially interesting
ways of considering what it means to be a person'. This is important, as
a fixed or reified theory of personality lends weight to the use of
instrumental therapeutic techniques or even attitudes designed on the
part of the therapist to effect change. The other problem with Rogers'
original conception of personality is that it appears more
individualistic than other, more relational aspects of his theory (see
[Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)).

Other theoreticians we have already cited have also made important
contributions to a more fluid understanding of personality theory:

- Henry Murray -- Although initially heavily influenced by Freudian
  thinking, Murray was, according to Hall and Lindzey (1978, p. 212)
  'strongly oriented toward a view that gives adequate weight to the
  history of the organism'. Unlike Rogers he is wary of the word
  'structure' with regard to personality. He acknowledges that an
  individual's personality is an abstraction and conceptualisation
  formulated by the theorist, and proposes that an individual's
  personality refers to and reflects the enduring and recurring elements
  of a person's behaviour over time, as well as to the new, distinct and
  unique behaviour. It follows that, with regard to research, Murray was
  interested in detailed study of individual subjects (see Murray,
  1959).

- John Macmurray -- Macmurray (1961/91, p. 25) critiques the way in
  which 'personality' is used to refer to the quality or set of
  characteristics which distinguish one person from another, arguing,
  rather, that this should be referred to as 'personal individuality'.

- Gordon Allport -- In many ways Allport (1955) puts the personal back
  into personality. He argues that personality, defined as including
  habits and skills, frames of reference, matters of fact and cultural
  values, never seems warm or important. He suggests another term, the
  *proprium* to include (1955, p. 40): 'what is warm and important also
  -- all the regions of our life that we regard as peculiarly ours ...
  The proprium includes all aspects of personality that make for inward
  unity.' He goes on to offer eight aspects or properties of the
  proprium:

  -- Bodily sense or *coenesthesis* -- the bodily *me* which (p. 42)
  'remains a lifelong anchor for our self-awareness'.

  -- Self-identity -- which provides a sense of continuity over time.

  -- Ego-enhancement -- i.e. self-seeking.

  -- Ego-extension -- the extension of me to 'mine' with reference to
  objects and others of importance.

  -- Rational agent -- that functioning of the proprium that is capable
  also (p. 46) 'of yielding true solutions, appropriate adjustments,
  accurate planning, and a relatively faultless solving of the equations
  of life'.

  -- Self-image or phenomenal self -- which includes our self-regard and
  evaluation of our abilities, status and roles, as well as our
  aspirations.

  -- Propriate striving -- which refers to a higher level of motivation
  characterised by its resistance to equilibrium and the maintenance of
  tension (see [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)).

  -- The knower -- 'a blended unit of a sort that guarantees the
  continuance of all becoming' (p. 54).

Allport acknowledges that person and personality are broader conceptions
than the proprium, and that personality includes 'adjustive activities'
(a point we pick up when we discuss adjustment and maladjustment in
[Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)). Nevertheless, he finds these terms more useful
than many 'doctrines' of the self which (p. 61) 'are so inclusive as to
blur these distinctions'.

\

### A structuralist, Marxist conception of personality

\

We are interested to explore a structural and, specifically, a Marxist
conception of personality for a number of reasons:

1.  It is influential -- the Marxist and feminist re-readings of Freud
    (see, for example, Mitchell, 1975) have been highly influential in
    the development of psychoanalysis and, more generally,
    psychotherapy. Such critiques have not been so prominent with regard
    to person-centred psychology, with the exception of a recent volume
    (Proctor & Napier, 2004) edited by two feminists.
2.  It emphasises human relations in their social context, under the
    predominant economic system, i.e. capitalism. It thus offers a
    contextual (economic/social/cultural) view of the person, which in
    many ways is compatible with person-centred psychology.
3.  Its starting point is the 'ensemble of social relations' rather than
    the individual or individuality. It thus emphasises relationship,
    relationship-in-context, and context-in-relationship, which is also
    compatible with a person-centred psychology that emphasises
    relationships.
4.  It provides a theory of alienation which, as a concept, is largely
    missing from person-centred accounts of human experience, and which
    we develop in [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml).

A Marxist perspective views personality as the organisation of forces
within the individual in response to need. Since needs are relative and
developed in relation to others and the world, personality too is
constantly developing. This describes a process conception of
personality.

The methodological basis of Marxism has been described as historical or
dialectical materialism. Politzer (1976) identifies four laws of
dialectics which we compare with person-centred principles and values
(Table 5.1).

Historical materialism sees experience, life and consciousness as
determined by social existence. Traditional psychoanalysis views these
as determined by instinctual drives. Both Marx and Freud view
consciousness as helping to grasp the nature of reality so that
individuals can organise their existence. Person-centred psychology sees
consciousness as the symbolisation of experience (see [Chapter
3](#c3.xhtml)) and symbolisation as the organisation of experience or
existence. For Freud and Freudians there are universal conflicts, such
as the Oedipus complex, irrespective of the type of society or mode of
production. For Rogers and most person-centred therapists conflicts are
particular, personal, and phenomenological. For Marx and Marxists any
conflict which exists in the personality is an expression of conflict in
the structure of society. For example, a conflict between, say, a man
and a woman about housework, cannot be understood without some
reference, at some level of consciousness, to:

\

[*Table 5.1* Laws of dialectics and person-centred
principles](c5_tbl1.xhtml){#c5.xhtml_tbl5_1}

- Capitalist modes of production and reproduction, that is, the view
  that capital needs labour power to be reproduced on a daily and
  generational basis -- which reproduction is generally considered to be
  'women's work'.
- Waged and unwaged labour -- and hence the debate amongst feminists in
  the 1970s about wages for housework (see Dalla Costa, 1972; James,
  1975; Smith, 1978).
- Changes in women's expectations in and about domestic life and the
  world of work, which may be traced back one or two generations, often
  personally, to the impact of changing roles as a result of the Second
  World War.

We think that such consideration is useful in that it helps the
therapist hold a contextual and historical view of what she may
otherwise view as a personal conflict between partners. From a
person-centred perspective, the ultimate or fundamental test of the
usefulness of such analysis or understanding, however, remains its
contribution to the therapist's regard and empathy.

In terms of the emphasis on human relations, the Marxist science of
biography is based on the historical materialism of the individual and,
therefore, involves a dialectical approach to the individual in their
social relations. On this basis, it is impossible, for instance, to
understand the personality of a working-class woman without at least
studying the effects of class and gender (as above). That said,
scientific Marxism demands a *specific* historical and social analysis
of the individual, in some ways akin to the approach of Murray (p. 148).
The work of both Marx and Rogers shares an empirical basis, even if Marx
was more concerned with the empirical analysis of social relations, and
Rogers with an understanding of intrapersonal and interpersonal
relations. From a Marxist perspective, the structure of personality at
least reflects the structure of society and, some would say, is in the
mathematical sense absolutely congruent with it. Thus, in a static
society in which no significant change occurred for hundreds of years,
such as 'the Asiatic mode of production' identified by Marx (1858/
1964), we could hypothesise that people's personalities did not change
much either. As the mode of production changes, so does the personality.
With regard to the development of Rogers' ideas, Barrett-Lennard (1998)
considers the impact of Rogers' milieu: the Great Depression, reform and
Franklin Roosevelt's 'New Deal'. The following quote from Dewey (1928/
60, pp. 286--7) (which Barrett-Lennard uses as an epigram to a chapter
in his book) makes the link between this context and the potential of
personality:

::: cite
The possibility of freedom is deeply grounded in our very beings. It is
one with our individuality ... But like all other possibilities, this
possibility has to be actualized: and, like all others, it can only be
actualized through interaction with objective conditions ... the
conditions that form political and economic liberty are required in
order to realize the potentiality of freedom each of us carries within
him in his very structure.
:::

To focus on social relations and context, however, is generally viewed
within person-centred psychology as introducing something from the
therapist's frame of reference and, therefore, ultimately, directive.
Discussing the intersections of feminism and the person-centred
approach, Proctor and Napier (2004b, p. 5) see the fact that feminism
has a different focus of study as a point of conflict with the approach:
'A person-centred approach does not include gender analysis or analysis
of any other societal factors unless an individual specifically mentions
them as being personally relevant.' We agree that a person-centred
therapist does not normally or gratuitously introduce such factors. We
think, however, that such analyses are both relevant and legitimate
areas of study which help us understand the organism in its environment.
In our view, a greater appreciation of the client's social relations
addresses the criticism that person-centred therapy is too
individualistic (see Buber in Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990a; Vitz,
1997).

From a Marxist perspective it is clear that the human essence *is* the
ensemble of social relations, and that people are irreducibly social and
not independent of social relations. We only have to consider some of
the issues involved in the exchange of money for psychotherapy in
private practice (see Tudor & Worrall, 2002) to have a practical sense
of this. Molina (1977, p. 241) describes this well: 'social relations
(society) are not a mere "social framework" with respect to individuals,
but they stand as the very structural \"ensemble" which *constitutes*
individuality itself'. As Einstein put it (cited in Newnes, 2004):
'Individuality is an illusion created by skin.' For example, from this
perspective, the family, as the predominant psychological agency of
society, stamps its specific structure on the child. The repetition of
childhood experiences (play and discipline, as well as abuse) are not so
much repetitions of *content* (a particular game, being tidy in a
certain way, a particular form of abuse) as *structure.* In their
ethnographic study of the authoritarian and prejudiced (anti-semitic)
personality, Adorno *et al.* (1969, p. 971) describe it thus:

::: cite
A basically hierarchical, authoritarian, exploitative parent--child
relationship is apt to carry over into power-oriented, exploitatively
dependent attitudes towards one's sex partner and one's God and may well
culminate in a political philosophy and social outlook which has no room
for anything but a desperate clinging to what appears to be a strong and
disdainful rejection of whatever is relegated to the bottom. The
inherent dramatization likewise extends from the parent--child dichotomy
to the dichotomous conception of sex roles and of moral values, as well
as to a dichotomous handling of social relations as manifested in
stereotypes.
:::

Elsewhere, Horkheimer and Adorno (1972, p. 211) describe a personality
determined by the economic context: 'Here in America there is no
difference between a man and his economic fate. A man is made by his
assets, income, position, and prospects. The economic mask coincides
completely with a man's inner character.' This Marxist perspective on
social relations gives a sharper edge to our understanding of people in
relationship. In this sense relations and relationships are both
personal and political or social: they *are* social, and are
*experienced* personally. Where Marxist and Rogerian perspectives part
company is the degree to which people are viewed as determined by social
forces and having little or no individuality. However, if we substitute
'conditioned' for 'determined', then the two perspectives appear closer.
Bozarth (1998, p. 83) argues that 'conditionality is the bedrock of a
person-centered theory of pathology', and Van Kalmthout (2002, p. 140)
says that 'Living in the grip of the conditioned self only leads to
feelings of meaninglessness, depression and other signs of alienation'
(see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)).

In practical terms a psychotherapy which integrates ideas from a
structuralist approach to personality such as Marxism holds, amongst
other things:

1.  A focus on the pathological features of society before those of the
    individual. Indeed our understanding of the pathological features of
    an individual can only be understood in this context (see [Chapter
    6](#c6.xhtml)).
2.  A critique of the dominant constructions of pathology in terms of
    illness and madness (see Sanders & Tudor, 2001).

Having explored and elaborated organism ([Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)) and its
tendency to actualise ([Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)), self ([Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml)) and person in this present chapter, we now turn our
attention to the disorganisation of these entities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1^](#c5.xhtml_fn1){#c5.xhtml_ft1} The book interleaves papers written
by Rogers and his associates with Stevens' personal 'warm, human
reaction' to the papers. Rogers' own writings on values, freedom and
interpersonal relationships are followed by three contributions on work
undertaken with people diagnosed as having schizophrenia.
:::::::::::

[]{#c6.xhtml}

::::::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 6 Alienation

::: cite
Every self-estrangement of man from himself and nature is manifested in
the relationship he sets up between other men and himself and nature.

Karl Marx

Mental health is an ongoing process of dedication to reality at all
costs.

M. Scott Peck

Conditionality is the bedrock of Rogers' theory of pathology.

Jerold Bozarth

A person becomes inauthentic if they are alienated from self and Others,
i.e. from the experiencing organism and the necessary genuine
relationships.

Peter Schmid
:::

In previous chapters we explored the nature of organism ([Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)), self ([Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)) and person ([Chapter
5](#c5.xhtml)). These, in effect, describe and elaborate the
authenticity of the human organism. We agree with Schmid (2004, p. 39)
that the notion of inauthenticity

::: cite
differs qualitatively from the common meaning of illness or disorder.
What is experienced from an internal frame of reference as
'psychological suffering' is seen from an external point of view as
alienation or maladjustment. If it is called 'disorder', one must
permanently keep in mind that the 'order' always is also a cultural
norm.
:::

In the first part of this chapter we elaborate this point by discussing
alienation in the context of authenticity, a discussion which reframes
and relocates discussions about health and illness or 'disorder'. In
order to discuss particular disorders, we first address the concept and
subject of process differentiation, which stands as a necessary
introduction to the subsequent parts. Following this, we take up
Schmid's challenge to develop a genuinely person-centred systematic
description of inauthentic processes, and discuss the pathology of
organism, self and person. Whilst maintaining our perspective on
alienation, we consider such pathologies in their different forms and
with regard to terms which are more generally used in both
person-centred literature and in the field of mental illness: for the
organism, disorganisation; for the self and the person, disorder. The
examples we use to illustrate our discussion reflect broader changes in
psychopathology and reflect the 'disorders' of our times; that is, those
which have become more identified in the last thirty years in affluent
societies: compulsive overeating, dependency-related disorder and
narcissistic personality process. These also represent a range of
'disorders' across the three groupings or 'clusters' identified by the
American Psychiatric Association's (2000) *Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM)* (now in its fourth edition). We
recognise that some disorders, including anxiety and obesity, may be
symptoms of organic rather than psychological pathology. Any
sophisticated differential diagnosis will take this into account. Given
our backgrounds we focus on the psychological and the social aspects of
pathology or alienation. We recognise also our limitations and believe
that it's both beneficial and necessary to work with professionals from
other disciplines who may have particular diagnostic skills. In the
final part of the chapter, we draw on Murray's (1938) concept of
environmental 'press' and consider briefly the ways in which our
tendency to actualise is thwarted.

\

## Authenticity and alienation, health and illness, order and disorder {#c6.xhtml_clnk1}

For Rogers authenticity is synonymous with congruence. In his 1959b
paper he defines a number of terms, viewing them all as forming a
cluster which grows out of the concept of congruence (p. 207):

::: cite
Congruence is the term which defines the state. Openness to experience
is the way an internally congruent individual meets new experience.
Psychological adjustment is congruence as viewed from a social point of
view. Extensional is the term which describes the specific types of
behavior of a congruent individual. Maturity is a broader term
describing the personality characteristics and behavior of a person who
is, in general, congruent.
:::

Rogers' point about openness to experience is interesting in the light
of personality research (Cloninger, Svrakic & Pryzbeck, 1993; Benjamin
*et al.,* 1996) which suggests that some characteristics, including
novelty-seeking and adaptability, are inherited; and that some of us are
temperamentally open to new experience and seek it out, while others are
cautious and prefer things to stay the same. People who are autistic,
for instance, can find apparently minor differences in their environment
difficult to accept and manage. The way they process information means
generally that they prefer sameness.

The authentic person is, in effect, fully functioning, for further
discussion of which see [Chapters 5](#c5.xhtml) and [8](#c8.xhtml).

In a later paper, Rogers (1975/81) sees a deep concern for authenticity
as a quality of the multifaceted, emerging person. He goes on to
describe this person in polemical and political terms, citing examples
of people who are prepared to reject a culture they see as hypocritical,
to confront those in authority, to refuse orders, to work for civil
rights, and to take full personal responsibility in situations (p. 158):
'Such painful honesty, such willingness to confront, and the willingness
to pay the price of such utterances are indications of the value this
emerging person places on being authentic.' Schmid (2004, p. 38) says
simply that: 'To be a person can truly be called living the process of
authenticity.'

This authenticity describes mankind in relationship and unity with
itself and nature -- and, if not united, being prepared and willing to
do something about it, to be, in Barrett-Lennard's (1998, p. 75) words
describing the purposeful, open system that is the organism, 'in
particularly active interchange with its environment' (see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)). Alienation is the opposite. Alienation, for Marx, the
philosopher of alienation, is the distortion of such unities. Marx talks
in terms of 'distorted relations', Rogers (1951) of 'distorted
perceptions'. The difference is that a Marxist point of view argues that
the distortion lies in oppressive forms of society, such as feudalism
and capitalism, and not only in the individual's perception of distorted
relations, as Rogers suggests in his theory of personality. Marx
conceptualises alienation as four basic but closely related social
relations within capitalism: man's *(sic)* relation to his product, his
productive capacity, to other people, and to his species, a framework
which Tudor (1997) draws on to describe examples of class-conscious
therapeutic practice. Roy (1988) adds to this taxonomy a further set:
that of man's alienated social relations with the earth, a perspective
which informs contemporary concerns about the environment, and a
developing interest in ecopsychology. Again, we find in the work of
Angyal and, specifically, in his holistic theory of *Neurosis and
Treatment* (1965/73), more of a relational perspective on alienation. He
uses the term 'alienness' to describe (p. 92) 'the central figure of the
neurotic mythology ... \[which\] results from the persisting state of
isolation of the child whose attempts at relating himself to the world
have largely failed, so that no communication and no real community has
been established'.

A number of therapists from different traditions have taken up the
concept of alienation. Here we refer to two, from gestalt psychology and
from transactional analysis:

- Discussing alienation in the context of the malfunctioning process of
  projection, Perls, Hefferline and Goodman (1951/73, p. 259) describe
  this as a psychological process:

  <div>

  Alienated from his own impulses, yet unable to obliterate the feelings
  and acts to which they give rise, man makes 'things' out of his own
  behaviour. Since he then does not experience it as himself-in-action,
  he can disclaim responsibility for it, try to forget it or hide it, or
  project it and suffer it as coming from the outside.

  </div>

  A person who is passive, who disowns her feelings and behaviour, who
  blames 'them' or 'the world' is, in these terms, inauthentic or
  alienated in some way. On the other hand, therapy which invites a
  client to 'own' her impulses and behaviours, and to experience herself
  as herself-in-action in a social world, describes a process of
  dis-alienation, a process which, Bulhan (1980) argues, is impossible
  without a total restructuring of society.

- Based on a theory of alienation, and an analysis of oppression and
  power, derived from Marx and influenced by Reich, Marcuse, Fanon and
  Laing, the tradition of radical psychiatry within transactional
  analysis offers particular co-operative ways of working with
  individuals and groups to reclaim autonomy (see Steiner *et al.,*
  1975). Steiner and his colleagues came up with a formula which defines
  Alienation as equal to (=) Oppression + Mystification + Isolation.
  Echoing Marx's analysis, Steiner (2000) talks in terms of people being
  alienated from their hearts, or from love; being alienated from their
  minds, or from the capacity to think; being alienated from their
  bodies, or from their feelings; and being alienated from their hands,
  or from their work. Echoing the tradition of civil disobedience,
  Steiner (1981, p. 50) asserts: 'The first step in becoming powerful
  without using power to control others is to learn to be disobedient
  ... Refusing to be controlled against your will and judgement frees
  your own powers for whatever you may decide is good for you.' This
  analysis of power and responses to 'power plays' is echoed in the
  person-centred approach to personal power (Rogers, 1978) and
  collaborative power (Natiello, 1987, 1990).

We suggest (in [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)) that Rogers frames his theory of
personality in individualistic terms and that a structuralist conception
of personality focuses more on the impact of the environment and social
relations *in* the subject or client.

*After some months of therapy a client said to her therapist: 'You know,
I don't like people.' She was, in effect, describing her alienation from
her species which in part she knew, and in part discovered, had its
roots in her childhood and the ways in which her parents had stamped
their structures on her (see [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)). This affected all
aspects of her life: from how she viewed herself and her capacity for
enjoying life, through to how she organised her daily routine and even
how she drove her car without much care for herself or others. She and
the therapist spent the first few months of her therapy exploring the
ways in which she felt isolated and alienated from the world, and how
she protected herself against feeling the implications of this. She
acknowledged the ways in which she distorted certain perceptions of
herself ('That's how I am'), others ('... are out to get me'), and the
world ('... is against me'). She was also quite certain of the
impossibility of change for herself, although she recognised this and
even facilitated this in others. One day some birds flew past the window
of the consulting room. The client interrupted what the therapist was
saying to point this out and, with great knowledge and animation,
described the difference between the birds in some detail, and, in doing
so, revealed her passion for nature. She then apologised for the
interruption. The therapist acknowledged the affective vitality of the
client (Stern, 1985) and the significance of the 'interruption'. As he
saw it the temporary 'rupture' in relationship had actually had the
effect of helping him to refocus on her vitality and authenticity.
Drawing on his understanding of the different forms of social relations
and alienation, the therapist followed the client and discovered, as it
were, a whole world of the client's authentic social relations with
nature and the earth, in terms of her love of flora and fauna, and of
walking. This, and its origins in her childhood, became a significant
theme in therapy. Acknowledging this, client and therapist were able to
return to other areas and reassess her relationship with both the
'product' she produced and her productive capacity. By acknowledging and
working with all of this, the client was able to talk more about her
difficulty in relating to others and the social world. Reflecting on
this process sometime later, the client acknowledged that it was the
therapist's non-judgemental, acceptant response which had been most
helpful and reparative as, in her childhood, she had been consistently
told off for interrupting.*

This vignette highlights the value of thinking in terms of authenticity
and alienation rather than health and illness. 'In psychotherapy' says
Phillips (1994, p. 49) 'one always has to remember that anyone who is
failing at one thing is always succeeding at another.' Schmid (2004)
critiques terms such as 'health', 'normal', 'in order', 'in-firmity' and
'dis-ease' (p. 38): 'authenticity has nothing to do with being firm or
at ease. These common terms are not only misguiding, but completely
wrong, because a severely ill person can very well live most
authentically.' Whilst we agree with this in principle, we have two
modifications, one strategic and the other a reframe.

Our strategic concern is that we think there is a missing stage in
Schmid's argument. He refers to health and illness as if the two terms
are used separately. In our experience this is not the case. There is
such widespread conflation of these terms, especially in the field of
'mental health', i.e. mental *illness,* that we think there is a
strategic need first to argue that health is something different from
illness (see Antonovsky, 1979) and then that mental health or well-being
is something different from mental illness and 'disorder' (see Tudor,
1996, 2004) -- two terms, incidentally, which themselves are also
conflated and used synonymously, e.g. in current mental 'health'
legislation and policy in the UK and elsewhere.

The reframe we want to offer concerns the concepts of order and
organisation. The correlative of 'order' is 'dis-order' and, in any
context in which there is a tendency to polarise, these can be equated,
respectively and somewhat simplistically, with health and illness.
However, going back to Whitehead (1929/78) we discover a more inclusive
and dynamic sense of order. He argues:

1.  That both order and disorder are 'given', that is, that the basis of
    the organism's experience is given. This represents a more
    even-handed view of both order and disorder, and a less
    pathologising approach to disorder.
2.  That order is differentiated from 'givenness' by virtue of the
    notion of adaptation, i.e. that an organism adapts in order to
    attain a particular end or goal (see the discussion of needs in
    [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)).
3.  That (p. 84): 'There is not just one ideal "order" which all actual
    entities should attain and fail to attain.' This challenges the
    reification of health over illness, and the kind of health fascism
    which promotes the notion of the perfect body and which leads to
    obsessive concerns about physical ability, fitness and strength,
    body image and weight.
4.  That, as Emmet (1932/66, p. 217) summarises: 'order is always a
    balance on the verge of chaos ... the depth or intensity of order
    depends on the capacity to hold together diverse elements in
    experience as contrasts'. This acknowledges the inherent tension in
    organisms, and provides a link with chaos and complexity theory.

Thus, in its congruent, integrated state the human organism, as any
other organism, is more or less organised and unified from moment to
moment (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)). Lewin (1951/64, p. 101) makes a
similar point with regard to his preference for the term 'organisation':

<div>

Mathematically integration is the reverse of differentiation. However,
it has been rightly emphasized that psychological 'integration' does not
mean dedifferentiation. It may be better to replace this term by the
term 'organization.' This use of the term 'organization' seems to be
well in line with its use in embryology and also in sociology.

</div>

Before turning our attention to the specifics of process with regard to
organism, self and person, we want to remind ourselves and the reader of
the sheer complexity involved in order and organisation, organismic or
otherwise. Whitehead (1929/78, p. 108) reflects that:

<div>

All the life in the body is the life of the individual cells. There are
thus millions upon millions of centres of life in each animal body. So
what needs to be explained is not dissociation of personality but
unifying control, by reason of which we not only have unified behaviour,
which can be observed by others, but also consciousness of a unified
experience.

</div>

At times, and especially regarding the beginning of a human life, we may
focus on the risk that a foetus may not be 'perfect' and worry about the
statistical chances of there being something 'wrong' with it -- and, at
this stage, it is often referred to as 'it'! We may equally be amazed at
the chances and actuality of relative genetic and chromosomal order and
organisation. As Emmet (1932/66, p. 214) puts it: 'the miracle of a
living organism, is not dissociation, but *unified control '.* Peake
(1950) puts it more poetically: 'To live at all is miracle enough.' In
this sense the focus of the philosophy of the organism (Whitehead,
1929/78), the neurobiology of the organism (Goldstein, 1934/95), and the
psychology of the organism (Angyal, 1941; Raimy, 1943; Perls, 1947/69;
and Rogers, 1951, 1959b) promotes an appreciation of authenticity, order
and organisation from which we may develop an understanding of pathology
of the organism, self and person, grounded in an understanding of
alienation.

\

### Inauthenticity

\

In response to external threat, the human organism may become anxious.
In his 1959 paper, Rogers, to a certain extent, paralleled his
description of the cluster of terms around the concept of congruence
(see p. 156), with some terms describing incongruence or, more broadly,
inauthenticity. Browning (1966) views incongruence as estrangement and,
from a Christian theological perspective, describes it as a bondage (to
the self and its conditions of worth), and idolatrous (in absolutising
relative values). Here, we summarise the relevant terms and complete
this part of Rogers' framework.

- Incongruence -- defines or describes the state. It describes the
  discrepancy between the self as perceived and the actual experience of
  the organism.
- Closed to experience -- describes the way in which an internally
  incongruent individual meets new experience.

These represent two elements or continua in Rogers' (1958/67a) process
conception of psychotherapy (see [Appendix 3](#app3.xhtml)).

- Psychological maladjustment -- is incongruence as viewed from a social
  point of view. This exists (and here we combine Rogers' 1951 and 1959b
  definitions) when the organism denies to awareness or distorts in
  awareness significant sensory and visceral experiences which,
  consequently, are not accurately symbolised and organised into the
  gestalt of the self-structure. Schmid (2004, p. 39) takes this concept
  further, defining it as 'a deficit of relational authenticity'. He
  sees two types of deficit: autonomy deficit, the incongruence between
  self and experience; and relationship deficit, the incongruence
  between others as perceived and as they are. Drawing on
  Angyal's (1941) work, we recast this as:

  -- Autonomy deficit -- which describes the incongruence between self
  and experience.

  -- Homonomy deficit -- which describes the incongruence between self
  and self-in-relationship.

  -- Heteronomy deficit -- which describes the incongruence between self
  and differentiated 'Other', representing actual others or, more
  generally, difference.

- Intensionality -- is the term which describes the specific types of
  behaviour of an incongruent individual and, as Rogers (1959b, p. 205)
  describes it, is characterised by a person who tends 'to see
  experience in absolute and unconditional terms, to overgeneralize, to
  be dominated by concept or belief, to fail to anchor his reactions in
  space or time, to confuse fact and evaluation, to rely upon
  abstractions rather than reality-testing'.

- Immaturity -- describes the personality characteristics and behaviour
  of a person who is, in general, incongruent.

These terms describe rather than judge the inauthentic organism. Being
intensional or closed to experience is not bad or wrong. We want to
acknowledge the possibility and wisdom of being knowingly closed to some
kinds of experience. In this sense the ideal is not to be continuously
and gratuitously 'open', but to be discriminating about those
experiences to which we can be open. This view of authenticity and
alienation is akin to a psychodynamic perspective which values balanced
and mature defences.

Later in this chapter we elaborate this broad view of alienation and
inauthenticity in terms of organism, and self and person. This is
preceded by a discussion concerning process differentiation.

\

## Process differentiation {#c6.xhtml_clnk2}

This is defined by Swildens (2004, p. 16) as 'the diversification of the
client-centred attitude and its implementation on behalf of clients with
actual or supposed difficulties in receiving therapeutic interventions
in one or more phases of therapy'. There is currently a lively debate
within the person-centred and experiential therapeutic world in which
different 'tribes' take different stances on this (see Takens & Lietaer,
2004). The debate, in part, rests on therapists' view of diagnosis.

Rogers (1951) was opposed to the use of diagnostic labels applied to
psychological dynamics, viewing it as unnecessary, and detrimental to
the therapeutic process. Rogers' objection to diagnosis was twofold.
First, it places the locus of evaluation in the hands of experts which,
he argues, leads to a dependency in clients (1951, p. 224): 'there is a
degree of loss of personhood as the individual acquires the belief that
only the expert can accurately evaluate him, and that therefore the
measure of his personal worth lies in the hands of another'. Second,
diagnosis, for Rogers and others, has undesirable social and
philosophical implications, such as the diagnostician having control
over the client or patient, control which, ultimately, may take the form
of assessment, sectioning under mental health (illness) legislation, and
confinement.

A further note, which may be an objection for some, and a relief for
others, is that diagnosis changes over time. A study of the history of
diagnostic categories reveals considerable change over the past 100
years. Perhaps the most infamous example was the removal of
homosexuality from the APA's (1968) *DSM II* in the publication of its
third edition *(DSM III )* in 1980. In a brief review of the phenomenon
of hysterical syndromes, Swildens (2003, p. 8) comments about symptoms
and conditions which have disappeared and others which have taken their
place: 'Perhaps such fashionable renaming is not so much an expression
of a shift in psychopathology as a manifestation of the dominance of a
different school of therapy.' It seems that our view of what is
'neurotic' is more likely to change according to changing social mores
than what we refer to as 'psychotic', which seems more constant across
time and cultures. Some of our definitions of what is neurotic depend on
what is socially sanctioned or desirable. There is, for instance,
current concern about the extent to which the American health insurance
industry shapes the categorisation of disorders in the APA's *DSM.* We
think this is particularly important for person-centred therapists who,
in discussions with practitioners from other theoretical orientations
and other professions, as well as with clients, may take a less popular
but longer view of the usefulness of particular diagnostic
categorisations of symptoms.

Others since have followed and elaborated Rogers' lines of thinking. On
the basis that the primary purpose of diagnosis is to determine
treatment, Shlien (1989) argues that, since client-centred therapy has
only one 'treatment' for all clients, i.e. working in the context of the
necessary and sufficient therapeutic conditions, then diagnosis is
irrelevant. This has led to some criticism of person-centred therapy as
advancing a kind of therapeutic uniformity. Rogers (1951, pp. 223--4)
advances a number of prepositional statements regarding diagnosis,
concluding that:

<div>

Therapy is basically the experiencing of the inadequacies in old ways of
perceiving, the experiencing of new and more accurate perceptions, and
the recognition of significant relationships between perceptions.

In a very meaningful and accurate sense, therapy is diagnosis, and this
diagnosis is a process which goes on in the experience of the client,
rather than the intellect of the clinician.

</div>

In our view this is both a more moderate and more radical proposition
than the complete rejection of diagnosis. It is more moderate in that it
retains the concept of diagnosis, a position which, we believe, has led
to the recent elaboration of and debate about differential process. It
is more radical in that it clearly places the locus of evaluation and
control in the hands of the client. There is, for instance, a world and
a paradigm of difference between the statements 'The doctor sent me. I'm
depressed.' and 'I'm mad and I'm angry.' For Holland (1988) these
statements represent a shift from a functionalist to an interpretative
paradigm.

In the context of the dominance of the medical/psychiatric model this
person-centred attitude to diagnosis is counter-cultural. It can place
person-centred therapists outside of, or at least viewed with some
suspicion by, institutions such as the National Health Service in the
UK. In response, Tudor and Merry (2002) summarise three approaches to
diagnosis taken by person-centred practitioners:

1.  To eschew diagnosis completely -- as represented by Shlien (1989).
2.  To seek to understand other systems (medicine, psychology and other
    psychotherapeutic approaches) and their approaches to
    psychopathology, diagnosis, assessment and treatment, and to
    translate them into person-centred language, theory and concepts --
    for example, Speierer (1990) and Joseph and Worsley (2005).
3.  To develop a person-centred/experiential approach:
    i.  To 'illness', 'mental illness' and 'disorder', thus, illness as
        incongruence (Biermann-Ratjen, 1998; Speierer, 1996);
        person-centred theory and mental illness (Wilkins, 2005).
    ii. To psychodiagnosis and assessment (Fischer, 1989; Wilkins &
        Gill, 2003).
    iii. To specific 'conditions' such as borderline personality
         disorder (Bohart, 1990); fragile and dissociated process
         (Warner, 1991, 1998); neurosis (Lambers, 1994); depression
         (Catterall, 2005; Rowland, 2002; Schneider & Stiles, 1995);
         schizophrenic thought disorder (Warner, 2002); narcissistic
         defence (Swildens, 2004); psychotic functioning (Van Werde,
         2005); anti-social personality disorder (McCulloch, 2005);
         autism and Asperger's syndrome (Knibbs & Moran, 2005);
         post-traumatic stress (Joseph, 2005).

It is in elaborating these developments that differences have emerged
between what is characterised as a more classical person-centred therapy
and experiential therapy.

Proponents of process differentiation argue, as the term suggests, that
it is useful to differentiate a client's process. As we see (above),
Swildens writes about 'the diversification of the client-centred
attitude'. This implies that, depending on the client's process
(depressive, schizophrenic, border-line, narcissistic, and so on), the
therapist offers a diversified and differential response. If such
responses are framed in terms of more empathy for this client, more
congruence with regard to another, clearer boundaries for one, fewer for
another, then this would be clearly at odds with the principles of
person-centred therapy and, specifically, Rogers' therapeutic attitudes
or conditions (see [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml)), and the process of therapy
(see [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml)). Acknowledging the advances that
person-centred therapy has made with regard to understanding client
processes, and citing the work of Prouty (1994) and Warner (2000),
Mearns (2004, p. 98) argues: 'It is not that these client processes
demand particular therapeutic protocols additional to the principles of
person-centred working; rather, it is that these processes create
particularly demanding relationships in terms of communication,
engagement and trust.'

We think that the answer to what at times appears to be an impasse
between two polarised positions is summarised by three propositions:

1.  That the therapeutic relationship is a significant curative factor
    in psychotherapy. As Schmid (2004, p. 41) puts it: 'Since it is the
    relationship that facilitates the process of personalization,
    differentiated relationships are needed: each person-to-person
    relationship is different, otherwise it would not be a *personal*
    relationship.'
2.  That the most significant experience of differentiation is the
    client's. In other words, clients experience and, in various ways,
    construe their experience: one person is constantly suspicious of
    her neighbours, another isolates himself, a third experiences acute
    discomfort in close relationships, a fourth shows disregard for
    others, and so on. As therapists we may have a number of ways of
    conceptualising and understanding different differentiations. The
    ultimate test of these theories, however, is whether they help us to
    be empathic, and whether they help the client 'diagnose' herself
    (see Rogers, 1951). Of course our empathy for different clients is
    different -- because they're different, and because each therapeutic
    relationship is different. This perspective addresses the
    'uniformity myth' that person-centred therapy and therapists are the
    same. As Schmid (2004, p. 40) puts it, 'the therapeutic answer is:
    not uniform but unique'.
3.  That forms of therapy, such as pre-therapy, or therapeutic
    techniques (if used at all) are best conceptualised as forms of
    empathy, whether empathic understanding, empathic attunement,
    empathic responding, accurate empathy (Truax & Carkhuff, 1967),
    idiosyncratic empathy (Bozarth, 1984), or different levels (Truax &
    Carkhuff, 1967) or kinds of empathy (Neville, 1996). This
    reconceptualisation places such therapy with various forms of
    differentiated process, i.e. fragile (Warner, 1991), dissociated
    (Warner, 1998), psychotic, depressed (Rowland, 2002), and
    disconnected (Mearns & Cooper, 2005), at the heart of the
    person-centred therapeutic endeavour and process, rather than before
    it.

\

## Organismic disorganisation {#c6.xhtml_clnk3}

Based on the observation of people with brain injuries, Goldstein
(1934/95) formulates certain general rules which determine organismic
life. These include two classes of behaviour: ordered and disordered or
'catastrophic' (pp. 48--9):

<div>

In an ordered situation, responses appear to be constant, correct,
adequate to the organism to which they belong, and adequate to the
species and to the individuality of the organism, as well as to the
respective circumstances. The individual himself experiences them with a
feeling of smooth functioning, unconstraint, well-being, adjustment to
the world, and satisfaction, that is, the source of behavior has a
definite order, a total pattern in which all involved organismic factors
-- the mental and the somatic down to the physiochemical processes --
participate in a fashion appropriate to the performance in question.

</div>

Goldstein goes on (p. 49):

<div>

The 'catastrophic' reactions, on the other hand, are not only
'inadequate' but also disordered, inconstant, inconsistent, and embedded
in physical and mental shock. In these situations, the individual feels
himself unfree, buffeted, and vacillating. He experiences a shock
affecting not only his own person, but the surrounding world as well. He
is in that condition that we usually call anxiety.

</div>

If Goldstein's language appears polarised, the intention in his work and
a major theme of *The Organism* is the acknowledgement of the value of
pathology. This is partly because it illuminates health. Duff (1993, p.
33) suggests that 'illness is to health what dreams are to waking life
-- the reminder of what is forgotten, the bigger picture working towards
resolution'. This echoes another point which Goldstein makes about
rehabilitation: that being well means being capable of ordered behaviour
despite being ill, 'disordered' or impaired in some way. This represents
a two-continua concept of health/order and illness/disorder (see
Minister of National Health and Welfare, 1988; Tudor, 1996) and
addresses Schmid's point (p. 159) about being both authentic and ill.

According to Rogers (1959b, p. 204), 'anxiety is phenomenologically a
state of uneasiness or tension whose cause is unknown ... Anxiety is the
response of the organism to the "subception" that... discrepancy may
enter awareness, thus forcing a change in the self-concept.' This
catches the sense of the non-conscious and the implicit about organismic
disorganisation, from the mental and the somatic down to
micro-physiochemical processes. In organismic terms anxiety may be
expressed in terms of breathlessness, due to oxygen hunger; excitement,
marked by increased cardiac activity; and restlessness, represented by
increased motoric activity (see Perls, 1947/69). Whilst organismic
disorganisation may occur and operate internally on a microbiological
level, it is often expressed somatically:

- Internally, in terms of psychosomatic ailments such as back problems
  or irritable bowel syndrome.
- Externally, through the skin, for example, blushing, psoriasis.
- Externally, in terms of behaviour, such as forms of agitation.

Here, as an example of organismic disorganisation, we discuss the
disorder and experience of someone who compulsively overeats. This
disorder or disorganisation is widespread, particularly in the so-called
advanced economies in which, according to a number of reports, it is
reaching epidemic proportions. According to one website
([www.aplaceofhope.com](http://www.aplaceofhope.com)) between 10% and
15% of all Americans suffer from some type of serious eating disorder;
at least one third of all Americans are now considered to be obese; and
60% are clinically overweight. From an organismic perspective, we cannot
understand this outside of the particular environmental context. Thus,
it is no coincidence that this disorder is more prevalent in
industrialised societies as, in such societies, there is generally an
abundance of food available. In the case of anorexia nervosa, this is
coupled with expectations about attractiveness which is equated with
thinness (see APA, 1994). Compulsive overeating is defined when a person
consumes a large amount of food in a short period of time (less than two
hours), but does not engage in purging behaviour. It may include a
history of dieting, alternating with overeating. The 'compulsive' in
'compulsive eating disorder' refers to the fact that she (and this
disorder predominantly affects women) eats without regard to physical
cues signalling hunger or satisfaction. 'Eating' refers to a set of
eating habits, strategies regarding weight management, and attitudes
about weight and body shape. 'Disorder' refers to the degree of impact
of such actions, resulting in a loss of self-control; obsession,
anxiety, and guilt; alienation from self and others; and physiological
imbalances which are potentially life-threatening.

In her discussion of compulsive overeating, Barth (1991) sees four major
areas from self psychology which can contribute to a therapist's work
(see also [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)). We discuss these with reference to
organismic, person-centred psychology.

1.  The focus on self-esteem and self-cohesion. Both person-centred
    psychology and self psychology share a view that human beings strive
    for regard, from others and from self, and that we have a tendency
    to seek balance over time, one expression of which is self-cohesion
    (see Stern, 2000, and [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)). When we lose this, as
    organisms, we seek to compensate. In the short term, overeating
    helps to alleviate feelings of fragility, dissociation, confusion
    and self-hatred. Barth reports one client saying: 'It's better to
    hate yourself than not to have a self at all.'
2.  The view of symptoms as attempts to restore and/or maintain
    self-esteem and self-cohesion. This is consistent with an organismic
    view of symptoms (as we discuss in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)).
    Hartmann (1958) describes symptoms as not simply evidence of
    psychopathology, but also often evidence of an adaptive response to
    an unhealthy or pathological environment. Self-cohesion is, for
    Stern (1985, 2000), one of the experiences which comprises a sense
    of core self (see [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)) which, for us, is an
    aspect of the experiencing organism. Many people with eating
    disorders have difficulty in articulating their feelings which, from
    the perspective of both self psychology and person-centred
    psychology, is viewed as an adaptation to some aspects of their
    experience and, possibly, a developmental deficit.
3.  The use of empathy as a primary therapeutic tool. Given that many
    people with eating disorders are highly self-critical, a therapist's
    empathy may be a new, challenging and reparative experience. The use
    of empathy as a tool, condition or attitude is obviously familiar to
    the person-centred practitioner. Whilst Barth (op. cit.)
    acknowledges that Kohut didn't 'invent' empathy, like many other
    self psychologists, she omits Rogers from her resume of the concept
    and its development. One of the contributions of self psychology to
    our understanding of empathy has been its emphasis on the client's
    internalisation of the therapist's stance and the development of
    self-empathy. From a person-centred perspective Snyder (1994, p. 97)
    discusses self-empathy, which he defines as 'the attitude of
    compassion and curiosity regarding one's own experience that enables
    one to be simultaneously conscious of feelings and detached from
    them'. Barrett-Lennard (1997) explores this further.
4.  The concept of the self-object. For self psychologists, the client's
    ability to utilise the therapist's empathic attitude is part of the
    'self-object transference' (see [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)). Whilst the
    vocabulary and some of the concepts may differ between self
    psychology and person-centred psychology, the idea that the
    therapist may, for a time, fulfil certain needs for the client is,
    in our view, uncontentious. It is consistent with views about the
    process of empathy (Greenberg & Elliot, 1997; Stern, 1985, 1990);
    and with an acknowledgement of the importance of the client's
    empathy for themselves (Rogers, 1959b); in the context of group
    therapy, for each other (see Giesekus & Mente, 1986); and of the
    importance of the client's experience of empathy through contact in
    the therapeutic relationship (see Erskine, Mousund & Trautmann,
    1999). When we are, for instance, working with or thinking about a
    client with an eating disorder, we may think about this in terms of
    her self- or organismic regulation of self-esteem, feelings and
    behaviours.

\

### Organismic reorganisation

\

From the discussion about the somatic element of organismic
disorganisation (p. 167), it follows that 'organismic reorganisation', a
term Perls (1947/ 69) uses, also works -- and must work -- at a somatic
level. In the context of his process conception of psychotherapy, Rogers
(1958/67a) suggests that there is a certain physiological loosening at
what he identifies as the sixth stage of this process. He reports
moistness in the eyes and muscular relaxation, and hypothesises improved
circulation and improved conductivity of nervous impulses. He follows
this (p. 148) with a transcription of part of a therapy session. The
client has expressed the wish that his parents would die or disappear:

  -------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  *Client:*      They're somehow still so strong. I don't know. There's some umbilical -- I can almost feel it inside me -- swish *(and he gestures, plucking himself away by grasping at his navel.)*
  *Therapist:*   They really do have a hold on your umbilical cord.
  *Client:*      It's funny how real it feels ... It's like a burning sensation, kind of, and when they say something which makes me anxious I can feel it right here *( pointing).* I never thought of it quite that way.
  *Therapist:*   As though if there's a disturbance in the relationship between you, then you do just feel it as though it was a strain on your umbilicus.
  *Client:*      Yeah, kind of like in my gut here. It's so hard to define the feeling that I feel there.
  -------------- -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

It is this kind of therapeutic work, amongst other examples he cites,
that leads Fernald (2000) to assert that organismic experiencing is the
fundamental construct of the person-centred approach, and to claim
Rogers as a body-centred therapist. As Rogers (1953/67a, p. 103) himself
puts it: 'psychotherapy (at least client-centered therapy) is a process
whereby man becomes his organism -- without self-deception, without
distortion ... \[It\] seems to mean a getting back to sensory and
visceral experience.'

For instance, when a person experiences her whole body or a part of it
as either 'dead' or as not belonging to her, her thoughts and emotions
as not arising from her, and when her movements are not accompanied by
feelings of spontaneity, she may experience herself as influenced by
outside forces. For Angyal (1941, p. 116) such a 'loss of ego reference'

<div>

refers to a disturbance on the symbolic level. This complex of symptoms
indicates, however, that certain factors of the biological subject
organization are no longer under the government of the total organism,
but they have fallen out or become segregated from the biological total
process. They have been segregated possibly because they are
incompatible with the rest of the personality.

</div>

Laing (1965, p. 78) describes this as 'the schizoid condition' in which

<div>

there is a persistent scission between the self and the body. What the
individual regards as his true self is experienced as more or less
disembodied, and bodily experience and actions are in turn felt to be
part of the false-self system.

</div>

One example of therapeutic work with this experience state is reported
by Van Werde (2002). He describes his work with 'Henry', a patient who
believes that his internal organs have been relocated, and that the only
way to reorganise them is for him to fall down onto the floor heavily.
This was often accompanied by loud and disturbing screaming. Accepting
his frame of reference, and drawing on the theory and practice of
pre-therapy (see Prouty, 1994; Prouty, Van Werde & PÃ¶rtner, 2002), Van
Werde helps Henry to contact his feelings, with the result that his
falling and self-harming behaviour lessens.

Other approaches, especially some forms of gestalt and body
psychotherapy, take a more active, interventionist approach to such
reorganisation (see Perls, 1947/69; Staunton, 2002). Perls suggests (p.
73) an addition to the psychoanalytic rule of free association: that the
patient 'is expected to communicate everything he feels in his *body*
... A simple method of covering the whole organismic situation is to ask
the patient to convey to the analyst whatever he experiences mentally,
emotionally and *physically,'* Brown (1990, p. viii), a body
psychotherapist who first trained as a Rogerian therapist, for instance,
talks about change in terms of dissolving rigidities:

<div>

The positive change and growth process for us hinges upon the degree to
which the old rigidities, both energetic and characterological, are
dissolved and replaced by new forms of beingness-for-self and
beingness-for-others that attest to a more integrated differentiation
for the person's embodied soul.

</div>

However, Fernald (2000, p. 176) observes that Rogers' ultimate interest
is to facilitate organismic experiencing and that he does not push to
intensify or to regulate experiences: 'For Rogers the organic movement
of contracting or tightening are no less important than those of
expanding and loosening.' Although Rogers values fluidity (see [Chapters
2](#c2.xhtml) and [8](#c8.xhtml)), his empathic tracking of organismic
movement in whatever direction shows his commitment to a positive regard
which is unconditional of the direction of movement. Fernald's point
also echoes our own observations and assertions about the *descriptive*
nature of Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy (see [Appendix
3](#app3.xhtml)).

\

## Self disorder, personality disorder {#c6.xhtml_clnk4}

We discuss these together as we view them as two perspectives on the
same phenomenon of 'disorder'. In person-centred psychology, self is a
theoretical construct (see [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)) and personality is a
functional construct (see [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)). Whilst we may
understand 'self' as more reflexive and 'personality' as more social, we
cannot understand any form of psychopathology, inauthenticity or
alienation without considering both the *intra-*personal and the
interpersonal nature of its origins and development, unless it is
clearly organic. This view is echoed in recent and current thinking
about psychopathology in contributions from psychoanalysis, self
psychology and developmental psychology (see, for example, Masterson,
1988, and Ronningstam, 1998). The APA (2000) still uses the term
'personality disorder' and doesn't refer to self disorder. However, most
of the literature on personality disorders recasts them in terms of
'disorders of the self' or 'primary disorders of the self'. Also,
certain diagnostic categories such as dissociative identity disorder,
formerly multiple personality disorder, are being more accurately
described as dissociative self disorder. Swildens (2003, p. 9) suggests
that 'Self-pathology precedes interpersonally acquired guilt and the
ensuing guilt economy. At first, we are primarily preoccupied with
ourselves, and consequently of course with the important others who
contributed to the formation of our selves.' However, as we argued in
earlier chapters, and especially [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml), we cannot
understand 'self' outside of the interpersonal field. Self does not
precede personality. They are, rather, different ways of thinking about
different aspects or manifestations of the human organism.

We discussed Rogers' theory of development and, specifically,
self-development in [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml). Here, we take up the story
where we left it there, and describe the breakdown of that development,
in terms of: the development of incongruence, discrepancies in
behaviour, the experience of threat and the process of defence,
breakdown and disorganisation. Rogers (1959b, p. 224):

â'When *self-experiences* of the individual are discriminated by
significant others as being more or less worthy of *positive regard,*
then *self-regard* becomes similarly selective.'

Rogers uses the word 'when' rather than 'if' as he acknowledges that
this process is inevitable. The absence of any conditions of worth is a
hypothetical state in which (p. 244) 'the needs for *positive regard*
and *self-regard* would never be at variance with *organismic
evaluation',*

âWhen the individual avoids or seeks an experience solely because it is
less or more worthy of regard, by himself or others, then he acquires a
condition of worth or value: 'You're only OK, if you ...'

In moving away from 'that self which one truly is' Rogers (1960/1967)
identifies a tendency to move away from pleasing others and, similarly,
one away from meeting the expectations of others. Some years later, from
a transactional perspective, Kahler and his colleagues, who were
interested in the behavioural clues to such expectations and
conditionality, identified certain distinctive sets of behaviours,
expressed in words, tones, gestures, postures and facial expressions.
They listed five of these behaviour sequences: Be Perfect, Please
(others), Try Hard, Be Strong, and Hurry Up (Kahler & Capers, 1974;
Kahler, 1978).

â Because of the need for self-regard and the regard of others, the
individual perceives his experience selectively, in terms of the
external conditions of worth he internalises.

â In certain situations experiences which fit with his conditions of
worth are perceived and symbolised accurately: 'I did please her, and I
am OK'. Experiences which don't fit with such conditions are perceived
selectively and distorted: 'I didn't do that right, so I must be bad or
wrong' or 'There's no pleasing them'; are denied to awareness, as if 'I
shouldn't want that'; or ignored: 'What desire?' (see Rogers, 1951).

Rogers (ibid., p. 226) comments that 'from the time of the first
selective *perception* in terms *of conditions of worth,* the states *of
incongruence between self and experience, of psychological
maladjustment* and *of vulnerability,* exist to some degree'. Bozarth
(1998, p. 83) summarises this process: 'Conditionality is the bedrock of
Rogers' theory of pathology.'

Although distortion and denial are the two defence mechanisms generally
identified within person-centred psychology, a close reading of Rogers'
(1951) theory of personality and behaviour shows that he also refers to
those experiences which are ignored (p. 503) '*because there is no
perceived relationship to the self-structure'.* Despite identifying this
third defence mechanism, when he comes to represent the personality in
diagrammatic terms, Rogers omits this defence of ignoring or
'ignoration' (see Tudor & Merry, 2002). We consider this to be an
example of Rogers emphasising a self-referential view of the individual,
and discounting the impact of others in the phenomenal, environmental
field.

â Some experiences now occur in the organism which the person does not
recognise as self-experiences. He does not accurately symbolise them or
organise them into his self-structure.

â This leads to the development of discrepancies in behaviour which are
(Rogers, 1959b, p. 227) 'either unrecognized as self-experiences or
perceived in distorted or selective *fashion in such a way as to be
congruent with the* self'.

For Rogers, this describes the psychological basis for neurotic and
psychotic behaviours. Consistent with both his empiricism and his
phenomenological perspective (see [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml)), Rogers views
rationalisation, compensation, fantasy, paranoia, catatonia, and so on
as *behaviours.* In doing so, he cuts across the traditional conceptual
distinction between neurosis and psychosis, a point we discuss further
(below).

Rogers continues (p. 228): 'the incongruence between self and experience
is handled by the distorted perception of experience or behaviour, or by
the denial of experience ... or by some combination of distortion and
denial'.

â As the organism continues to function, an experience which is
incongruent is perceived or subceived as threatening.

This is because if the experience were perceived and symbolised
accurately, the self-concept would no longer be a consistent gestalt and
the person would feel more anxious. According to Rogers (p. 227), 'The
process of *defence* is the reaction which prevents these events from
occurring.' In other words: defences are there for protection. However,
the consequences of defensiveness are: rigidity of perception, an
inaccurate perception of reality, and 'intensionality', which Rogers
describes as the characteristic of a person in a defensive state:
perceiving his experience in absolute, unconditional and
over-generalised terms, and confusing fact with evaluation.

Rogers' theory of defence and, specifically, his use of the word
'threat' was influenced by the work of Hogan (1948). In defining anxiety
as a threat Rogers is agreeing with Adler, Goldstein, Horney and May in
viewing anxiety as a result of a threat to a value that an organism
holds as necessary for existence, as distinct from viewing threat as an
instinctual impulse.

â Finally, in this process, if the organism's process of defence is
unable to operate successfully, due to a large or significant degree of
incongruence, occurring suddenly or obviously, for instance, as a result
of a trauma, then a person will experience a state of disorganisation.

Rogers (ibid.) distinguishes between defensive and disorganised
behaviours. The distinction is based on a description of a gradual
process from discrepancy, threat and defence to a distinct point at
which a person's process of defence no longer holds. This experience and
concept of disorganisation includes many of the more 'irrational' and
'acute' psychotic behaviours. Rogers argues both that this is a more
fundamental classification than the neurotic--psychotic one, and that it
avoids the concepts of neurosis and psychosis being viewed as entities
in themselves.

Reflecting on this process towards disorganisation, Rogers suggests
that, once such acute psychotic behaviours have been exhibited, a
further process of defence sets in in order to protect the organism
against the painful awareness of such disorganisation. The process of
this defence, he tentatively suggests, is characterised by a switch
between the denied experiences and an altered self-concept being
'regnant'. This has echoes of Berne's (1961/1975) notion of different
ego states having at different times 'executive power'.

Most theories of personality propose a structure to the personality
(such as id, ego and superego) and, indeed, in his description and image
of the structure of the total personality ([Figure
6.1](#c6.xhtml_fig6.1)) Rogers (1951) also uses the language of
structure. The overlapping area in [Figure 6.1](#c6.xhtml_fig6.1)
represents that part of the personality which is congruent and
integrated, and the distance or gap between experience and
self-structure. We refer to the personality as being in tension, as that
is consistent with Rogers' view of the organism (see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)).

::: image
![0175_001](images/0175_001.jpg)

[*Figure 6.1* The total personality -- in tension (Rogers,
1951).]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.1}
:::

Although Rogers concludes his outline of a theory of personality and
behaviour with this figure, he frames the theory in terms of process.
Moreover, his description of self-structure and experience refers to an
'area' and a 'realm' of the phenomenal field. In this sense, his figure
of the total personality is a framework within which we may describe the
relationship between a person and their environment, including other
persons (see [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml)). Gendlin (1964) makes a similar
point when he argues that personality structure cannot explain
personality *change.* Structure arises out of process, a view which is
consistent with the principles of constructivism. Given that this figure
represents a process, we may use it to symbolise the authentic organism
([Figure 6.2](#c6.xhtml_fig6.2)) and, drawing on Rogers' distinction,
behaving defensively ([Figure 6.3](#c6.xhtml_fig6.3)) and in a
disorganised way ([Figure 6.4](#c6.xhtml_fig6.4)).

This description of the breakdown of self-development, an increasing
alienation from self, together with increasing disordered behaviour,
provides the person-centred therapist with a view of self pathology
which encompasses 'disorders of the self'. According to Kohut (1977) all
addictions to substances (food, alcohol, drugs), as well as to sex, aim
to fulfil the structural gap which ensues from having an insecurity
about the self and feelings of self-fragmentation. This may be viewed as
an example of Rogers' description of a gap between the experience of
fragmentation and a concept of self which doesn't allow of such
fragmentation.

In [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml) we refer to Clarkson and Lapworth's (1992)
interrelated concepts of self (wholeness, interpersonally developed, and
moving). Here we summarise the sense of experiencing a multiplicity of
selves and the concept of the true -- and false -- self.

::: image
![0176_001](images/0176_001.jpg)

[*Figure 6.2* The total personality -- when experience is symbolised
accurately.]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.2}
:::

::: image
![0176_002](images/0176_002.jpg)

[*Figure 6.3* The total personality -- defensive
behaviour.]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.3}
:::

::: image
![0176_003](images/0176_003.jpg)

[*Figure 6.4* The total personality -- disorganised
behaviour.]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.4}
:::

- 'I wasn't myself', 'He was beside himself with rage' -- These describe
  the sense of someone feeling, or witnessing someone feeling,
  dislocated. In the second case the subject is, as it were, standing
  somewhere else, 'beside' himself. In this description the person is
  dissociated, his rage is discounted and, possibly, his related
  behaviour is unowned, as in 'I couldn't help myself'. Being 'taken
  over' in some way (by drink, rage, anxiety or panic) implies that
  there are parts of the whole person which act independently or 'feel'
  independent. This may be thought of as false or compliant (see next
  point); such 'parts' certainly imply a multiple sense of self or a
  sense of multiple selves which, at an extreme, may be manifested in a
  multiple personality disorder or dissociative identity disorder. From
  a client-centred perspective, Warner (1998, 2000) identifies and
  discusses dissociated process, describing effective therapeutic work
  based on understanding and empathic connection with clients' multiple
  presentations.
- 'I'm not feeling myself today' and 'She's back to her old self' --
  Both these phrases imply a sense of a core or 'true' self, which a
  person may not be feeling today but which she can get back to. 'I'm so
  sorry. I don't know what came over me. That wasn't like me at all' --
  describes a sense of 'not me' or 'false self'. For Winnicott (1960/65)
  'me/not me' is an inevitable corollary of the sense of 'I am' and a
  necessary and important part of human development, one which has
  parallels in transactional analysis in the concept of impasse (see
  Mellor, 1980; Clarkson & Lapworth, 1992). The notion of the 'real me'
  goes back to James (see [Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml)) and, in the fields of
  psychiatry and psychotherapy, has been developed notably by Winnicott
  (1956/58, 1960/65) and later by Masterson (1988). The problem with the
  interrelated terms of true and false is that they not only posit a
  split in the self, but also one which implies a judgement of good and
  bad. It is echoed within person-centred literature by the unhelpful
  notion of the 'organismic self' (Seeman, 1983). Significantly
  Winnicott (1956/58) himself views the 'false self' as an aspect of the
  true self:

<div>

In the cases on which my work is based there has been what I call a true
self hidden, protected by a false self. This false self is no doubt an
aspect of the true self. It hides and protects it, and it reacts to the
adaptation failures and develops a pattern corresponding to the pattern
of environmental failure. In this way the true self is not involved in
the reacting, and so preserves a continuity of being. However, this
hidden true self suffers an impoverishment that derives from lack of
experience \[our emphasis\].

</div>

### Dependency-related 'disorder'

\

As an example of self disorder we discuss dependency-related disorder.
We think this is particularly interesting because, of all mammals, human
beings are born the least neurologically mature, with only 25% of adult
brain volume; develop the most slowly; and are, in comparison, the most
dependent for the longest period of time for nutritional, social and
emotional support. We may say that we are 'hard wired' for dependence,
and have to learn independence. In the early phases of human infancy,
social care is synonymous with physiological regulation (see [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)). From an organismic perspective which acknowledges the
importance and impact of the environment, any understanding of
dependence must consider the extent to which a person's environment was
in particularly active interchange with her as an infant.

The APA (2004, p. 665) defines dependent personality disorder as 'A
pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to
submissive or clinging behaviour and fears of separation, beginning by
early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts' as indicated by a
number of criteria (see [Box 6.1](#c6.xhtml_box6.1)). The wording and
tone of this description of diagnostic features is passive and blaming.
Whose 'need' is it anyway? Given the necessary early dependent
relationship between a primary caregiver and child, this could as easily
read: 'A pervasive and excessive need to take care of another that leads
to submissive or clinging behaviour and fears of separation in the
caregiver or child, or both.'

From an organismic perspective we argue that:

- Dependence has its origins in necessary and healthy development.
  Advice and reassurance (criterion 1), for instance, may be viewed as
  an expression of the unconditional positive regard of a significant
  other. Furthermore, as Angyal (1965/73, pp. 106--7) points out, though
  the word has taken on a pejorative meaning, dependence 'is one aspect
  of every community formation, an expression of the homonomous trend'.
  He continues: 'Only the dependence that expresses the neurotic feeling
  of helplessness, and consequently far exceeds the objective necessity
  for support, merits negative evaluation.'
- Dependence, therefore, begins in childhood and not in early adulthood.
  Furthermore, there are many examples of ways in which society, through
  its institutions, encourages dependency and discourages responsibility
  (criterion 2). In his critique of the education system, for instance,
  Gatto (2002) argues that schools themselves can become pathological,
  and that psychopathic schools encourage dependency and passivity. We
  see that this is also true of those psychotherapy and counselling
  trainings which infantilise adult learners or trainees.

  ::: box
  [*Box 6.1* Diagnostic criteria for dependent personality disorder
  (APA, 2000)]{#c6.xhtml_box6.1}

  **Diagnostic Criteria for 301.6 Dependent Personality Disorder**

  A pervasive and excessive need to be taken care of that leads to
  submissive or clinging behaviour and fears of separation, beginning by
  early adulthood and present in a variety of contexts as indicated by
  five (or more) of the following:

  1.  has difficulty making everyday decisions without an excessive
      amount of advice and reassurance from others
  2.  needs others to assume responsibility for most major areas of his
      or her life
  3.  has difficulty expressing disagreement with others because of fear
      of loss of support or approval. **Note:** Do not include realistic
      fears of retribution.
  4.  has difficulty initiating projects or doing things on his or her
      own (because of a lack of self-confidence in judgment or abilities
      rather than a lack of motivation or energy)
  5.  goes to excessive lengths to obtain nurturance and support from
      others, to the point of volunteering to do things that are
      unpleasant
  6.  feels uncomfortable or helpless when alone because of exaggerated
      fears of being unable to care for himself or herself
  7.  urgently seeks another relationship as a source of care and
      support when a close relationship ends
  8.  is unrealistically preoccupied with fears of being left to take
      care of himself or herself
  :::
- Each of the statements defining the criteria of dependent personality
  disorder may be turned around. Thus (criterion 3), if a child is not
  supported or approved of when expressing disagreement, then it is
  likely that she learns to be acquiescent, and thereby develops a
  condition of worth: 'I'm only OK if I keep quiet' (see p. 172). In
  this sense, each of the criteria statements, if turned around, may be
  viewed as describing a particular form of alienation, of a dependent
  process, which illustrates the process of defence, breakdown and
  disorganisation described above (pp. 172--4).
- Most of the statements carry some comparative qualifier (excessive,
  most, exaggerated, urgently, unrealistically) which implies or relies
  on a judgement about how the particular person functions and is in any
  case value-laden and culturally specific. From a person-centred
  perspective such a judgement can, ultimately, only be made by the
  'dependent' person herself, in the context of her environment.
- Dependence is co-created by the primary caregiver/s and significant
  others in a child's environment, and by how the child responds and is
  supported to respond. Thus the child may develop authentically or may
  express her alienation in the form of this 'disorder' or, more
  accurately, *process.*

In advancing this critique we are not denying the reality of what one
client referred to as being 'too dependent on others'. Laing (1965)
describes it poignantly, and phenomenologically, with regard to one
client who 'could not become a "person" '. He had ' "no self", "I am
only a response to other people, I have no identity of my own ... other
people supply me with my existence." '

\

### Narcissistic personality 'disorder'

\

The third example of 'disorder' we use to illustrate our approach to
psychopathology as alienation is narcissistic personality disorder,
which, following Lasch (1979), we think is still prevalent in Western
culture. The disorder or, as we prefer, 'process', takes its name from
the Greek myth of Narcissus.

According to myth, Narcissus was the son of a god, extremely handsome,
and admired by many. One of the women who loved Narcissus was a nymph
called Echo. Echo couldn't speak except to repeat what was said to her,
so she couldn't tell Narcissus that she loved him. One day, Narcissus
was walking in the woods with some friends. Having become separated from
them, he called out 'Is anyone here?' to which Echo replied: 'Here.
Here.' She stepped forward with open arms, but Narcissus refused to
accept her love. Echo was so upset that she went and hid in a cave, and
wasted away until nothing was left of her, except her voice. Nemesis, a
goddess, found out about this, and was very angry. She decided to punish
Narcissus by making him fall in love with himself. One day, when
Narcissus looked at his reflection in a pond, he fell in love with it.
He stayed, gazing at his reflection, until he too died, rooted to the
spot forever, and taking the form of a flower -- narcissus. In other
versions it is Aphrodite, the goddess of love, who curses Narcissus for
his rejection of romantic love.

As we reflect on this story, we may identify a number of elements:

1.  That Narcissus and others both perceived that he was extremely
    handsome and admired. There is a view that every Narcissus needs his
    or her Echo, but in most versions of the myth, the original
    Narcissus knew that he was handsome and admired before he saw his
    reflection. This hints at an earlier, developmental process by which
    he learnt to love himself rather than to love (an)other, and leads
    to an egotistical narcissism.
2.  That Echo couldn't speak her love to Narcissus acknowledges the fact
    that narcissism is co-created, in part by the withholding of love or
    of the communication of love. This process leads to a more
    dissociative narcissism.
3.  That, having become separated from his friends, it is significant
    that Narcissus calls out 'Is anyone here?' It would be more usual to
    say 'Is anyone there?' It's as if the movement towards relationship
    has to be initiated by the other, and even so may well be rejected.
    Fairbairn (1952) suggests that our greatest motivation is for
    contact and that, as a consequence of this, our greatest fear is of
    separation. Similarly, Symington (1993, p. 18) says that, as the
    self is inherently relational, 'the core of narcissism is a hatred
    of the relational ... and one of the ways that narcissism operates
    is to destroy separateness'.

In this sense narcissism is a form of alienation from
self-in-relationship.

According to Kohut (1971, p. 200) the particular affective experiences
of narcissistic disorders encompass a spectrum, 'ranging from anxious
grandiosity and excitement on the one hand to mild embarrassment and
self-consciousness or severe shame, hypochondria, and depression on the
other'. It is said that shame loves to hide, and many narcissists hide
their shame or fear of shame by being out in the open, often the centre
of attention, in the public gaze. A person may deal with a shaming
experience by becoming obsessive about himself: 'It's all about me.' The
classical 'features' of narcissism include: grandiosity;
self-importance, maintained by exaggeration of achievements and talents;
being 'special'; requiring excessive admiration; having a sense of
entitlement; being exploitative; lacking in empathy; envious; and
arrogant. From an holistic perspective, we see this inflation of self as
representing a loss of a sense of self as homonomous, and of a sense of
others in the relational field.

In the ordinary course of events a child's grandiosity and omnipotence
get deflated and challenged by the rough and tumble of life, and by
having to deal with others. Masterson (1981) argues that, in the case of
people who have a narcissistic disorder, this deflation didn't happen
and that this represents an arrest in the child's development. Schore
(1994), amongst others, locates the origins of narcissism in the
practising phase of child development, especially in transacting
reunions following stressful separations. Broucek (1982) identifies two
types of narcissism: an 'egotistical' type and a 'dissociative' type,
also described by Gabbard (1989) as 'oblivious' and 'hypervigilant',
respectively. This is important, as the *DSM-IV* fails to characterise
the latter type of narcissism, thereby misrepresenting the range of
narcissistic personality process. Schore (1994, p. 430) explains the
neurobiology of these emotional developments:

<div>

Due to psychobiological regulatory failures the high levels of positive
affect that fuel grandiose states are either underregulated or
overregulated. An insecure-resistant attachment interaction is a source
generator of egotistical narcissistic personalities who possess a
sympathetic-dominant limbic system, while an insecure-avoidant one
engenders dissociative narcissistic personalities.

</div>

Schore's focus on regulation is entirely consistent with the organismic
perspective developed in this present work (see especially [Chapter
2](#c2.xhtml)).

The person with an egotistical narcissistic process will often have been
reared by adoring, doting parents who have objectified their child, and
failed to provide enough realistic positive and negative evaluation to
support, as Broucek (1991, p. 60) puts it, 'some degree of tension
between the actual self and the idealized self'. From a person-centred
perspective, tension is inherent in the human organism: a fact and
necessity of life. However, as we note above (p. 174), it is the degree
and extent of tension which distinguishes defensive from disorganised
behaviours and personality processes (see Figures 6.3 and 6.4). In
narcissistic process, this is fuelled by the degree of idealisation,
initially from the mother or primary carer. One mother, informed about
her adult son's grandiosity and criminality, became misty-eyed, and
could only comment that 'He was such a lovely child, so loving and
artistic.' In this case, in the child's development, there was no
tension between mother and son, that is, no realistic evaluation of his
behaviour or early confrontation of his developing narcissism. In terms
of Rogers' (1951) personality theory, we would expect that the further
apart a person's experience is from his sense of self-structure, the
more extreme the sense of alienation and the more serious the
pathological process. However, this is to read [Figure
6.3](#c6.xhtml_fig6.3) in only one plane. In the case of narcissistic
process, the person's experience is more or less congruent with his
sense of self, as he does not let in or allow much, if any, feedback
from the environment which doesn't support his grandiosity. One example
of this is a person whose behaviour had breached codes of professional
and ethical conduct. Confronted by colleagues who were considering
taking action against him, he is reported to have said: 'Don't worry.
I'm going to complain about myself.' This kind of narcissistic process
is represented in [Figure 6.5](#c6.xhtml_fig6.5) in which the boundary
between the total personality and his environment is shown as thicker or
more rigidly defensive and impervious to feedback from the environment
of others. The rejection or deflection of such feedback maintains a
rigid, though coherent, sense of self-in-isolation.

An egotistical narcissistic process is, in effect, the result of an
overdose at a feeling level. Working with the adult narcissist, it is
important that the therapist is empathic and that this is experienced by
the client as relational. As the client allows himself to experience the
therapist's empathy, he also becomes more open to the evaluations of
others and thus experiences more dissonance between his experience (of
the therapist and others) and his sense of self.

::: image
![0183_001](images/0183_001.jpg)

[*Figure 6.5* The total personality -- egotistical narcissistic
process.]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.5}
:::

The dissociative type of narcissism, by contrast, is, for the child, the
result of being emotionally underwhelmed. Often, a parent who is
depressed does not provide sufficient positive vitality affects in
mirroring transactions, or help for the child to recover from his shame,
with the result that the child often has low self-esteem and diminished
energy. As both child and adult he becomes highly sensitive. In contrast
to the self-absorption of the egotistical narcissist, the attention of
the dissociative narcissist is continually directed towards others. One
client continually rejected his therapist's empathy, responding 'Yes,
but ...' to her every empathic response. No matter how hard the
therapist tried she '... got it wrong' and ended up feeling rejected,
blamed and de-skilled (see [Figure 6.6](#c6.xhtml_fig6.6)).

Both narcissistic processes are based on parental misattunement and lack
of regulation. Therapists working with narcissistic process experience
what is referred to in the literature as the client's 'narcissistic
rage'. The rage of the egotistical narcissistic process is more
explosive, and the dissociative process is more implosive. One way of
understanding this is that the client experiences the therapist's
responses as repetitions of the unempathic approach of his parent or
parents. Working with this process is hard for the therapist and, in
doing so, we find the following helpful to remember and sometimes hang
on to:

1.  That the client's rage is a communication of certain needs as
    perceived by the self.
2.  That the client's rage is a form of repair, in that, as a child, he
    could not be thus rageful or vengeful.
3.  That the client's rage is an attempt to create a more responsive
    other.

    ::: image
    ![0184_001](images/0184_001.jpg)
    [*Figure 6.6* The total personality -- dissociative narcissistic
    process.]{#c6.xhtml_fig6.6}
    :::
4.  That the very fact of being in therapy is highly evocative for the
    client as it involves some abandonment of his self-sufficiency, and
    this quite often leads to premature termination on the part of the
    client.
5.  That, often, and especially early on in therapy, the therapist needs
    to 'hang on', and maintain her empathic attitude.
6.  That empathy has been found to be particularly useful with
    narcissistic process, a treatment strategy also elaborated by Kohut
    (1977).
7.  That it is important that empathy is viewed and presented in a
    relational context. In this sense, as we argue throughout the book,
    we find the concept of homonomy especially useful. Autonomy, both as
    a value and a goal, can be used to support this pathological
    process, often in the form of a fierce and rigid self-sufficiency,
    from a place of mistrust, as if the client feels he'd be poisoned if
    he were to take in anything from somebody else. The concept of
    homonomy puts the client in a relational field, with the therapist.

One of the reasons we have focused on narcissistic process, apart from
the cultural perspective referred to above, is because therapy itself,
and therapists themselves, may be viewed as narcissistic (see [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml)). For person-centred therapists there is a danger that we
may be, or may be experienced as, 'too empathic'. As Hargaden puts it,
in a contribution to an internet discussion group
(relationalta@topica.com, 3 October, 2005): 'Therapy based on
person-centred or self-psychological perspectives, with their focus on
endlessly tolerating the client's needs for mirroring and twinship, can
sometimes seem to be quintessentially narcissistic.' Whilst we take
issue with Hargaden's use of the word 'endlessly' as, for us, that would
simply be bad therapy or misattunement, we think she has a point. She
continues: 'The consequence of this is that the therapist becomes
idealised, thus making client and therapist the "perfect" narcissistic
couple.' Of course, this critique applies equally to therapies which
rely on a transferential type of treatment. The notion that a client can
only be cured through the analysis of his projections onto the
therapist, places the analyst, and her reflective self-analysis, at the
centre of the treatment, with the client reduced to an echo. This said,
we find it heartening that in psychoanalytical circles there is an
increasing interest in empathy; in considering empathy and the client's
response as a test of the accuracy and effectiveness of interpretations;
and in the relational turn in therapy.

In this chapter we have reviewed three 'disorders' of our times. In
doing so we have sought to develop or begin to develop systematic and
genuinely person-centred descriptions of alienated and inauthentic
processes. With regard to the organismic disorder of compulsive eating
we drew on elements of a person-centred self psychology (see [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml)). With regard to a dependent 'self' disorder we offered a
critique of a particular psychiatric formulation, based on Rogers'
(1959) theory of self and personality development. With regard to
narcissistic personality processes, we offered an integration of a
holistic theory of neurotic process with more recent research in
neuroscience, framed in terms of Rogers' (1951) personality theory. The
selection of 'disorders' is significant in that, being 'of our times',
they may be clearly viewed as organismic and environmental. Finally, our
approach to their understanding offers a number of ways in which we may
further develop systematic descriptions of pathology, as an aid to
theory and practice.

\

### Self reintegration, personality integration

\

The process of self-reordering or reintegration is described by Rogers
(1959b, p. 230) as encompassing and requiring:

1.  a decrease in conditions of worth; and an increase in unconditional
    positive regard, and
2.  the unconditional positive regard of a significant other,
    communicated in a context of empathic understanding, with the
    consequent increase in the client's own unconditional positive
    self-regard, whereby threat is reduced, the process of defence
    reversed and '*experiences* customarily *threatening* are
    *accurately symbolized* and integrated into the *self concept'.*

A person's ability to integrate, specifically her mastery of her
environment and her perception of reality, was one of Jahoda's (1958)
criteria for mental health. Within person-centred literature, and
specifically with reference to the concept of the fully functioning
person, Seeman (1983, 1984) has written about 'personality integration'
(see [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)).

If conditionally is, as Bozarth (1998, p. 83) says, 'the bedrock of
Rogers' theory of pathology', then unconditionality is fundamental to
the process of reintegration. We need only reflect on our own
conditionality as therapists, and the conditionality of many
environments in the field of mental illness and psychiatry, to
appreciate the radical implications of this statement for therapeutic
practice and services (see Newnes, Holmes & Dunn, 1999, 2001). The
second point about the context of empathy is particularly pertinent in
the light of recent research in neuroscience concerning the impact and
benefits of empathy (see [Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and [4](#c4.xhtml)).

*Paula referred herself to a therapist, describing herself as 'too
dependent on others', and wanting some short-term therapy to resolve
this. She held a responsible job in a caring profession. She was,
however, anxious at work, one expression of which was that she tended to
over prepare, in an attempt to seek the approval of her managers,
unsuccessfully as it turned out. She lived with her parents, having
returned to the family home after college in which she had lived in
halls of residence. She had difficulty in making everyday decisions.
After a period of individual therapy she joined a therapy group in
which, initially, she would often represent the same issue or question,
seeking advice and reassurance from other group members. She was
generally pleasing, had a somewhat fixed smile, and, initially, rarely
disagreed with either her therapist or other group members. She had
difficulty in taking the initiative in relationships due to her lack of
self-confidence. She had a series of unfulfilling, casual relationships,
including one in which she was abused. However, she was reluctant to let
the particular man go as she experienced him as caring for her when he
was around. This need was partly fuelled by the fact that she felt
uncomfortable and helpless when alone. In diagnostic terms she fulfilled
the criteria for dependent personality disorder (APA, 2000).*

*Initially the therapy went well. The therapist liked Paula, and Paula
seemed to benefit from feeling acknowledged and supported. She joined a
group run by the therapist. Again, she felt supported by the therapist
and by the others members of the group, although she found any conflict
upsetting. After a while she seemed to be stuck: work was still
difficult, she was still living at home, and there were no signs of a
supportive partner. At this time the therapist realised that, in subtle
ways, he had been avoiding Paula and had been treating her somewhat
conditionally, favouring some of her decisions over others. He realised
that he needed to pay attention to her and to accept her need to depend
upon him. This led to a fruitful period of therapy during which the
therapist adopted some of the principles of sharing life therapy
(Stamatiadis, 1990), including shorter, more frequent individual
sessions, accepting phone calls from her, and so on. Over time and some
testing, this led to him experiencing an increase in unconditional
positive regard for her and an increase in Paula's own unconditional
positive self-regard. Gradually she came to feel less threatened by
others and was able to establish independent relationships with friends
and, eventually, a partner.*

A note on the pathology of organism, and self and person. In our
discussions of the 'pathology' of the organism, and self and person, we
have aimed to elaborate a person-centred description of inauthentic
process. We do not want to create another framework for the
categorisation of different forms of mental illness, disorder or disease
and specifically do not locate, for example, eating disorders as a form
of organismic disorganisation, and -- as we outlined earlier --
disorders of the self as only self disorders, and personality disorders
as only disordering of the person. Rather, from an organismic
perspective, we believe that any form of alienation, wherever it
originates, is likely to resonate in the whole person, organismically,
in relationship with herself, and with others in the context of their
environment. We do believe that it is important to acknowledge
differentiated processes and we see such processes, such as dependent
processes or narcissistic processes, as various and varied expressions
of the inauthenticity of organism, as well as the self and person.

\

## Environmental press {#c6.xhtml_clnk5}

Given the views we outline in [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml) concerning the
organism's tendency to actualise, it makes no sense to talk in terms of
a pathological tendency. However, it does make sense to consider the
ways in which external factors influence, support or thwart this
inherent organismic tendency. In this consideration we draw on Murray's
(1938) concept of 'press'. Although the concept of need had been widely
used in psychology before Murray, he was the first psychologist to
provide such a complete taxonomy of needs. Murray argues that whilst a
person's needs influence their motives, motives are also influenced by
external events. Just as the concept of need represents the significant
determinants of behaviour *within* the person, the concept of 'press'
refers to the significant determinants of behaviour in the *external*
environment (1938, p. 121): 'The *press* of an object is what it can *do
to the subject or for the subject* --- the power that it has to affect
the well-being of the subject in one way or another.' The connection
between press and motive (and implied behaviour) is illustrated by
examples in [Table 6.1](#c6.xhtml_tbl6_1). The examples of press are
adapted from Murray's original list.

Murray's concept of environmental press prefigures Lewin's (1952) force
field analysis of change, influenced by driving and restraining forces.
One example of environmental press might be when you're eating a
sandwich. As you finish the sandwich, someone comes in with a take-away.
Suddenly you don't feel satisfied. You lose interest in the sandwich and
start to crave for some of the take-away meal. The motive to eat has
been restimulated, not by a need but by a stimulus or press from the
environment. The slightly old-fashioned phrase 'May I press you to ...
another cake?' echoes the sense of external pressure, polite or
otherwise. In elaborating this concept, Murray distinguishes between
*beta press,* that is, the significance of environmental objects as a
person perceives them, and *alpha press,* that is, the properties of
those environmental objects as they exist objectively, such as
advertising -- and, indeed, the press!

\

[*Table 6.1* Examples of press and motive (developed from Murray,
1938)](c6_tbl1.xhtml){#c6.xhtml_tbl6_1}

In his book *The Clinical Treatment of the Problem Child,* Rogers (1939)
devotes one part to examples of the change of environment as a form of
treatment, in terms of the foster home, and institutional placement. He
does not, however, extend his acknowledgement of the therapeutic
significance of a change of environment to a theoretical level. Murray's
concept of press, by contrast, offers a (then) contemporary theoretical
elaboration of the significance of the environment in the context, as we
note in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml), of an appreciation of the organism. We
think this is significant in a number of ways:

1.  It provides the historical ground for other, more recent,
    considerations of the impact of the environment on the individual
    within person-centred therapy.
2.  It provides a different focus on the person in that the gaze of
    therapeutic enquiry is not only on the individual alone.
    Interestingly, one element of Murray's (op. cit., p. 156) definition
    of autonomy is 'To be independent and free to act according to
    impulse. To be unattached, unconditioned, irresponsible. To defy
    conventions.' The environment, in the form of the environmental
    press, and especially the *beta press* the person experiences or
    perceives, becomes equally the focus of a person (organism or
    environment)-centred therapy.
3.  It provides an environmental context to the organism's tendency to
    actualise, whatever form, twists and turns that takes. Rather than
    seeing the person or, for instance, his tendency to self-harm as a
    problem or the problem, the concept of press promotes an
    appreciation of the interpersonal, intersubjective and co-created
    relationship between the person and their environment. Both person
    and environment, as well as the relationship between them, form the
    figure and ground of therapy. We now turn to the conditions of that
    therapy.
:::::::::::::::::::::

[]{#c7.xhtml}

:::::::::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 7 Conditions

::: cite
It is as though he listened and such listening as his enfolds us in a
silence in which we begin to hear what we are meant to be.

Lao Tzu

Love received and love given comprise the best form of therapy.

Gordon Allport

The counselor, then, is one who is skilled in understanding human beings
and their perceptions and who provides the conditions under which change
in perceptions, and then self-initiated behavior change, can occur.

C.H. Patterson

The conditions serve to keep me on track when I tend to stray. Their
richness continues to edify me as I explore their meaning and
ramifications. Thus, I begin virtually all of my work by reviewing them.

Ned Gaylin
:::

In this chapter we narrate a history of each therapeutic condition. This
is consistent with what we've called our 'back to the future' approach,
and allows us to look again at the roots of each condition, identify
original understandings, track subsequent deviations and
misunderstandings, and consider the implications of any of this for
current and future practice. Although we have critiqued and, to some
extent, debunked the conditions, at least as far as their logical
necessity and sufficiency is concerned, we think it is important,
nevertheless, to examine them in some detail. We think this for a number
of reasons. Whether they are necessary or sufficient or not:

- They remain implicated in the process of effective therapy.
- They are central to much person-centred literature and thinking.
- They provide a framework for discussion and research within and
  outside person-centred therapy.

Before we do this we want to remind ourselves that we see the theory of
the conditions as a seminal rather than a technological theory. Given
this, the process of separating the conditions one from another is
necessarily artificial. They are, says Gaylin (2002, p. 340), 'an
integral whole, none separable from the others'. We separate them only
so as to enrich our understanding of the whole. We close this chapter by
looking again at the conditions as a whole, and at some of the ways in
which they live with and inform one another in the service of that
whole.

\

## Psychological contact {#c7.xhtml_clnk1}

Contact, or psychological contact, specifies for Rogers (1957) a
'minimal relationship', where (p. 96), each person 'makes some perceived
difference in the experiential field of the other'. Its sole function in
the theory seems to be to anchor his conviction, initially, at least,
that meaningful therapeutic change can happen only when two or more
people are in relationship. The human need for contact appears in the
work of theorists as diverse as Angyal (1941), where it is implicit in
the trend to homonomy; Fairbairn (1952), who views contact as the source
of our greatest motivation as humans; and Berne (1970/73), who wrote
about contact as a human hunger. Psychological contact, therefore, in
these terms, is a *sine qua non,* an absolutely necessary condition or
pre-condition. Gaylin (2002, p. 340) says that it 'has been virtually
overlooked', and that for him it's synonymous with relationship. Sanders
and Wyatt (2002, p. 8) describe it as 'a reciprocal interpersonal event,
symbolized in awareness'. Although we agree with them that it's both
interpersonal and reciprocal, we question whether it needs to be
symbolised in awareness. Our grounds for this come from Rogers, who
argues (1957, p. 96) that perception is probably not necessary, and that
it may be 'sufficient if each makes some "subceived\" difference'.
Disputing this, Sanders and Wyatt (2002, p. 7) refer to an 'overwhelming
body of scientific evidence' which they say militates against the notion
of subception, and they wonder why person-centred writers have ignored
this.

Rogers (1957, p. 100) defines psychological contact as a binary
phenomenon, by which he means that two people are either in
psychological contact, or they're not. In his 1959 paper (1959b, p. 215)
he says specifically that the other five conditions 'exist on continua',
implying that psychological contact, at least as he understands it, does
not. Others disagree. Mearns, for instance, asserts (1997, p. 17) that
'the phenomenological reality of psychological contact to both clients
and counsellors is that there are *degrees* of contact'. We wonder, in
the first instance, how anyone can assert another's phenomenological
reality dogmatically, as if it were an uncontested fact. We then need to
ask whether clients and counsellors do experience degrees of contact,
whether it's necessary or helpful to modify Rogers' original
formulation, and what it might add to our thinking or practice if we do.
We see no reason to complicate the idea of contact. We think it's
simpler, more elegant and more parsimonious to leave the notion as
Rogers defined it, and to agree instead degrees of empathic
understanding, unconditional acceptance, communication and perception.

This raises a number of questions, the first and most pressing of which
is why we would allow degrees of other conditions, and not psychological
contact. One answer to this is historical: because Rogers said so. He
notes (1959b, p. 207) that he originally used the word 'relationship' to
describe this condition, and found that this led to misunderstanding,
'for it was often understood to represent the depth and quality of a
good relationship, or a therapeutic relationship'. He means, rather, to
describe 'the *least* or minimum experience which could be called a
relationship'. A relationship, then, does not have to begin at depth,
nor to have therapeutic qualities from the beginning. Rogers argues
simply that therapeutic change starts in and from the existence of
relationship *per se,* rather than from any particular qualities of
particular relationships. He continues: 'If more than this simple
contact between two persons is intended, then the additional
characteristics of that contact are specified in the theory.' We think
that this is unambiguous, that Rogers saw psychological contact as a
binary precondition, and that the burden of argument rests therefore
with those who hold that psychological contact comes in degrees. We can
sum up our position at this point by saying that psychological contact
resembles electrical contact. All parts of a circuit need to be
connected before electricity can flow, and the switch that connects is
either on or off. Once the switch is on, electricity is flowing, and we
can harness its power for all manner of tasks. Likewise, once we are in
psychological contact the relationship is, so to speak, current, and all
manner of things are possible.

If we define psychological contact as the least that can be called a
relationship, then anything more of a relationship is, by definition,
something more than psychological contact. We need, therefore, other
terms to describe that something more. Rogers (1957, p. 96) says that
the remaining five conditions 'define the characteristics of the
relationship' which psychological contact allows. They offer ways of
describing the degrees of relationship between therapist and client, and
we suggest that they are precise enough, flexible enough, and open
enough to allow us to describe those relationships in as much detail as
they demand and deserve.

Rogers' inclusion of psychological contact as a *necessary* condition
raises a question for us: is a relationship between two people really
necessary for therapeutic change to occur? Bearing in mind our
examination of the notion of necessity in [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml), we are
asking whether therapeutic change can ever happen without psychological
contact. Rogers seems eventually to have asked himself a similar
question. In a chapter published after Rogers' death, Rogers and Sanford
(1989, p. 1484) give an example of therapeutic growth precipitated in a
man as he is reading, in a prison cell, on his own. Later in the same
chapter (p. 1492) they list five conditions as necessary for therapeutic
change to take place. Psychological contact is not one of them.

This makes sense to us. Although many people experience moments of
change within the immediacy of a relationship, there seems no reason why
those moments should necessarily occur *only* in relationship. To return
to our electrical analogy: there are some tasks that require
electricity, and some that we can achieve more efficiently or
effectively with electricity. Electricity, however, is not the only
source of power, and some of us, sometimes, cook with gas.

There's another argument for suggesting that psychological contact need
not be one of the six conditions. Watson (1984, p. 19) argues that if
the other conditions are present, then psychological contact can be
assumed and 'does not require its own operational definition'. We agree.
If a therapist is experiencing empathic understanding and unconditional
positive regard, and if a client is feeling understood and accepted,
then the two are necessarily in psychological contact. It's implied in
the other conditions and doesn't, therefore, need to be specified as a
separate condition.

In the last thirty years, some theorists and practitioners, working
within the person-centred approach and associated specifically with
experiential therapy, have developed a way of working which they refer
to as 'Pre-Therapy' (see Prouty, 1976, 1994; Van Werde, 1994, 1998).
They work with people, some of whom are hospitalised, who are
'pre-expressive', 'psychotic' or 'retarded'. Their work is based on the
theory of contact functions and behaviour, and the practice of contact
reflections, and, as such, is viewed by some as expanding the concept of
contact. The term 'pre-therapy' refers to the fact that they work with
clients who would normally be considered or thought of as not amenable
to therapy by virtue of their inability to make or sustain relationship.
Conceptually, we locate this work at stages 1 and 2 of Rogers'
(1958/67a) process conception of psychotherapy (see [Appendix
3](#app3.xhtml)). On these grounds, we understand this as a specialised
form of therapy, rather than 'pre'-therapy, and we see contact
reflections as particular forms of empathic responses.

\

## Client incongruence {#c7.xhtml_clnk2}

The notion of incongruence refers specifically to an incongruence or
inconsistency between experience and self, and captures the idea that
aspects of a person's experience and being may be at odds with one
another, with psychological, emotional and behavioural consequences. It
is, says Rogers (1957, p. 96), 'a basic construct in the theory we have
been developing' and 'refers to a discrepancy between the actual
experience of the organism and the self picture of the individual
insofar as it represents that experience'.

Incongruence is relatively unexamined and undeveloped as a theoretical
construct. Once he'd defined it, and despite the significance we think
it has for our understanding of psychological distress, Rogers paid less
attention to it as a condition in its own right than he did to some of
the other conditions. Subsequent writers have followed suit, to the
point that a recent series of books on the therapeutic conditions gives
congruence, empathic understanding and unconditional positive regard a
volume each, contact and perception a shared volume, and incongruence
nothing in its own right. There are exceptions. Drawing on the work of
Hellmuth Kaiser, and using his terms, Van Kalmthout and Pelgrim (1990,
p. 387) suggest that incongruence is a 'universal symptom', one of the
'perennial constants in human problems and their solutions'. Speierer
(1990) and Biermann-Ratjen (1996, 1998) also examine incongruence and
its relationship to psychopathology.

We think it's important to note that Rogers uses the term to describe a
particular kind of incongruence, between particular and named aspects of
a person's being: organismic experience and self picture. This
definition of incongruence is a precise one, and Brazier (1995, p. 221)
reminds us that we can't take all apparent inconsistencies as evidence
of incongruence:

<div>

When one is harmonious, one's outward manifestation in behaviour, facial
expression, speech and so on is all of a piece with one's inner
sentiments, beliefs and thoughts as they arise. However, what is
consistent and what is inconsistent is more a function of the depth of
perception of the observer than a description of the actual state of the
person in question.

</div>

Incongruence is one of the organism's ways of protecting itself. It is
not, therefore, in and of itself pathological. Biermann-Ratjen (1996,
1998) has described a process by which an organism (a) develops a
self-concept in response to its perception of what others think; and (b)
becomes incongruent as it defends against organismic experiences which
are then inconsistent with that self-concept. Although the development
of incongruence, then, has its roots in an organism's tendency to
preserve itself in the face of immediate threat, some of the longer-term
consequences of incongruence are unsettling or worse. 'There are' says
Speierer (1990, p. 339) 'no neuroses nor psychosomatic disorders without
incongruence.' This statement suggests that the notion of incongruence
helps to describe and explain how people become psychologically
distressed. It also paves the way for his later idea (1996, p. 300) that
client-centred therapy is, essentially, 'the treatment of incongruence',
and that its 'aims include the reduction of experienced incongruence,
the improvement of coping with incongruence, the improvement of the
ability to self-congruent experiencing, and the enlargement of
incongruence tolerance'.

Rogers (1957, p. 96) describes a client's incongruence as if it were a
fact: a client 'is in a state of incongruence, being vulnerable or
anxious'. In his 1959 paper he identifies three process elements of
incongruence: a general and generalised *vulnerability,* a dimly
perceived tension or *anxiety,* and an *awareness* of incongruence. We
think it's consistent with the otherwise phenomenological nature of
person-centred thinking and practice to emphasise especially a client's
*awareness* of incongruence. Just as psychological contact marks the
beginning of relationship, so a client's awareness of his own
incongruence marks the beginning of his search for health and healing.
Unless a client is aware that he's unhappy or distressed he's unlikely
to think about seeing a therapist. In that sense, we could argue that
such awareness precedes psychological contact, since without it a client
is unlikely even to find himself sitting with a therapist and available
for relationship. In Rogers' words (1958/67a, p. 132), such an
individual, unaware of his own incongruence, 'is not likely to come
voluntarily for therapy'. Putting a client's awareness of his own
incongruence first recognises that without it the therapeutic endeavour
doesn't even begin, and that the client is not only at the *centre* of
the process, but essential to the *beginning* of it. This is consistent
with the view, reported by Tony Merry (personal communication, 18 July
1999), that Rogers also regarded this condition as, in effect, a
pre-condition. Another way of saying this is that a client's awareness
of incongruence is, in strict terms, a necessary condition, a condition
without which therapy will not happen.

\

## Congruence {#c7.xhtml_clnk3}

Of the six conditions, congruence has probably generated the most
confusion, a confusion deepened by polemical and polarised arguments
about its place in theory and practice. On the one hand, for instance,
we have Thorne (1991, p. 189): 'Acceptance, empathy and congruence --
these three, as always, but the greatest and the most difficult and the
most exciting and the most challenging is congruence.' And on the other
we have Bozarth (2001, p. 189): 'When Rogers states that the conditions
may be separate and that congruence is the most important,
client-centered therapy no longer exists.'

We want first to distinguish between the term congruence and the idea
which the term describes, if only to expose the extent to which the idea
predates the term. The ideas of personal integrity and personal
involvement, and the idea that these qualities are therapeutically
helpful, predate the christening of those ideas with the name
congruence. Writing in the early 1930s Taft (1933, p. 21), whose work
Rogers read, says this:

<div>

In the last analysis, therapy as a qualitative affair must depend upon
the personal development of the therapist and his ability to use
consciously for the benefit of his client, the insight and
self-discipline which he has achieved in his own struggle to accept
self, life and time, as limited, and to be experienced fully only at the
cost of fear, pain and loss. I do not mean that knowledge is not
necessary, that technical skill is not necessary; they are, but they are
of no value therapeutically without the person. To make case work
therapeutic, incidentally or deliberately, one must be a therapist and
only to the extent that this is true are the relationships one sets up
therapeutic, regardless of the label, the number of visits or the
interpretation recorded in the dictation.

</div>

Although she doesn't use the term congruence, Taft is describing some of
the elements which we would now understand the term to cover. Implicit
in what she says here are the following ideas:

- Therapy depends first upon the therapist's 'personal development' and
  then upon her willingness to put the fruits of that development --
  'insight and self-discipline' -- at the service of her client. The
  person of the therapist is central to the therapeutic endeavour.
- The therapist's self-acceptance is important, and particularly her
  acceptance of personal limitations -- the 'struggle to accept self ...
  as limited'. This suggests a need for humility, and both knowledge and
  acceptance of our own limits.
- The therapist's 'life and time' are also limited, and she must accept
  this. In some ways this is a recognition of existential givens.
- The therapist needs 'knowledge' and 'skills', but it's not these that
  are therapeutically valuable. This reminds us of some of what Rogers
  and Bozarth, among others, have said about the relative non-importance
  of techniques in person-centred practice.
- The therapist must, above all, '*be* a therapist'. Taft italicises the
  verb. This echoes her own etymological assertion (1933, p. 3) that
  therapy is about waiting and serving rather than doing anything to
  anyone; it prefigures the later Rogerian and person-centred emphasis
  on therapy as a way of being rather than doing; and foreshadows
  Bozarth's assertion (2001, p. 197): 'The only goal of the
  client-centered therapist is to be a certain way.'

Writing in *Client-Centered Therapy* (1951, p. 76), Rogers has this to
say about congruence:

<div>

This experience of discovering within oneself present attitudes and
emotions which have been viscerally and physiologically experienced, but
which have never been recognized in consciousness, constitutes one of
the deepest and most significant phenomena of therapy.

</div>

We notice two things here:

1.  The word congruence doesn't appear in the index to that book, so we
    can assume that Rogers hadn't named it yet.
2.  He describes it as one of the outcomes of effective therapy for a
    client, and not as one of the conditions that it's necessary for a
    therapist to hold.

The structure of Rogers' later description of congruence is, though,
already in place and will be familiar to readers of his later work. He's
describing two worlds: a world of visceral and physiological experience,
and a world of recognition 'in consciousness'. He's saying that in
therapy those two worlds can become consistent one with the other, and
therefore implying that they are often not, that we may often be
experiencing feelings or sensations which we have not recognised in
consciousness, of which we are not aware.

Ellingham (2001) has articulated some of the problems with this way of
thinking about congruence. He points out that it borrows heavily from
the Freudian model, and that that in itself carries some implications
for person-centred practice. Freudian undertones aren't surprising if we
remember that Rogers credits Otto Rank, one of the first generation of
psychoanalysts, as an early and significant influence. Although Rank
broke with Freud in the mid 1920s, his influence on Rogers puts Rogers
only one handshake away from Freud; for more on this, see Kramer (1995).

Later in *Client-Centered Therapy,* Rogers articulates nineteen
propositions, the fifteenth of which (p. 513) argues as follows:

<div>

Psychological adjustment exists when the concept of the self is such
that all the sensory and visceral experiences of the organism are, or
may be, assimilated on a symbolic level into a consistent relationship
with the concept of the self.

</div>

This resembles the earlier quotation: it posits the same two worlds and
sees the still un-named congruence as describing the psychological
adjustment of the client rather than a necessary characteristic of the
therapist. Both of these quotations suggest that Rogers approached
congruence initially from the perspective of what it shows the therapist
about the client. This is interesting given that eighteen years earlier
Taft had insisted that the therapist needed to be psychologically
well-adjusted, not that the client would get to be. We notice also (a)
that Rogers says 'are, or may be'; and (b) that he talks about
assimilating 'on a symbolic level'. The first point relates to that
strand of Rogers' thinking about congruence which argues that it's
enough that experience be 'available to awareness'. The second point
looks forward to his increasingly common usage of the idea of
symbolising. We'll look at that in more detail shortly. Rogers hasn't
yet broached the idea of communicating congruence. He's also still
talking about congruence as an outcome for the client, and as an
internal process.

Within a year or two, Rogers (1959b, p. 214) is using the word
congruence to describe an accurate matching of experience with
awareness:

<div>

The 'growing edge' of this portion of the theory has to do with point 3,
the congruence or genuineness of the therapist in the relationship. This
means that the therapist's symbolization of his own experience in the
relationship must be accurate, if therapy is to be most effective. Thus
if he is experiencing threat and discomfort in the relationship, and is
aware only of an acceptance and understanding, then he is not congruent
in the relationship and therapy will suffer. It seems important that he
should accurately 'be himself' in the relationship, whatever the self of
that moment may be.

</div>

Although not published until 1959, this paper was written by the end of
1954 (see Rogers & Hart, 1970), and was certainly available at the same
time as the 1957 paper was published (see [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml)). This
is interesting because some people still talk about the 1957 paper as if
it precedes the 1959 paper, and make assumptions therefore that the 1959
paper represents a development in Rogers' thinking over the 1957 paper.

So, by 1954 Rogers is using the word congruence to describe the
therapist's wholeness or integrity. He's still describing it in terms of
the relationship between two worlds, the world of experience and the
world of awareness. And, acknowledging a debt to Angyal, he's using the
word symbolisation to describe the process by which congruence is
attained. Elsewhere in this paper Rogers (1959b, p. 198) defines
accurate symbolisation as the state in which the 'symbols which
constitute our awareness... match, or correspond to, the "real"
experience, or to "reality\"'.

A symbol is something which stands for something else. The most obvious
symbol is a word, which is a sound that stands for a thing, a something
else. The word cup is not the thing cup. The word cup allows us to
communicate about the thing cup. The word anger is not the experience
anger. The word anger, if we have it, allows us to symbolise the
experience anger in awareness, and to communicate the experience. Put
words together and you have an elaborate and sophisticated network of
symbols called language, with which we can (a) articulate our experience
to ourselves and (b) communicate it to others.

So, congruent is what we are when we have symbolised, or given a name
to, our experiences, when we can say that this or this or this is what
we're feeling or experiencing. It seems reasonable to infer from what
Rogers writes that the symbols we make for our experience, the words we
use to describe our experience to ourselves, should be both accurate and
adequate: accurate to the nature of whatever we're experiencing; and
adequate to its complexity and subtlety.

Rogers stresses five times (!) in the four sentences of this one
paragraph that he is talking about the therapist's congruence 'in the
relationship'. He argues later in this paper (1959b, p. 215) and again
in the 1957 paper that he does not expect any therapist to be 'a
completely congruent person at all times'.

In the next paragraph, Rogers addresses the issue of communication, and
suggests that there are two sets of circumstances in which a therapist
might choose to communicate his or her feelings:

1.  'if the therapist finds himself persistently focused on his own
    feelings rather than those of the client, thus greatly reducing or
    eliminating any experience of empathic understanding', and
2.  if the therapist is 'persistently experiencing some feeling other
    than unconditional positive regard'.

There are a number of implications to draw out here:

- Rogers' default position at this time seems to be that the demand of
  congruence covers the relationship between experience and awareness
  only. It is primarily an internal process that provides the basis or
  preparation for authentic empathic understanding and unconditional
  positive regard. The requirement to be congruent does not normally
  need to extend to communication. This is the position Bozarth arrives
  at in 1996 and develops (2001, p. 197) five years later:

  <div>

  The only goal of the client-centered therapist is to be a certain way.
  This way of being entails being congruent in the relationship in order
  to experience unconditional positive regard towards, and empathic
  understanding of, the client's frame of reference.

  </div>
- In his formal, if-then, description of the conditions, Rogers does not
  say that communication is necessary (or sufficient). We can infer from
  this that he at least, at that time, did not see a therapist's
  communication of his or her experience as ordinarily necessary for the
  process of therapy. It would have been easy for Rogers to say that
  communication was necessary. He didn't.
- There are defined circumstances where communication is indicated:
  where a therapist's feelings 'persistently' (and Rogers uses this word
  in each of the two exceptions he describes) impede or occlude his or
  her experience of empathic understanding or unconditional positive
  regard.
- In those circumstances where a therapist may communicate from his or
  her own experience, Rogers talks specifically about a therapist
  communicating feelings, rather than thoughts, ideas or imaginings.

Later in the 1959 paper, Rogers formulates what he calls 'a tentative
law of interpersonal relationships'. He describes it as a theory deduced
from the theory of therapy, and as 'a theory in the making, rather than
a finished product'. He sees therapy relationships as special examples
of interpersonal relationships. Speaking explicitly about interpersonal
relationships (rather than therapy relationships) he says this (p. 240)
about congruent communication:

<div>

the greater the communicated congruence of experience, awareness, and
behavior on the part of one individual, the more the ensuing
relationship will involve a tendency toward reciprocal communication
with the same qualities, mutually accurate understanding of the
communications, improved psychological adjustment and functioning in
both parties, and mutual satisfaction in the relationship.

</div>

Writing again about relationships generally, rather than about therapy
relationships specifically, and building on the established notion that
congruence covers experience and awareness, Rogers suggests (1961/67a,
p. 339) that we might extend it 'to cover a matching of experience,
awareness and communication'.

If 'communicated congruence' is so beneficial in interpersonal
relationships, why is Rogers so cautious about allowing, endorsing or
encouraging it in therapy relationships? We don't have an answer to
this, although we note that Rogers identified different kinds of
relationships, within which different qualities were relatively more
important. In a paper originally published in 1975 he describes
(1975/80, p. 160) three kinds of relationship, each of which calls for a
particular quality from the helper or therapist:

- What Rogers calls 'the ordinary interactions of life -- between
  marital and sex partners, between teacher and student, employer and
  employee, or between colleagues or friends' demand congruence, or 'the
  straightforward expression of personally owned feelings -- both
  negative and positive'. In these relationships 'congruence is a basis
  for living together in a climate of realness'.
- Other 'nonverbal relationships -- between parent and infant, therapist
  and mute psychotic, physician and very ill patient' call for 'a
  nurturing climate in which delicate, tentative new thoughts and
  productive processes can emerge'.
- Other relationships where one person is 'hurting, confused, troubled,
  anxious, alienated, terrified, or when he or she is doubtful of
  self-worth, uncertain as to identity' call for a 'deep understanding'
  which he believes is 'the most precious gift one can give to another'.

There's a lot to draw out here. Rogers talks in the first paragraph
about 'the ordinary interactions of life'. What follows suggests that he
does not include therapeutic relationships as ordinary: they are
extra-ordinary, separate, different. The second paragraph describes what
we might call extreme relationships, of the sort that, Prouty, Warner
and Van Werde have written about. The third paragraph seems to us to be
the one that most clearly describes what most of us would recognise as a
therapeutic relationship. And Rogers is saying that in this particular
kind of relationship, empathic understanding is most important.

Even where he allows for the explicit communication of awareness, Rogers
counsels caution. 'There is' he says (1961/67a, p. 341) 'an important
corollary of the construct of congruence which is not at all obvious':

<div>

If an individual is at this moment entirely congruent, his actual
physiological experience being accurately represented in his awareness,
and his communication being accurately congruent with his awareness,
then his communication could never contain an expression of an external
fact.

</div>

This is an extraordinary statement, simple, obvious and profound. If we
are describing our awareness of our *experience,* rather than our
perception or our observation, we can speak only of what we feel rather
than of facts about the other person, his world or the world in general.
This has obvious implications for practice.

\

## Unconditional positive regard {#c7.xhtml_clnk4}

Rogers (1959b, p. 208) describes unconditional positive regard as 'one
of the key constructs of the theory'. Bozarth's (2001) history of the
idea begins in 1940, and refers briefly to Freud, Rank, Allen and Taft
as intellectual forerunners. We think that Taft is especially
significant. She describes (1933, p. v) a shift in her own thinking over
the course of twenty-five years, a shift that takes her away from seeing
therapy as 'a reform of the \"other" through superior knowledge of life
and psychology' towards 'a therapy which is purely individual,
non-moral, non-scientific, non-intellectual, which can take place only
when divorced from all hint of control, unless it be the therapist's
control of himself in the therapeutic situation'.

This interests us on two counts:

1.  It describes a movement away from broadly psychodynamic therapy,
    which privileges the authority of the therapist, to a broadly
    humanistic therapy, which privileges the authority of the client.
2.  It prefigures some of Rogers' thinking, and especially the notion of
    non-judgemental acceptance or unconditional positive regard.

Taft's own description of her work with two children includes examples
of radical unconditionality which we think is challenging to her clients
and challenging even now to us. She describes (1933, p. 60) working in a
third-floor room with 7-year-old Helen. Helen 'has her toes resting on
the middle frame work of the lower sash and the rest of her is out of
the window':

<div>

'Helen, if you fall out on your head, it's not my fault,' I say in a
most indifferent tone of voice.

'Whose fault will it be?' she asks.

'It's going to be yours. There is nothing I can do about it; just fall
if you want to.'

I am much surprised to find that she responds by being very careful.

</div>

Whatever we may think now about such practice, Taft is clearly offering
Helen a profoundly challenging level of unconditional acceptance, up to
and including an acceptance of her right to hurt herself.

Gaylin (2002, p. 344) suggests that unconditional positive regard really
describes two conditions:

1.  unconditionality, or 'a non-judgmental stance', and
2.  positive regard, or a degree of 'caring, or love'.

This reading makes explicit ideas which are implicit in Rogers' own
description. In the first and third of three paragraphs, Rogers (1959b,
p. 208) draws attention to the unconditional aspect of the idea, saying
that it involves perceiving the other person 'in such a way that no
self-experience can be discriminated as more or less worthy of positive
regard than any other'. In other words, unconditional positive regard
involves responding to any and all of a client's self-experiences
even-handedly, valuing all experiences equally, embracing what we might
see as resistance as willingly as we would embrace any apparent
enthusiasm to grow, and expressions of affection as easily as overt
hostility. The message to a client is not that whatever he thinks or
feels or does is OK, but that no one thing he thinks or feels or does is
more or less valuable or acceptable than any one other. The middle
paragraph takes the word 'prizing' from Dewey, adds the word
'acceptance' and suggests that both are 'synonymous with unconditional
positive regard'. In other words, unconditional positive regard carries
connotations of approval, warmth, and appreciation. If we conflate these
two strands, we see that unconditional positive regard involves
accepting, appreciating and acknowledging a client equally and without
bias across the whole range of her experiences, whatever we might think
or feel about them from our own perspective.

This is clearly a counsel of perfection, and Rogers acknowledges as much
in a footnote (1957, p. 98n):

<div>

The phrase 'unconditional positive regard' may be an unfortunate one,
since it sounds like an absolute, an all or nothing dispositional
concept. It is probably evident from the description that completely
unconditional positive regard would never exist except in theory.

</div>

Nevertheless, as Fernald (2000) points out (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)),
such radical acceptance elicits deep organismic experiencing.

Rogers (ibid., p. 98) goes on to say that effective therapists probably
experience such regard for their clients 'during many moments' of their
contact with them, and that they are also likely to experience from time
to time 'a conditional positive regard' and perhaps at times 'a negative
regard'. 'It is' he concludes 'in this sense that unconditional positive
regard exists as a matter of degree in any relationship.' Having heard
students and colleagues berate themselves for their failure to offer
their clients completely unconditional positive regard at all times, we
think this footnote deserves wider exposure.

Bozarth (1996) argues with conviction that a client's experience of her
therapist's unconditional positive regard for her is the agent of
therapeutic change. A client who experiences herself as unconditionally
accepted is challenged to examine whatever conditions she grew up
believing she had to meet in order to be accepted. She is then in a
position to live her life moment to moment on the basis of what she
knows is right for her, rather than on the basis of what she believes
she has to do if she wants to stay acceptable. We describe this
experience as a challenge for a number of reasons. In the first place,
an experience of unconditional positive regard challenges whatever
previous experiences a client may have of being conditionally loved and
accepted. This may mean she has to review her feelings towards and
relationships with those who have loved and accepted her conditionally
over the years. It also challenges whatever rules or habits she may have
evolved so as to stay acceptable, and leaves her having to decide for
herself how to live. Unconditional positive regard sounds like a
wonderful and positive experience to offer, and to receive, and in many
ways it is. It is also, as Bozarth argues, a potent agent of change, and
as such it precipitates processes that question the status quo and
demand new responses to life. A client who feels herself to be genuinely
and consistently accepted without having to meet any conditions is
challenged to review her history, her decisions, her picture of who she
is and the way in which she is living. We think it's important to
recognise that the offering of an apparently warm and benign acceptance
can precipitate such an inherently unsettling process. This view of
unconditional positive regard as the basis of change is akin to the
paradoxical theory of change in gestalt psychology which states
(Beisser, 1970/2004, p. 103) '*that change occurs when one becomes what
he is, not when he tries to become what he is not'.*

Speaking to camera before meeting Gloria, Rogers says a little about how
he works and about what he thinks makes for effective therapy (Shostrom,
1965). He says that we might fairly call unconditional positive regard a
kind of 'non-possessive love'. This makes sense to us. The qualities of
unconditional positive regard as Rogers and others have described them
do add up to a kind of loving: attentive, permissive, accepting. In this
sense, Rogers made room for love within therapeutic relationships, even
if his own ambition or reticence, or the strictures of academic
psychology in 1950s America, made it difficult for him to use the word.
Stickley and Freshwater (2002, p. 252) take a more critical view:

<div>

If Rogers' concept of unconditional positive regard actually equals
love, as we are led to believe, it could be argued that Rogers has done
much to exorcise the term from the vocabulary of the therapy world.
Unconditional positive regard may easily be viewed as a skill, or
technique, which diminishes the potency of love in its original form.

</div>

We think this is harsh. It fails to recognise the context within and
against which Rogers was writing, and pays more attention to terminology
than to practice. We agree that unconditional positive regard is an ugly
phrase, that it sounds heartless and technical, and that it can invite
heartless and technical application. In practice, however, it demands,
legitimises and makes room for a kind of loving within the process of
therapeutic relationships.

\

## Empathic understanding {#c7.xhtml_clnk5}

Empathic understanding stands in a tradition of psychology that seeks to
understand rather than to explain, a tradition which has its roots in
the work of Wilhelm Dilthey (1833--1911) who argued in 1894 for a
descriptive and analytic psychology. In this sense, empathic
understanding is an explicitly phenomenological concept. This reflects
the then contemporary use of the term to describe aesthetic experience
in and in response to various art forms (see Hunsdahl, 1967). Our
emotional responses to a piece of art are, in effect, empathic
projections onto an object, a work, an event or a person. Earlier, in
1858, Johann Droysen (1804--1884) was the first to contrast
'understanding' *(Verstehen)* with 'explanation' *(Erklaren)* (see Van
Belle, in press, 2005). This distinction underpins the concept of
empathic understanding in person-centred therapy, and distinguishes
person-centred therapy from therapies which seek to analyse, interpret
or explain.

Rogers (1959b, p. 210) says that empathic understanding means 'to
perceive the internal frame of reference of another with accuracy, and
with the emotional components and meanings which pertain thereto, as if
one were the other person, but without ever losing the "as if"
condition'. On the basis that this condition describes an act of
perceiving, some commentators, such as Hackney (1978), question whether
this condition fulfils Rogers' own ambition (1959b, p. 246) to provide
'operationally definable constructs' and (1957, p. 95) 'terms which are
clearly defined and measurable'. Such commentators, however, ignore
Rogers' (1959b) views on theory and research and, specifically, his
elaboration of the problem of measurement and quantification. Whilst
arguing for a continuing programme of theory and research which (p. 251)
'would meet the rigorous requirements of the logic of science', Rogers
also questions the logical positivist approach in which he was reared in
favour of the phenomenon of subjectivity. Nevertheless, some
researchers, notably Truax and Carkhuff, together and separately (Truax
& Carkhuff, 1965; Truax, 1970; Carkhuff, 1971) have elaborated the
second element of Rogers' condition of empathic understanding: that of
communication to the client. Hackney (1978) views this as a distinction
between the process and outcome of empathy.

Bozarth (1996, p. 48) has argued that empathic understanding is 'the
vessel' which carries a therapist's experience of unconditional positive
regard, by which he means that it both manifests and communicates a
therapist's unconditional acceptance of her client. 'It appears' he
continues 'that this is the only pure way that Rogers believed
unconditional positive regard could be perceived by the client.'
Communicating empathic understanding, then, is what a therapist mainly
does, at least in visible behavioural terms.

Although many therapists talk about 'feeling' empathic, we recognise
that it is a cognitive process as well as an affective one. This is
represented by Wexler (1974) who, with others, chose cognitive learning
psychology as a theoretical framework for developing the person-centred
approach. He views an empathic response (p. 97) as deliberate and
organised:

<div>

when it is optimal, an empathic response is a structure or group of
structures that more fully captures, and better organizes, the meaning
of the information in the field that the client is processing than had
the structure(s) the client had generated himself.

</div>

A recent research review (Bachelor & Horvath, 1999) reports one study
finding that 44% of clients interviewed valued a cognitive-type empathic
response.

In a discussion of the difference between affect attunement and empathy,
Stern (1985, p. 145) identifies four distinct and probably sequential,
cognitive processes to empathy: '(1) the resonance of feeling state; (2)
the abstraction of empathic knowledge from the experience of emotional
resonance; (3) the integration of abstracted empathic knowledge into an
empathic response; and (4) a transient role identification'. Bohart and
Greenberg (1997) cite Tausch's (1988) research comparing the therapy
responses of Rogers with those of a cognitive therapist. They observe
(p. 21) that 'Rogers' empathic responses were more balanced, with about
two thirds focusing predominantly on cognitive aspects of the client's
experiences and one third on emotion or on both cognition and emotion.'
Greenberg and Elliot (1997) expand the notion of understanding,
identifying, in addition to this, four forms of empathic responding:
evocation, exploration, conjecture and interpretation. As Tudor and
Merry (2002, p. 46) put it:

<div>

The process of therapy can, through appropriate resonance, response and
checking out of understanding by the therapist, become a genuine
dialogue in which client and therapist engage in a search for deeper
levels of understanding of the client's experiencing process and
internal frame of reference.

</div>

Accurate empathic understanding seems to be potent in two ways. The
first is that it helps clients identify, clarify and then symbolise or
find words for the nuances of their own experience. This is consistent
with what Rogers writes (1951, p. 223) about diagnosis: that 'the
purpose of the therapist is to provide the conditions in which the
client is able to make, to experience, and to accept the diagnosis of
the psychogenic aspects of his maladjustment'. The second way in which
empathy is potent follows from this. A client who feels himself
accurately understood and still accepted feels less alienated, less
alone, and more related to another human being. In 1954 Rogers
(1954/67a, p. 358) describes it thus:

<div>

If I say that I 'accept' you, but know nothing of you, this is a shallow
acceptance indeed, and you realize that it may change if I actually come
to know you. But if I understand you empathically, see you and what you
are feeling and doing from your point of view, enter your private world
and see it as it appears to you -- and still accept you -- then this is
safety indeed. In this climate you can permit your real self to emerge,
and to express itself in varied and novel formings as it relates to the
world.

</div>

In 1986 he puts it this way (p. 129):

<div>

To my mind, empathy is in itself a healing agent. It is one of the most
potent aspects of therapy, because it releases, it confirms, it brings
even the most frightened client into the human race. If a person can be
understood, he or she belongs.

</div>

We can understand more fully the significance of this aspect of
empathy's power if we refer back to Angyal, who explored (1941, p. 182)
the concept of homonomy: 'the tendency to conform to, unite with,
participate in, and fit into superindividual wholes'. He suggests that
this tendency, this urge to belong to a something larger than oneself,
is 'a source of profound motivation for human behavior'. Empathic
understanding, then, is one way of satisfying this urge, for both
therapist and client. When one understands the other, both belong to
something larger and more inclusive than either one of them
individually.

This way of thinking helps to explain why empathic understanding
enriches both client and therapist. Rogers articulates both the risks
and the riches of understanding another person. 'If I let myself really
understand another person,' he writes (1953/67b, p. 18), 'I might be
changed by that understanding. And we all fear change.' In her
discussion of empathy, Afuape (2004) echoes this view of its reciprocal
nature, and asserts that its basis in the emotional and the intuitive
makes it a subjective and fluid response rather than an 'objective'
condition.

Of course, Rogers was not alone in promoting the power and efficacy of
empathy. He was preceded by Freud (1916/73), and theorists and
clinicians from other schools have also used and developed the concept:
Moreno in psychodrama; Jaspers, the existential psychoanalyst; Winnicott
(1965) in object relations; and, as we discussed in [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml), Kohut in self psychology. Angyal (1965/73, p. 290)
references Rogers explicitly:

<div>

With patients whose emotions are not, or no longer, completely submerged
or falsified, a sensitive recognition of all their feelings by the
therapist can do much to increase the patient's awareness of his mental
states. Because of this greater differentiation, and also because the
therapist naturally resonates to genuine undistorted feelings, this
process also furthers their growth. This is one reason why reflection of
feelings advocated and practiced by Rogers and his followers often
proves so effective.

</div>

The contributions of a number of theoretical orientations to
reconsidering empathy have been brought together in a volume edited by
Bohart and Greenberg (1997). In an otherwise excellent collection, in
their own introduction, the editors (Bohart & Greenberg, 1997) somewhat
undermine their credibility by perpetuating a common misunderstanding of
the conditions by referring to the 'core conditions' only as 'necessary
and sufficient'. As we note in [Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and
[4](#c4.xhtml), research in the fields of neuroscience and infant
development generally supports the importance of empathy in terms of
limbic resonance and in sparking relationship, originally between mother
or primary care-giver and child. Schore (1994) discusses the emergence
of empathy and its importance in altruistic behaviour, viewing this (p.
351) as 'an essential prerequisite to later social and moral
development'. We see this most in therapeutic groups in which group
members are able to express empathy for each other (see Giesekus &
Mente, 1986). Yalom (1995) sees such altruism as one of the curative
factors in group psychotherapy. Recently, Sayers (2004) argues that:

<div>

Empathy, however, is crucial in therapy not only as a means by which
therapists become aware of, and correct their failed empathy. It is also
crucial as a means of investigating and researching into the unknown and
unconscious factors contributing to the discontents bringing people into
therapy.

</div>

Citing Rogers, Sayers emphasises the value of empathy as an object of
neuropsychological, philosophical and psychotherapy research as well as
a mirroring, receptive and projective means of enabling self-knowledge.

\

## Client perception {#c7.xhtml_clnk6}

In his 1959 paper (p. 213), Rogers' sixth condition is formulated thus:
'That the client perceives, at least to a minimal degree, conditions 4
and 5, the unconditional positive regard of the therapist for him, and
the empathic understanding of the therapist.' In the 1957 paper, Rogers
says (p. 99) that: 'The communication to the client of the therapist's
empathic understanding and unconditional positive regard is to a minimal
degree achieved.' Van Belle (in press, 2005) outlines the philosophical
traditions which support the importance of prizing and understanding
others:

<div>

to practice Person-Centered therapy with success one must prize the
otherness of others and believe in the importance of empathizing with,
or understanding others. One needs to believe in the importance of
indwelling a person's personal frame of reference rather than logically
dissecting his or her mind for expert treatment. This is the legacy of
Romanticism and Anti-Positivism in Person-Centered therapy.

</div>

Whether we emphasise the client's perception or the therapist's
communication, this is the most significant condition, and the condition
by which the process of therapy stands or falls. It is, for Rogers
(1958/67a, p. 130), the *assumed* condition:

<div>

I shall assume that the client experiences himself as being fully
received. By this I mean that whatever his feelings -- fear, despair,
insecurity, anger, whatever his mode of expression -- silence, gestures,
tears or words; whatever he finds himself being in this moment, he
senses that he is psychologically received, just as he is, by the
therapist. There is implied in this term the concept of being
understood, empathically, and the concept of acceptance. It is also well
to point out that it is the client's experience of this condition which
makes it optimal, not merely the fact of its existence in the therapist.

</div>

'The organism' says Rogers (1951, p. 484) 'reacts to the field as it is
experienced and perceived. This perceptual field is, for the individual,
\"reality\".' This has a number of clear implications for the process
and practice of therapy. In the context of the six conditions it
provides a rationale for suggesting that this sixth condition, a
client's own experience and perception of her own therapy, is the most
significant determining factor of its effectiveness. Therapy depends not
on the skill of the therapist, nor on particular responses, nor even on
the quality of the therapeutic relationship. In so far as it depends on
any of these things at all, it depends specifically on the way his
client experiences and perceives them, because his client's experiencing
and perceiving constitute her reality. It may sometimes seem that we
simply 'take in' the world as it exists. However, our perceptual
processing is more complex than that. Pally (2000, p. 19) describes how
the brain actively constructs perceptions thus:

<div>

Contrary to popular belief, the brain does not operate like a camera
taking in a whole scene, but operates more like a feature detector. The
brain detects the individual stimulus features of the environment such
as edges, contour, line orientation, colour, form, pitch, volume and
movement and processes them in separate regions of the cortex. There is
no place in the brain 'where it all comes together' as a whole image. To
create a perception, the brain takes a pattern of neuronal activity
created by the simultaneous processing of all these individual
environmental features and compares it with patterns stored in the
memory. When a match for the current pattern is found, perception
occurs. The vast majority of perception occurs non-consciously.

</div>

Whilst this highlights the importance of the therapeutic environment and
perhaps calls us as therapists to be mindful of our own consistency in
terms of edge, decor, aesthetics, tone, movement and expression, it also
offers a relief, in that we can't possibly control or determine the
environmental conditions, therapeutic or otherwise. One therapist worked
from two different settings and rooms which were, to all intents and
purposes, quite different in terms of structure, decoration, and
objects. The feedback from clients, however, was consistent: that 'the
room', 'this place' was calming. Whilst the clients expressed themselves
about the room and the place, what we understand from how we construct
perceptions is that they were drawing on much more and, perhaps, much
more to do with the therapist, than they were aware of.

This sixth condition puts the client at the centre of the process and
outcome of therapy. Clinical research cited by Miller, Hubble and Duncan
(1995) indicates that the client is the single most potent factor in
therapy, contributing 40% to the outcome of therapy. Because this
condition is so important in terms of the process and outcome of
therapy, we discuss this further in the next chapter on process. Very
little has been written about this condition. One exception to this is a
paper by Toukmanian (2002) in which she emphasises perception as the
core element in person-centred and experiential psychotherapies. Tudor
(2000) refers to this, together with conditions 1 and 2, as 'the lost
conditions'.

\

## Other conditions {#c7.xhtml_clnk7}

For as long as people have been helping others professionally and, more
specifically, offering psychotherapy, there has been an interest in
knowing and researching what works. Rogers' own development of the
theory of therapeutic conditions was an attempt to describe,
operationalise and, ultimately, evidence the conditions of therapy and
of therapeutic change. McLeod (2003, p. 150) assesses Rogers and his
colleagues' work as the 'single most important programme of research
into therapeutic process'. He identifies two reasons for this: 'Firstly,
it pioneered many research methods that have subsequently been widely
adopted. Secondly, it used research to test and develop theory in a
systematic manner.' Although, to a large extent, the concern and focus
of research has moved away from the therapeutic conditions (a discussion
we pick up in the next section), practitioners and writers within the
approach still addressed 'conditions' of therapy. In this section we
consider a number of writers since Rogers who have suggested other
conditions that seem to them to be necessary for therapeutic growth to
occur.

- Thorne (1991c, p. 74) suggests 'tenderness', not so much as an
  addition to the established conditions, nor even 'to make them more
  effective'. He proposes simply that 'if tenderness is present,
  something qualitatively different may occur'.

- Rebutting critiques of person-centred practice, and reviewing the
  three therapist conditions of congruence, empathy and unconditional
  positive regard, Natiello (1987, p. 204) suggests that 'the concept of
  therapist personal power underlying the approach is so integral to its
  successful practice that it might be considered a fourth condition'.

- Mearns (1990) suggests 'sufficiency of therapeutic context' as a
  condition for effective therapy.

- In a paper published in 1986, Rogers (1986/90, p. 137) describes
  another characteristic of his work:

  <div>

  when I am at my best, as a group facilitator or a therapist... when I
  am closest to my inner, intuitive self, when I am somehow in touch
  with the unknown in me, when perhaps I am in a slightly altered state
  of consciousness in the relationship, then whatever I seem to do seems
  full of healing. Then simply my presence is releasing and helpful.
  There is nothing I can do to force this experience, but when I can
  relax and be close to the transcendental core of me ... at those
  moments it seems that my inner spirit has reached out and touched the
  inner spirit of the other.

  </div>

  Thorne (1992) proposes this as a fourth condition, in addition to the
  three 'core conditions', an argument which we refute as we don't see
  how presence, as Rogers describes it, however desirable, can be a
  *condition* of therapy (see Tudor & Worrall, 1994).

- Taking a different slant on the conditions, Land (1996, p. 73) says
  this:

  <div>

  I have decided that there is only one necessary and sufficient
  attitude or predisposition or condition which I can intentionally and
  rather consistently bring to therapy. Everything else unfolds
  naturally or is discovered or experienced or invented along the way.
  (The only efficient cause of therapy, of course, is the client's own
  ability and choice to change for the better, although clients and
  therapists clearly need each other.) That one attitude which I can
  intentionally bring and which I know the client surely needs from me
  is a sustained and generous interest.

  </div>

  Land acknowledges that whatever a therapist brings to the therapeutic
  endeavour is limited to the context and occurrence of that endeavour,
  and that ultimately success in therapy depends more upon the resources
  of the client than upon anything the therapist does. Bozarth's
  findings (1998, p. 19) support this idea: 'The data increasingly point
  to "the active client" and the individuality of the client as the core
  of successful therapy.' Additionally, Land's idea is broad enough to
  allow for any number of idiosyncratic and emergent manifestations, and
  in some ways takes us back to the pragmatism that Rogers describes as
  characteristic of his own early practice, where the only question
  worth asking was whether something worked.

- In [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml) we discuss creativity as an important
  process outcome, and the inner conditions necessary for creativity.
  Here, briefly, we discuss the external conditions which Rogers
  identifies as important. His ideas about creativity are not well
  known. They have been taken up by some, most notably his daughter in
  her work on creative and expressive therapy (N. Rogers, 1993/2000).
  Rogers identifies two conditions which foster creativity:
  1.  Psychological safety. This, in turn, is established by three
      processes:

      a.  Accepting the individual as of unconditional worth.
      b.  Providing a climate in which external evaluation is absent.
      c.  Understanding empathically.

      It is important to note, from a therapeutic perspective, that this
      is concerned with providing the conditions under which people may
      feel 'safe', rather than attempting to guarantee or ensure safety
      which, in our view, is impossible.

  2.  Psychological freedom and permissiveness -- of *symbolic*
      expression. It is this emphasis on symbolic expression which
      Natalie Rogers has taken forward in her use of the expressive arts
      in healing.

      Natalie Rogers (1993/2000) has added a third condition:

  3.  Offering stimulating and challenging experiences. Whilst the first
      two conditions may be viewed as the provision of the soil and
      nutrients for creativity, this third, external condition is
      offered by the therapist/facilitator in a more active way. The
      expressive therapist may offer suggestions to the client designed
      to stimulate and challenge: 'I suggest using chalks with your
      fingers rather than painting with a brush.' These suggestions are
      meant to facilitate expression rather than to direct a client's
      experience. The stimulation of movement, dance, drawing, sculpting
      and so on are also supported by Gardner's (1983/93) work on
      multiple intelligences.

\

## The conditions: An holistic view {#c7.xhtml_clnk8}

Having reviewed the conditions separately we consider their
interrelationship and them as a whole. First we comment on the
ubiquitous use of the term the 'core conditions'.

\

### The 'core conditions'

\

Before we advance a theory, it is sometimes necessary to state what the
theory is not. The term 'core conditions' seems to have been coined by
Carkhuff (1969a, 1969b) who used it in the context of identifying 'core,
facilitative and action-oriented conditions' from divergent orientations
to therapy by which the helper facilitated change in the client (or
'helpee'). In addition to empathic understanding, respect and
genuineness, these included: specific emphasis on emotional
experiencing, concreteness in problem solving, the ability to confront
and the ability to interpret the helping relationship. The term '*the*
core conditions' was taken up by people much closer to Rogers than
Carkhuff (G. Barrett-Lennard, personal communication, 17 May 1999) and
applied to three of the six necessary and sufficient conditions and,
although Rogers himself did not use the term, it has nevertheless since
become part of the person-centred lexicon. Truax and Carkhuff (1967)
refer to the three conditions as 'central therapeutic ingredients',
whilst Shlien and Levant (1984) refer to them as 'the facilitative
conditions'.

Carkhuff, Truax and, most notably, Egan, all of whom refer to 'core
conditions' and are often claimed to be 'person-centred', laid the
ground for a human relations *technology* enterprise which, whilst
popularising these conditions and attitudes, has in effect also moved a
long way from the spirit and substance of Rogers' thought and
person-centred practice. Most importantly, the theoretical denial and
distortion of this central hypothesis of person-centred therapy and,
specifically, the nature of the therapeutic relationship, perpetuates a
reduced version of the approach and confirms a partial and insufficient
view of person-centred therapy. This has, at worst, led to successive
generations of students of person-centred therapy perceiving that it
lacks conceptual completeness and theoretical integrity. This
misunderstanding has led to a number of problems:

1.  The view that the 'core conditions' alone are necessary and
    sufficient.
2.  The view that, by naming them together, they are the same in nature.
3.  The view that they are, in some way, 'core' or at the heart of this
    theory and, more broadly, the person-centred approach.
4.  The corollary, that the other three conditions are less 'core' or
    central.

\

### Reconditioning the conditions

\

From the preceding discussion we note a number of clarifications to the
theory of the therapeutic conditions:

- That there are therapist conditions (1, 3, 4 and 5) and client
  conditions (1, 2 and 6). This acknowledges the active involvement of
  the client in the facilitative healing of therapy. It may also explain
  Rogers' apparent reference to the 'core conditions' as necessary and
  sufficient attitudes *on the part of the therapist,* whilst reserving
  discussion of the six conditions as a theoretical statement about
  relationships (Merry, personal communication, 18 July 1999).

- That client incongruence is more accurately formulated and placed as a
  precondition. Arguably, the view that the client is herself both
  necessary and sufficient makes her the only condition of the
  therapeutic process.

- That there is an important difference between the therapist's
  condition of congruence on the one hand and those of unconditional
  positive regard and empathic understanding on the other. The
  difference is that the client needs to perceive the latter two
  (Rogers, 1959b) or that the therapist needs to communicate them
  (Rogers, 1957) for the 'if-then' formulation to be fulfilled. In our
  view, this makes congruence the quiet condition, whereas both
  therapist and client need to be more active and explicit about
  communicating, experiencing and perceiving the other two conditions.

  From these two points together we can re-present the conditions thus:

  ::: image
  ![0214_001](images/0214_001.jpg)
  :::

- That the central or 'assumed' condition is the client's perception.
  This radical emphasis on the client's report and reality is, in
  practice, missing from most accounts of the therapeutic process and
  relationship. Significantly *Client-Centered Therapy* (Rogers, 1951)
  contains a long chapter which draws on clients' diaries to describe
  the relationship 'as experienced by the client'. In it Rogers cites an
  article by Axline (1950), a close colleague, who invited clients to
  write descriptions of their experiences. More recently, Duncan and
  Moynihan's (1994) outcome research utilises the client's frame of
  reference. For further references to client experiences of therapy see
  [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml).

\

### From conditions to relationship

\

Rogers' use of the term 'conditions' supports his 'if-then' formulation
of theory which was developed in a particular historical, philosophical
and theoretical context designed within and to appeal to the prevailing
logical positivist view of science and research methodology. We know
that Rogers himself (1959b), although actively engaged in such research,
also questioned its limitations, specifically from a subjective,
phenomenological perspective. Interestingly, the main ideas in the
facilitative-conditions model have informed and been assimilated into
research about the therapeutic alliance (Bordin, 1979; Hovarth &
Greenberg, 1986) and the therapeutic relationship (Gelso & Carter,
1985). A review of the process-outcome literature in psychotherapy and
counselling (Orlinsky, Grawe & Parks, 1994), involving the collation of
results of more than 2000 studies concluded:

- That the quality of the client's participation in therapy is the most
  important determinant of outcome.
- That the therapeutic bond, especially as perceived by the client, is
  important in mediating the link between process and outcome.
- That the therapist's contribution towards helping the client is made
  mainly through empathic, affirmative, collaborative and self-congruent
  engagement with the client.

McLeod (2003) acknowledges the resemblance between these conclusions and
Rogers' facilitative conditions and points out (p. 165) what he views as
three aspects of process missing from this comparison: 'the type of
contract between therapist and client, the active participation of the
client, and the active use of interventions by the therapist'. In
response to this, we think:

1.  That any therapeutic contract needs to follow contact between client
    and therapist, and to be understood in terms of the principles,
    theory and conditions of person-centred therapy (see Worrall, 1997).
    In any case, in his early works, Rogers discusses the practicalities
    of therapy, including contractual issues such as boundaries and time
    (Rogers, 1942; Rogers & Wallen, 1946).
2.  That the active participation of the client is implied in this
    current rereading of the therapeutic conditions; and that we should
    also be mindful of creating and reifying 'activity' as a condition
    of therapeutic worth.
3.  That the same is true of the relative activity of the therapist; and
    that the concept of 'interventions', let alone 'active
    interventions', is itself a construct (see Warner, 2000a).

This said, one of the implications of the language of a therapeutic
conditions model is that it implies a somewhat linear 'if-then' process
with the therapist 'doing unto' the client, and the client being, at
worst, the passive recipient of the therapist's love and understanding.
This supports the view of some person-centred practitioners that they
'do' or 'provide' congruence or empathy, as if these conditions were a
pill or remedy to be given *per diem* or, more likely, weekly. In order
to rectify this, we present the conditions in a relational context, by
drawing on person-centred personality theory (see [Figure
7.1](#c7.xhtml_fig7.1)). This has a number of advantages:

- Both therapist and client are described as total personalities (after
  Rogers, 1951). The therapist's conditions are seen as they are:
  located within and emanating from her personality and, ideally, from
  that part which is congruent and integrated in relationship. Equally,
  the client 'receives' these conditions (or not) within the context of
  his personality and the relationship as he experiences it, in the
  field as he perceives it.
- It illustrates Rogers' (1959b) point that conditions 2 to 6 are each
  on a continuum. We view this not as an abstract continuum but one
  which is located in the experience and, therefore, the personality of
  the participants in the therapeutic encounter.
- Both psychological contact (condition 1) and 'being received'
  (condition 6) are experienced directly and congruently or, in some
  way, distorted or denied. In his relationship inventory
  Barrett-Lennard (1962, 1978) discusses the intensity and intimacy of
  interpersonal contact. In his presentation the client's experience of
  being received or, more actively, of experiencing the therapist's love
  and understanding (condition 6), is more closely linked to this
  interpersonal contact (condition 1) in a kind of feedback loop. Given
  that Rogers saw psychological contact as binary, and given what he
  said about unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding,
  we argue that a client's *perception* that he is loved and understood
  results more from his therapist's love and understanding than from the
  nature or 'depth' of contact.
- Viewing the conditions in the context of person-centred personality
  theory also illustrates more clearly the dynamic between the therapist
  offering unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding and
  the client's experience or perception of these (or not). The client
  needs to have some self-regard and some regard for the therapist's
  regard, some empathy for themselves and some empathy for the
  therapist's empathy in order to experience or perceive these
  conditions. This is borne out by more recent studies of child
  development which emphasise the developmental and interpersonal
  necessity for the child to experience and give love and empathy (see
  [Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and [4](#c4.xhtml) and Stern, 1985, 2000).

Finally, there is a further and significant theoretical movement
represented by this re-working of the therapeutic conditions model which
takes us from the therapeutic relationship as noun to therapeutic
relating as an active verb. This keeps the process of therapy active,
alive, mutual and cocreative, qualities which we explore in the next
chapter.

::: image
![0217_001](images/0217_001.jpg)

[*Figure 7.1* The necessary and sufficient conditions -- in a relational
and cultural context (Tudor, 2000).]{#c7.xhtml_fig7.1}
:::
::::::::::::::::::::::::

[]{#c8.xhtml}

:::::::::::::::::::::: chapter
# Chapter 8 Process

::: cite
We must cultivate the science of human relationships.

Franklin D. Roosevelt

For many years now I have been trying to formulate for myself the
process by which change in personality and behavior is achieved in
psychotherapy.

Carl Rogers
:::

In his formulation of a theory of therapy, personality and interpersonal
relationships, Rogers (1959b) describes what he saw as the conditions,
process and outcomes of therapy. In [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml) we discussed
the conditions. In this chapter we examine both process and outcomes,
which are, for us, inextricably connected. An examination and
reformulation of Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy precedes a
discussion of process and outcome in terms of fluidity, creativity and
personal power. We see the process of effective therapy as, in itself,
one of the outcomes of an experience of effective therapy. We see any of
the apparent outcomes of effective therapy as more or less sharply
differentiated aspects of its process. This way of thinking offers a
critique of outcome-based therapy, and of current preoccupations with
focus, cure and solution. In the last part of the chapter we draw a
distinction between the therapeutic relationship and 'therapeutic
relating'. We elaborate this through discussions on the person of the
therapist, the person of the client and the process of relating.

Drawing specifically on the work of Jessie Taft, person-centred therapy
has always held the relationship between therapist and client as central
to whatever potential for healing it offers. Taft (1933, p. 17) called
her work 'relationship therapy' and defined it 'as a process in which
the individual finally learns to utilize the allotted hour from
beginning to end without undue fear, resistance, resentment or
greediness'. She went on to say that when he, the client,

<div>

can take it and also leave it without denying its value, without trying
to escape it completely or keep it forever because of this very value,
in so far he has learned to live, to accept this fragment of time in and
for itself, and strange as it may seem, if he can live this hour he has
in his grasp the secret of all hours, he has conquered life and time for
the moment and in principle.

</div>

By this definition relationship therapy is clearly more about helping
people live fulfilling lives than it is about the alleviation of
particular local symptoms. We suggest that the same is true of
person-centred therapy. Marking it off as a particular kind of therapy,
Rogers and Sanford (1989, p. 1483) say this:

<div>

The single element that most sets client-centered psychotherapy apart
from the other therapies is its insistence that the medical model --
involving diagnosis of pathology, specificity of treatment, and
desirability of cure -- is a totally inadequate model for dealing with
psychologically distressed or deviant persons.

</div>

In 1958 Rogers published two articles describing the helping or
therapeutic relationship. In one (Rogers, 1958/67b) he describes the
characteristics of a helping relationship, as well as certain ways in
which the helper or therapist can create that kind of relationship.
These, posed in the form of a series of questions, offer a number of
meditations and challenges to the helper:

- 'Can I *be* in some way which will be perceived by the other person as
  trustworthy, as dependable or consistent in some deep sense?' (p. 119)
- 'Am I secure enough within myself to permit him his separateness?' (p.
  121)

In the second article, Rogers (1958/67a) attempts to describe a process
conception of psychotherapy through seven stages. The task of describing
any process is not easy. 'It is' says Tolstoy (1869/1982, p. 974),

<div>

impossible for the human intellect to grasp the idea of absolute
continuity of motion. Laws of motion of any kind only become
comprehensible to man when he can examine arbitrarily selected units of
that motion. But at the same time it is this arbitrary division of
continuous motion into discontinuous units which gives rise to a large
proportion of human error.

</div>

Tolstoy articulates the difficulties and risks of the task which Rogers
set himself: to describe in words that are public, linear and discrete a
process that is continuous, normally private, often unspoken, always
subtle and invariably subjective. The limitations of language make it
difficult to catch in words the essence of *any* process in its
richness, detail and fluency. Phillips (1994, p. 160) makes the same
point: 'All modern theory is written in the shade of Heraclitus. But
however inclined we are to the idea of process, our language seems to
need punctuation.' It's easier to describe differentiated elements of a
process one by one, but that inevitably loses the seamless
continuousness which is the essence of process.

The point of examining the process of therapy is to look at what changes
happen, and to think then about what causes, allows or invites those
changes to happen, in the hope, ultimately, that we will learn what to
do to facilitate them more effectively. This is what Rogers was about.
He wanted to describe the process of therapy, to see what order he could
find in it, and then to develop (1951, p. 132) a theory 'sufficient to
contain the evidence thus far available'. He wondered (ibid., p. 131)
'what *really happens* in successful therapy? What are the psychological
processes by which change comes about?' These questions preface a
chapter in which Rogers presents 'the many hypotheses which are
currently held in regard to the process of client-centered therapy, and
the research evidence which supports some of them'. The chapter itself
includes research findings, theoretical speculations, and case examples,
and although Rogers makes a number of interesting points about the
process of therapy, the chapter as a whole is less structured and less
focused than his later writings on the same theme.

By 1956, when he came to write 'A Process Conception of Psychotherapy',
first published in 1958, Rogers had settled on a methodology, and this
chapter is much more focused and ordered. He saw that studying the
outcomes of therapy would yield little about the process of therapy;
that objective research would cast light on individual moments rather
than 'ongoing movement'; and (1958/67a, p. 127) that research procedures
would probably not 'shed light directly upon the process of personality
change'. He resolved instead (ibid., p. 128) 'to take a naturalist's
observational, descriptive approach' to the phenomena of therapy, 'and
to draw forth those low-level inferences' which seemed to arise most
naturally from his observations, and which seemed 'most native to the
material itself'. Another way of saying this is that he approached his
work phenomenologically, with the intention simply to see and describe
what happened there, and to let order, structure and theory emerge
gradually out of observation and description.

For the purposes of this venture, Rogers assumed (1958/67a, p. 130) 'a
constant and optimal set of conditions' which we discussed in [Chapter
7](#c7.xhtml). He summed these up by saying that a client had to
experience himself as being 'received'. This notion of being received is
a significant one, central to our thinking about the process of therapy.
Rogers collapses all that he thought and wrote about the conditions for
therapeutic change into this one word. Instead of thinking about six
conditions, we can now think more simply and more immediately about how
we might receive our clients as fully as possible. A client's experience
of being received in therapy furthers a process of change begun before
therapy began and continued outside of it. To understand some of how
this happens we turn to Proposition XVII (Rogers 1951, p. 517):

<div>

Under certain conditions, involving primarily complete absence of any
threat to the self-structure, experiences which are inconsistent with it
may be perceived, and examined, and the structure of self revised to
assimilate and include such experiences.

</div>

Based on an unconditional trust in an organism's tendency to actualise,
this proposition suggests that environmental safety is the most a
therapist can provide or needs to provide in order for a client to begin
or carry on the process of therapeutic change. To offer the 'complete
absence of any threat to the self-structure' therapists need both to
understand and to accept a client's lived reality, as he experiences it
and communicates it, without conditions, evaluation, diagnosis,
interpretation or agenda. The proposition asserts that in such safety a
client will be increasingly open to experience and will therefore
necessarily dissolve overly rigid structures and constructs.

As we note in [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml), the results of a major study into
*The Therapeutic Relationship and Its Impact* (Rogers *et al.,* 1967)
did not prove the causal relationship between the therapist's attitudes
and patient process movement. It did conclude that therapy is more
accurately viewed as a mutually interactive process.

\

## The process conception of psychotherapy {#c8.xhtml_clnk1}

Having steeped himself in the phenomena of his work with clients, Rogers
then drew from what he noticed seven elements or continua along which he
saw clients move, and divided their movement along those continua into
seven stages. The seven stages have probably received more attention
than the continua, at least on training courses where they provide a
relatively friendly, if crude, way of measuring change or progress. They
seem to us, though, to be both arbitrary and potentially unhelpful.
Rogers (1958/67a, p. 131) admits that the number of stages at least is
arbitrary. He says that although he identified seven stages, the process
of change in therapy 'is a continuum', and would be a continuum 'whether
one discriminated three stages or fifty'. Further to this, we think that
they're unhelpful in that they enshrine the notion of progress rather
than process, with the seventh stage being the desirable goal, and
clients at the fourth stage being more advanced than clients at the
second. This invites therapists to think in terms of moving their
clients on from one stage to the next, to practise accordingly, and to
feel skilled or incompetent themselves according to how well or not
their clients are doing. We suggested when we examined the six
conditions that Rogers wrote the theory as a description of phenomena,
and expected us to read it as such. We think the same here, and we see
the same risks as we did there of reading it as a prescription. We also
find it unhelpful to think about a process in terms of stages. Process
theories and stage theories are qualitatively different. That Rogers
uses the language of a stage theory to describe what he says is a
process theory seems to us to support our assertion that he straddles a
line between quantitative and qualitative, objective and subjective,
modern and postmodern.

We are more interested in the continua of change than in the stages. We
think that they're helpful in that they describe the lived process of
therapy naively and accurately. They articulate a movement from fixed to
fluid, from closed to open, from rigid to flowing, and from stasis to
process. Thus, for example, during the course of therapy, a client may
move from being remote from his feelings, unable or unwilling to
acknowledge or experience them in the present, to a process of
experiencing them with immediacy as a continually changing flow. Rogers
is clear that *he* values fluidity (ibid., p. 135):

<div>

Would everyone agree that this is a desirable process of change, that it
moves in valued directions? I believe not. I believe some people do not
value fluidity. This is one of the social value judgements which
individuals and cultures will have to make.

</div>

Notwithstanding this, Rogers views clients in terms of what they are
experiencing subjectively, and not according to some 'objective',
external diagnosis, including his own. His commitment to regarding a
client's organismic experiencing without conditions means that he also
values an individual's fixity. His process conception of psychotherapy,
thus, is a description rather than a prescription of process. Even more
specifically, he acknowledges it (p. 155) as describing a process which
is set in motion 'when the individual experiences himself as being fully
received'. It is thus a person-centred model rather than a generic one.
He is critical of his own descriptive groupings under each stage, which
are, in any case, incomplete. In [Appendix 3](#app3.xhtml) we include
Rogers' own descriptions and examples, completing the gaps in his
original work by adding our own. Rogers describes the continua of change
as follows:

- A loosening of feelings.
- A change in the manner of experiencing.
- A shift from incongruence to congruence.
- A change in the manner and extent of communication.
- A loosening of the cognitive maps of experience.

  ::: image
  ![0224_001](images/0224_001.jpg)
  [*Figure 8.1* Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy, showing the
  location of pretherapy.]{#c8.xhtml_fig8.1}
  :::
- A change in the individual's relationship to his problems.
- A change in the manner of relating.

Taken together, these continua indicate one of the theoretical outcomes
of successful therapy: the 'fully-functioning person' (Rogers 1959b, p.
234) (see next section).

In terms of his conception of this process in *stages,* Rogers makes
specific points about some of the stages (see [Figure
8.1](#c8.xhtml_fig8.1)). He suggests, for instance, that therapists
'have a very modest degree of success in working with' clients at stage
2. Most therapy begins, then, when an individual is 'at' stage 3 (p.
134). Conceptually this means that stages 1 and 2 describe a pretherapy
process of being received. Rogers talks about this happening
occasionally in play or group therapy, in which (p. 133) 'the person can
be exposed to a receiving climate, without himself having to take any
initiative, for a long enough time to experience himself *as received
'.* We know both from our own experiences and from those of our clients
that often it takes someone a long time to get to therapy. Knowing that
a therapist has helped someone else, or has a generally good reputation,
can give a potential client enough hope that he will be received to take
the first step and to make contact. This conceptualisation also locates
'pre-therapy' (Prouty, 1976, 1994; Van Werde, 1994, 1998) in terms of
Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy.

In summary, Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy acknowledges:

- That there is a process pre therapy.
- That stages 4 and 5 (p. 139) constitute 'much of psychotherapy as we
  know it'.
- That, regarding the sixth stage, (p. 150) 'these moments of immediate,
  full accepted experiencing are in some sense almost irreversible'.

  ::: image
  ![0017_001](images/0017_001.jpg)
  [*Figure 8.2* Rogers' process conception of therapy and
  development.]{#c8.xhtml_fig8.2}
  :::
- That there is a stage beyond therapy in which the client is not much
  in need of the therapist's help -- what some other approaches refer to
  as 'transference cure'.

We complete Rogers' stage conception of the process of psychotherapy
(see [Appendix 3](#app3.xhtml)), with two amendments:

1.  We present it principally in terms of the elements or process scales
    (see Rogers & Rablen, 1958; Rogers, 1959a), as we see a discrepancy
    between Rogers' emphasis on process and the way in which he presents
    it (1958/67a) as a stage theory.
2.  We present it in reverse, beginning with stage 7, to make and
    emphasise a point about human development and process (see [Figure
    8.2](#c8.xhtml_fig8.2)). We see that the process of therapy takes
    place within a process of human development that begins at
    conception. Rogers (1953/67a, p. 80) notes that 'one of the
    fundamental directions taken by the process of therapy is the free
    experiencing of the actual sensory and visceral reactions of the
    organism without too much of an attempt to relate these experiences
    to the self'. Rogers (1958/67a, p. 154) describes a person at stage
    7 as someone who 'has now incorporated the quality of motion, of
    flow, of changingness, into every aspect of his psychological life'.
    Rogers again (1953/67a, p. 80):

<div>

The end point of this process is that the client discovers that he can
be his experience, with all of its variety and surface contradiction;
that he can formulate himself out of his experience, instead of trying
to impose a formulation of self upon his experiences, denying to
awareness those elements which do not fit.

</div>

It is clear from our discussion in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml) about the
nature and development of the organism that this describes an authentic,
fully functioning organism or person at any and every age from
conception onwards.

It doesn't make sense, then, to talk in terms of an individual as
'reaching' or 'achieving' stage 7. To do so is problematic for a number
of reasons:

- It takes us into the realm of stage theory as distinct from process
  theory.
- It implies a greater valuing of stage 7 over other previous stages
  and, therefore, a prescriptive model of therapeutic change.
- It contradicts Rogers' (1959a) theory of human development.

\

## Process and outcome {#c8.xhtml_clnk2}

In person-centred therapy, outcomes are process outcomes. In his 1959
paper Rogers lists fifteen different aspects of the outcome of a
successful therapeutic experience. All these outcomes follow from a
client's increased capacity to experience fully those aspects of herself
which she found previously unacceptable in some way. Nearly all of these
process outcomes have been measured operationally by various objective
measures, including: the thematic apperception test, the Rorschach
ink-blot test, Q-sorts, a discomfort-relief quotient, and an emotional
maturity scale. Rogers cites thirty-five research studies in support of
his hypothesised outcomes.

This view of process outcome is epitomised in the concept of 'the fully
functioning person' (see [Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml) and Rogers, 1957/67,
1959b). Rogers didn't see such a person as ever existing in the flesh.
He describes a fully functioning person (1959b, p. 234) as 'the ultimate
in the actualization of the human organism' and the 'ultimate
hypothetical person'. It seems clear that he is describing an outcome of
therapy that is possible only in theory, and not in actuality.

Given that proviso, is the notion of the fully functioning person
helpful? We think it is for a number of reasons:

- It brings together under one heading many of the apparently random or
  unconnected phenomena we may notice as we work. This helps us
  therefore make tentative and provisional sense of seeming chaos, and
  to trust the process even when we're not sure where it's leading.
- It provides us with a description of optimal health which is
  consistent with the philosophical values of person-centred practice,
  and which allows us to dialogue with other mental health professionals
  who may have their own such descriptions.
- It specifies in a general way a possible outcome of effective therapy
  and allows us therefore to make soft, or impressionistic, assessments
  of how we and our clients are doing.

*One client found this approach to therapy challenging. He saw the
changes he needed and wanted to make in his life in functional terms,
with the result that he tended to fast forward ', for instance, from
going out with someone to imagining a more intimate relationship. He was
then disappointed if a 'date' didn't further his progress towards a
permanent relationship. Discussing this with his therapist he came to
see that the ' "what" is the "how" ', a phrase that became a kind of
meditation for him. Taking this on, he became more relaxed about 'what'
he did and focused more on enjoying the 'how': going out more, meeting
more people, enjoying the encounters for their own sake rather than
worrying about a particular outcome.*

There are three aspects of process which, in our view, are understated
and, perhaps underrated in person-centred therapy: fluidity, creativity
and personal power. As we acknowledge in [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml), we view
these as qualities of the organism. We discuss them here as process
outcomes of therapy.

\

### Fluidity

\

Fluidity is an expression of the organism's tendency to actualise. In a
paper on the process of psychotherapy Rogers (1958/67a, p. 158)
describes this as 'new experiencing with immediacy' in which 'feeling
and cognition inter-penetrate, self is subjectively present in the
experience' and 'volition is simply the subjective following of a
harmonious balance of organismic direction'. The person 'has changed,
but what seems most significant, he has become an integrated process of
changingness'. This is an important passage in which there are a number
of points worth highlighting:

- 'New experiencing with immediacy' -- Rogers is advancing an
  experiential, existential and phenomenological psychology which values
  new experiencing at least alongside old experiences, and subjectivity
  over objectivity. The approach is both person-centred and
  present-centred.
- 'Feeling and cognition interpenetrate' -- That we feel and think at
  the same time is an organismic, integrative perspective, and one which
  is supported by more recent findings in neuroscience.
- 'Volition is simply the subjective following of a harmonious balance
  of organismic direction' -- This involves free-flowing internal
  communication with ourselves and similar external communication with
  others. The key word here is 'balance'. The person-centred approach,
  along with others, stands accused of promoting the 'selfish gene', or
  the self-centred person (see Buber in Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990;
  Vitz, 1977). Rogers' emphasis on the pro-social organism addresses
  this criticism: 'A hurt to one is a hurt to all'; 'In my tendency to
  actualise I will balance the needs of others', and herein lies the
  difference between Rogers' view of the actualising tendency or the
  tendency to actualise on the one hand and Maslow's view of
  'self-actualisation' and self-actualised persons on the other (see
  [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)).
- 'A unity of flow, of motion ... an integrated process of changingness'
  -- This phrase reflects Rogers' valuing of fluidity. Indeed, his whole
  theory of the process of psychotherapy is based on a movement from
  fixity to changingness, from rigid structure to flow, from stasis to
  process.

Rogers (ibid., p. 155) acknowledges that he values fluidity as a
desirable state of being:

<div>

Would everyone agree that this is a desirable process of change, that it
moves in valued directions? I believe not. I believe some people do not
value fluidity. This will be one of the social value judgements which
individuals and cultures will have to make.

</div>

He continues: 'Such a process of change can easily be avoided, by
reducing or avoiding those relationships in which the individual is
fully received as he is.' At the same time, in supporting people in
their distress and 'stuckness', it is important to value fixity, an
apparent contradiction we addressed in [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml).

There is an interesting link between Rogers' values concerning fixity
and fluidity and the notion from neuroscience concerning the 'design' of
the brain which strikes a balance between what is referred to as
'circuit permanence' and 'circuit plasticity'. Whilst for cortical
functions such as vocabulary and logic there is a lot of plasticity,
Pally (2000, p. 15) reports that 'the subcortical limbic "emotional"
circuits that develop in infancy have less plasticity ... \[which\]
therefore may have long-lasting effect on subsequent psychological
development'. Thus, we may have less plasticity in our emotional
circuits than accounted for in Rogers' theory of process and value
concerning fluidity. Such limitation is moderated, however, by two
facts: (i) that it is precisely circuit permanence that allows infants
to form attachments and, later, adults to seek such relationships; and
(ii) that the cortex develops the capacity to modulate the emotional
responses of the subcortex. Also, Pally (ibid., p. 15) suggests that:
'Since it is known that consciously attending to and verbalising
something can enhance cortical activation ... treatments such as
analysis enhance cortical functioning, and take advantage of cortical
plasticity, \[so as\] to modulate deeply engrained emotional responses.'

\

### Creativity

\

In her commentary on Whitehead's (1929/78) philosophy of the organism,
Emmet (1932/66, p. 73) describes creativity as 'the urge towards
differentiation and unification' -- and, combining notions of pure
potentiality and the principle of individuation, as answering to the
idealist Aristotelian concept of 'primary matter'. This places the act
and process of creativity at the heart of person-centred theory and
practice. Ever the social scientist, Rogers (1954/67a, p. 349)
identifies two elements of the creative process and, also
characteristically, a relationship between them: '... there must be
something observable, some product of creation ... \[and\] These
products must be novel constructions.'

He goes on (p. 150) to define the creative process as: '*the emergence
in action of a novel* relational *product, growing out of the uniqueness
of the individual on the one hand, and the materials, events, people, or
circumstances of his life on the other'* \[our emphasis\].
Interestingly, in a recently published oral history based on a series of
interviews, Rogers reflects on the fact that he wrote this article on
creativity, in essence, in one night: 'It was in itself a creative act.
It just flowed' (Rogers & Russell, 2002, p. 296). In a brief passage he
describes having been tested in terms of right brain/left brain
functioning and found to be quite even. He also talks about his one
painting (which he prized), and creating mobiles. Rogers hypothesises
certain external conditions which foster creativity. We discuss those in
[Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml).

In a paper first presented in 1954, Rogers (1954/67a) describes also
three significant 'inner conditions':

- Openness to experience -- or extensionality, the opposite of
  psychological defensiveness. Rogers describes this explicitly as being
  aware of *this* existential moment *as it is.*
- An internal locus (or place) of evaluation. 'The value of his product
  is, for the creative person, established not by the praise or
  criticism of others, but by himself. Have I created something
  satisfying to *me*? Does it express part of me?' (p. 354). Rogers
  refers to this as an organismic reaction to and appraisal of the
  created product. In our experience this is often discouraged in
  family, educational and other social systems where external
  evaluations abound.
- An ability to toy or play with elements and concepts. Rogers
  (ibid., p. 355) describes this as:

<div>

the ability to play spontaneously with ideas, colors, shapes,
relationships -- to juggle elements into impossible juxtapositions, to
shape wild hypotheses, to make the given problematic, to express the
ridiculous, to translate from one form to another, to transform into
improbable equivalents. It is from this spontaneous toying with life
that there arises the hunch, the creative seeing of life in a new and
significant way.

</div>

A person-centred approach to theory reflects this ability to toy and
play. Such toying and playing with ideas is a healthy use of theory, and
leads to good practice.

Elsewhere Rogers (1959b) argues that creativity is one of the outcomes
of therapy, that there is a social need for creativity (1980a), and that
it depends on a nurturing environment. This social need for creativity
has been echoed in the UK by Estelle Morris, the then Minister for the
Arts, Sports and Culture (and former Minister for Education) in an
interview on the Today Programme on BBC Radio 4 (16 October 2003) in
which she said:

<div>

creativity itself is more important than ever before. It's the
difference between a good business and an excellent business ... an
excellent teacher and a good teacher. I don't think we've got a way of
really describing the impact of creativity in our wider life ... it's
undervalued ... I want to play my part in trying to tell the story of
creativity across government and elsewhere. Without creativity the
quality of our lives both personally and nationally would be a lot, lot
poorer.

</div>

### Personal power

\

We can equate the idea of personal power with the notion of autonomy,
and with a client's development or reclaiming of an internal locus of
evaluation. Rogers argues (1978, p. 239) that an organism's
actualisation involves 'a trend toward self-regulation and away from
control by external forces'. He thus locates personal power centrally as
one of the manifestations of actualisation, and by implication therefore
as one of the observable outcomes of effective therapy. This, we think,
suggests that he saw personal power as one aspect of the organism in its
natural state. A therapist, therefore, does not, and maybe cannot,
*empower* her clients. It is simply not in her gift to make them
powerful, or more powerful than they already are in potential. She can,
however, ensure at least that she does nothing to impede or diminish her
clients in their expression of personal power. At best she can help make
a space within which they feel free enough to be personally powerful.
Paraphrasing Gertrude Stein on Paris, Rogers (1978, p. xii) says: 'It is
not that this approach gives power to the person; it never takes it
away.'

Natiello (1990) takes up the notion of personal power. She sees it as a
way of beginning to nurture what she calls 'collaborative power', a
concept which she says (p. 273) 'is implicit in Rogers' work'. She
distinguishes collaborative power from authoritarian power, or power
over others, which is, she says (1990, p. 268), 'still the primary
political orientation in the world'. Recognising that this authoritarian
power is, politically, 'inappropriate and ineffective', she makes the
point that those of us who favour instead relationships of mutuality and
collaboration have tended (p. 270) to 'reject the concept of power in
any form'. She sees this as a mistake, points out that non-authoritarian
leaders like Mahatma Gandhi and Martin Luther King were particularly
powerful, and suggests that therapists too must have a sense of their
own personal power if they are to be effective in their work (p. 274):
'Such an empowered presence is inherent in the concept of congruence --
the ability and willingness to be as fully one's real self as possible.'

Personal power, as Rogers and Natiello write about it, carries an
implicit recognition that the organism is also pro-social. In Angyal's
terms, the organism tends towards both autonomy and homonomy. It seeks,
that is, both to exert personal power, and to belong to a family, group
or community. The dynamic tension between these two tendencies means
that personal power is not an excuse for selfish or reckless
self-assertion, and that the exercise of personal power will necessarily
take both self and other into account. We think that this line of
thought answers some of the criticisms of therapy in general, and of
some therapies in particular, that they derive from and promote a
selfish individualism. We think also that it challenges the practice of
some therapists who attend more to an individual client's rights than to
his familial or social responsibilities.

\

## Therapeutic relating {#c8.xhtml_clnk3}

In this part we develop (from the previous chapter) our understanding of
therapeutic relating through three discussions concerning the person of
the therapist, the person of the client and the process of therapeutic
relating.

\

### The person of the therapist

\

We noted earlier Taft's thinking about the significance of the
therapeutic relationship. She also had ideas about the person of the
therapist. 'In my opinion' she says (1933, p. 19) 'the basis of therapy
lies in the therapist himself, in his capacity to permit the use of self
which the therapeutic relationship implies as well as his psychological
insight and technical skill.' These ideas prefigure some of Rogers' own
thinking that the therapist's personal values, beliefs and ways of being
are important variables in the therapeutic process. The therapist's 'use
of self' has been taken up by different therapeutic traditions, from a
psychoanalytic perspective principally with reference to the notion of
countertransference, and within humanistic psychology often with
reference to Rogers' conditions. These two streams of thinking about the
therapist have been brought together in a recent book, co-authored by
two practitioners who represent these different traditions (Rowan &
Jacobs, 2002).

The therapeutic conditions require the following qualities of the
therapist: to be contactful, congruent in the relationship,
unconditionally accepting and accurately empathic. Rogers (1958/67b)
elaborates these qualities. Although he frames them in terms of the
characteristics of a helping relationship ([Box 8.1](#c8.xhtml_box8.1))
they are, equally, qualities essential in an effective therapist.

::: box
[*Box 8.1* Characteristics of a helping relationship (Rogers,
1958/67b)]{#c8.xhtml_box8.1}

- Can I be trustworthy?
- Can I communicate myself unambiguously?
- Can I let myself experience positive attitudes towards this person?
- Can I be strong enough to be separate (from the other) -- and am I
  secure enough to permit them their separateness?
- Can I let myself enter fully into the world of their feelings and
  meanings and understand these as they do?
- Can I be acceptant of each facet of this other person?
- Can I act with sufficient sensitivity in the relationship that my
  behaviour will not be perceived as a threat -- and can I free them
  from the threat of external evaluation?
- Can I meet this person as a person in the process of becoming (or will
  I be bound by their and my own past)?
:::

These questions invite self-reflection. Both the therapeutic conditions
and these qualities, in effect, at least invite us if not require us, as
therapists, to take up the challenge of the ancient injunction,
variously attributed to Greek or Egyptian origins, to 'Know thyself'.
Whether we engage in this self-knowing informally by means of personal
self-reflection or, more formally, through supervision, is a matter of
debate, for more on which see Wilkins (1997) and Tudor and Worrall
(2004). Boy and Pine (1982) identify a number of professional values,
including a 'commitment' to ongoing self-assessment as well as periodic
evaluation.

Of course, the qualities of the person that is the therapist are not
abstract. They are specific, relational, and effective in so far as his
clients perceive them. Rogers (1959b, p. 213) embodies this in the sixth
condition: 'That the client perceives, at least to a minimal degree ...
the unconditional positive regard of the therapist for him, and the
empathic understanding of the therapist.' Lake (1966, p. 36) puts it
well:

<div>

Patients are in general more sensitive to the fact that it is the
quality of spirit and personality that differentiates the psychiatrists
who help them from those who do not... It is the power of being, the
power of acceptance, and the spiritual strength of the therapist which
is his main curative resource.

</div>

Patients or clients are also sensitive to perceived inconsistencies in
the therapist, for instance, between thought or speech and action. In
this respect the person-centred approach, perhaps more than other
approaches to therapy, challenges the therapist to be themselves not
only as a therapist but as a person, and to embody the qualities
required not only in the consulting room but in their lives. Robbins
(1977, p. 253) puts this robustly: 'Any psychiatrist or psychologist
whose own life isn't happy and whole enough to be exemplary isn't worth
the hide it takes to upholster his couch. He ought to be horsewhipped
and sued for malpractice.' Whilst we might not advocate such a punitive
response, we endorse the demand for consistency and integrity.

Working in a way which relies on her personal qualities, and indeed on
the person of the therapist herself, demands more of the therapist.
Being congruent or integrated in the relationship, for example, requires
us to acknowledge and accept our own fears, failings and
vulnerabilities, and to risk feeling or being incongruent and
disintegrated. This brings us to a second ancient injunction, a proverb,
cited in the gospel of Saint Luke (4: 23): 'And he said unto them, Ye
will surely say unto me this proverb, \"Physician, heal thyself\".'
Again, quite how psychotherapists do this is the subject of much debate
in professional circles. The debate centres, for the most part, around
whether or not therapists should be required to have personal therapy.
For registration with the United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy
(UKCP), for instance, it is a requirement that all psycho-therapists
undertake their own personal therapy throughout their training: 'The
Trainee must engage in a continuous process of analysis and
self-examination, before, during and after training' (UKCP Special
General Meeting Resolution, May 1990). Further to this, a document
produced by the UKCP's Training Standards Committee in 1993 states that
'any training shall include arrangements to ensure that the trainees can
identify and manage appropriately their personal involvement in and
contribution to the processes of the psychotherapies that they
practice'. Further, the Training Standards Committee within the
Humanistic and Integrative Psychotherapy Section of the UKCP, states
(1992) that:

<div>

For membership of this Section, it is a requirement of a training course
that trainees have personal psychotherapy with an experienced
psychotherapist as part of their training. This should be at least as
intensive in terms of frequency and duration as the form of
psychotherapy to be practiced.

</div>

From a person-centred perspective which values autonomy and
non-directiveness, it is clearly antithetical to *require* or *direct*
someone to be in therapy (see Mearns, 1994). It is nevertheless
consistent, in our view, that students who wish to be accredited or
registered respond to the requirements of organisations and bodies of
which they wish to be members.

We discussed fluidity, creativity and personal power earlier in relation
to the person in process (pp. 227ff.). In relation to the person of the
therapist these qualities manifest in a number of ways: curiosity;
non-defensiveness; a willingness both to follow the client's process,
and to engage robustly in the process of relationship; non-attachment to
particular outcomes or perspectives; an ability to be stimulating and
challenging (see N. Rogers, 1993/ 2000); continence, or a capacity to
contain thoughts, feelings, hunches, intuitions and experiences. This is
not an exhaustive list.

Finally, in a paper on the philosophical roots of person-centred therapy
in the history of Western thought, Van Belle (in press, 2005) summarises
some of the necessary beliefs of the person-centred therapist:

1.  A belief in people's capacity to heal through self-reflection.
2.  A prizing of 'the otherness of others'.
3.  A trust in others and in their exercise of free will.
4.  A belief in people's ability and right to choose, as well as their
    capacity to reason.
5.  A love of 'the ambiguity of therapy': 'One must prefer the disorder
    of emotion to the order of logic, for the Person-Centered
    therapeutic process is anything but linear and predictable.'

\

### The person of the client

\

The general psychotherapeutic literature contains little about the
person of the client. Most studies, reports and vignettes focus on the
client's problems and pathology and are, by definition, particular and
partial descriptions of the person. The logic of this present approach
and its emphasis on organismic psychology within a broader tradition of
health psychology offers a more holistic view of the person of the
client. Bergner and Holmes (2000) see Rogers as someone who assigned to
all of his clients the status of an unconditionally acceptable human
being, not on the basis of observation, but *a priori.* Person-centred
therapy provides a relationship in which clients, independently of the
facts about their lives and persons, are genuinely regarded and treated
as acceptable persons. Bergner and Holmes elaborate this and advocate
that therapists assign a large number of statuses to the client. Where
Rogers assigned one status, they suggest a 'status dynamic therapy', in
which the client is regarded and treated, *a priori,* as a person: (1)
who is acceptable; (2) who makes sense; (3) whose best interests come
first in the therapeutic relationship; (4) who is important and
significant to the therapist; (5) who already possesses enabling
strengths, knowledge, and other resources for solving problems; (6) who,
given a choice between equally realistic but differentially degrading
appraisals of him or her, is to be given the benefit of the doubt; and
(7) who is an agent, i.e. an individual capable of entertaining
behavioural options and selecting from among them, as opposed to a
helpless victim of genetic, historical, environmental, or other forces
(Bergner & Staggs, 1987). We think this is an interesting elaboration
which is consistent with Rogers' assumptions about the person. It is
also consistent with the developmental perspective outlined earlier (see
pp. 110ff.).

\

### The process of relating

\

As far as the therapeutic relationship or therapeutic relating is
concerned, the logic of client- or person-centred therapy is to centre
or focus on the client. However, there is comparatively little in the
psychotherapeutic literature from the client's perspective. As we note
in [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml), Rogers devotes a long chapter in
*Client-Centered Therapy* (1951) to the relationship as experienced by
the client, and he was one of the first therapists and theoreticians to
do so. At the end of the chapter Rogers refers to other accounts and
studies of clients' experiences of therapy, including Snyder (1947),
Lipkin (1948) and Axline (1950). In this tradition there is a small
number of books written by clients about their experiences of therapy,
including the failure of therapy and therapists, from a technical
article about libido development written by an analysand (Brunswick,
1940), and a personal story of a psychoanalysis (Knight, 1950), to more
recent accounts by Tilmann (1977), von Drigalski (1986), France (1988),
Heyward (1993), Alexander (1995), Gordon (2000), and Sands (2000, 2001).
Yalom (1974) offers his own account of a therapeutic relationship
alongside his client's account. Some research into therapeutic process
has elicited open-ended accounts from clients, including: a relationship
inventory, based on Rogers' process conception of psychotherapy
(Barrett-Lennard, 1986); a content analysis of 'received' empathy
(Bachelor, 1988); client accounts of what they found helpful and
hindering in client-centred/experiential psychotherapy (Lietaer, 1992);
and a study of how clients make therapy work (Bohart & Tallman, 1999).

In this final part, we bring together these two persons, the therapist
and the client, and consider some ideas which inform the way they relate
to each other in the service of the client's healing. We discuss this
with reference to non-directivity, intersubjectivity and co-creative
therapeutic relating; the question of transference in person-centred
therapeutic relating; dialogue; and mutuality. Although we think that
person-centred therapy has, from its beginnings, made a particular
contribution to our understanding of 'relationship therapy', we
recognise that we are not alone in this interest. Over a number of
years, other therapeutic approaches have become increasingly interested
in the relational perspective.

*Non-directivity*

We indicated in the Introduction (p. 1) that person-centred therapy was
originally called 'non-directive' therapy. In part, Rogers described his
work as such so as to distinguish it from prevailing models of therapy,
whose practitioners accrued to themselves a level of expertise and
authority that allowed them, legitimately in their own eyes, to hold and
express views about what clients should or shouldn't do in their lives.
The term also describes practice that both devolves from and manifests
an unconditional trust in an individual client's tendency and capacity
to actualise as fully as environmental conditions allow. As Levitt
(2005, p. i) puts it in his preface to a recently edited volume on the
subject: 'Non-directivity is the distinguishing feature of the
revolutionary, anti-authoritarian approach to psychotherapy and human
relations developed by Carl Rogers.' Raskin (1948) points out that
Rogers' predecessors, including Freud, Rank, Taft and Allen were also
non-directive in various aspects of their work, and to varying degrees.

Taft is perhaps the most immediate forerunner. She describes (1933, p.
v) her move over twenty-five years away from 'the notion of a reform of
the \"other" through superior knowledge of life and psychology, a
concept closely allied to that of scientific control in the field of
emotions and behavior' and towards 'a therapy which is purely
individual, non-moral, non-scientific, non-intellectual, which can take
place only when divorced from all hint of control, unless it be the
therapist's control of himself in the therapeutic situation'. The case
studies which constitute the bulk of her book show her working with a
degree of permissiveness which we think is still radical today (see
[Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml)). Rogers (1942, p. 127) puts it this way:

<div>

The non-directive viewpoint places a high value on the right of every
individual to be psychologically independent and to maintain his
psychological integrity. The directive viewpoint places a high value
upon social conformity and the right of the more able to direct the less
able. These viewpoints have a significant relationship to social and
political philosophy as well as to techniques of therapy.

</div>

The term, though, is problematical in a number of ways. It defines the
process of therapy (a) in terms of therapist rather than client, since
it is the therapist who is non-directive; and (b) in terms of what the
therapist doesn't do, rather than in terms of what he does. This exposes
person-centred therapists to the accusation that they are merely
reflective, passive, uncommitted and not engaged. It is perhaps for
these reasons that Rogers begins to call his work 'client-centred'
rather than 'non-directive'. Cain (1989, p. 125) goes further, and
points out that Rogers 'barely addresses the issue' after about 1942.

Setting aside the question of what we call the approach, the principle
that person-centred practitioners are essentially non-directive in their
work with their clients has been more or less central to the practice of
person-centred therapy since its beginning. To be completely
non-directive, though, even if desirable, is clearly unattainable.
Lietaer (1998, p. 63) says that 'it makes little sense to wonder whether
a therapist is directive or not. It only makes sense to see *in what
way* he or she is directive or task-oriented.' Brodley (1997, 1999/2005)
on the other hand asserts the view that non-directivity refers to an
attitude and not to specific behaviour, for example, asking questions of
clients. 'Further' Brodley (1999/2005, p. 1) argues: 'attitudes are not
defined in terms of behavior, although they affect behavior. They are
defined in terms of intentions, sensibilities, feelings and values.
Attitudes are manifested in intentions that adapt to particular
circumstances -- thus they cannot be rigid.' The view that the
person-centred therapist should never ask a client a question is a rigid
rule of behaviour. We are more interested in the therapist's underlying
attitude and value, which may result in her asking a question of a
client. If the intention of any question is to understand the client,
and not to be inquisitive or clever, then the behaviour of asking a
question is congruent with the non-directive attitude. Merry (1999, p.
75) also promotes the value of non-directiveness as an underlying
attitude: 'a general non-authoritarian attitude maintained by a
counselor whose intention is empathically to understand a client's
subjective experience'. He continues (pp. 75--6) and makes the
connection between this non-directive attitude and the belief in the
person's tendency to actualise:

<div>

It refers also to the theory that the actualising tendency can be
fostered in a relationship of particular qualities, and that whilst the
general direction of that tendency is regarded as constructive and
creative, its particular characteristics in any one person cannot be
predicted, and should not be controlled or directed.

</div>

Writing about what he refers to as the paradox of non-directiveness Cain
(1989) suggests that to be non-directive on principle and with all
clients fails to recognise or attend to the different needs of
individual clients, some of whom might benefit from a therapist who is
more rather than less directive.

Responding to Cain, Grant (1990) argues for a distinction between
'principled' and 'instrumental' non-directiveness. He suggests that
principled non-directiveness arises out of a therapist's commitment to
be non-directive *on principle,* and without any attachment as to
particular outcome. It is, he says (ibid., p. 81), 'an attitude that
provides a "space" for growth, not one that intends to cause it'.
Instrumental non-directiveness (ibid., p. 78) is more an expression of a
pragmatic strategy 'to bring about growth or empower clients'. 'Respect
for the client' he says (ibid., p. 79) 'is not absent, but is allied to
or tempered with a pragmatic concern with promoting growth.' The debate
about whether person-centred therapy is non-directive or not is, he says
(ibid., p. 79), 'better understood as a dispute about what is the
morally best way of doing therapy'. This echoes Rogers' conviction above
that the choice to be non-directive or not carries more than merely
clinical implications. Grant continues (ibid., p. 79):

::: cite
We must be able to argue why it is good to engage in the practices we
advocate. We should be able to do this because psychotherapy is a moral
enterprise. It is an activity which can and does affect the well-being
of others, and which is based on ideas about right and wrong.
:::

Patterson (2000b, p. 181) calls Grant's distinction 'ridiculous, patent
non-sense'! 'Therapy' he says (ibid., p. 182) 'is an influencing
process. The intent of the therapist is to influence the client. If this
were not so, the therapist would not be practicing.' These comments
indicate that the debate is not simply about whether we're directive or
non-directive, but more subtly about how directive we are, and in what
areas, and to what ends. As therapists we have, may negotiate, and
maintain structure, for example, with regard to time and fees. We may
offer structure in terms of providing materials for creative, expressive
therapy. This does not mean that we direct the client to have a
particular experience. In the context of research into group
facilitation, Coghlan and McIlduff (1990) draw a useful distinction
between intervention and structure on the one hand and direction on the
other.

Brazier (1995, p. 102) provides one way out of the impasse:

::: cite
Some would say that in therapy one should never go beyond what the
client has given us. On the other hand, the whole purpose of therapy is
to help the client go beyond what they have come with. In order to tune
into the client's world, the rule of staying within what the client has
expressed is vitally important. Once one has tuned in, however,
therapist and client are together occupying a privileged space in which
new possibilities may spontaneously occur to either of them. What is
crucial then is whether they ring true to the client rather than whether
the client actually spoke them first.
:::

We find this argument compelling. Brazier sees the significance of
sustained empathic attention, and sees also that when therapist and
client achieve a level of mutuality, the debate about what's directive
and what's not becomes less important. This is also echoed by Brodley
(1999/2005, p. 1) who views the non-directive attitude as intrinsic to
Rogers' formulation of the therapeutic conditions: 'The concept of
non-directivity comes into existence *within the meaning* of these
therapeutic attitudes -- they are the source of the non-directive
principle.'

*Intersubjectivity*

Therapist and client meet as two subjective persons. To this encounter a
therapist may bring an understanding of intersubjectivity (see [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml)), or the meeting of two subjective worlds or frames of
reference. As Laing (1967, p. 53) puts it: 'Human beings relate to each
other not simply externally, like two billiard balls, but by the
relations of the two worlds of experience that come into play when two
people meet.' Rogers (1959b) offers a theoretical framework which
includes a theory of self and ideas about how a therapist may use his
experience in the service of the client. As we acknowledge in [Chapter
4](#c4.xhtml), this 'use of self' has subsequently been elaborated by
self psychologists, who offer a particular understanding of how
therapeutic relationships are disrupted and restored. If we focus on the
intersubjective world, we will ask 'What is happening here between us?',
rather than 'What's happening to you?' or 'What's happening to me?'.
Stolorow and Atwood (1992) frame this question in terms of the interface
between the therapist's subjective world and the client's subjective
world, and the meanings of the dynamics that this interface creates.

Parlett (1991, p. 75) suggests that one implication of this approach is
that 'when two people converse or engage with one another in some way,
something comes into existence which is a product of neither of them
exclusively ... there is a shared field, a common communicative home,
which is mutually constructed'. Intersubjectivity thus supports a
'two-person' mode of therapeutic action (see Stark, 2000).

*Co-creative relating*

This brings us to the concept of co-creativity. We discussed
constructivism in [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml). This philosophical perspective
argues that 'reality' is constructed. Two people talking together
co-construct their shared reality. This, of course, includes disputing
and negotiating, constructing and deconstructing. As Sapriel (1998, p.
42) puts it:

::: cite
this better reflects the reality that meaning is being co-created by
both subjectivities ... with neither person holding a more objectively
'true' version of reality than the other. It reflects an appreciation of
the inevitable, moment-by-moment participation of the therapist's
subjective organisation of experience in a system of mutual influence.
:::

For us, this describes an active, engaged and participative approach to
therapeutic relating which is entirely compatible with person-centred
principles and therapeutic process.

Writing about transactional analysis, Summers and Tudor (2000) identify
three principles which underpin co-creative therapy:

1.  The principle of 'we'-ness. That the therapeutic relationship or
    therapeutic relating is a more potent phenomenon than either
    therapist or client alone. Therapists seem to avoid the 'we' word as
    if it connotes some form of collusion with the client. We think that
    using 'we' can be more inclusive and sharing, and can acknowledge
    and support a sense of homonomy.
2.  The principle of shared responsibility. That co-creative therapy
    (p. 24) 'supports the practical manifestation of interdependence,
    co-operation and mutuality within the therapeutic relationship by
    emphasizing shared client-therapist responsibility for the
    therapeutic process'. *One partially deaf client kept apologising
    for not hearing what his therapist had said. The therapist responded
    by owning her own responsibility to talk more clearly and more
    loudly and, at the same time, asked the client to tell her when he
    couldn't hear her so well.*
3.  The principle of present-centred development. Co-creative therapy
    emphasises the importance of a present-centred perspective on human
    development as distinct from a past-centred model of child
    development (see [Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and [4](#c4.xhtml)). What
    follows from this principle (p. 25) is that 'the therapeutic focus
    is on supporting the here-and-now developmental direction of the
    client'. This principle, in particular, runs counter to conventional
    wisdom about transference, to which we turn.

*Transferential relating*

Rogers acknowledges that the notion of transference is useful in so far
as it describes a process by which patterns of past relationships inform
and influence the way we make relationships in the present. In keeping
with his phenomenological, experiential and existential leanings,
however, he is more interested in exploring what's present and immediate
than he is in unearthing what's past. This means that person-centred
practice is inherently present-centred rather than past-centred, and
attends to relationships for what they signify in the present rather
than for anything they may tell us about the past.

This does not deny the existence, or even the significance, of
transference or 'transference attitudes' (Rogers, 1951). It does,
however, recognise that even if we're talking about the past, and even
if we're relating to our therapist as if she were our mother or father,
we're doing so inevitably in the immediate present. An analyst might
foster a transference as a way of helping a patient expose and examine
the past, in order to make eventual sense of the present. A
person-centred practitioner is more likely to stay with what's present
in the belief that that will expose whatever a client most needs to
attend to next.

Shlien (1984) takes a more extreme view than Rogers. He argues that
transference is a myth, and that we don't need to look at all to the
past to explain or make sense of present behaviour. There are, he says,
enough reasons in the present to account for present behaviour. Even if
we behave now as we did then, we do so not *because* we did so then, but
*for the same reasons* as we did so then.

These thoughts about past, present and future remind us that Taft, whose
influence Rogers acknowledges, sees time as one of the inevitable
limitations of therapeutic relationships. She argues (1933, p. 12) that
a client's relationship with and use of the therapeutic hour indicates,
or even mirrors, his relationship with and use of his life:

::: cite
Time represents more vividly than any other category the necessity of
accepting limitations as well as the inability to do so, and symbolizes
therefore the whole problem of living. The reaction of each individual
to limited or unlimited time betrays his deepest and most fundamental
life pattern, his relation to the growth process itself, to beginnings
and endings, to being born and to dying.
:::

If he resolves his relationship with the limitations of the therapeutic
hour he will, therefore, also resolve his relationship with the
existential limitations of his life.

Finally in this section, Bohart *et al.* (1993) suggest that human
beings tend naturally to look towards the future rather than at the
past, and suggest that therapists can, in the present, choose to attend
to and empathise with whatever their clients express of hope or future
aspiration.

*Dialogue and mutuality*

The ideas above to do with intersubjectivity and co-creative relating
mean that person-centred relating is characterised by dialogue and
mutuality. If we see constructivism as the philosophy of process, and
intersubjectivity and co-creativity as constituting the theory, then
dialogue is the practice and mutuality the outcome.

Dialogue implies a conversation or exchange between two (or more)
people. Frankl (1963), De Mare, Piper and Thompson (1991), and Friedman
(1992) all talk about dialogue as a form of therapy. Friedman's thinking
about the place of dialogue in therapy is influenced by the
psychological views of Martin Buber, whose influence Rogers also
acknowledges. Through dialogue, client and therapist acknowledge each
other's voices and co-create the meaning of what they hear. It is the
visible outworking of the philosophy and theory.

The concept of mutuality in person-centred therapy refers to the idea
that the therapeutic relationship is, in some ways, reciprocal. The
client learns from their work with the therapist; the therapist learns
about herself from her work with the client. Mearns (1994, p. 6)
describes mutuality as 'where the counsellor and client understand each
other across different levels of perspective'. Merry (1999, p. 67)
regards some degree of mutuality as characteristic of effective therapy
relationships: 'there is a sense that the two people are mutually
engaged in exploring meanings and working towards understanding. In
successful therapeutic relationships, mutuality can develop into an
intimate and close sharing of thoughts, emotions and experiences.' We
think this epitomises effective therapy in which the two parties
co-regulate (see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)). We may say, to paraphrase
Schore (1994), that person-centred therapy facilitates the patterns of
affect regulation that integrate organismic growth, and allows for a
continuity of inner experience. Whilst we see this process as co-created
and co-regulated, we do not see mutuality as symmetrical. Aron (1996)
makes the point that mutuality is not symmetrical, and that the focus of
attention remains with the client's process.

In this chapter we conclude our discussion of the theory and practice of
person-centred therapy. In the next and final chapter we consider the
environmental context of this therapy.
::::::::::::::::::::::

[]{#c9.xhtml}

::::::: chapter
# Chapter 9 Environment

::: cite
An old text says, 'If you do not know a man, look at his friends; if you
do not know a ruler look at his attendants.' Environment is the
important thing! Environment is the important thing!

Hsun-tzu

Always think of the universe as one living organism, with a single
substance and a single soul; and observe how all things are submitted to
the single perceptivity of this one whole, all are moved by its single
impulse, and all play their part in the causation of every event that
happens. Remark the intricacy of the skein, the complexity of the web.

Marcus Aurelius

We must recognize that the human organism is not an isolated entity,
sufficient unto itself. Every individual is born, lives, and dies
inseparably from the larger contexts of physical, social, political, and
spiritual influences. The laws governing the physical universe are not
separate from those governing the functions of living organisms ... we
must begin by comprehending clearly the setting in which the human being
is found, how it influences him, and in turn how he affects it.

George Vithoulkas
:::

Person-centred therapy is an environmental model of therapy. First, the
notion of therapeutic conditions, necessary, sufficient or otherwise,
makes the therapeutic environment integral to the process and outcome of
therapy. Client and therapist are heteronomous to each other, each a
part of the other's environment. Together they co-create the therapeutic
environment. Second, and perhaps more centrally, as others including
Angyal (1941) and Barrett-Lennard (1996) and we argue, the organism
cannot be understood outside of its environment. As we emphasise
throughout this book, the organism -- and, more broadly, the person --
is in a dynamic, transactional relationship with its environment (see
Rogers, 1959b). We think it is relevant, therefore, to discuss the
environment or context of the client, whether individual, couple, family
or group. Taking this one step further we also think it is important to
reflect on person-centred therapy in its environmental context. Our
focus in this last chapter, therefore, is on the environment external to
person-centred therapy: the field, as it were, in which person-centred
therapy and its practitioners stand, act, interact and impact. In the
first part of the chapter we consider three environments: the
intellectual, the ethical and the professional. In the second part we
discuss the extent to which person-centred therapy is or may be seen as
an integrative therapy. In the third part, which also concludes this
book, we reflect on person-centred therapy in its own terms.

\

## Person-centred therapy: Environmental understandings {#c9.xhtml_clnk1}

We think that the broader, environmental context of theory and practice
is important, especially from an organismic perspective. Just as the
environment is the context for the organism, so the social, political
and cultural environment is the context for person-centred therapy
itself. Two books have addressed this especially. Van Belle's (1980)
study of Rogers in relation to his view of therapy, personality and
interpersonal relations is a major, if relatively unknown, contribution
to the literature. Barrett-Lennard (1998) discusses the sociopolitical
and cultural context of the beginnings of client-centred therapy,
including Franklin Roosevelt's 'New Deal' programme, and juxtaposes his
presidency with Rogers' directions, steps and style.

\

### The intellectual environment

\

In this book we acknowledge the intellectual environment of
person-centred therapy, with regard to the ideas and historical
antecedents which have informed and shaped it. We comment on the
autobiographical nature of theory (see Rogers, 1967, and the
Introduction). We emphasise the organismic origins and the relational
nature of person-centred theory. We note that person-centred therapy is
often located within the school or third 'force' of humanistic
psychology. We share Mearns and Thorne's (2000) critique of this broad
categorisation (see the Introduction) which, in any case, does not do
justice to Maslow's (1962) vision of humanistic psychology as
'epi-Freudian' and 'epi-behaviouristic', that is, building upon previous
analytic and behavioural forces. For us, Pine's (1990) quadri-partite
analysis of conceptual domains of psychoanalysis offers a more coherent,
meta-theoretical framework for an understanding of the more general
field of psychotherapy. In his eponymous book, he summarises the
substantive phenomena *of Drive, Ego, Object and Self (see* [Box
9.1](#c9.xhtml_box9.1)).

::: box
[*Box 9.1* Pine's taxonomy of drive, ego, object relations and self
psychology]{#c9.xhtml_box9.1}

  ----------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Drive psychology              Urges, motivation
  Ego psychology                Modes of defence and adaptation
  Object relations psychology   Relationships, their internalisation, distortion and repetition
  Self psychology               Phenomena of differentiation and boundary formation, of personal agency and authenticity, and of self-esteem
  ----------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

Pine omits organismic psychology from his conceptual analysis, probably
because he was more concerned with the history of psychoanalysis, and
with an integrative view of the phenomena under discussion, than with
providing a comprehensive, conceptual history of psychology. In this
book, we reclaim the conceptual domain of organismic psychology as the
under-pinning of person-centred therapy. In doing so, we consider the
phenomena Pine identifies from an organismic perspective and framework
(see [Box 9.2](#c9.xhtml_box9.2)).

::: box
[*Box 9.2* The location of discussions in this present work, in terms of
Pine's taxonomy]{#c9.xhtml_box9.2}

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Drive, urges, motivation                                                                          Discussed in the context of the organism's tendency to actualise ([Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml))
  Ego, defence and adaptation                                                                       Discussed in terms of self and person ([Chapters 4](#c4.xhtml) and [5](#c5.xhtml))
  Object relations, relationships, their internalisation, distortion and repetition                 Discussed as 'subject relations' ([Chapters 4](#c4.xhtml), [6](#c6.xhtml) and [8](#c8.xhtml))
  Self, differentiation and boundary formation, personal agency and authenticity, and self-esteem   Discussed in relation to the organism ([Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)) and self ([Chapter 4](#c4.xhtml))
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
:::

Organismic theory takes a holistic approach to the study of the person
(see [Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)). Research investigations based on
organismic theory focus on the *total* person, within the context of her
environment, and not on isolated psychological functions and
functioning. Within person-centred therapy such research has taken
different forms: from early research based on the methodology of the
Q-sort, which informs a number of contributions in Rogers and Dymond
(1954); co-operative experiential enquiry (see Reason & Heron,
2002/1986); heuristics, a method of enquiry which proceeds towards an
unknown goal by incremental exploration (see, for example, Barrineau &
Bozarth, 2002/1989; Moustakas, 1990; Merry, 2004); through to
hermeneutic inquiry, which is based on the view that the study of person
can only be carried out through a distinctive human science (see, for
instance, Guba & Lincoln, 1990).

Organismic theory is also all-encompassing. Hall and Lindzey (1978)
argue that it offers a broad base for understanding the total organism.
They distinguish this from a narrow preoccupation with such things as
learning and perception, for example, which they say is true of gestalt
psychology. This reminds us of the importance of and necessity for a
holistic, multi-dimensional and multi-disciplinary approach to the study
of the organism. Viewing and locating person-centred psychology as an
organismic psychology forges its intellectual links historically with
psychobiology (see Rennie, 1943), psychosomatics (see Dunbar, 1954),
neurology (see Taylor, 1931), neuropsychiatry (see Goldstein, 1934/95)
and, currently, with developments in neuroscience and evolutionary
psychology (see [Chapters 2](#c2.xhtml) and [4](#c4.xhtml)).

Person-centred therapy is widely acknowledged (McLeod, 2003) as one of
the first approaches to psychotherapy to conduct substantial research
into its own processes and outcomes, research which has informed and
still influences psychotherapy research in general. Van Belle (in press,
2005) also acknowledges that Rogers was probably the first therapist to
advocate and to practice empirical research, and that, in some sense,
this makes him a positivist. However, Van Belle goes on to argue that,
in terms of his basic intent and the tools that he and his colleagues
used, Rogers was anti-positivist.

Research in psychotherapy is as important now as ever, and perhaps even
more important, given the gap between research and practice for most
practitioners, for discussion of which see McLeod (2003). We see a
number of reasons for promoting this aspect of the intellectual
environment which person-centred and other therapies inhabit:

- Holism -- and diversity. We live in a diverse world, culturally,
  spiritually, politically, intellectually, and therapeutically. As we
  espouse holism, we take a holistic approach to the study of the person
  and a particular approach to therapy. This means adopting research
  methods which are consistent with the approach *and,* as we stated in
  the Introduction, being open to research which refutes theory or
  practice.
- Duty of care. Some people view research as part of a duty of care that
  practitioners have towards their clients. This involves being able to
  read and understand the implications of research across theoretical
  orientations, and to be cognisant of research methods and findings.
  With the increase in psychotherapy training courses validated at
  Masters' level, and especially those offering MSc degrees, this
  perceived duty is becoming increasingly framed as a necessary skill to
  fulfil both academic and professional requirements.
- The therapeutic relationship and therapeutic relating. Psychotherapy
  outcome research shows consistently that the therapeutic relationship
  is a significant factor in determining the effectiveness of therapy.
  Some studies put the significance of this factor as high as 40%. Given
  the history of person-centred therapy as 'relationship therapy',
  person-centred therapists are -- or should be -- particularly
  interested in this. The number of approaches to therapy suggests that
  no one approach has a monopoly on the truth. This makes it more
  important that we have an overview of such factors as the significance
  of the therapeutic relationship.
- Reflexivity. Reflective and critical consciousness is a feature of the
  human condition and our tendency to actualise, our aspiration, or
  *physis* (see [Chapter 3](#c3.xhtml)). In this we draw on Rogers'
  (1969, 1983) own views about education and learning, as well as
  Schon's (1983) seminal work *The Reflective Practitioner,*
  Merry (2004) takes this logic further and sees supervision as a form
  of heuristic inquiry.
- Advancing the approach. As we have said, person-centred therapy has,
  historically, been well researched (see Rogers, 1942; Rogers *et al.,*
  1967; Seeman, 1990). In 1956 the American Psychological Association
  honoured Rogers, along with Wolfang KÃ¶hler and Kenneth W. Spence, with
  its first Distinguished Scientific Contribution Award. His citation
  acknowledged him: 'for formulating a testable theory of psychotherapy,
  and for extensive systematic research to exhibit the value of the
  method and explore and test the implications of the theory' (cited in
  Kirschenbaum & Henderson, 1990b, p. 201). More recently,
  person-centred therapy has stood the test of comparative trials (see
  Friedli *et al.,* 1997; King *et al.,* 2000).

In addition to the more generic reasons outlined above, research into
person-centred therapy may also counter some of the misrepresentations
of the theory. For instance, most researchers acknowledge the
person-centred contribution to process research and the identification
of process variables which make a difference to outcome (see [Chapter
8](#c8.xhtml)).

\

### The professional environment

\

Since the birth of psychotherapy, there have been fierce debates, at
times leading to splits, about the nature of this activity, its status
as a profession allied to medicine, and the requirements for training
and qualification. Whether we like it or not we inhabit a professional
environment, full of stimulation and support, co-operation and
competition, envy and gossip. The professional environment in the UK and
many other countries is highly organised and structured. Professional
associations and bodies accredit or validate training courses and
register individual therapists. There is also in the UK currently a move
towards the statutory registration of psychotherapists, a move which
government and key professional bodies support. The professional
environment is also increasingly competitive. Students and trainees are
increasingly expected to gain multiple qualifications, vocational and
academic, and to seek accreditation or registration.

Person-centred therapy holds a particular position in this environment
on several counts:

1.  Psychotherapy & counselling. Person-centred therapy, historically,
    holds that there is no difference between psychotherapy and
    counselling. Perceived differences are, in our view, based on
    spurious claims about 'depth' (see [Chapter 1](#c1.xhtml)), focus,
    or self-defining assertions: that one is 'long-term', for example,
    and the other 'short-term'. Differences between psychotherapy and
    counselling are often based on history, context, organisation,
    interest, politics, and theoretical orientation (see Tudor, 1997).
    Generally, psychotherapy and psychotherapists have more status than
    counselling and counsellors and, for various historical reasons, the
    person-centred approach is seen as more aligned to counselling than
    psychotherapy. This prejudice has resulted in some person-centred
    therapists experiencing a glass ceiling in terms of qualification,
    registration and access to employment.
2.  Anti-institutional. The second count lies in the autobiography of
    person-centred therapy, and, in effect, of Carl Rogers himself. In a
    series of papers written towards the end of his life, when he was
    more interested in wider social issues and applications of his
    theory, he (1978) talks about 'a new political figure' gaining
    influence and fostering an emerging culture. In 1980(a) he describes
    twelve qualities of the 'person of tomorrow', including: having a
    desire for authenticity, and wholeness; having an authority within;
    being a process person; and being anti-institutional. What this
    means is that, in her practice and in her professional life, the
    person-centred therapist is often free-thinking, questioning,
    assertive and anti-institutional. The principal argument used in
    favour of statutory registration, for instance, is that it protects
    the public. Despite Mowbray's (1995) excellent work which debunks
    this argument, it is still widely used to support the move towards
    statutory registration. Person-centred therapists are -- or should
    be -- sceptical of and opposed to any mandatory or coercive system,
    including any regulation based exclusively on external standards.
3.  Deconstruction. We have argued that the principles of constructivism
    are consistent with person-centred philosophy, and that an
    appreciation of its principles enhances both our understanding of
    theory, and our practice of therapy (see Introduction).
    Constructivism involves deconstruction, the analysis and dissolution
    of fixed concepts or discourses. Parker (1999) and House (2003) have
    both made significant contributions to the process of deconstructing
    some of the givens of psychotherapy. House deconstructs a number of
    specific psychother-apeutic ideas, such as boundaries,
    confidentiality, resistance, safety, and what he refers to as
    'profession-centred therapy'. From its beginnings, person-centred
    theory has enshrined a similar willingness to question both
    'received' wisdom and its own evolving customs and practice.

As individual therapists we help individual clients to examine their own
fixed ideas and to find the words which describe their experiences most
comprehensively and accurately. This demands of both client and
therapist a willingness to deconstruct and reconstruct meaning and
understanding continuously in the light of new experiencing. Consistent
with our point in [Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml) about co-creative relating, we
see this as a co-constructive process. Similarly, we believe that it is
consistent with person-centred philosophy and principles to deconstruct
and reconstruct our professional environment in the light of organismic
experiencing.

\

### The ethical environment

\

'The greatest trust between man and man' says Bacon (1625/1906, p. 62),

::: cite
is the trust of giving counsel. For in other confidences men commit the
parts of life; their lands, their goods, their children, their credit,
some particular affairs; but to such as they make their counsellors,
they commit the whole: by how much the more they are obliged to all
faith and integrity.
:::

Bacon's argument is the basis for our assertion, which we hope is
uncontentious, that the practice of psychotherapy and counselling makes
ethical demands of its practitioners. If, as Angyal argues, the organism
tends as much towards homonomy as autonomy; and if, as Rogers argues,
the organism of both therapist and client is essentially trustworthy,
truth-seeking and pro-social; then we might reasonably imagine that
codes of ethics and professional practice, and procedures for
complaints, would be rarely necessary.

One person in crisis or distress, however, seeks help from another who
offers it. The potential for abuse or exploitation is obvious. Masson
(1988/ 89) goes so far as to suggest that this potential is so great and
so intrinsic to the process of therapy that the whole endeavour is
necessarily compromised from the start, whether potential becomes actual
or not. Concern about exploitation and fear of litigation show in the
many recent books and articles about boundaries, ethics, complaints and
grievances, and in the energy and attention with which professional
bodies revise, maintain and implement their various ethical codes and
frameworks.

The central question for us is whether these responses to the risk of
abuse or exploitation are necessary, adequate or helpful. They seem to
us to start from a position of mistrust, and to work on a model of
punishment. While we acknowledge the problem they set out to address,
our view is that they encourage therapists to adopt a protected or
defensive stance that may, indeed, limit the risk to their clients but
which, at the same time, almost certainly also limit the likelihood of
deeply creative or radical therapeutic practice. With Murdoch (1985, p.
78) we take the view that concern about ethics offers more than this:
'Ethics should not be merely an analysis of ordinary mediocre conduct,
it should be a hypothesis about good conduct and about how this can be
achieved.'

\

## Person-centred therapy as an integrative therapy {#c9.xhtml_clnk2}

Integration is the *zeitgeist* in psychotherapy. It's the new eclectic.
Despite the argument that integration requires a meta-theoretical
framework into which to integrate the separate parts or elements of
therapy, there are many 'integrative' practitioners who have completed a
first-level training which introduces them to a breadth of
psychotherapeutic approaches but not a depth of any one approach,
discipline or organising principle. As a public description of a
modality of or approach to therapy, 'integrative' does not *per se*
define or describe the integrating principle or model used. So, people
who use the term and want to communicate what they do, have to explain
their organising principle, whether it's therapeutic conditions (Rogers,
1957, 1959b), 'phenomenological considerations' (Thorne, 1967), the
therapeutic relationship (Gelso & Carter, 1985, 1994; Clarkson, 1990),
or a conceptual, paradigm analysis (Tudor, 1996).

*Frameworks for integration*

There are a number of ideas within person-centred psychology and therapy
which provide organising frameworks for integrating theory and
therapeutic practice. Here we are concerned to identify meta-theoretical
frame-works. We differ in this from Worsley (2004) who explicitly
eschews this task, preferring to describe his own 'idiosyncratic'
practice of being integrative. We discuss two of these frameworks: the
organism and its tendency to actualise; and the integrative nature of
the therapeutic conditions. These frameworks are relevant to
person-centred therapists and to therapists who work within and draw on
other theoretical approaches and methods.

The first point to make here is that organismic theory is integrative.
According to Hall and Lindzey (1978, p. 298): 'Organismic theory
emphasizes the unity, integration, consistency, and coherence of the
normal personality. Organization is the natural state of the organism;
disorganization is pathological and is usually brought about by the
impact of an oppressive or threatening environment.' Personality
integration is viewed as criterial to mental health, a perspective which
has been elaborated by researchers and practitioners in the generic
field of mental health, such as Jahoda (1958), as well as by writers
within the person-centred tradition, such as Seeman (1984). In the field
of psychology, psychotherapy and counselling there has, particularly
over the past twenty years, been a growing interest in integrative
theory. We view the person-centred theory of therapy, rooted in
organismic theory, as *ipso facto,* an integrative theory and practice.
Thus when, as therapists, we help a client to acknowledge health,
alongside their illness, we are helping them to have a more integrated
view of themselves, which we may see in terms of their personality (see
[Chapter 5](#c5.xhtml)). We note in [Chapter 7](#c7.xhtml) that Rogers
often uses 'integrated' as a synonym for 'congruent'.

Rogers (1957) describes the six conditions which his own clinical
experience and 'pertinent research' suggested were both necessary and
sufficient for effecting therapeutic personality change. He makes the
point that these describe the conditions and qualities relevant for
therapists or helpers in *any* situation in which constructive
personality change occurs. In this paper Rogers (p. 230) says explicitly
that 'it is not stated that these six conditions are the essential
conditions for client-centered therapy, and that other conditions are
essential for other types of psychotherapy'. In other words these
conditions pertain for all types of therapy. Thus, this paper may be
viewed, as Bozarth (1996) puts it, as an 'integrative statement'. The
integrative nature of Rogers' 1957 statement of the conditions is,
arguably, made more clear by the fact that he refers (a) to
relationships which occur in everyday life, and (b) to programmes other
than therapy that are aimed at constructive personality growth, such as
leadership and educational programmes, and the work of community
agencies.

\

### From integration to integrating

\

In the same way as we prefer the term 'relating' to 'relationship' (see
[Chapter 8](#c8.xhtml)), we advocate a shift in thinking from
'integration' (noun) and even 'integrative' (adjective) to 'integrating'
(verb). This acknowledges the *process* of integrating and carries a
sense of movement and fluidity rather than fixity or rigidity. Again, we
look for a meta-theoretical perspective, and find this within the
person-centred and experiential tradition. Warner (2000) has developed a
framework by which she characterises different therapist responses and
styles or 'levels of interventiveness':

- Level 1 describes the therapist's pure intuitive contact (and is
  largely a hypothetical level).
- Level 2 is when the therapist conveys their understanding of the
  client's internal frame of reference.
- Level 3 describes the situation in which the therapist brings material
  into the therapeutic relationship in ways which foster client choice.
- Level 4 is when the therapist brings material into the therapeutic
  relationship from their own frame of reference, from a position of
  authority or expertise.
- Level 5 describes when the therapist brings material into the
  therapeutic relationship that is outside the client's frame of
  reference, and in such a way that the client is unaware of both the
  intervention/s and the therapist's purpose or motivation.

Warner suggests that there is a fundamental dividing line between levels
3 and 4: between the more client-directed therapies which focus on the
nature of the client's process (levels 1 to 3), and more authoritative
therapies (levels 4 and 5). Warner also suggests (p. 34) that 'there are
very real dangers in trying to mix interventions and theories at
different levels of intervention, since these therapies are grounded in
quite different types of therapeutic relationship'. We view this
framework as person-centred in that it has the concept of the client's
internal frame of reference as the criterion for its distinctions.
Whilst Warner uses this framework to generalise about 'therapies', we
take this as more descriptive of how a therapist intervenes from moment
to moment. We also view this as an integrating framework in that we may
use it to understand different therapies as well as different
therapeutic 'interventions', transactions and responses.

Reflecting on the logic of integration in the context of training,
Clarkson (1995, p. 280) suggests that 'a systemic integrative approach
to psychotherapy integration does not necessarily seek to provide one
true model of integration'. Respecting the vitality of individual
difference of both trainees and clients, she argues that training needs
to be *integrating* rather than integrative. In this sense, with its
emphasis on personal development, a person's training in person-centred
therapy is -- or should be -- based on a thorough, personal process of
integrating ideas into a whole, which is consistent with the student's
personal philosophy, theory, and practice.

\

## Final reflection {#c9.xhtml_clnk3}

We end with a brief reflection on what Sanders (2000) identifies as
three 'primary principles' of the person-centred approach:

- The primacy of the actualising tendency.
- The necessity and sufficiency of six therapeutic conditions.
- The primacy of the non-directive attitude, at least in terms of the
  content of the helping situation.

Sanders distinguishes these principles from secondary principles such as
autonomy, equality and holism. We and others have found Sanders'
clarification and presentation of these principles helpful (see Tudor,
2003; Embleton Tudor *et al.,* 2004). We have a number of reservations
about Sanders' formulation:

1.  We have already discussed our preference for referring to 'the
    tendency to actualise' rather than 'the actualising tendency'.
2.  Sanders conflates philosophical principles, such as primacy,
    necessity and sufficiency, with clinical principles, such as the
    non-directive attitude. Primacy and necessity are evaluations of
    principles, based on philosophical logic (see [Chapter
    6](#c6.xhtml)) rather than the principles themselves. We prefer to
    keep them separate.
3.  By ordering them in the way he does, Sanders appears to separate the
    non-directive attitude from the tendency to actualise, from which it
    arises and which it follows.
4.  Finally, distinguishing secondary from primary principles creates a
    false hierarchy, especially as some of the 'secondary' principles
    are, as we discuss above, qualities or properties of the organism
    ([Chapter 2](#c2.xhtml)) and its tendency to actualise ([Chapter
    3](#c3.xhtml)).

Placing the organism at the heart of the theory of the person-centred
approach clarifies a number of problems about this formulation, and
allows us to revise it as follows:

- Principle 1: That the human organism, as other organisms, has a
  tendency to actualise.
- Principle 2: That, therefore, in order to be facilitative of another,
  a therapist adopts a non-directive attitude to her client's
  experience.
- Principle 3: That, therapist and client create, and continually
  co-create, certain facilitative conditions.
:::::::

[]{#app1.xhtml}

::: forward
# Appendix 1 References for Epigrams

## Introduction {#app1.xhtml_clnk1}

Eliot, G. (1995) *Daniel Deronda.* Harmondsworth: Penguin. (Original
work published 1876)

Tawney, R.H. (1961) *The Acquisitive Society.* London: Fontana.

Rogers, C.R. & Wood, J.K. (1974) Client-centered theory: Carl Rogers. In
A. Burton (ed.) *Operational Theories of Personality* (pp. 211--58). New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

\

## Chapter 1 {#app1.xhtml_clnk2}

Whitehead, A.N. (1978) *Process and Reality* (D.R. Griffin & D.W.
Sherburne, eds.) (corrected edn.). New York: The Free Press. (Original
work published 1929)

Goldstein, K. (1995) *The Organism.* New York: Zone Books. (Original
work published 1934)

Rogers, C.R. (1957) The necessary and sufficient conditions of
therapeutic personality change. *Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21,*
95--103.

Murdoch, I. (1985) The idea of perfection. In *The Sovereignty of Good*
(pp. 1--45). London: Routledge. (Originally published in 1970)

\

## Chapter 2 {#app1.xhtml_clnk3}

Goldstein op. cit.

Perls, F. (1969) *Ego, Hunger and Aggression.* New York: Vintage.
(Original work published 1947)

Vithoulkhas, G. (1986) *The Science of Homeopathy.* New York: Grove
Press.

Rogers, C.R. (1967) Some of the directions evident in therapy. In *On
Becoming a Person* (pp. 73--106). London: Constable. (Original work
published 1953)

\

## Chapter 3 {#app1.xhtml_clnk4}

Aurelius, M. (1964) *Meditations* (M. Staniforth, trans.).
Harmondsworth: Penguin.

Vogel, A. (undated). Cited online at
[www.alexander-essentials.com/vogel-naturedoctor.php3](http://www.alexander-essentials.com/vogel-naturedoctor.php3)

Rogers, C.R. (1963) The actualizing tendency in relation to 'motives'
and to consciousness. In M.R. Jones (ed.) *Nebraska Symposium on
Motivation. Volume XI in the series Current Theory and Research in
Motivation* (pp. 1--24). Lincoln, NR: University of Nebraska Press.

\

## Chapter 4 {#app1.xhtml_clnk5}

Rogers, C.R. (1951) *Client-Centered Therapy.* London: Constable.

Tillich, P. (1952) *The Courage to Be.* London: Fontana.

Mathews, F. (1991) *The Ecological Self.* London: Routledge.

\

## Chapter 5 {#app1.xhtml_clnk6}

Shakespeare, W. (1600) *Henry IV Part 2.*

Macmurray, J. (1991) *Persons in Relation. Volume II of The Form of the
Personal.* London: Faber & Faber. (Original work published 1961)

\

## Chapter 6 {#app1.xhtml_clnk7}

Marx, K. (1964) *Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations.* London: Lawrence &
Wishart. (Original work published 1858)

Scott Peck, M. (1985) *The Road Less Travelled.* London: Rider.
(Original work published 1978)

Bozarth, J. (1998) Unconditional positive regard. In J.D. Bozarth (1998)
*Person-Centered Therapy: A Revolutionary Paradigm* (pp. 83--8).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Schmid, P. (2004) Back to the client: A phenomenological approach to the
process of understanding and diagnosis. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies,* 3(1), 36--51.

\

## Chapter 7 {#app1.xhtml_clnk8}

Lao Tzu (1962) *The Way of Life According to Lao Tzu* (W. Bynner,
trans.). New York: Capricorn Books.

Allport, G.W. (1983) *Becoming: Basic Considerations for a Psychology of
Personality.* New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. (Original work
published 1955)

Patterson, C.H. (2000a) A unitary theory of motivation and its
counseling implications. In C.H. Patterson *Understanding Psychotherapy:
Fifty Years of Client-Centred Theory and Practice* (pp. 10--21).
Llangarron: PCCS Books. (Original work published 1964)

Gaylin, N. (2002) The relationship: The heart of the matter. In J.C.
Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice* (pp. 339--47). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

\

## Chapter 8 {#app1.xhtml_clnk9}

Roosevelt, F.D. (1972) Undelivered speech. In J.P. Lasch (ed.) *Eleanor:
The Years Alone* (p. 210). New York: W.W. Norton. (Original work
unpublished 1945)

Rogers, C.R. (1970) The process equation of psychotherapy. In J.T. Hart
& T.M. Tomlinson (eds.) *New Directions in Client-Centered Therapy* (pp.
190--205). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original work published 1961)

\

## Chapter 9 {#app1.xhtml_clnk10}

Hsun-tzu (2000) Human nature is evil. In L. Stevenson (ed.) *The Study
of Human Nature: A Reader* (2nd edn.) (pp. 27--33). Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Aurelius op. cit.

Vithoulkhas op. cit.
:::

[]{#app2.xhtml}

::: forward
# Appendix 2 Philosophical contributions to the understanding of self

+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Concept                                                | Definition/Summary  | Origins/Authors   | Developments       |
+========================================================+=====================+===================+====================+
| Ätman\                                                 | Eternal             | Hinduism\         | Jung (1921),       |
| \                                                      | self/individual     | \                 | Wilber (1980).\    |
|                                                        | soul/'soul of the   |                   | \                  |
|                                                        | All'/ultimate or    |                   |                    |
|                                                        | essential self.     |                   |                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Selflessness\                                          | ...based on         | Buddhism\         | Three dimensions   |
| The illusion of the self\                              | transcendentalism.\ | Siddhartha\       | of the self:       |
| \                                                      | \                   | Gautama\          |                    |
| \                                                      | \                   | (The Buddha)\     | - The 'boundless   |
| \                                                      | \                   | (c.560-c.480BCE)\ |   self' (the       |
| \                                                      | \                   | \                 |   highest)         |
|                                                        | \                   | \                 | - The 'inner self' |
|                                                        | \                   |                   |   *(kokoro),* a    |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   fixed core for   |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   self-identity    |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   and subjectivity |
|                                                        |                     |                   | - The social or    |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   interactional,   |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   'face-sensitive' |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   self (the        |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   lowest) (Lebra,  |
|                                                        |                     |                   |   1992).           |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| *Communitas*\                                          |                     |                   | An idealised state |
| \                                                      |                     |                   | of being,          |
| \                                                      |                     |                   | involving          |
| \                                                      |                     |                   | collapsing the     |
|                                                        |                     |                   | boundaries between |
|                                                        |                     |                   | self and other     |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (Turner, 1967).\   |
|                                                        |                     |                   | \                  |
|                                                        |                     |                   | See also Zukav     |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (1979), Capra      |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (1983), Parfit     |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (1984).            |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| *Cogito ergo sum* (I think therefore I am)\            | The self is an      | RenÃ© Descartes\   | Rationalist        |
|                                                        | innate idea,        | (1596--1650)\     | philosophy         |
|                                                        | discernable through | \                 | (Spinoza,          |
|                                                        | intellectual        | \                 | Leibnitz).\        |
|                                                        | intuition.\         |                   | \                  |
|                                                        | \                   |                   | \                  |
|                                                        | \                   |                   | \                  |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| *Conatus*\                                             | The impulse for     | Baruch de         | Self -- 'this      |
| \                                                      | self-preservation.\ | Spinoza\          | special kind of    |
| \                                                      | \                   | (1632--1677)\     | individual, whose  |
|                                                        | \                   | \                 | autonomy and       |
|                                                        |                     |                   | integrity are a    |
|                                                        |                     |                   | function of its    |
|                                                        |                     |                   | interconnectedness |
|                                                        |                     |                   | with its           |
|                                                        |                     |                   | environment'       |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (Mathews, 1994, p. |
|                                                        |                     |                   | 108).              |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Personal identity                                      | Self as personal    | John Locke\       | Empiricist         |
|                                                        | identity, united    | (1632--1704)      | philosophy         |
|                                                        | through             |                   | (Berkeley, Hume).\ |
|                                                        | consciousness.      |                   | \                  |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Perception\                                            | Self as a           | George Berkeley\  | Phenomenalism â    |
| \                                                      | perceiving, active  | (1685--1753)\     | Kant â             |
| \                                                      | being.\             | David Hume\       | phenomenology.\    |
| \                                                      | \                   | (1711--1776)\     | \                  |
| \                                                      | Self as 'but a      | \                 | \                  |
| \                                                      | bundle or           | \                 | \                  |
|                                                        | collection of       |                   | \                  |
|                                                        | different           |                   | \                  |
|                                                        | perceptions' (Hume, |                   |                    |
|                                                        | 1738/1968, p. 239), |                   |                    |
|                                                        | unsupported by      |                   |                    |
|                                                        | senses, to which we |                   |                    |
|                                                        | mistakenly ascribe  |                   |                    |
|                                                        | an identity.        |                   |                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Experiencing self Self-consciousness                   |                     | Immanuel Kant\    | Kant's philosophy, |
|                                                        |                     | (1724--1804)\     | also referred to   |
|                                                        |                     | \                 | as the 'Copernican |
|                                                        |                     |                   | revolution',       |
|                                                        |                     |                   | synthesised        |
|                                                        |                     |                   | rationalism and    |
|                                                        |                     |                   | empiricism â       |
|                                                        |                     |                   | provides the       |
|                                                        |                     |                   | philosophical      |
|                                                        |                     |                   | basis for          |
|                                                        |                     |                   | Ryce-Menuhin's     |
|                                                        |                     |                   | (1988) analytic    |
|                                                        |                     |                   | psychology of the  |
|                                                        |                     |                   | self.              |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Self-awareness\                                        |                     | Georg Hegel       |                    |
| Self-alienation\                                       |                     | (1770--1831)\     |                    |
|                                                        |                     | \                 |                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| 'Authenticity'[^1^](#app2.xhtml_ft1){#app2.xhtml_fn1}\ | 1.  Authenticity as | Friedrich         | â existentialism   |
| \                                                      |     spontaneous     | Nietzsche\        | (Husserl,          |
| \                                                      |     choice.         | (1844--1990)\     | Heidegger, Sartre, |
| \                                                      | 2.  Authenticity as | \                 | Merleau-Ponty).\   |
| \                                                      |     actualising     | \                 | 'To be that self   |
|                                                        |     potential.      | \                 | which one truly    |
|                                                        |                     |                   | is' (Kierkegaard), |
|                                                        | \                   |                   | a phrase Rogers    |
|                                                        | \                   |                   | (1960/67b) uses in |
|                                                        |                     |                   | a paper on         |
|                                                        |                     |                   | personal goals.    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Sense-experience\                                      | 'a self ... is, in  | Alfred J. Ayer\   |                    |
| \                                                      | fact, a logical     | (1910--1989)\     |                    |
|                                                        | construction out of | \                 |                    |
|                                                        | sense-experiences   |                   |                    |
|                                                        | ... \[which\]       |                   |                    |
|                                                        | constitute the      |                   |                    |
|                                                        | sense-history of a  |                   |                    |
|                                                        | self' (Ayer,        |                   |                    |
|                                                        | 1936/71, p. 165).   |                   |                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+
| Quantum self\                                          | Self as elementary  | Danah Zohar       |                    |
| \                                                      | particle system,    | (b.1945)\         |                    |
|                                                        | carrying the        |                   |                    |
|                                                        | properties of waves |                   |                    |
|                                                        | and particles.      |                   |                    |
+--------------------------------------------------------+---------------------+-------------------+--------------------+

[1](#app2.xhtml_fn1){#app2.xhtml_ft1} Whilst Nietzsche did not use the
term 'authenticity' explicitly, the notion of *Wahrhafttigkeit*
(truthfulness) is virtually a synonym for what is referred to in the
later existentialist literature as authentic.
:::

[]{#app3.xhtml}

::: forward
# Appendix 3 A process conception of development and psychotherapy

+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Here we present a process version of Rogers' (1958/67a) stage conception of the process of psychotherapy (see [Chapter 6](#c6.xhtml)). We         |
| complete the gaps in his original work by adding our own (in italic type). We also change some of the language Rogers uses so that, as much as    |
| possible, the elements/scales may be read either way.                                                                                             |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Stage 7        | Stage 6                   | Stage 5                   | Stage 4             | Stage 3        | Stage 2          | Stage 1        |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Occurs as much | A distinctive and often   |                           |                     |                | Only a modest    |                |
| outside as     | dramatic stage\           |                           |                     |                | degree of        |                |
| inside the     | \                         |                           |                     |                | success with     |                |
| therapeutic    | \                         |                           |                     |                | voluntary        |                |
| relationship\  | \                         |                           |                     |                | clients at this  |                |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                | stage            |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | A loosening of feelings\                                                                                        |                |
|                | From a process of experiencing a continually changing flow of feelings ... to remote, unowned feelings, not     |                |
|                | present ...                                                                                                     |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Feelings are   | Feelings are experienced  | Feelings are expressed    | Feelings are        | Fewer/more     | Feelings         | Feelings       |
| experienced    | with immediacy\           | freely as in the present\ | described as        | expression of  | described as     | neither        |
| with immediacy | \                         | \                         | objects in the      | feelings, as   | unowned or as    | recognised nor |
| and richness   | \                         | \                         | present\            | past\          | past objects\    | owned\         |
| of detail\     | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| \              |                           | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| 'In therapy    | '...and there's that same | 'That kinda came out and  | 'It discourages me  | 'There were so | 'The symptom was | *'I don't know |
| here, what has | feeling, being scared     | I just don't understand   | to feel dependent   | many things I  | -- it was --     | why she said   |
| counted is     | that I've so much of      | it. *(Long pause)* I'm    | because it means    | couldn't tell  | just being very  | anything to    |
| sitting down   | this.\                    | trying to get hold of     | I'm kind of         | people --      | depressed.'\     | you. I'm fine. |
| and saying,    | *(Tears)'*\               | what that terror is.'\    | hopeless about      | nasty things I | \                | It's the anger |
| "This is       | \                         | \                         | myself.'\           | did. I felt so | \                | that she gets  |
| what's         | \                         | \                         | \                   | sneaky and     | \                | upset about'*\ |
| bothering me"  | \                         | \                         | \                   | bad.'\         | \                | \              |
| and            | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| play\[ing\]    | \                         |                           |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| around with it |                           |                           |                     | \              |                  |                |
| for a while.'\ |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | A change in the manner of experiencing\                                                                         |                |
|                | From living freely and acceptantly in a fluidity of experiencing ... to a fixity and remoteness of experiencing |                |
|                | ...                                                                                                             |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Process        | The immediacy of          | Experience is loose, not  | Experiencing more/  | Expression     | Experiencing is  | Fixity and     |
| experiencing:  | experiencing is accepted\ | remote, and frequently    | less bound by       | about          | bound by the     | remoteness of  |
| situations are | \                         | occurs with little delay\ | structure of past,  | self-related   | structure of the | experiencing\  |
| experienced    | \                         | \                         | more/less remote,   | experiences as | past\            | \              |
| and            | \                         | \                         | and may occur with  | objects\       | \                | \              |
| interpreted in | \                         | \                         | delay               | \              | \                | \              |
| their newness\ | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| 'When I'm      | 'The butterflies are the  | 'I'm still having a       | 'I feel bound -- by | 'And yet there | 'I suppose the   | *'I don't      |
| working on an  | thoughts closest to the   | little trouble trying to  | something or other. | is the matter  | compensation I   | think it's     |
| idea, the      | surface. Underneath       | figure out what this      | It must be me!      | of, well, how  | always make is   | useful that    |
| whole idea     | there's a deeper flow. I  | sadness -- and this       | There's nothing     | much do you    | ... well, shall  | one should get |
| develops like  | feel very removed from    | weepiness -- means.'\     | else that seems to  | leave yourself | we say, being on | too caught up  |
| \[a\] latent   | it.'\                     | \                         | be doing it.'\      | open to        | an intellectual  | in             |
| image ...It    | \                         | \                         | \                   | marriage ...   | level.'\         | emotions.'*\   |
| comes in *all  | \                         | \                         | \                   | it does place  | \                | \              |
| over.'*\       | \                         | \                         | \                   | a limitation   | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | on your        | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | contacts.'\    |                  | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  | \              |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | **Congruence**\                                                             |                |                  |                |
|                | From congruence ... to incongruence ...                                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Awareness,     | Incongruence between      | A desire to live feelings | Realisation of      | Some           | Incongruence:    | Incongruence,  |
| living that    | experience and awareness  | and to be the 'real me'   | concern about       | recognition of | anxiety and      | i.e.           |
| awareness,     | vividly experienced       | ... a tendency towards    | contradictions and  | vulnerability  | tension\         | discrepancy    |
| open           | through expressed         | exactness in              | incongruencies      | and of         | \                | between the    |
| communication  | congruence\               | differentiation\          | between experience  | contradictions | \                | self as        |
| in the         | \                         | \                         | and self            | in experience\ | \                | perceived and  |
| present\       | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | organismic     |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | experiencing   |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| *'You know,    | 'Who, Me? Beg?... That's  | '...some tension that     | 'I'm not living up  | *'I have great | *'I don't know.  | *'My boss said |
| Ifeel great,   | an emotion I've never     | grows in me, or some      | to what I am. I     | expectations.  | There's no       | I'd lose my    |
| and that's     | felt clearly at all ...   | hopelessness, or some     | really should be    | I really want  | reason to be     | job if I       |
| partly because | I've got such a confusing | kind of incompleteness    | doing more than I   | to achieve     | unhappy. I'm not | didn't         |
| I don't feel   | feeling ... to have these | ... Seems to be, the      | am.'\               | something in   | really sure why  | come.'*\       |
| like I have to | new things come out of    | closest thing it gets to, | \                   | my life, but   | I'm here.'*\     | \              |
| say "I'm       | me.'\                     | is*hopelessness.'*\       | \                   | I'm not sure   | \                | \              |
| feeling great" | \                         | \                         | \                   | if I'm up to   | \                | \              |
| when I'm       | \                         | \                         | \                   | the work       | \                | \              |
| not.'*\        | \                         | \                         | \                   | involved. I    | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         | \                   | know I'm       | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | lazy.'*        | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | **Communication**\                                                                                              |                |
|                | From a willingness to communicate a changing awareness of internal experiencing ... to an unwillingness to      |                |
|                | communicate ...                                                                                                 |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Open           | Self as object tends to   | Feelings expressed freely | Some communication  | Less/freer     | Reluctance to    | Unwillingness  |
| communication  | disappear, communication  | as in the present\        | of self\            | flow of        | communicate      | to communicate |
| of             | of self\                  | \                         | \                   | expression     | self\            | self\          |
| ever-changing  | \                         | \                         | \                   | about the self | \                | \              |
| self\          | \                         | \                         |                     | as object      | \                |                |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| 'realised "I'm | *'I am sad. I am, right   | 'I expected kinda to get  | *'You know, I think | 'I try hard to | *'I'm OK,        | 'Well, I'll    |
| acting         | now, my sadness. There's  | a severe rejection -this  | I'm beginning to    | be perfect     | really, and even | tell you, it   |
| childishly"    | nothing else.'*\          | I expect all the time ... | feel more and to    | with her --    | if I were not    | always seems a |
| and somehow I  | \                         | somehow I guess I even    | feel OK about       | cheerful,      | I'm not sure     | little         |
| chose to do    | \                         | feel it with you.'\       | telling you what    | friendly,      | what good it     | nonsensical to |
| that.'\        | \                         | \                         | I'm feeling.'*\     | intelligent,   | would do to talk | talk about     |
| \              | \                         | \                         | \                   | talkative      | about it.'*\     | one's self     |
| \              | \                         | \                         | \                   | -because I     | \                | except in      |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | want her to    | \                | times of dire  |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | love me.'      |                  | necessity.'\   |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  | \              |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | **Constructs**\                                                                                                 |                |
|                | From developing constructions which are modifiable by each new experience ... to construing experience in rigid |                |
|                | ways ...                                                                                                        |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Personal       | The relevant personal     | Less/further discovery of | Some discovery and  | Personal       | Constructs       | Personal       |
| constructs     | construct is dissolved in | personal constructs as    | recognition of      | constructs     | becoming         | constructs are |
| tentatively    | experiencing\             | such, critical            | personal constructs | becoming/still | more/still       | extremely      |
| reformulated,  | \                         | examination and           | and questioning of  | rigid, but may | rigid,           | rigid\         |
| validated      | \                         | questioning of them\      | their validity\     | be recognised  | unrecognised as  | \              |
| against        | \                         | \                         | \                   | as constructs\ | such, thought of | \              |
| further        | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | as facts\        | \              |
| experience,    | \                         | \                         |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| held fluidly   |                           | \                         |                     |                | \                | \              |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| 'I can see ... | 'I was living so much of  | 'This idea of needing to  | 'It amuses me ...   | 'I felt so     | 'I can't do      | *'That was a   |
| what it would  | my life, and seeing so    | please -- of having to do | it's a little       | guilty for so  | anything right   | silly thing to |
| be like --     | much of my life in terms  | it -- that's really been  | stupid of me and I  | much of my     | -- I can't ever  | do. I am       |
| that it        | of being scared of        | kind of a basic           | feel a little tense | life that I    | finish it.'\     | stupid.'*\     |
| doesn't matter | something.'\              | assumption of my life.'\  | about it ... Humour | felt I         | \                | \              |
| if I don't     | \                         | \                         | has been my bulwark | deserved to be | \                | \              |
| please         | \                         | \                         | all my life.'\      | punished ...   | \                | \              |
| people.'\      | \                         | \                         | \                   | whenever       | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | affection is   | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | involvea it    | \                | \              |
| \              | \                         | \                         |                     | means          | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     | submission.'\  |                  |                |
| \              |                           |                           |                     | \              |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | The individual's relationship to their **problems**\                                                            |                |
|                | From living problems subjectively, and being responsible for their part in the development of problems ... to   |                |
|                | problems being unrecognised (and, therefore, the individual having no desire to change) ...                     |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Problems are   | Problems owned and lived\ | Decreasing/increasing     | Vacillating         | Some           | Problems are     | No problems    |
| not external   | \                         | quality of acceptance of  | feelings of         | recognition of | perceived as     | are recognised |
| or internal,   | \                         | self-responsibility for   | self-responsibility | problems\      | external to      | or perceived\  |
| only phases of | \                         | problems\                 | for problems\       | \              | self\            | \              |
| problems lived | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| subjectively   |                           | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
|                |                           |                           |                     |                | \                |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| *'At best, I   | *'Of course I have        | *'Something in me is      | *'Yes, I do         | *'Well, it     | 'Disorganisation | *'I don't have |
| think          | problems; the difference  | saying, "What more do I   | recognise that not  | seems as if I  | keeps cropping   | any problems.  |
| 'problems' are | is that I recognise them  | have to give up? ...This  | saying things to    | must have a    | up in my life.'\ | In any case,   |
| challenges     | as my problems and, most  | is me talking to me ...   | people is my        | problem.       | \                | you can't      |
| from which I   | of the time, I am more    | It's complaining now."*\  | problem. At the     | People keep    | \                | change what    |
| haven't yet    | interested in how I can   | \                         | same time, some     | telling me I   | \                | you've been    |
| learned what I | resolve them.'*\          | \                         | people don't make   | should get     | \                | given.'*\      |
| need to        | \                         | \                         | it easy.'*          | some help      | \                | \              |
| learn!'*\      | \                         | \                         |                     | ...'*\         | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     | \              | \                | \              |
| \              |                           |                           |                     | \              |                  |                |
| \              |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
|                | The individual's manner of relating **relating**\                                                               |                |
|                | From living openly and freely in relation to others ... to avoiding close relationships ...                     |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| Experiencing   | Internal and external     | Decreasingly/increasingly | Risks relating on   | Some relating  | Little relating  | Close and      |
| of effective   | communicatio n            | freer dialogues with      | the basis of        | to others\     | to others\       | communicative  |
| choice in new  | decreasingly/increasingly | others on the basis of    | feeling\            | \              | \                | relationships  |
| ways of being\ | clear\                    | dialogues within the      | \                   | \              | \                | are construed  |
| \              | \                         | self\                     | \                   | \              | \                | as dangerous   |
|                |                           | \                         |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
| 'I realise how | 'I feel like I know       | 'The real truth of the    | *'I'm not quite     | 'I can feel    | *'I'm a "lone    | *'People       |
| much *I've     | *myself better.* I *know* | matter is that I'm not    | sure how to put     | myself smiling | ranger" ...I've  | either let you |
| changed, like  | what's going on "*inside" | the sweet, forbearing guy | this but I was      | sweetly the    | had my fingers   | down or stab   |
| I've* got back | and can talk more to      | that I try to make out I  | feeling a little    | way my mother  | burned too many  | you in the     |
| to where I     | others about* this.'\     | am ...I don't know why I  | upset with how you  | does.'\        | times to get too | back.'*\       |
| *was: I'm more | \                         | should pretend I'm *not*  | treated me last     | \              | involved with    | \              |
| effective;     | \                         | that way.'\               | week.'*\            | \              | someone.'*\      | \              |
| more           | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| confident;     | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| more assertive | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| when* I*need*  | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| to be -- and   | \                         | \                         | \                   | \              | \                | \              |
| less so when   |                           | \                         |                     | \              |                  | \              |
| Idon't need to |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
| be.'           |                           |                           |                     |                |                  |                |
+----------------+---------------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+----------------+------------------+----------------+
:::

[]{#ref.xhtml}

::: forward
# References

Adorno, T.W., Frenkel-Brunswik, E., Levinson, D.J. & Sanford, R.N.
(1969) *The Authoritarian Personality.* New York: Norton.

Afuape, T. (2004) Challenge to obscuring difference: Being a Black woman
psychologist using SELF in therapy. *Journal of Critical Psychology,
Counselling and Psychotherapy, 4(3),* 165--75.

Alexander, R. (1995) *Folie a Deux.* London: Free Association Books.

Allen, J.R. & Allen, B.A. (1997) A new type of transactional analysis
and one version of script work with a constructivist sensibility.
*Transactional Analysis Journal, 27(2),* 89--98.

Allport, G.W. (1961) Comment on earlier chapters. In R. May (ed.)
*Existential Psychology* (pp. 94--9). New York: Random House.

Allport, G.W. (1983) *Becoming: Basic Considerations for a Psychology of
Personality.* New Haven, NJ: Yale University Press. (Original work
published 1955)

American Psychiatric Association. (1968) *Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders* (2nd edn.). Washington, DC: APA.

American Psychiatric Association. (1980) *Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders* (3rd edn.). Washington, DC: APA.

American Psychiatric Association (1994) *Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders* (4th edn.). Washington, DC: APA.

Anderson, R. & Cissna, K. (1997) *The Martin Buber* -- *Carl Rogers
Dialogue: A New Transcript with Commentary.* Albany, NY: Suny Press.

Anderson, W.T. (1990) *Reality Isn't What It Used to Be: Theatrical
Politics, Ready-to-Wear Religion, Global Myths, Primitive Chic, and
Other Wonders of the Post-modern World.* San Francisco: Harper & Row.

Angyal, A. (1941) *Foundations for a Science of Personality.* New York:
Commonwealth Fund.

Angyal, A. (1973) *Neurosis & Treatment: A Holistic Theory.* New York:
John Wiley & Sons. (Original work published 1965)

Antonovsky, A. (1979) *Health, Stress and Coping: New Perspectives on
Mental and Physical Well-Being.* San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

Aristotle (1955) *Ethics* (J.A.K. Thomson, trans). Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin.

Aron, L. (1996) *A Meeting of Minds: Mutuality in Psychoanalysis.*
Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press.

Atwood, G. & Stolorow, R. (1996) *A Meeting of Minds: Mutuality in
Psycho-analysis.* Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press.

Aurelius, M. (1964) *Meditations* (M. Staniforth, trans). Harmondsworth,
UK: Penguin.

Axline, V. (1950) Play therapy experiences as described by child
participants. *Journal of Consulting Psychology, 14,* 53--63.

Ayer, A.J. (1971) *Language, Truth and Logic.* Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin. (Original work published 1936)

Bachelor, A. (1988) How clients perceive therapist empathy: A content
analysis of 'received' empathy. *Psychotherapy, 25,* 227--40.

Bachelor, A. & Horvath, A. (1999) The therapeutic relationship. In M.A.
Hubble, B.L. Duncan & S.D. Miller (eds.) *The Heart and Soul of Change:
What Works in Therapy* (pp.133--78). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Bacon, F. (1625/1906) *Essays.* London: Dent.

Barker, P. (1996) *Psychotherapeutic Metaphors: A Guide to Theory and
Practice.* New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Barker, R., Dembo, T. & Lewin, K. (1941) *Frustration and Regression: An
Experiment with Young Children.* Iowa City, IA: University of Iowa
Press.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1962) Dimensions of therapist response as causal
factors in therapeutic change. *Psychological Monographs, 76(43).*

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1978) The relationship inventory: Later
developments and applications. JSAS *Catalog of Selected Documents in
Psychology,* 8(68). (MS No. 1732)

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1979) A new model of communicational-relational
systems in intensive groups. *Human Relations, 32,* 841--9.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1986) The relationship inventory now: Issues and
advances in theory, method and use. In L.S. Greenberg & W.M. Pinsof
(eds.) *The Psychotherapeutic Process: A Research Handbook* (pp.
439--76). New York: Guilford Press.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1996) Therapy and groups in context: A study of
developmental episodes in adulthood. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F.
Schmid & R. Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 185--96). Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1997) The recovery of empathy -- toward others
and self. In A.C. Bohart & L.S. Greenberg (eds.) *Empathy Reconsidered:
New Directions in Psychotherapy* (pp. 103--21). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1998) *Carl Rogers' Helping System.* London:
Sage.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (2002) The helping conditions in their context:
Expanding change theory and practice. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies, 1(1&2),* 144--55.

Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (2005) *Relationship at the Centre: Healing in a
Troubled World.* London: Whurr.

Barrineau, P. & Bozarth, J.D. (2002) A person-centered research model.
In D. Cain (ed.) *Classics in the Person-Centered Approach* (pp.
317--22). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books. (Original work published 1989)

Barth, D. (1991) When the patient abuses food. In H. Jackson (ed.)
*Using Self Psychology in Psychotherapy* (pp. 223--42). Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Beaumont, H. (1993) Martin Buber's 'I-Thou' and fragile
self-organization: Gestalt couples therapy. *British Gestalt Journal,
2(2),* 85.

Beck, C.E. (1963) *Philosophical Foundations of Guidance.* Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Becker, H.S. (1967) Whose side are we on? In W.J. Filstead (ed.)
*Qualitative Methodology: Firsthand Involvement with the Social World*
(pp. 239--247). Chicago, IL: Markham.

Beech, C. & Brazier, D. (1996) Empathy for a real world. In R. Hutterer,
G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid & R. Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 331--46).
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Beisser, A. (2004) The paradoxical theory of change. *International
Gestalt Journal, 27(2),* 103--7. (Original work published 1970)

Benjamin, J.B., Li, L., Greenberg, B.D., Murphy, D.L. & Hamer, D.H.
(1996) Population and familial association between the dopamine
regulator gene and measures of novelty seeking. *Nature Genetics, 12,*
81--4.

Bergner, R. & Staggs, J. (1987) The positive therapeutic relationship as
accreditation. *Psychotherapy, 24,* 315--20.

Bergner, R.M. & Holmes, J.R. (2000) Self-concepts and self-concept
change: A status dynamic approach. *Psychotherapy, 37* 36--44.

Berne, E. (1968) *Games People Play.* Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.
(Original work published 1964)

Berne, E. (1971) *The Mind in Action.* New York: Simon & Schuster.
(Original work published 1947)

Berne, E. (1973) *Sex in Human Loving.* Harmondsworth: Penguin.
(Original work published 1970)

Berne, E. (1975) *Transactional Analysis in Psychotherapy.* London:
Souvenir Press. (Original work published 1961)

Biermann-Ratjen, E.-M. (1996) On the way to a client-centered
psychopathology. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid & R. Stipsits
(eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in
Motion* (pp. 11--24). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Biermann-Ratjen, E.-M. (1998) Incongruence and psychopathology. In B.
Thorne & E. Lambers (eds.) *Person-Centred Therapy: A European
Perspective* (pp. 119--30). London: Sage.

Bion, W. (1961) *Experience in Groups and Other Papers.* London:
Tavistock.

Bohart, A.C. (1990) A cognitive client-centered perspective on
borderline personality development. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts & R. Van
Balen (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the
Nineties* (pp. 599--621). Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Bohart, A.C. (1991) Empathy in client-centered therapy: A contrast with
psychoanalysis and self psychology. *Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
31(1),* 34--48.

Bohart, A.C. (2004) How do clients make empathy work? *Person-Centered &
Experiential Psychotherapies, 3(2),* 102--16.

Bohart, A.C. & Greenberg, L.S. (eds.) (1997) *Empathy Reconsidered: New
Directions in Psychotherapy.* Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Bohart, A.C., Humphrey, A., Magallanes, M., Guzman, R., Smiljanich, K. &
Aguallo, S. (1993) Emphasizing the future in empathy responses. *Journal
of Humanistic Psychology, 33(2),* 12--29.

Bohart, A.C. & Tallman, K. (1999) *How Clients Make Therapy Work.*
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Bohm, D. (1983) *Wholeness and the Implicate Order.* London: Ark.
(Original work published 1980)

Bordin, E. (1979) The generalizability of the psychoanalytic concept of
the working alliance. *Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice,
16,* 252--60.

Boring, E.G. & Lindzey, G. (eds.) (1967) *A History of Psychology in
Autobiography, Vol. V.* New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Bowen, M., Miller, M., Rogers, C.R. & Wood, J.K. (1980) Learnings in
large groups: Their implications for the future. In C.R. Rogers *A Way
of Being* (pp. 316--35). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Boy, A.V. & Pine, G. (1982) *Client-Centered Counseling: A Renewal.*
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.

Boyeson, G. & Boyeson, M.L. (1981) *Collected Papers from Biodynamic
Psychology Vol.1.* London: Biodynamic Psychology Publications.

Boyeson, G. & Boyeson, M.L. (1982) *Collected Papers from Biodynamic
Psychology Vol.2.* London: Biodynamic Psychology Publications.

Bozarth, J.D. (1984) Beyond reflection: Emergent modes of empathy. In R.
Levant & J. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach: New Directions in Theory, Research and
Practice* (pp. 59--75). New York: Praeger.

Bozarth, J.D. (1993) Not necessarily necessary, but always sufficient.
In D. Brazier (ed.) *Beyond Carl Rogers* (pp. 92--105). London:
Constable.

Bozarth, J.D. (1996) A theoretical reconceptualization of the necessary
and sufficient conditions for therapeutic personality change. *The
Person-Centered Journal,* 3(1), 44--51.

Bozarth, J.D. (1998) Playing the probabilities in psychotherapy.
*Person-Centred Practice,* 6(1), 9--21.

Bozarth, J.D. (2001) Congruence: A special way of being. In G. Wyatt
(ed.) *Congruence* (pp. 174--83). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Brazier, D. (ed.) (1993a) *Beyond Carl Rogers.* London: Constable.

Brazier, D. (1993b) Introduction. In D. Brazier (ed.) *Beyond Carl
Rogers* (pp. 7--13). London: Constable.

Brazier, D. (1993c) *Congruence.* Occasional Paper No.28. Available from
Eigenwelt Interskill, 53 Grosvenor Place, Newcastle upon Tyne NE2 2RD.

Brazier, D. (1993d) The necessary condition is love: Going beyond self
in the person-centred approach. In D. Brazier (ed.) *Beyond Carl Rogers*
(pp. 72--91). London: Constable.

Brazier, D. (1995) *Zen Therapy.* London: Constable.

Brodley, B.T. (1997) The non-directive attitude in client-centered
therapy. *The Person-Centered Journal, 4(1),* 18--30.

Brodley, B.T. (1999) The actualizing tendency concept in client-centered
theory. *The Person-Centered Journal, 6(2),* 108--20.

Brodley, B.T. (2005) Introduction: About the non-directive attitude. In
B. Levitt (ed.) *Embracing Non-Directivity: Reassessing Person-Centered
Theory and Practice in the 21st Century* (pp. 1--4). Ross-on-Wye, UK:
PCCS Books. (Original work published 1999)

Bronson, M.B. (2000) *Self-Regulation in Early Childhood.* New York:
Guilford Press.

Broucek, F.J. (1982) Shame and its relationship to early narcissistic
developments. *International Journal of Psycho-Analysis, 63,* 369--78.

Brown, M. (1990) *The Healing Touch: An Introduction to Organismic
Psychotherapy.* Mendocino, CA: Liferhythm.

Browning, D. (1966) *Atonement and Psychotherapy.* Philadelphia, PA: The
Westminster Press.

Brunswick, R.M. (1940) The pre-Oedipal phase of libido development. *The
Psychoanalytic Quarterly, 11,* 293--319.

Bulhan, H.A. (1980) Fritz Fanon: The revolutionary psychiatrist. *Race &
Class, 21,* 251--70.

Butler, J.M. & Haigh, G.V. (1954) Changes in the relation between
self-concepts and ideal concepts consequent upon client-centered
counseling. In C.R. Rogers & R.F. Dymond (eds.) *Psychotherapy and
Personality Change* (pp. 55--75). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Butler, J.M. & Rice, L.N. (1963) Adience, self-actualization and drive
theory. In J.M. Wepman & R.W. Heine (eds.) *Concepts of Personality*
(pp. 79--110). Chicago, IL: Aldine.

Cain, D.J. (1989) The paradox of nondirectiveness in the person-centered
approach. *Person-Centered Review, 4(2),* 123--31.

Cain, D.J. (1990) Celebration, reflection, and renewal: 50 years of
client-centered therapy and beyond. *Person-Centered Review,* 5(4),
357--63.

Cambray, J. & Carter, L. (2004) Analytic methods revisited. In J.
Cambray & L. Carter (eds.) *Analytic Psychology: Contemporary
Perspectives in Jungian Analysis.* London: Brunner-Routledge.

Campos, L. (1980) 'Cure' as finding the right metaphor. *Transactional
Analysis Journal, 10(2),* 172--4.

Capra, F. (1983) *The Turning Point.* London: Fontana.

Carkhuff, R.R. (1969a) *Helping and Human Relations Vol. I: Selection
and Training.* New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Carkhuff, R.R. (1969b) *Helping and Human Relations Vol. II: Practice
and Research.* New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Carkhuff, R.R. (1971) *The Development of Human Resources.* New York:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.

Carroll, R. (2002) Biodynamic massage in psychotherapy: Re-integrating,
re-owning and re-associating through the body. In T. Staunton (ed.)
*Body Psychotherapy* (pp. 78--100). London: Brunner-Routledge.

Cartwright, D. (1957) Annotated bibliography of research and theory
construction in client-centred therapy. *Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 4,* 82.

Cartwright, D.S. & Graham, M.J. (1984) Self-concept and identity:
Overlapping portions of a cognitive structure of self. In R.S. Levant &
J.M. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered
Approach* (pp. 108--30). New York: Praeger.

Caspary, W. (1991) Carl Rogers -- Values, persons and politics. The
dialectic of individual and community. *Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 31(4),* 8--31.

Catterall, E. (2005) Working with maternal depression: Person-centred
therapy as part of a multidisciplinary approach. In S. Joseph & R.
Worsley (eds.) *Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of
Mental Health* (pp. 202--25). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Chesterton, G.K. (1994) *What's Wrong with the World?* San Francisco,
CA: Ignatius Press. (Original work published 1910)

Clarkson, P. (1990) A multiplicity of psychotherapeutic relationships.
*British Journal of Psychotherapy,* 7, 148--63.

Clarkson, P. (1992) *Transactional Analysis Psychotherapy: An Integrated
Approach.* London: Routledge.

Clarkson, P. (1995) *The Therapeutic Relationship.* London: Whurr.

Clarkson, P. & Lapworth, P. (1992) The psychology of the self in TA. In
P. Clarkson *Transactional Analysis Psychotherapy: An Integrated
Approach* (pp. 175--203). London: Routledge.

Cloninger, C.R., Svrakic, D.M. & Pryzbeck, T.R. (1993) A
psychobiological model of temperament and character. *Archives of
General Psychiatry, 30,* 975--90.

Coghlan, D. & McIlduff, E. (1990) Structuring and non directiveness in
group facilitation. *Person-Centered Review, 5,* 13--29.

Combs, A.W. (1948) Phenomenological concepts in non-directive therapy.
*Journal of Consulting Psychology, 12(4),* 197--208.

Cooper, M. (2003) *Existential Therapies.* London: Sage.

Cooper, M. (2004) Existential approaches to therapy. In P. Sanders (ed.)
*The Tribes of the Person-Centred Nation* (pp. 95--124). Llangarron:
PCCS Books.

Corker, M. (2003) Developing anti-disabling counseling practice. In C.
Lago & B. Smith (eds.) *Anti-Discriminatory Counselling Practice* (pp.
33--49). London: Sage.

Cornelius-White, J.H.D. & Godfrey, P.C. (2004) Pedagogical crossroads:
Integrating feminist critical pedagogies and the person-centred approach
to education. In R. Moodley, C. Lago & A. Talahite (eds.) *Carl Rogers
Counsels a Black Client: Race and Culture in Person-Centred Counselling*
(pp. 166--78). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Cortina, M. (2003) Defensive processes, emotions and internal working
models. A perspective from attachment theory and contemporary models of
the mind. In M. Cortina & M. Marrone (eds.) *Attachment Theory and the
Psychoanalytic Process* (pp. 307--33). London: Whurr.

Corwall, R. & Reeves, P. (2003, 14 November) Iraq: The crumbling
coalition. *The Independent,* p. 1.

Dalla Costa, M. (1972) *Women and the Subversion of the Community.*
Bristol, UK: Falling Wall Press.

Damasio, A. (1996) *Descartes' Error: Emotion, Reason and the Human
Brain.* London: Penguin. (Original work published 1994) Damasio, A.
(1999) *The Feeling of What Happens: Body, Emotion and the Making of
Consciousness.* London: Heinemann.

Davies, D. & Neal, C. (eds.) (1996) *Pink Therapy: A Guide for
Counsellors and Therapists Working with Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual
Clients.* Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.

Davies, D. & Neal, C. (eds.) (2000) *Therapeutic Perspectives on Working
with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Clients.* Buckingham, UK:
Open University Press.

Davies, P. (1995) *About Time: Einstein's Unfinished Revolution.*
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

De MarÃ©, P., Piper, R. & Thompson, S. (1991) *Koinonia: From Hate,
Through Dialogue, to Culture in the Large Group.* New York:
Brunner/Mazel.

Dewey, J. (1928) Philosophies of freedom. In H. Kallen (ed.) *Freedom in
the Modern World.* New York: Coward-McCann.

Dewey, J. (1960) Philosophies of freedom. In R.J. Berstein (ed.)
*Experience, Nature and Freedom.* New York: Bobs-Merrill. (Original work
published 1928)

Diefenbeck, J.A. (1995) *A Subjective Theory of Organism.* Lanham, MD:
University Press of America.

Donner, S. (1991) The treatment process. In H. Jackson (ed.) *Using Self
Psychology in Psychotherapy* (pp. 51--70). Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Duff, K. (1993) *The Alchemy of Illness.* London: Virago.

Dunbar, H.F. (1954) *Emotions and Bodily Changes* (4th edn.). New York:
Columbia University Press.

Duncan, B.L. & Moynihan, D.W. (1994) Applying outcome research:
Intentional utilization of the client's frame of reference.
*Psychotherapy, 31,* 294--301.

Dymond, R.F. (1954) Adjustment changes over therapy from self-sorts. In
C.R. Rogers & R.F. Dymond (eds.) *Psychotherapy and Personality Change*
(pp. 76--84). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Edelman, G.M. (1992) *Bright Air Brilliant Fire: On the Matter of the
Mind.* New York: Basic Books.

Edelman, G.M. & Tononi, G. (2000) *Consciousness: How Matter Becomes
Imagination.* London: Penguin.

Edwards, P. (ed.) (1967) *Encyclopedia of Philosophy.* New York:
Macmillan.

Eiden, B. (2002) Application of post-Reichian psychotherapy: A Chiron
perspective. In T. Staunton (ed.) *Body Psychotherapy* (pp. 27--55).
London: Brunner-Routledge.

Ellingham, I. (1995) Quest for a paradigm: Person-centred
counselling/psychotherapy versus psychodynamic counselling and
psychotherapy. *Counselling,* 6(4), 288--90.

Ellingham, I. (1997) On the quest for a person-centred paradigm.
*Counselling,* 8(1), 52--55.

Ellingham, I. (1998) Person-centred porridge. *Person-Centred Practice,
6(2),* 110--12.

Ellingham, I. (1999a) Carl Rogers' 'congruence' as an organismic, not a
Freudian concept. *The Person-Centered Journal, 6(2),* 121--40.

Ellingham, I. (1999b) On transcending person-centred postmodernist
porridge. *Person-Centred Practice, 7(2),* 62--78.

Ellingham, I. (2001) Carl Rogers' congruence as an organismic, not a
Freudian concept. In G. Wyatt (ed.) *Congruence* (pp. 96--115).
Llangarron: PCCS Books. (Original work published 1999)

Ellingham, I. (2002) Foundation for a person-centred, humanistic
psychology and beyond: The nature and logic of Carl Rogers' 'formative
tendency'. In J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century:
Advances in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 16--35). Llangarron:
PCCS Books.

Embleton Tudor, L., Keemar, K., Tudor, K., Valentine, J. & Worrall, M.
(2004) *The Person-Centred Approach: A Contemporary Introduction.*
Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave.

Embleton Tudor, L. & Tudor, K. (ed.) (2002) Psyche and soma \[Theme
issue\]. *Person-Centred Practice, 10(2).*

Emmet, D. (1966) *Whitehead 's Philosophy of the Organism* (2nd edn.).
New York: Macmillan. (Original work published 1932)

Erskine, R.G. (1998) Attunement and involvement: Therapeutic responses
to relational needs. *International Journal of Psychotherapy,* 3(3),
235--43.

Erskine, E., Moursund, J. & Trautmann, R. (1999) *Beyond Empathy* -- *A
Therapy of Contact-in Relationship.* New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Evans, D. & Zarate, O. (1999) *Introducing Evolutionary Psychology.*
Cambridge: Icon Books.

Evans, R.I. (1981) *Dialogue with Carl Rogers.* New York: Praeger.
(Original work published 1975)

Fairbairn, W.R.D. (1952) *An Object Relations Theory of the
Personality.* New York: Basic Books.

Fairhurst, I. (1999) *Women Writing in the Person-Centred Approach.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Federn, P. (1952) *Ego Psychology and the Psychoses.* New York: Basic
Books.

Feldenkreis, M. (1981) *The Elusive Obvious.* Cupertino, CA: Meta
Publications.

Ferenczi, S. (1995) *The Clinical Diary of Sandor Ferenczi* (J. Dupont,
ed. & M. Balint & N.Z. Jackson, trans). Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press. (Original work published 1932)

Fernald, P.S. (2000) Carl Rogers: Body-centered counselor. *Journal of
Counselling & Development, 78,* 172--9.

Finke, J. (1990) Dream work in client-centered psychotherapy. In G.
Lietaer, J. Rombauts & R. Van Balen (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties* (pp. 507--10). Leuven:
Leuven University Press.

Finke, J. (2002) Aspects of the actualizing tendency from a humanistic
psychology perspective. *Person-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapies, l(l&2),* 28--40.

Fischer, C.T. (1989) The life-centered approach to psychodiagnostics:
Attending to lifeworld, ambiguity and possibility. *Person-Centered
Review, 4(2),* 163--170.

Fordham, M. (1957) *New Developments in Analytical Psychology.* London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Fowles, J. (1981) *The Aristos* (rev. edn.). London: Triad/Granada.
(Original work published 1964)

France, A. (1988) *Consuming Psychotherapy.* London: Free Association
Books.

Frankl, V. (1963) *Man's Search for Meaning.* New York: Simon &
Schuster.

Freud, S. (1958) Recommendations to physicians practicing
psychoanalysis. In *The Standard Edition of the Complete Psychological
Works of Sigmund Freud. Vol 12* (J. Strachey, ed. & trans., pp.
111--20). London: Hogarth Press. (Original work published 1912)

Freud, S. (1962) The question of lay-analysis. In *Two Short Accounts of
Psycho-Analysis* (J. Strachey, ed. & trans., pp. 89--170).
Harmondsworth, UK: Pelican. (Original work published 1926)

Freud, S. (1973) Introductory lectures on psychoanalysis. In *The
Pelican Freud Library, Vol. 1: Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis*
(J. Strachey & A. Richards, eds., J. Strachey, trans.). Harmondsworth,
UK: Pelican.

Frie, R. (ed.) (2003) *Understanding Experience: Psychotherapy and
Postmodernism.* London: Routledge.

Friedli, K., King, M., Lloyd, M. & Horder, J. (1997) Randomised
controlled assessment of non-directive psychotherapy versus routine
general practitioner care. *Lancet, 350,* 1662--5.

Friedman, M. (1992) *Dialogue and the Human Image: Beyond Humanistic
Psychology.* Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Fromkin, V. & Rodman, R. (1983) *Introduction to Language.* London:
Holt-Saunders.

Fromm, E. (1971) *The Crisis of Psychoanalysis.* London: Jonathon Cape.

Fuller, R.C. (1984) Rogers's impact on pastoral counselling and
contemporary religious reflection. In R. Levant & J. Shlien (eds.)
*Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered Approach: New
Directions in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 352--69). New York:
Praeger.

Gabbard, G.O. (1989) Two subtypes of narcissistic personality disorder.
*Bulletin of the Menninger Clinic, 53,* 527--32.

Gallagher, S. (1998) *Personalism: A Brief Account.* Paper available
online at <http://www2.canisius.edu/~gallaghr/pers.html>

Gardner, H. (1993) *Frames of Mind: The Theory of Multiple
Intelligences* (2nd edn.). London: Fontana Press. (Original work
published 1983)

Gatto, J.T. (2002) *Dumbing Us Down: The Hidden Curriculum of Compulsory
Schooling.* Gabriola Island, BC: New Society Publishers.

Gaylin, N. (2002) The relationship: The heart of the matter. In J.C.
Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice* (pp. 339--47). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Geggus, P. (2002) Zero balancing: Person-centred bodywork -- or
body-centred personwork. *Person-Centred Practice, 10(2),* 88--95.

Gelb, A. & Goldstein, K. (1920) *Psychologische Analysen
Hirnpathologischer FÃ¤lle \[Psychological Analysis in Brain Pathological
Cases\].* Leipzig: Barth.

Gelso, C.J. & Carter, J.A. (1985) The relationship in counseling and
psychotherapy: Components, consequences and theoretical antecedents.
*The Counseling Psychologist, 13(2),* 115--243.

Gelso, C. & Carter, J. (1994) Components of the psychotherapy
relationship: Their interaction and unfolding during treatment. *Journal
of Counseling Psychology, 41,* 296--306.

Gendlin, E.T. (1961) Experiencing: A variable in the process of
therapeutic change. *American Journal of Psychotherapy, 15,* 233--45.

Gendlin, E. T. (1964) A theory of personality change. In P. Worchal & D.
Byrne (eds.) *Personality Change* (pp. 102--48). New York: Wiley.

Gendlin, E.T. (1981) *Focusing* (rev. edn.). New York: Bantam.

Gendlin, E. (1986) *Let Your Body Interpret Your Dreams.* Wilmette, IL:
Chiron.

Gergen, K.J. (1991) *The Saturated Self.* New York: Basic Books.

Giesekus, U. & Mente, A. (1986) Client empathic understanding in
client-centered therapy. *Person-Centered Review, 1,* 163--171.

Gilligan, C. (1982) *In a Different Voice: Psychological Theory and
Women's Development.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Goldstein, K. (1940) *Human Nature in the Light of Psychopathology.*
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Goldstein, K. (1995) *The Organism.* New York: Zone Books. (Original
work published 1934)

Golomb, J. (1995) *In Search of Authenticity.* London: Routledge.

Gomez, L. (1997) *Introduction to Object Relations.* London: Tavistock.

Gordon, D. (1978) *Therapeutic Metaphors.* Cupertino, CA: Meta
Publications.

Gordon, E.F. (2000) *Mockingbird Years.* New York: Basic Books.

Graf, C.L. (1984) A comparison of Carl Rogers' and Heinz Kohut's
humanistic theories of the fully functioning person. In A.S. Segrera
(ed.) *Proceedings of the First International Forum on the
Person-Centered Approach.* Oaxrepec, Moreles, Mexico: Universidad
Iberamericana.

Grant, B. (1990) Principled and instrumental nondirectiveness in
person-centered and client-centered therapy. *The Person-Centered
Review,* 5(1), 77--88.

Gray, J. (2003) *Straw Dogs: Thoughts on Humans and Other Animals.*
London: Granta. (Original work published 2002)

Greenberg, L.S. & Elliot, R. (1997) Varities of empathic responding. In
A.C. Bohart & L.S. Greenberg (eds.) *Empathy Reconsidered: New
Directions in Psychotherapy* (pp. 167--86). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Griffin, D.R. (1976) *God, Power and Evil: A Process Theodicy.*
Philadelphia, PA: Westminster.

Guba, E.G. & Lincoln, Y.S. (1990) Can there be a human science?:
Constructivism as an alternative. *Person Centred Review,* 5(2),
130--54.

Hackney, H. (1978) The evolution of empathy. *Personnel and Guidance
Journal,* 35--38.

Hall, C. & Lindzey, G. (1957) *Theories of Personality.* New York:
Wiley.

Hall, C. & Lindzey, G. (1970) *Theories of Personality* (2nd edn.). New
York: Wiley.

Hall, C. & Lindzey, G. (1978) *Theories of Personality* (3rd edn.). New
York: Wiley.

HarrÃ©, R. (1998) *The Singular Self.* London: Sage.

Hartmann, H. (1958) *Ego Psychology and the Problem of Adaptation.* New
York: International Universities Press.

Hartshorne, C. (1962) *The Logic of Perfection and Other Essays in
Neoclassical Metaphysics.* La Salle, IL: Open Court.

Haule, J.R. (1996) *The Love Cure: Therapy Erotic and Sexual.*
Woodstock, CT: Spring Publications.

Hayashi, S. & Kara, A. (2002) Understanding self through Taoist
emptiness. In J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century:
Advances in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 73--8). Llangarron: PCCS
Books.

Hayashi, S., Kuno, T., Morotomi, Y., Osawa, M., Shimizu, M. & Suetake,
Y. (1994) *A Reevaluation of the Client-Centered Therapy Through the
Work of F. Tomoda and Its Cultural Implications in Japan.* Paper
presented at the Third International Conference on Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy, Gmunden, Austria.

Heyward, C. (1993) *When Boundaries Betray Us.* New York: HarperCollins.

Hillman, J. & Ventura, M. (1992) *We've Had a Hundred Years of
Psychotherapy and the World 's Getting Worse.* San Francisco, CA:
Harper.

Hoffman, L. (1993) A reflective stance for family therapy. In S. McNamee
& K.J. Gergen (eds.) *Therapy as Social Construction* (pp. 7--24).
London: Sage.

Hogan, R. (1948) *The Development of a Measure of Client Defensiveness
in the Counselling Relationship.* Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of Chicago.

Holdstock, L. (1990) Can client-centered therapy transcend its
monocultural roots? In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts & R. Van Balen (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties* (pp.
109--21). Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Holdstock, L. (1993) Can we afford not to revision the person-centred
concept of self? In D. Brazier (ed.) *Beyond Carl Rogers* (pp. 229--52).
London: Constable.

Holdstock, L. (1996a) Discrepancy between the person-centered theories
of self and of therapy. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid & R.
Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A
Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 163--81). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Holdstock, L. (1996b) Implications of developments regarding the concept
of self for client-centered theory and practice. In U. Esser, H. Pabst &
G.-W. Speierer (eds.) *The Power of the Person-Centred Approach: New
Challenges* -- *Perspectives* -- *Answers* (pp. 83--90). KÃ¶ln:
Gesellschaft fÃ¼r wissenschaftliche GesprÃ¤chspsy-chotherapie.

Holland, R. (1977) *Self in Social Context.* London: Macmillan.

Holland, S. (1988) Defining and experimenting with prevention. In S.
Ramon & M.G. Giannichedda (eds.) *Psychiatry in Transition* (pp.
125--37). London: Pluto Press.

Horkheimer, M. & Adorno, T.M. (1972) *Dialectic of Enlightenment.* New
York: Herder & Herder.

Horney, K. (1939) *New Ways in Psychoanalysis.* New York: W.W. Norton.

Horvarth, A.O. & Greenberg, L.S. (1986) Development of the working
alliance inventory. In L.S. Greenberg & W.M. Pinsof (eds.) *The
Psychotherapeutic Process: A Research Handbook.* New York: Guilford
Press.

Hospers, J. (1967) *An Introduction to Philosophical Analysis* (2nd
edn.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

House, R. (2003) *Therapy Beyond Modernity: Deconstructing and
Transcending Profession-Centred Therapy.* London: Karnac.

Howard, A. (2000) *Philosophy for Counselling and Psychotherapy:
Pythagoras to Postmodernism.* Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan.

Hume, D. (1968) *A Treatise of Human Nature. Volumes 1 and 2.* London:
Dent. (Original work published 1738)

Hunsdahl, J.B. (1967) Concerning EinfÃ¼hlung (empathy): A concept
analysis of its origin and early development. *Journal of the History of
the Behavioral Sciences, 3,* 180--91.

Hutterer, R., Pawlowsky, G., Schmid, P.F. & Stipsits, R. (eds.) (1996)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion.*
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Ivey, A.E., Ivey, M.B. & Simek-Morgan, L. (1993) *Counseling and
Psychotherapy* (3rd edn.). London: Allyn & Bacon.

Jackson, H. (ed.) (1991) *Using Self Psychology in Psychotherapy.*
Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

Jacobs, M. (1998) *The Presenting Past.* Buckingham, UK: Open University
Press.

Jacobson, E. (1964) *The Self and the Object World.* New York:
International Universities Press.

Jahoda, M. (1958) *Current Concepts of Positive Mental Health.* New
York: Basic Books.

James, S. (1975) *Sex, Race and Class.* Bristol: Falling Wall Press.

James, W. (1890) *Principles of Psychology. Vol.1.* New York: Henry
Holt.

James, W. (1999) The self. In R.F. Baumeister (ed.) *The Self in Social
Psychology* (pp. 68--77). Philadephia, PA: Psychology Press. (Original
work published 1892)

Jennings, J.L. (1986) The dream is the dream is the dream. *The
Person-Centered Review, 1(3),* 310--33.

Jones, M. (1996) Person-centred theory and the post-modern turn.
*Person-Centred Practice, 4(2),* 19--26.

Joseph, S. (2005) Understanding post-traumatic stress from the
person-centred perspective. In S. Joseph & R. Worsley (eds.)
*Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of Mental Health*
(pp. 190--201). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Joseph, S. & Worsley, R. (2005) Psychopathology and the person-centred
approach: Building bridges between disciples. In S. Joseph & R. Worsley
(eds.) *Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of Mental
Health* (pp. 1--8). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Josselson, R. (1987) *Finding Herself: Pathways to Identity Development
in Women.* London: Jossey-Bass.

Jung, C.G. (1964) Psychological types. In *The Collected Works of C.J.
Jung. Vol. 6: Psychological Types* (H. Read, M. Fordham & G. Adler,
eds., R.F.C. Hull, trans.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (Original
work published 1921)

Jung, C.G. (1967) *The Collected Works of C.J. Jung. Vol. 12: Psychology
and Alchemy* (H. Read, M., Fordham & G. Adler, eds., R.F.C. Hull,
trans.). London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. (Original work published 1944)

Kahler, T. (1978) *Transactional Analysis Revisited.* Little Rock, AR:
Human Development Publications.

Kahler, T. with Capers, H. (1974) The miniscript. *Transactional
Analysis Journal, 4(1),* 26--42.

Kahn, E. (1985) Heinz Kohut and Carl Rogers: A timely comparison.
*American Psychologist, 40,* 893--904.

Kahn, E. (1989a) Carl Rogers and Heinz Kohut. On the importance of
valuing the 'self'. In D.W. Dettick & S.P. Dettick (eds.) *Self
Psychology: Comparisons and Contrasts* (pp. 213--28). Hillsdale, NJ: The
Analytic Press.

Kahn, E. (1989b) Carl Rogers and Heinz Kohut: Toward a constructive
collaboration. *Psychotherapy, 26(4),* 555--63.

Kahn, E. (1996) The intersubjective perspective and the client-centered
approach: Are they one at their core? *Psychotherapy, 33(1),* 30--42.

Kahn, E. & Rachman, A.W. (2000) Carl Rogers and Heinz Kohut: A
historical perspective. *Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy, 17(2),* 294--312.

Kant, I. (2005) *Critique of Pure Reason* (M. Weigelt, ed.). London:
Penguin. (Original work published 1781)

Kantor, J.R. (1924a) *Principles of Psychology. Vol.1.* New York: Knopf.

Kantor, J.R. (1924b) *Principles of Psychology. Vol.2.* New York: Knopf.

Kearney, A. (1997) Class, politics and the training of counsellors.
*Person-Centred Practice, 5(2),* 11--15.

Keen, S. (1983) *The Passionate Life: Stages of Loving.* London: Gateway
Books.

Kegan, R. (1982) *The Evolving Self: Problem and Process in Human
Development.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Keil, S. (1996) The self as a systemic process of interaction of 'inner
persons'. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid & R. Stipsits (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy* (pp. 53--66). Frankfurt
am Main: Peter Lang.

Kelly, G.A. (1955) *The Psychology of Personal Constructs. Vol.1.* New
York: W.W. Norton.

Kelly, G.A. (1962) Europe's matrix of decision. In M.R. Jones (ed.)
*Nebraska Symposium on Motivation, 1962* (pp. 83--123). Lincoln, NE:
University of Nebraska Press.

Keys, S. (1999) The person-centred counsellor as an agent of human
rights. *Person-Centred Practice,* 7(1), 41--7.

Kiesler, D.J., Mathieu, P.L. & Klein, M.H. (1967) A summary of the
issues and conclusions. In C.R. Rogers, E.T. Gendlin, D.J. Kiesler &
C.B. Truax (eds.) *The Therapeutic Relationship and Its Impact: A Study
of Psychotherapy with Schizophrenics* (pp. 295--311). Madison, WI:
University of Wisconsin Press.

King, M., Lloyd, M., Sibbald, B., Gabbay, M., Ward, E. & Byford, S.
(2000) Randomised controlled trial of non-directive counselling,
cognitive behaviour therapy and usual general practitioner care in the
management of depression as well as mixed anxiety and depression in
primary care. *Health Technology Assessment, 4(19).*

Kirkpatrick, F.G. (1991) Introduction. In J. Macmurray (ed.) *Persons in
Relation* (pp. ix--xxv). London: Faber & Faber. (Original work published
1961)

Kirschenbaum, H. (1979) *On Becoming Carl Rogers.* New York: Delacorte
Press.

Kirschenbaum, H. & Henderson, V.L. (eds.) (1990a) *Carl Rogers:
Dialogues.* London: Constable.

Kirschenbaum, H. & Henderson, V.L. (eds.) (1990b) *The Carl Rogers
Reader.* London: Constable.

Knibbs, J. & Moran, H. (2005) Autism and Asperger syndrome:
Person-centred approaches. In S. Joseph & R. Worsley (eds.)
*Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of Mental Health*
(pp. 260--75). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Knight, J. (1950) *The Story of My Psychoanalysis.* New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Knox, J. (2004) Developmental aspects of analytical psychology: New
perspectives from cognitive neuroscience and attachment theory. In J.
Cambray & L. Carter (eds.) *Analytic Psychology: Contemporary
Perspectives in Jungian Analysis.* London: Brunner-Routledge.

Koch, S. (ed.) (1959) *Psychology: A Study of a Science, Vol. 3:
Formulation of the Person and the Social Context.* New York:
McGraw-Hill.

Kohak, E. (1997) Personalism: Towards a philosophical delineation.
*Personalist Forum, 13(1),* 3--11.

Kohlberg, L. (1976) Moral stages and moralization: The
cognitive-developmental approach. In T. Lickona (ed.) *Moral Development
and Behavior: Theory, Research and Social Issues* (pp. 31--53). New
York: Holt Rinehart & Winston.

Kohler, W. (1940) *Dynamics in Psychology.* New York: Liveright
Publishing Corporation.

Kohut, H. (1959) Introspection, empathy and psychoanalysis: An
examination of the relationship between mode of observation and theory.
In P.H. Ornstein (ed.) *The Search for Self Vol. 1* (pp. 205--32). New
York: International Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1971) *The Analysis of the Self.* New York: International
Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1977) *The Restoration of the Self.* New York: International
Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1981) On empathy. In P.H. Ornstein (ed.) *The Search for Self
Vol. 4* (pp. 525--35). New York: International Universities Press.

Kohut, H. (1982) Introspection, empathy and the semicircle of mental
health. *International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 63,* 395--408.

Kohut, H. (1984) *How Does Analysis Cure?* Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.

Kramer, R. (1995) The birth of client-centered therapy: Carl Rogers,
Otto Rank, and 'The beyond'. *Journal of Humanistic Psychology, 35(4),*
54--110.

Lago, C. & Clark, J. (2004) Growing race awareness in the therapist
(Reflections on Carl Rogers' videotaped session with Dadisi). In R.
Moodley, C. Lago & A. Talahite (eds.) *Carl Rogers Counsels a Black
Client: Race and Culture in Person-Centred Counselling* (pp. 148--59).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Lago, C. & MacMillan, M. (eds.) (1999) *Experiences in Relatedness:
Groupwork and the Person-Centred Approach.* Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Laing, R.D. (1965) *The Divided Self.* Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

Laing, R.D. (1967) *The Politics of Experience* and *The Bird of
Paradise.* Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

Lake, F. (1966) *Clinical Theology: A Theological and Psychiatric Basis
to Clinical Pastoral Care.* London: Darton Longman & Todd.

Lambers, E. (1994) The person-centred perspective on psychopathology:
The neurotic client. In D. Mearns (ed.) *Developing Person-Centred
Counselling* (pp. 105--9). London: Sage.

Land, D. (1996) Partial views. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid
& R. Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A
Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 67--74). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Lapworth, P. (2003, April) *Introjective Transference in Working with
Lesbian, Gay and Bisexual Clients Who are Addressing Their Sexual
Identity.* Workshop, Institute of Transactional Analysis Conference,
Swansea.

Lasch, C. (1979) *The Culture of Narcissism.* New York: Warner Books.

Laungani, P. (1999) Client centred or culture centred counselling. In S.
Palmer & P. Laungani (eds.) *Counselling in a Multicultural Society*
(pp. 133--52). London: Sage.

Leary, D.E. (ed.) (1990) *Metaphors in the History of Psychology.*
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lebra, T.S. (1992) Self in Japanese culture. In N. Rosenberger (ed.)
*Japanese Sense of Self (pp.* 105--20). Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.

Lecky, P. (1945) *Self-Consistency: A Theory of Personality.* New York:
Island Press.

Le Doux, J. (1995) Emotion: Clues from the brain. *Annual Review of
Psychology, 46,* 209--35.

Le Doux, J. (1998) *The Emotional Brain.* London: Weidenfeld &
Nicholson.

Levitt, B.E. (2005) Preface. In B. Levitt (ed.) *Embracing
Non-Directivity: Reassessing Person-Centered Theory and Practice in the
21st Century* (pp. i--iii). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Lewin, K. (1952) *Field Theory in Social Science.* New York: Harper &
Row.

Lewontin, R.C. (2000) *The Triple Helix: Gene, Organism and
Environment.* Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Lietaer, G. (1992) Helping and hindering processes in
client-centered/experiential psychotherapy: A content analysis of client
and therapist postsession perceptions. In S.G. Toukmanian & D.L. Rennie
(eds.) *Psychotherapy Process Research: Theory-Guided and
Phenomenological Research Strategies* (pp. 134--62). Newbury Park, CA:
Sage.

Lietaer, G. (1998) From non-directive to experiential: A paradigm
unfolding. In B. Thorne & E. Lambers (eds.) *Person-Centred Therapy: A
European Perspective* (pp. 62--73). London: Sage.

Lietaer, G., Rombauts, J. & Van Balen, R. (1990) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties.* Leuven: Leuven University
Press.

Lipkin, S. (1948) The client evaluates nondirective psychotherapy.
*Journal of Consulting Psychology, 12,* 137--46.

Littman, R.A. (1958) Motives, history and causes. In M.R. Jones (ed.)
*Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 1958* (pp. 114--68). Lincoln, NR:
University of Nebraska Press.

Lucretius (1951) *On the Nature of the Universe* (R.E. Latham, trans.).
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

Lynch, G. (1997) Words and silence: Counselling and psychotherapy after
Wittgenstein. *Counselling,* 8(2), 126--8.

Lynch, V.J. (1991) Basic concepts. In H. Jackson (ed.) *Using Self
Psychology in Psychotherapy* (pp. 15--25). Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

MacIsaac, D.S. (1997) Empathy: Heinz Kohut's contribution. In A.C.
Bohart & L.S. Greenberg (eds.) *Empathy Reconsidered: New Directions in
Psychotherapy* (pp. 245--64). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association.

Macmurray, J. (1991) *The Self as Agent. Volume I of The Form of the
Personal.* London: Faber & Faber. (Original work published 1957)

Macmurray, J. (1991) *Persons in Relation. Volume II of The Form of the
Personal.* London: Faber & Faber. (Original work published 1961)

Marques-Teixeira, J. & Antones, S. (2000) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy.* Linda a Velha, Portugal: Vale & Vale.

Martel, Y. (1996) *Self.* London: Faber & Faber.

Marx, K. (1964) *Pre-Capitalist Economic Formations.* London: Lawrence &
Wishart. (Original work published 1858)

Maslow, A.H. (1954) *Motivation and Personality.* New York: Harper &
Row.

Maslow, A.H. (1962) *Towards a Psychology of Being.* New York: Van
Nostrand.

Masson, J. (1989) *Against Therapy.* London: Collins. (Original work
published 1988)

Masterson, J.F. (1981) *The Narcissistic and Borderline Disorders.* New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Masterson, J.F. (1985) *The Real Self: A Developmental, Self, and Object
Relations Approach.* New York: Brunner/Mazel.

Masterson, J.F. (1988) *The Search for the Real Self: Unmasking the
Personality Disorders of Our Age.* New York: The Free Press.

Mathews, F. (1991) *The Ecological Self.* London: Routledge.

May, R. (ed.) (1961a) *Existential Psychology.* New York: Random House.

May, R. (1961b) The emergence of existential psychology. In R. May (ed.)
*Existential Psychology* (pp. 11--51). New York: Random House.

Maylon, A. (1982) Psychotherapeutic implications of internalized
homophobia in gay men. In J. Gonsiorek (ed.) *Homosexuality and
Psychotherapy.* New York: Haworth Press.

McCleary, R.A. & Lazarus, R.S. (1949) Autonomic discrimination without
awareness. *Journal of Personality, 18,* 171--79.

McCulloch, L.A. (2005) Anti-social personality disorder and the
person-centred approach. In S. Joseph & R. Worsley (eds.)
*Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of Mental Health*
(pp. 169--189). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

McDougall, W. (1908) *Introduction to Social Psychology.* London:
Methuen.

McDougall, W. (1932) *The Energies of Men: A Study of the Fundamentals
of Dynamic Psychology.* London: Methuen.

McLeod, J. (2003) *Doing Counselling Research* (2nd edn.). London: Sage.

Mead, G.H. (1934) *Mind, Self and Society* (ed. C.W. Morris). Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.

Mearns, D. (1990) The counsellor's experience of success. In D. Mearns &
W. Dryden (eds.) *Experiences of Counselling in Action* (pp. 97--112).
London: Sage.

Mearns, D. (1994) *Developing Person-Centred Counselling.* London: Sage.

Mearns, D. (1996) Working at relational depth with clients in
person-centred therapy. *Counselling,* 7(4), 306--11.

Mearns, D. (1997) *Person-Centred Counselling Training.* London: Sage.

Mearns, D. (1999) Person-centred therapy with configurations of the
self. *Counselling, 10(2),* 125--130.

Mearns, D. (2002) Further theoretical propositions in regard to self
theory within the person-centered therapy. *Person-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapies, 1(1&2),* 14--27.

Mearns, D. (2004) Foreword. In M. McMillan (ed.) *The Person-Centred
Approach to Therapeutic Change.* London: Sage.

Mearns, D. & Cooper, M. (2005) *Working at Relational Depth.* London:
Sage

Mearns, D. & Thorne, B. (2000) *Person-Centred Therapy Today: New
Frontiers in Theory and Practice.* London: Sage.

Mellor, K. (1980) Impasses: A developmental and structural
understanding. *Transactional Analysis Journal, 10(3),* 213--20.

Merry, T. (1999) *Learning and Being in Person-Centred Counselling.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Merry, T. (2003) The actualisation conundrum. *Person-Centred Practice,
11(2),* 83--91.

Merry, T. (2004) Supervision as heuristic research enquiry. In K. Tudor
& M. Worrall (eds.) *Freedom to Practise: Person-Pentred Approaches to
Supervision* (pp. 189--99). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.

Miller, J.G. (1988) Bridging the content-structure dichotomy: Culture
and the self. In M.H. Bond (ed.) *The Cross-Cultural Challenge to Social
Psychology* (pp. 266--81). London: Sage.

Miller, S., Hubble, M. & Duncan, B. (1995, March/April) No more bells
and whistles. *The Family Therapy Networker,* 53--63.

Minister of National Health and Welfare. (1988) *Mental Health for
Canadians.* Ottawa: MNHW.

Mitchell, J. (1975) *Psychoanalysis and Feminism.* Harmondsworth, UK:
Penguin.

Molina, V. (1977) *Notes on Marx and the Problem of Individuality.*
Working Paper in Cultural Studies 10. University of Birmingham: Centre
for Contemporary Cultural Studies.

Moodley, R. (2003) Double, triple, multiple jeopardy. In C. Lago & B.
Smith (eds.) *Anti-Discriminatory Practice* (pp. 120--34). London: Sage.

Moodley, R., Lago, C. & Talahite, A. (eds.) (2004) *Carl Rogers Counsels
a Black Client: Race and Culture in Person-Centred Counselling.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Moore, J. (1997) Who is the person in the person-centred approach?
*Person-Centred Practice,* 5(2), 21--5.

Moustakas, C. (1990) Heuristic research: Design and methodology.
*Person-Centered Review,* 5(2), 170--90.

Mowbray, R. (1995) *The Case Against Psychotherapy Registration: A
Conservation Issue for the Human Potential Movement.* London:
Transmarginal Press.

Murdoch, I. (1985) The idea of perfection. In *The Sovereignty of Good*
(pp. 1--45). London: Routledge. (Originally published in 1970)

Murphy, G. (1947) *Personality: A Biosocial Approach to Origins and
Structure.* New York: Harper.

Murray, H.A. (1938) *Explorations in Personality.* Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Natiello, P. (1987) The person-centered approach: From theory to
practice. *Person-Centered Review, 2,* 203--16.

Natiello, P. (1990) The person-centered approach, collaborative power,
and cultural transformation. *Person-Centered Review,* 5(3), 268--86.

Naysmith, S. (2003) Scotland at forefront of radical plan to improve
behaviour. *The Scotsman.*

Neville, B. (1996) Five kinds of empathy. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky,
P.F. Schmid & R. Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 439--53). Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang.

Newnes, C. (2004) Psychology and psychotherapy's potential for
countering the medicalization of everything. *Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 44,* 358--76.

Newnes, C., Holmes, G. & Dunn, C. (eds.) (1999) *This is Madness: A
Critical Look at Psychiatry and the Future Mental Health Services.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Newnes, C., Holmes, G. & Dunn, C. (eds.) (2001) *This is Madness Too:
Critical Perspectives on Mental Health Services* (pp. 147--60).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Nobles, W.W. (1973) Psychological research and the black self-concept: A
critical review. *Journal of Social Issues, 29, 11--31.*

Norris, C. (1995) Post-modernism. In T. Honderich (ed.) *The Oxford
Companion to Philosophy* (p. 708). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Northrup, C. (1998) *Women's Bodies, Women's Wisdom: The Complete Guide
to Women's Health and Wellbeing.* London: Piatkus Books.

O'Connor, N. & Ryan, J. (1993) *Wild Desires and Mistaken Identities:
Lesbianism and Psychoanalysis.* New York: Columbia University Press.

O'Hara, M. (1984) Person-centered gestalt: Toward a holistic synthesis.
In R.S. Levant & J.M. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach* (pp. 203--21). New York: Praeger.

O'Hara, M. (1989) Person-centered approach as conscientizacao: The works
of Carl Rogers and Paulo Freire. *Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
29(1),* 11--36.

O'Hara, M. (1995) Streams: On becoming a postmodern person. In M.M. Suhd
(ed.) *Positive Regard: Carl Rogers and Other Notables He Influenced*
(pp. 105--55). Palo Alto, CA: Science & Behavior Books.

O'Hara, M. (1999) Moments of eternity: Carl Rogers and the contemporary
demand for brief therapy. In I. Fairhurst (ed.) *Women Writing in the
Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 63--77). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Orange, D.M., Atwood, G.E. & Stolorow, R.D. (2001) *Working
Intersubjectively: Contextualism in Psychoanalytic Practice.* New York:
The Analytic Press.

Orlinsky, D.E., Grawe, K. & Parks, B.K. (1994) Process and outcome in
psychotherapy: Noch einmal. In A.E. Bergin & S.L. Garfield (eds.)
*Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior Change* (4th edn., pp.
270--376). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Ornstein, A. (1986) Supportive psychotherapy: A contemporary view.
*Clinical Social Work, 14,* 14--30.

Paglia, C. (1994) No law in the arena. In C. Paglia (ed.) *Vamps and
Tramps* (pp. 19-- 94). New York: Vintage,

Paglia, C. (1995, 19 September) *AOL Transcript Camille Paglia.*
Document available online at
<http://archive.aclu.org/about/transcripts/paglia.htlm>

Pally, R. (2000) *The Mind-Brain Relationship.* London: Karnac Books.

Panksepp, J. (1998) *Affective Neuroscience: The Foundations of Human
and Animal Emotions.* Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Parfit, D. (1984) *Reasons and Persons.* Oxford: Oxford University
Press.

Parker, I. (1999) *Deconstructing Psychotherapy.* London: Sage.

Parlett, M. (1991) Reflections on field theory. *The British Gestalt
Journal, 1,* 69--81.

Parsons, T. (1959) An approach to psychological theory in terms of the
theory of action. In S. Koch (ed.) *Psychology: A Study of Science. Vol.
3: Formulation of the Person and the Social Context* (pp. 612--711). New
York: McGraw-Hill.

Patterson, C.H. (1965) *Theories of Counseling and Psychotherapy.* New
York: Harper & Row.

Patterson, C.H. (2000a) A unitary theory of motivation and its
counseling implications. In C.H. Patterson, *Understanding
Psychotherapy: Fifty Years of Client-Centred Theory and Practice* (pp.
10--21). (Original work published 1964)

Patterson, C.H. (2000b) On being non-directive. In C. H. Patterson,
*Understanding Psychotherapy: Fifty Years of Client-Centred Theory and
Practice* (pp. 181--4). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Peake, M. (1950) *The Glass Blowers.* London: Eyre & Spottiswoode.

Perls, F. (1969) *Ego, Hunger and Aggression.* New York: Vintage.
(Original work published 1947)

Perls, F., Hefferline, R.F. & Goodman, P. (1973) *Gestalt Therapy:
Excitement and Growth in the Human Personality.* (Original work
published 1951)

Philippson. P. (2004) *Gestalt Therapy and the Culture of Narcissism.*
Article available online from Manchester Gestalt Centre website:
[www.123webpages.co.uk](http://www.123webpages.co.uk)

Phillips, A. (1994) *On Flirtation.* London: Faber & Faber.

Piaget, J. (1954) *The Construction of Reality in the Child.* New York:
Basic Books. (Original work published 1937)

Pine, F. (1988) The four psychologies of psychoanalysis and their place
in clinical work. *Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association,
36,* 571--96.

Pine, F. (1990) *Drive, Ego, Object and Self: A Synthesis for Clinical
Work.* New York: Basic Books.

Piontelli, A. (1992) *From Fetus to Child: An Observational and
Psychoanalytic Study.* London: Tavistock/Routledge.

Poitier, S. (2000) *The Measure of a Man: A Memoir.* London: Simon &
Schuster.

Politzer, G. (1976) *Elementary Principles of Philosophy.* London:
Lawrence & Wishart.

Proctor, G. & Napier, M.B. (eds.) (2004a) *Encountering Feminism:
Intersections between Feminism and the Person-Centred Approach.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Proctor, G. & Napier, M.B. (2004b) Introduction. In G. Proctor & M.B.
Napier (eds.) *Encountering Feminism: Intersections between Feminism and
the Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 1--11). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Prouty, G.F. (1976) Pre-therapy, a method of treating pre-expressive,
psychotic and retarded patients. *Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and
Practice, 13(3),* 290--5.

Prouty, G.F. (1994) *Theoretical Evolutions in
Person-Centered/Experiential Therapy: Applications to Schizophrenic and
Retarded Psychoses.* Westport, CT: Praeger.

Prouty, G.F., Van Werde, D. & Portner, M. (2002) *Pre-Therapy.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Purton, C. (2004) *Person-Centred Therapy: The Focusing-Oriented
Approach.* Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave.

Putnam, S.P., Spritz, B.L. & Stifter, C.A. (2002) Mother--child
coregulation during delay of gratification at 30 months. *Infancy,
3(2),* 209--25.

Quinton, A. (1995) Philosophy. In T. Honderich (ed.) *The Oxford
Companion to Philosophy* (pp. 666--70). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Raimy, V. (1943) *The Self-Concept as a Factor in Counseling and
Personality Organization.* Unpublished PhD thesis, Ohio State
University.

Raimy, V. (1948) Self reference in counseling interviews. *Journal of
Consulting Psychology, 12,* 153--63.

Raimy, V. (1975) *Misconceptions of the Self.* San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass. Ramachandran, V.S. (2003) Hearing colors, tasting shapes.
*Scientific American, 288(5),* 52--9.

Rank, O. (1989) *The Double: A Psychoanalytic Study* (H. Tucker, trans.
& ed.). London: Karnac. (Original work published 1914)

Rank, O. (1941) *Beyond Psychology.* New York: Dover Publications.

Rapaport, D. (1959) The structure of psychoanalytic theory: A
systematizing attempt. In S. Koch (ed.) *Psychology: A Study of Science.
Vol. 3: Formulation of the Person and the Social Context* (pp. 55--183).
New York: McGraw-Hill.

Raskin, N.J. (1948) The development of non-directive psychotherapy.
*Journal of Consulting Psychology, 13,* 154--6.

Reason, P. & Heron, J. (2002) Research with people: The paradigm of
cooperative experiential enquiry. In D. Cain (ed.) *Classics in the
Person-Centered Approach* (pp. 293--304). Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books.
(Original work published 1986)

Reich, W.R. (1983) *The Function of the Orgasm.* London: Souvenir Press.
(Original work published 1924)

Rennie, T.A.C. (1943) Adolf Meyer and his psychobiology; the man, his
methodology and its relation to therapy. *Papers of the American
Congress of General Semantics, 2,* 156--65.

Robbins, T. (1977) *Even Cowgirls Get the Blues.* London: Corgi.
(Original work published 1976)

Robinson, D.N. (1995) *An Intellectual History of Psychology* (3rd edn.)
London: Arnold. (Original work published 1976)

Rodgers, B.J. (2003) An exploration into the client at the heart of
therapy: A qualitative perspective. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies,* 2(1), 19--30.

Rogers, A. (2001) Do we need 'a' theory of personality. *Person-Centred
Practice, 9(1),* 37--42.

Rogers, C.R. (1931) *Measuring Personality Adjustment in Children Nine
to Thirteen.* New York: Teachers College, Columbia University, Bureau of
Publications.

Rogers, C.R. (1939) *The Clinical Treatment of the Problem Child.*
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Rogers, C.R. (1941) Psychology in clinical practice. In J.S. Gray (ed.)
*Psychology in Use. A Textbook in Applied Psychology* (pp. 114--67). New
York: American Book Company.

Rogers, C.R. (1942) *Counseling and Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts in
Practice.* Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Rogers, C.R. (1947) Some observations on the organization of
personality. *American Psychologist, 2,* 358--68.

Rogers, C.R. (1951) *Client-Centered Therapy.* London: Constable.

Rogers, C.R. (1956) Intellectualized psychotherapy. \[Review of *The
Psychology of Personal Constructs\]. Contemporary Psychology, 1(12),*
357.

Rogers, C.R. (1957) The necessary and sufficient conditions of
therapeutic personality change. *Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21,*
95--103.

Rogers, C.R. (1959a) A tentative scale for the measurement of process in
psychotherapy. In E.A. Ruenstein & M.B. Parloff (eds.) *Research in
Psychotherapy. Vol. I* (pp. 96--107). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.

Rogers, C.R. (1959b) A theory of therapy, personality and interpersonal
relationships, as developed in the client-centred framework. In S. Koch
(ed.) *Psychology: A Study of Science. Vol. 3: Formulation of the Person
and the Social Context* (pp. 184--256). New York: McGraw-Hill.

Rogers, C.R. (1963) The actualizing tendency in relation to 'motive' and
to consciousness. In M. Jones (ed.) *Nebraska Symposium on Motivation
1963* (pp. 1--24). Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press.

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) Some of the directions evident in therapy. In *On
Becoming a Person* (pp. 73--106). London: Constable. (Original work
published 1953)[^1^](#ref.xhtml_ft1){#ref.xhtml_fn1}

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) 'This is me'. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp.
3--27). London: Constable. (Original work published 1953)

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) Toward a theory of creativity. In *On Becoming a
Person* (pp. 347--59). London: Constable. (Original work published 1954)

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) What it means to become a person. In *On Becoming a
Person* (pp. 107--24). London: Constable. (Original work published 1954)

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) Personality change in psychotherapy. In *On
Becoming a Person* (pp. 225--42) London: Constable. (Original work
published 1955)

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) Persons or science? A philosophical question. In
*On Becoming a Person* (pp. 199--224) London: Constable. (Original work
published 1955)

Rogers, C.R. (1967) A therapist's view of the good life: The fully
functioning person. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 183--96). London:
Constable. (Original work published 1957)

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) A process conception of psychotherapy. In *On
Becoming a Person* (pp. 125--59). London: Constable. (Original work
published 1958)

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) The characteristics of a helping relationship. In
*On Becoming a Person* (pp. 39--57). London: Constable. (Original work
published 1958)

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) Client-centered therapy in its context of research.
In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 243--70). London: Constable. (Original
work published 1960)

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) 'To be that self which one truly is': A therapist's
view of personal goals. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 163--82). London:
Constable. (Original work published 1960)

Rogers, C.R. (1967a) A tentative formulation of a general law of
interpersonal relationships. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 338--46).
London: Constable. (Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1967b) *On Becoming a Person: A Therapist's View of
Psychotherapy.* London: Constable. (Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1967c) Personal thoughts on teaching and learning. In *On
Becoming a Person: A Therapist's View of Psychotherapy* (pp. 273--8)
London: Constable. (Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1967d) The place of the individual in the new world of the
behavioral sciences. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 384--402). London:
Constable. (Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1967e) What we know about psychotherapy -- Objectively and
subjectively. In *On Becoming a Person* (pp. 59--69). London: Constable.
(Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1967) Carl R. Rogers. In E.G. Boring & G. Lindzey (eds.)
*A History of Psychology in Autobiography, Vol. V* (pp. 343--84). New
York: Appleton-Century-Crofts.

Rogers, C.R. (1968) Some thoughts regarding the current presuppositions
of the behavioral sciences. In C.R. Rogers & W.R. Coulson (eds.) *Man
and the Science of Man* (pp. 55--72). Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.

Rogers, C.R. (1969) *Freedom to Learn.* Columbus, OH: Charles E.
Merrill.

Rogers, C.R. (1970) The process equation of psychotherapy. In J.T. Hart
& T.M. Tomlinson (eds.) *New Directions in Client-Centered Therapy* (pp.
190--205). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original work published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1973) *Carl Rogers on Encounter Groups.* New York: Harper
& Row. (Original work published 1970)

Rogers, C.R. (1973) *Becoming Partners: Marriage and Its Alternatives.*
London: Constable.

Rogers, C.R. (1978) *Carl Rogers on Personal Power.* London: Constable.

Rogers, C.R. (1979) The foundations of the person-centred approach.
*Education, 100(2),* 98--107.

Rogers, C.R. (1980) Ellen West -- and loneliness. In C.R. Rogers *A Way
of Being* (pp. 164--80). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original work
published 1961)

Rogers, C.R. (1980) The foundations of a person-centred approach. In
C.R. Rogers *A Way of Being* (pp. 113--36). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
(Original work published 1963)

Rogers, C.R. (1980) Some new challenges to the helping professions. In
C.R. Rogers *A Way of Being* (pp. 235--59). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
(Original work published 1973)

Rogers, C.R. (1980) Can learning encompass both ideas and feelings? In
C.R. Rogers *A Way of Being* (pp. 263--91). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
(Original work published 1974)

Rogers, C.R. (1980) Empathic: An unappreciated way of being. In C.R.
Rogers *A Way of Being* (pp. 137--63). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
(Original work published 1975)

Rogers, C.R. (1980) Beyond the watershed: And where now? In C.R. Rogers
*A Way of Being* (pp. 292--315). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original
work published 1977)

Rogers C.R. (1980) Do we need 'a' reality? In C.R. Rogers *A Way of
Being* (pp. 96--108). Boston: Houghton Mifflin. (Original work published
1978)

Rogers, C.R. (1980a) *A Way of Being.* Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Rogers, C.R. (1980b) Introduction. In C.R. Rogers *A Way of Being* (pp.
vii--x). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Rogers, C.R. (1981) The emerging person: A new revolution. In R.I. Evans
*Dialogue with Carl Rogers* (pp. 147--75). New York: Praeger. (Original
work published 1975)

Rogers, C.R. (1983) *Freedom to Learn for the 80s.* Columbus, OH:
Charles E. Merrill.

Rogers, C.R. (1986) Rogers, Kohut, and Erickson: A personal perspective
on some similarities and differences. *Person-Centred Review, 1(2),*
125--40.

Rogers, C.R. (1990) A client centered/person-centered approach to
therapy. In H. Kirschenbaum & V.L. Henderson (eds.) *The Carl Rogers
Reader* (pp. 135--52). London: Constable. (Original work published 1986)

Rogers, C.R. & Dymond, R.F. (eds.) (1954) *Psychotherapy and Personality
Change.* Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Rogers, C.R. & Freiberg, H.J (1994) *Freedom to Learn* (3rd edn.).
Columbus, OH: Charles E. Merrill.

Rogers, C.R., Gendlin, E.T., Kiesler, D.J. & Truax, C.B. (eds.) (1967)
*The Therapeutic Relationship and Its Impact: A Study of Psychotherapy
with Schizophrenics.* Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.

Rogers, C.R. & Hart, J. (1970) Looking back and looking ahead: A
conversation with Carl Rogers. In J.T. Hart & T.M. Tomlinson (eds.) *New
Directions in Client-Centered Therapy* (pp. 502--34). Boston: Houghton
Mifflin.

Rogers, C.R. & Rablen, R.A. (1958) *A Scale of Process in
Psychotherapy.* Mimeographed manual. University of Wisconsin.

Rogers, C.R. & Russell, D.E. (2002) *Carl Rogers the Quiet
Revolutionary: An Oral History.* Roseville, CA: Penmarin Books.

Rogers, C.R. & Sanford, R. (1989) Client-centered psychotherapy. In H.I.
Kaplan & B.J. Sadock (eds.) *Comprehensive Textbook of Psychiatry, Vol.
2.* (pp. 1482--1501). Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins.

Rogers, C.R. & Wallen, J.L. (1946) *Counseling with Returned
Servicemen.* New York: McGraw-Hill.

Rogers, C.R. & Wood, J.K. (1974) Client-centered theory: Carl Rogers. In
A. Burton (ed.) *Operational Theories of Personality* (pp. 211--58). New
York: Brunner/Mazel.

Rogers, N. (2000) *The Creative Connection.* Llangarron: PCCS Books.
(Original work published 1993)

Ronningstam, E. (1998) *Disorders of Narcissism.* Washington DC:
American Psychiatric Press.

Rowan, J. (1990) *Subpersonalities.* London: Routledge.

Rowan, J. & Jacobs, M. (2002) *The Therapist's Use of Self.* Maidenhead,
UK: Open University Press.

Rowland, B. (2002) Depressed process: A person-centred view of
depression. *Person-Centred Practice, 10(1),* 27--34.

Roy, B. (1988) Loss of power -- Alienation. In B. Roy & C. Steiner
(eds.) *Radical Psychiatry: The Second Decade* (pp. 3--13). Unpublished
manuscript. See
[www.emotional-literacy.com/rp0.htm](http://www.emotional-literacy.com/rp0.htm)

Ryce-Menuhin, J. (1988) *The Self in Early Childhood.* London: Free
Association Books.

Sacks, O. (1995) Foreword. In K. Goldstein *The Organism* (pp. 7--14).
New York: Zone Books. (Original work published 1934)

Sander, L.W. (1982) Polarities, paradox, and the organizing process. In
J. Call, E. Galenson & R. Tyson (eds.) *Proceedings of the First World
Congress on Infant Psychiatry* (pp. 871--908). New York: Basic Books.

Sander, L.W. (2002) Thinking differently: Principles of process in
living systems and the specificity of being known. *Psychoanalytic
Dialogues, 5,* 11--42.

Sanders, P. (2000) Mapping person-centred approaches to counselling and
psychotherapy. *Person-Centred Practice,* 8(2), 62--74.

Sanders, P. (ed.) (2004) *The Tribes of the Person-Centred Nation.*
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Sanders, P. & Tudor, K. (2001) This is therapy: A person-centred
critique of the contemporary psychiatric system. In C. Newnes, G. Holmes
& C. Dunn (eds.) *This Is Madness Too: Critical Perspectives on Mental
Health Services* (pp. 147--60). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Sanders, P. & Wyatt, G. (2002) The history of conditions one and six. In
G. Wyatt & Sanders, P. (eds.) *Contact and Perception* (pp. 1--24).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Sands, A. (2000) *Falling for Therapy.* London: Macmillan.

Sands, A. (2001, 22 September) *Psychotherapy from a Client's Point of
View. Talk to the British Psychological Society.* Paper available online
at
[www.therapyabuse.net/information/articles.anna_sands_bps_talk.htm.](http://www.therapyabuse.net/information/articles.anna_sands_bps_talk.htm.)

Sapriel, L. (1998) Can gestalt therapy, self-psychology and
intersubjectivity theory be integrated? *The British Gestalt Journal,*
7(1), 33--44.

Sayers, J. (2004) Therapy as research: Focusing on empathy. *Journal of
Critical Psychology, Counselling and Psychotherapy, 4(2),* 86--93.

Scheerer, M. (1954) Cognitive theory. In G. Lindzey (ed.) *Handbook of
Social Psychology Vol. I* (pp. 91--142). New York: Random House.

Schiff, J.L., Schiff, A.W., Mellor, K., Schiff, E., Schiff, S., Richman,
D. *et al.* (1975) *Cathexis Reader: Transactional Analysis Treatment of
Psychosis.* New York: Harper & Row.

Schlebusch, P. (2004) Review \[Problem drinking: A person-centred
dialogue\]. *Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies, 3(1),*
70--2.

Schmid, P. (1998) 'On becoming a person-centred approach': A
person-centred understanding of the person. In B. Thorne & E. Lambers
(eds.) *Person-Centred Therapy: A European Perspective* (pp. 38--52).
London: Sage.

Schmid, P. (2004) Back to the client: A phenomenological approach to the
process of understanding and diagnosis. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies,* 3(1), 36--51.

Schneider, C.K. & Stiles, W.B. (1995) A person-centered view of
depression: Women's experiences. *The Person-Centered Journal, 2,
67--77.*

Schon, D.A. (1983) *The Reflective Practitioner.* New York: Basic Books.

Schore, A.N. (1994) *Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self: The
Neurobiology of Emotional Development.* Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates Inc.

Schore, A.N. (2003) *Affect Regulation and the Repair of the Self.* New
York: W.W. Norton.

Schwartz, B. (1986) *The Battle for Human Nature: Science, Morality, and
Modern Life.* New York: W.W. Norton.

Seeman, J. (1983) *Personality Integration: Studies and Reflections.*
New York: Human Sciences Press.

Seeman, J. (1984) The fully functioning person: Theory and research. In
R.F. Levant & J. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach: New Directions in Theory, Research and
Practice* (pp. 131--52). New York: Praeger.

Seeman, J. (ed.) (1990) Human inquiry and the person-centered approach
\[Special Issue\]. *Person-Centered Review,* 5(2).

Shlien, J. (1984) A countertheory of transference. In R. Levant & J.
Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered Approach:
New Directions in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 153--81). New
York: Praeger.

Shlien, J. (1989) Boy's person-centered perspective on psychodiagnosis.
A response. *Person-Centered Review, 4(2),* 157--62.

Shlien, J.M. & Levant, R.F (1984) Introduction. In R.F. Levant & J.M.
Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered Approach:
New Directions in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 1--16). New York:
Praeger.

Shostrom, E. (Producer) (1965) *Three Approaches to Psychotherapy.*
Santa Ana: Psychological Films.

Siegel, D.J. (1999) *The Developing Mind.* New York: Guilford Press.

Smith, P. (1978) Domestic labour and Marx's theory of value. In A. Kuhn
& A Wolpe (eds.) *Feminism and Materialism* (pp. 198--219). London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.

Smuts, J. (1987) *Holism and Evolution.* New York: Macmillan. (Original
work published 1926)

Snyder, W.U. (1947) The present status of psychotherapeutic counseling.
*Psychological Bulletin, 44,* 297--386.

Snyder, W.U. (1994) *The Psychotherapy Relationship.* New York:
Macmillan. (Original work published 1961)

Solms, M. & Turnbull, O. (2002) *The Brain and the Inner World.* London:
Karnac.

Sontag, S. (1989) *AIDS and Its Metaphors.* Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin.

Speierer, G.-W. (1990) Toward a specific illness concept of
client-centered therapy. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts & R. Van Balen
(eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties*
(pp. 337--59). Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Speierer, G.-W. (1996) Client-centered psychotherapy according to the
differential incongruence model (DIM). In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky,
P.F. Schmid & R. Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 299--311). Frankfurt am Main:
Peter Lang,

Spielhofer, H. (2003) Organism and subjectivity --- 1: The concept of
'organism' and 'actualizing tendency'. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies, 2(2),* 75--88.

Spinelli, E. (1989) *The Interpreted World: An Introduction to
Phenomenological Psychology.* London: Sage.

Spinelli, E. (1997) *Tales of Un-Knowing: Therapeutic Encounters from an
Existential Perspective.* London: Duckworth.

Spinoza, B. de (1993) *Ethics.* (G.H.R. Parkinson, ed. & rev., A. Boyle,
trans.). London: Everyman. (Original work published 1677)

Stamatiadis, R. (1990) Sharing life therapy. *Person-Centered Review,*
5(3), 287--307.

Standal, S. (1954) *The Need for Positive Regard: A Contribution to
Client-Centered Theory.* Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of
Chicago.

Stanton, M. (1990) *SÃ¡ndor Ferenczi: Reconsidering Active Intervention.*
London: Free Association Books.

Stark, M. (2000) *Modes of Therapeutic Action: Enhancement of Knowledge,
Provision of Experience, Engagement in Relationship.* Northvale, NJ:
Jason Aronson.

Staunton, T. (ed.) (2002) *Body Psychotherapy.* London:
Brunner-Routledge.

Steiner, C. (1971) *Games Alcoholics Play.* New York: Grove Press.

Steiner, C. (1981) *The Other Side of Power.* New York: Grove Press.

Steiner, C. (2000) Radical psychiatry. In R.J. Corsini (ed.) *Handbook
of Innovative Therapy* (pp. 578--86). Chichester, UK: Wiley.

Steiner, C., Wyckoff, H., Golstine, D., Lariviere, P., Schwebel, R.,
Marcus, J. & Members of the Radical Psychiatry Center. (1975) *Readings
in Radical Psychiatry.* New York: Grove Press.

Stern, D.N. (1985) *The Interpersonal World of the Infant.* New York:
Basic Books.

Stern, D.N. (1991) *Diary of a Baby.* London: Fontana.

Stern, D.N. (2000) *The Interpersonal World of the Infant* (rev. edn.).
New York: Basic Books.

Stern, D.N. (2004) *The Present Moment in Psychotherapy and Everyday
Life.* New York: W.W. Norton & Co.

Stickley, T. & Freshwater, D. (2002) The art of loving and the
therapeutic relationship. *Nursing Inquiry, 9(4),* 250--6.

Stige, B. (1998) Perspectives on meaning in music therapy. *British
Journal of Music Therapy, 12(1),* 20--7.

Stinckens, N., Lietaer, G. & Leijssen, M. (2002) The valuing process and
the inner critic in the classical and current
client-centered/experiential literature. *Person-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapies, 1(1&2),* 41--55.

Stolorow, R. & Atwood, G. (1992) *Contexts of Being: The Intersubjective
Foundations of Psychological Life.* Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic Press.

Stolorow, R.D. (1976) Psychoanalytic reflections on client-centered
therapy in the light of modern conceptions of narcissism.
*Psychotherapy: Theory, Research & Practice, 13,* 26--9.

Stolorow, R.D., Brandchaft, B. & Atwood, G. (1987) *Psychoanalytic
Treatment: An Intersubjective Approach.* Hillsdale, NJ: The Analytic
Press.

Strawson, P.F. (1959) *Individuals.* London: Methuen.

Stumm, G. (2002) The person-centered approach and self psychology. In
J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice* (pp. 108--26). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Summers, G. & Tudor, K. (2000) Cocreative transactional analysis.
*Transactional Analysis Journal, 30(1),* 23--40.

Swildens, H. (2004) Self-pathology and postmodern humanity: Challenges
for person-centered psychotherapy. *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies, 3(1),* 4--18.

Symington, N. (1993) *Narcissism* -- *A New Theory.* London: Karnac
Books.

Taft, J. (1933) *The Dynamics of Therapy in a Controlled Relationship.*
New York: Macmillan.

Takens, R.J. & Lietaer, G. (2004) Process differentiation and
person-centredness: A contradiction? *Person-Centered & Experiential
Psychotherapies, 3(2),* 77--87.

Tausch, R. (1988) The relationship between emotions and cognition:
Implications for therapist empathy. *Person-Centred Review, 3,* 277--91.

Taylor, J. (1931) *Selected Writings of John Hughlings Jackson Vols. I &
II.* London: Hodder & Stoughton.

Thorne, B. (1991a) Carl Rogers and the doctrine of original sin. In B.
Thorne *Person-Centred Counselling: Therapeutic and Spiritual
Dimensions* (pp. 126--34). London: Whurr.

Thorne, B. (1991b) *Person-Centred Counselling: Therapeutic and
Spiritual Dimensions.* London: Whurr.

Thorne, B. (1991c) The quality of tenderness. In B. Thorne
*Person-Centred Counselling: Therapeutic and Spiritual Dimensions* (pp.
73--81). London: Whurr. (Original work published 1982)

Thorne, B. (1992) *Carl Rogers.* London: Sage.

Thorne, B. (2003) *Carl Rogers* (2nd edn.). London: Sage.

Thorne, B. & Lambers, E. (ed.) (1998) *Person-Centred Therapy: A
European Perspective.* London: Sage.

Thorne, F.C. (1967) *Integrative Psychology.* Brandon, VT: Clinical
Publishing Co.

Tillich, P. (1952) *The Courage to Be.* London: Fontana.

Tilmann, M. (1977) *Years of Apprenticeship on the Couch.* New York:
Urizen.

Tobin, S.A. (1991) A comparison of psychoanalytic self psychology and
Carl Rogers' person-centered therapy. *Journal of Humanistic Psychology,
30,* 9--33.

Tolan, J. (2002) The fallacy of the 'real' self: In praise of
self-structure. In J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century:
Advances in Theory, Research and Practice* (pp. 144--9). Llangarron:
PCCS Books.

Tolman, E.C. & Brunswik, E. (1935) The organism and the causal texture
of the environment. *Psychological Review, 42, 43--11.*

Tolstoy, L. (1982) *War and Peace* (R. Edmonds, trans.). Harmondsworth,
UK: Penguin. (Original work published 1869)

Tophoff, M. (1984) *The Dynamics of Person-Centered Body Work in a Group
Setting.* Paper presented at the VIIIth International Congress of Group
Psychotherapy, Mexico City.

Toukmanian, S. (2002) Perception: The core element in person-centered
and experiential psychotherapies. In G. Wyatt & P. Sanders (eds.)
*Contact and Perception* (pp. 115--32). PCCS Books: Llangarron.

Trevarthen, C. (1993) The foundations of intersubjectivity: Development
of interpersonal and cooperative understandings in infants. In D. Olsen
(ed.) *Essays in Honor of Jerome S. Bruner* (pp. 316--42). New York:
W.W. Norton. (Original work published 1980)

Truax, C.B. (1970) *A Tentative Scale of the Measurement of Accurate
Empathy.* Unpublished paper, University of Calgary, Canada.

Truax, C.B. & Carkhuff, R. (1965) Client and therapist transparency in
the psychotherapeutic encounter. *Journal of Counseling Psychology, 12,*
3--9.

Truax, C.B. & Carkhuff, R.R. (1967) *Toward Effective Counseling and
Psychotherapy. Training and Practice.* Chicago, IL: Aldine.

Truax, C.B. & Mitchell, K.K. (1971) Research on certain interpersonal
skills in relation to process and outcome. In A.E. Bergin & S.L.
Garfield (eds.) *Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behaviour Change: An
Empirical Analysis* (pp. 299--344). New York: Wiley & Sons.

Tudor, K. (1996) *Mental Health Promotion: Paradigms and Practice.*
London: Routledge.

Tudor, K. (1997) Being at dis-ease with ourselves: Alienation and
psychotherapy. *Changes, 15(2),* 143--50.

Tudor, K. (1999) 'I'm OK, You're OK -- and They're OK': Therapeutic
relationships in transactional analysis. In C. Feltham (ed.)
*Understanding the Counselling Relationship* (pp. 109--119). London:
Sage.

Tudor, K. (2000) The case of the lost conditions. *Counselling, 11(1),*
33--7.

Tudor, K. (2003) The neopsyche: The integrating adult ego state. In C.
Sills & H. Hargaden (eds.) *Ego states* (pp. 201--31). London: Worth
Reading.

Tudor, K. (2004) Mental health promotion. In I.J. Norman & I. Ryrie
(eds.) *The Art and Science of Mental Health Nursing: A Textbook of
Principles and Practice* (pp. 35--65). Buckingham, UK: McGraw Hill/Open
University Press.

Tudor, K. & Merry, T. (2002) *Dictionary of Person-Centred Psychology.*
London: Whurr.

Tudor, K. & Worrall, M. (1994) Congruence reconsidered. *British Journal
of Guidance and Counselling, 22(2),* 197--206.

Tudor, K. & Worrall, M. (2002) The unspoken relationship: Financial
dynamics in freelance therapy. In. J. Clark (ed.) *Freelance Counselling
and Psychotherapy* (pp. 80--90). London: Sage.

Tudor, K. & Worrall, M. (eds.) (2004a) *Freedom to Practise:
Person-Centred Approaches to Supervision.* Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Tudor, K. & Worrall, M. (2004b) Issues, questions, dilemmas and domains
in supervision. In K. Tudor & M. Worrall (eds.) *Freedom to Practise:
Person-Centred Approaches to Supervision* (pp. 79--96). Llangarron: PCCS
Books.

Turner, V. (1967) *Forest of Symbols.* Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.

UKCP (United Kingdom Council for Psychotherapy Humanistic and
Integrative Section Training Standards Committee) (1992) *Entry
Requirements and Curriculum Contents.* London: UKCP.

United Nations. (1948) *Declaration of Human Rights.* New York: UN.

Van Belle, H.A. (1980) *Basic Intent and Therapeutic Approach of Carl R.
Rogers.* Toronto: Wedge Publishing Foundation.

Van Belle, H.A. (1990) Rogers' later move towards mysticism:
Implications for client-centered therapy. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts &
R. Van Balen (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in
the Nineties* (pp. 47--57). Leuven: Leuven University Press.

Van Belle, H.A. (in press, 2005) Philosophical roots of person-centered
therapy in the history of western thought. *The Person-Centered
Journal.*

Van Kalmthout, M. (1998a) Personality change and the concept of self. In
B. Thorne & E. Lambers (eds.) *Person-Centred Therapy: A European
Perspective* (pp. 53--61). London: Sage.

Van Kalmthout, M. (1998b) Person-centred theory as a system of meaning.
In B. Thorne & E. Lambers (eds.) *Person-Centred Therapy: A European
Perspective* (pp. 11--22). London: Sage.

Van Kalmthout, M. (2002) The farther reaches of person-centered
psychotherapy. In J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman & M. Warner (eds.)
*Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century:
Advances in Theory, Practice and Research* (pp. 127--43). Llangarron:
PCCS Books.

Van Kalmthout, M.A. & Pelgrim, F.A. (1990) In search of universal
concepts in psychopathology and psychotherapy. In G. Lietaer, J.
Rombauts & R. Van Balen (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy in the Nineties* (pp. 381-- 96). Leuven: Leuven University
Press,

Van Werde, D. (1994) An introduction to client-centred pre-therapy. In
D. Mearns *Developing Person-Centred Counselling* (pp. 121--5) London:
Sage.

Van Werde, D. (1998) 'Anchorage' as a core concept in working with
psychotic people. In B. Thorne & E. Lambers (eds.) *Person-Centred
Therapy* (pp. 195--205) London: Sage.

Van Werde, D. (2002) The falling man: Pre-therapy applied to somatic
hallucinating. *Person-Centred Practice, 10(2),* 101--7.

Van Werde, D. (2005) Facing psychotic functioning: Person-centred
contact work in residential psychiatric care. In S. Joseph & R. Worsley
(eds.) *Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive Psychology of Mental
Health* (pp. 158--68). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Vargas, M.J. (1954) Changes in self-awareness during client-centered
therapy. In C.R. Rogers & R.F. Dymond (eds.) *Psychotherapy and
Personality Change* (pp. 145--66). Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.

Vitz, P. (1977) *Psychology as Religion: The Cult of Self-Worship.*
Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans.

von Broembsen, F. (1999) *The Sovereign Self: Toward a Phenomenology of
Self Experience.* Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson.

von Drigalski, D. (1986) *Flowers on Granite.* Berkeley, CA: Creative
Arts Book Company.

Vossen, T.J. (1990) Client-centered dream therapy. In G. Lietaer, J.
Rombauts & R. Van Balen (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy in the Nineties* (pp. 511--48). Leuven: Leuven University
Press.

Wann, T.W. (ed.) (1965) *Behaviorism and Phenomenology: Contrasting
Bases for Modern Psychology.* Chicago & London: Phoenix Books. (Original
work published 1964)

Warner, M.S. (1991) Fragile process. In L. Fusek (ed.) *New Directions
in Client-Centered Therapy: Practice with Difficult Client Populations
(Monograph Series 1)* (pp. 41--58). Chicago, IL: Chicago Counseling and
Psychotherapy Center.

Warner, M.S. (1997) Does empathy cure? A theoretical consideration of
empathy, processing and personal narrative. In A.C. Bohart & L.S.
Greenberg (eds.) *Empathy Reconsidered: New Directions in Psychotherapy*
(pp. 125--40). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.

Warner, M.S. (1998) A client-centered approach to therapeutic work with
dissociated and fragile process. In L. Greenberg, J. Watson & G. Lietaer
(eds.) *Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy* (pp. 368--87). New York:
Guilford Press.

Warner, M.S. (1999) The language of psychology as it affects women and
other traditionally disempowered groups. In I. Fairhurst (ed.) *Women
Writing in the Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 193--8). Llangarron: PCCS
Books.

Warner, M.S. (2000a) Person-centered psychotherapy: One nation, many
tribes. *The Person-Centered Journal,* 7(1), 28--39.

Warner, M.S. (2000b) Person-centred therapy at the difficult edge: A
developmentally based model of fragile and dissociated process. In D.
Mearns & B. Thorne *Person-Centred Therapy Today: New Frontiers in
Theory and Practice* (pp. 144--71). London: Sage.

Warner, M.S. (2002) Luke's dilemmas: A client-centered/experiential
model of processing with a schizophrenic thought disorder. In J.C.
Watson, R.N. Goldman & M.S. Warner (eds.) *Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice.* Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Waterhouse, R.L. (1993) Wild women don't have the blues: A feminist
critique of person-centered counseling and therapy. *Feminism and
Psychology,* 3(1), 55--71.

Watson, J.C., Goldman, R.N. & Warner, M.S. (ed.) (2002) *Client-Centered
and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice.* Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Watson, N. (1984) The empirical status of Rogers's hypotheses of the
necessary and sufficient conditions for effective psychotherapy. In R.F.
Levant & J.M. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach: New Directions in Theory, Research and
Practice* (pp. 17--40). New York: Praeger.

Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J.H. & Jackson, D.D. (1967) *Pragmatics of Human
Communication: A Study of Interactional Patterns, Pathologies, and
Paradoxes.* New York: W.W. Norton & Company.

Werner, H. (1948) *Comparative Psychology of Mental Development* (rev.
edn.). Chicago, IL: Follett.

Wexler, D.A. (1974) A cognitive theory of experiencing,
self-actualization and therapeutic process. In D.A. Wexler & L.N. Rice
(eds.) *Innovations in Client-Centered Therapy* (pp. 49--116). New York:
Wiley.

Wheeler, R.H. (1940) *The Science of Psychology* (2nd edn.). New York:
Crowell.

White, M. & Epstein, D. (1990) *Narrative Means to Therapeutic Ends.*
New York: Norton.

Whitehead, A.N. (1920) *The Concept of Nature.* Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Whitehead, A.N. (1933) *Adventures of Ideas.* London: Pelican.

Whitehead, A.N. (1954) *Dialogues of Alfred North Whitehead* (L. Price,
ed.) Westorrt, CT: Greenwood Press.

Whitehead, A.N. (1967) *Science and the Modern World.* New York: The
Free Press. (Original work published 1925)

Whitehead, A.N. (1971) *Function of Reason.* Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
(Original work published 1958)

Whitehead, A.N. (1978) *Process and Reality* (D.R. Griffin & D.W.
Sherburne, eds., corrected edn.). New York: The Free Press. (Original
work published 1929)

Wilber, K. (1980) *The Atman Project: A Transpersonal View of Human
Development.* Wheaton, IL: The Theosophical Publishing House.

Wilber, K. (1990) *Eye to Eye: The Quest for the New Paradigm.* Boston:
Shambhala.

Wilkins, P. (1997) *Personal and Professional Development for
Counsellors.* London: Sage.

Wilkins, P. (2003) *Person-Centred Therapy in Focus.* London: Sage.

Wilkins, P. (2005) Person-centred theory and 'mental illness'. In S.
Joseph & R. Worsley (eds.) *Person-Centred Psychopathology: A Positive
Psychology of Mental Health* (pp. 43--59). Ross-on-Wye, UK: PCCS Books.

Wilkins, P. & Gill, M. (2003) Assessment in person-centered therapy.
*Person-Centered & Experiential Psychotherapies,* 2(3), 172--87.

Winnicott, D.W. (1958) Clinical varieties of transference. In D.W.
Winnicott *Through Paediatrics to Psycho-Analysis.* London: Hogarth
Press/Institute of Psycho-Analysis. (Original work published 1956)

Winnicott, D.W. (1965) Ego distortion in terms of true and false self.
In D.W. Winnicott *The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating
Environment: Studies in the Theory of Emotional Development* (pp.
140--52). London: Hogarth Press/ Institute of Psycho-Analysis. (Original
work published 1960)

Winnicott, D.W. (1965) *The Maturational Processes and the Facilitating
Environment: Studies in the Theory of Emotional Development.* London:
Hogarth Press.

Wittgenstein, L. (1974) *Philosophical Investigations.* Oxford:
Blackwell. (Original work published 1922)

Wittgenstein, L. (2001) *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* (D.F. Pears &
B.F. McGuinness trans. & eds.). London: Routledge. (Original work
published 1921)

Wolter-Gustafson, C. (1999) The power of the premise: Reconstructing
gender and human development with Rogers' theory. In I. Fairhurst (ed.)
*Women Writing in the Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 199--214).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Wolter-Gustafson, C. (2004) Toward convergence: Client-centered and
feminist assumptions about epistemology and power. In G. Proctor & M.B.
Napier (eds.) *Encountering Feminism: Intersections between Feminism and
the Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 97--115). Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Wood, J.K. (1984) Communities for learning: A person-centered approach.
In R.S. Levant & J.M. Shlien (eds.) *Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach* (pp. 297--316). New York: Praeger.

Wood, J.K. (1996) The person-centered approach: Towards an understanding
of its implications. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky, P.F. Schmid & R.
Stipsits (eds.) *Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A
Paradigm in Motion* (pp. 163--81). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.

Wood, J.K. (1999) Toward an understanding of large group dialogue and
its implications. In C. Lago & M. MacMillan (eds.) *Experiences in
Relatedness: Groupwork and the Person-Centred Approach* (pp. 137--65).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Woodfin, R. & Groves, J. (2001) *Introducing Aristotle.* Cambridge: Icon
Books.

Woodworth, R.S. with Sheehan, M. (1965) *Contemporary Schools of
Psychology* (3rd edn.). New York: The Ronald Press Co. (Original work
published 1931)

Wordsworth, W. (1850) The Prelude. In T. Hutchinson (ed.) *Poetical
Works* (pp. 494--588, 1904). Oxford: Oxford University Press. (Revised
by E. de Selincourt, 1936)

Worrall, M. (1997) Contracting within the person-centred approach. In C.
Sills (ed.) *Contracts in Counselling* (pp. 65--75). London: Sage.

Wyatt, G. (2001) The multifaceted nature of congruence within the
therapeutic relationship. In G. Wyatt (ed.) *Congruence* (pp. 79--95).
Llangarron: PCCS Books.

Yalom, I. (1974) *Everyday Gets a Little Closer.* New York: Basic Books.

Yalom, I. (1995) *The Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy* (4th
edn.). New York: Basic Books.

Zimring, F.M. (1988) Attaining mastery. The shift from the 'me' to the
'I'. *Person-Centered Review,* 3(2), 165--75.

Zimring, F.M. (1995) A new explanation for the beneficial results of
client-centered therapy: The possibility of a new paradigm. *The
Person-Centered Journal, 2(2),* 36--48.

Zohar, D. (1991) *The Quantum Self.* London: Flamingo.

Zuckerkandl, V. (1973) *Man the Musician.* Princeton: Princeton
University Press.

Zukav, G. (1979) *The Dancing Wu Li Masters.* London: Rider.

ZÃºÃ±iga, G.L. (2001) What is economic personalism? A phenomenological
analysis. *Journal of Markets & Morality, 4(2),* 151--75.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[^1^](#ref.xhtml_fn1){#ref.xhtml_ft1} A number of Rogers' books comprise
previously published material. For historical interest and accuracy, we
refer to separate chapters in these books, citing them in the text, for
example, as 'Rogers (1957/67)'. Where two papers were previously
published in the same year we adopt the convention 'Rogers (1953/67a)'
and so on.
:::
