Person-Centred Therapy

Person-Centred Therapy The Focusing-Oriented Approach

CAMPBELL PURTON

© Campbell Purton 2004 All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or
transmission of this publication may be made without written permission.
No paragraph of this publication may be reproduced, copied or
transmitted save with written permission or in accordance with the
provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the
terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright
Licensing Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. Any person
who does any unauthorised act in relation to this publication may be
liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages. The author
has asserted his right to be identified as the author of this work in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988. First
published 2004 by PALGRAVE MACMILLAN Houndmills, Basingstoke, Hampshire
RG21 6XS and 175 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10010 Companies and
representatives throughout the world PALGRAVE MACMILLAN is the global
academic imprint of the Palgrave Macmillan division of St. Martin's
Press, LLC and of Palgrave Macmillan Ltd. Macmillan® is a registered
trademark in the United States, United Kingdom and other countries.
Palgrave is a registered trademark in the European Union and other
countries.

ISBN 978-0-333-96916-8 ISBN 978-0-230-21456-9 (eBook) DOI
10.1007/978-0-230-21456-9 This book is printed on paper suitable for
recycling and made from fully managed and sustained forest sources. A
catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. A
catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
10 13

9 12

8 7 11 10

6 09

5 08

4 3 07 06

2 05

1 04

For Val, Dinah and Tom

Contents Acknowledgements

viii

Terminological Note

x

Introduction

1

1.  Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

11

2.  Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

31

3.  The Origins of Focusing

54

4.  Focusing as a Taught Procedure

82

5.  Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

96

6.  Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

143

7.  Training and Supervision

163

8.  Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

175

Conclusion

207

Appendix A: The Wider Context

210

Appendix B: Resources

236

References

237

Index

250

vii

Acknowledgements I would like to thank Yoshihiko Morotomi for drawing my
attention to the work of Fujio Tomoda. It was from that spark that my
interest in focusing developed. Barbara McGavin was my first Focusing
teacher, followed later by Rob Foxcroft. I owe much to both of them. My
understanding of focusing has also been helped by attendance at Eugene
Gendlin's 'Thinking at the Edge' workshop in New York, and by workshops
run by Maarten Aalberse and Kevin McEvenue. I am grateful to Rose
Battye, Paul Cassell, Ann Weiser Cornell, Sarah Hawtin, Dave Mearns,
Judy Moore and two anonymous publishers' readers, who kindly read and
commented on parts of, or drafts of, the book. They have helped to make
the book better than it would otherwise have been. I would also like to
thank my Palgrave editors Alison Caunt and Andrew McAleer for their
patient support during the writing of the book. The 'Focusing and the
Power of Philosophy' courses, on the Isle of Cumbrae, which I have
taught with Rob Foxcroft, Barbara McGavin and Kye Nelson, helped a lot
in clarifying my own understanding of Gendlin's thinking. I benefited
from the opportunity to discuss parts of the book -- over wine and cake
-- at the UEA Counselling Service 'Writing and Research Group'; also
from teaching focusing on the UEA counselling diploma course. I have
learned a lot from our trainees, and I have very much valued the support
of my colleagues, Caroline Brown, Ian Draper, Judy Moore, Eamonn
O'Mahony and Louise Young, on the course. My understanding of focusing
has been helped greatly by my counselling clients; I hope that they have
benefited as much from my involvement in focusing as I have from working
with them. I am grateful to Brian Thorne, with whom I have worked for so
many years, for his initial encouragement to write the book and for his
continuing interest in it; to Muriel Frankl, who helped me see that
focusing, in spite of its being a way of helping people find their own
path, can get in the way of precisely that; to Mary Hendricks,
indefatigable Director of the Focusing Institute, for all her help along
the way; and to Gene Gendlin himself. Gendlin has not read this book,
though we have had helpful email discussions about some of viii

Acknowledgements

ix

the material. I am sure that in some places I will have unintentionally
misrepresented his ideas, and I apologise to him in advance for that. I
will have to leave it to the reader to assess how well I have done in
this regard, after they have consulted Gendlin's own writings. I very
much hope that readers will do this. My daughter Dinah (now working on a
PhD on existential themes) and my son Tom (now completing a Masters
degree in psychoanalysis) have helped to make me feel that it is all
worthwhile. Finally, my thanks to Val, who shares with me the pains and
pleasures of trying to write in spite of the pressures of our over-busy
lives.

Terminological Note I have for the most part chosen to use the pronouns
'they', 'them', 'their' and 'themself ' as singular forms in place of
the gender-specific 'he', 'him', and 'his' and 'himself '. This is
because I find that the consistent use of 'he or she', 'him or her' and
so on often leads to impossibly contorted sentences (how, for example,
could one live with such a rendering of 'He himself might feel that he
would like his work to be more congenial to him'?). 'S/he' is
unpronounceable, and the device of alternating the use of feminine and
masculine pronouns runs into difficulties in contexts where
gender-specific pronouns are required, and the distinction between a
gender-specific 'him' and a gender-neutral 'him' is lost. There can be
awkwardnesses in the singular use of the grammatically plural forms; for
example, I have preferred forms such as 'while they themself think' to
the grammatically correct 'while they themselves think' (though my
word-processor keeps 'correcting' this); however, I find I can live with
these awkwardnesses more comfortably than with any of the alternative
ways around the problem. Singular uses of grammatical plurals are not
unknown, although some readers may echo Queen Victoria's apocryphal 'We
are not amused'.

x

Introduction

Person-centred therapy occupies a unique position within the wide range
of psychological therapies available today. Just what its uniqueness
consists in is one thing which I hope to show in the course of this
book, through an exploration of the work of Carl Rogers' close colleague
Eugene Gendlin. I hope that the book will be of interest to counsellors,
trainees, and anyone who is involved in person-centred therapy, or who
is interested in looking at the ideas of Carl Rogers in a new way.
Rogers himself always saw theories -- including his own -- as tentative
constructions which were liable to modification in the light of further
experience. Gendlin's work can be seen as one way in which Rogers' ideas
can be carried forward. However, although Gendlin's approach grew out of
his work with Rogers, it is deeply relevant to any form of counselling
or psychotherapy. It provides a way of thinking about therapy which
should be of interest to those who see themselves as working in
'eclectic' or 'integrationist' ways because it provides a plausible view
of how such a way of working can avoid being superficial or incoherent.
I hope also that the book will be of interest to people who are
primarily interested in Gendlin's well-known 'Focusing' procedure, but
who have not yet fully appreciated the richness of thought which lies
behind the procedure. Finally, I hope the book will be of interest to
anyone who would like to glimpse a genuinely novel way of approaching a
range of issues which lie at the borders of psychotherapy -- issues
involving ethics, creativity, spirituality, and the relationship of
psychotherapy to science and contemporary culture. My aim is to take
Carl Rogers' 'person-centred therapy' and to view it from the
perspective developed by Gendlin. Gendlin's work is less known than that
of Rogers, but I hope to show that it provides 1

2

Person-Centred Therapy

a solid, and much-needed, grounding for the practice of personcentred
therapy. Although Gendlin's perspective does not entail radical changes
in person-centred practice, it does present that practice in a new
light. It also suggests a new way of seeing the relationships between
the various 'schools' of therapy, and explains the remarkably persistent
research finding that the practices of all the schools are equally
effective. Person-centred therapy centres the therapeutic work on the
individual client in a way which is quite distinctive but not entirely
easy to articulate. Carl Rogers initially characterised the form of
therapy which he was developing as 'non-directive'. This term catches
the idea that in this form of therapy the therapist's task is not to
direct the client towards ends which the therapist sees as good or
fulfilling, but to facilitate the client's efforts to determine their
own goals, based on their own experiencing. Nor is it the therapist's
task to direct the client along a path which the therapist sees as
likely to lead to the client's goals, but to facilitate the client's
movement along their own chosen path. Further, the task of the therapist
is not to provide the client with ways of thinking about their
situation, but to facilitate the development of the client's own ways of
thinking about that situation. These were revolutionary ideas when
Rogers formulated them, and while there are many quarters in which they
have still not been absorbed, there can be little doubt that Rogers'
influence has been pervasive. 'Person-centred therapy' has, for many
years, been one of the major approaches to counselling and psychotherapy
in Britain. In the United States it is no longer prominent under that
name, but the fourth edition of the American Handbook of Psychotherapy
and Behaviour Change (Bergin and Garfield, 1996) now accords
'experiential psychotherapy' -- that is, those forms of therapy which
take 'the client's ongoing awareness of his or her own experience as the
primary datum for therapy' (p. 509) -- the status of a 'major approach',
along with cognitive, behavioural and psychodynamic approaches. I think
that the principles of therapy which Rogers formulated are of enduring
importance, but they have a simplicity which can be mistaken for a lack
of depth. Person-centred therapy is often seen as lacking in theoretical
sophistication, and while some practitioners delight in this, others are
concerned about it and may seek to integrate person-centred ideas with
theoretical principles drawn from other schools of therapy. However,
there is already within the personcentred approach a developed body of
theory. It is the theory of experiencing developed by Gendlin which I
believe can provide

Introduction

3

a solid foundation for person-centred practice. This book is concerned
more with practice than with theory, but I hope to show something of the
relevance of the theory to the practice. In the early days of the
development of his approach, Rogers found that one simple and effective
way of facilitating the client's process of change was simply to reflect
back to the client what they had said. For Rogers this was a way of
checking whether he had understood the client's meaning, although
another aspect of this procedure -- emphasised more by Gendlin -- was
that in hearing their words back the client can check whether their
words really say what they meant to say. Then, having expressed what
they were previously unable to express, the client can move on a step.
This simple procedure of listening and reflecting, which Barrett-Lennard
(1998) calls 'nondirective reflective psychotherapy', has remained
important in the person-centred approach ever since Rogers introduced
it. It is clear that in listening and reflecting, the therapist is in an
important way influencing what happens in the session. Whatever the
therapist does will have an influence on the client, and person-centred
therapists, like all therapists, do what they do in the expectation of
having an influence which will be helpful to the client. Whether such
conscious influence on the process of therapy should be called
'direction' is something we will need to address later. I think it is
fair to say that there is in person-centred therapy at least some
encouragement of a certain sort of process, that is, the sort of process
which involves the client finding their own way forward. The
person-centred therapist believes that it is in this particular sort of
process that the client 'finds themself', so that it would be absurd for
the therapist not to do things that help to bring about this sort of
process. So it seems that the term 'non-directive' is not entirely
accurate as a description of Rogers' practice, and he himself later came
to prefer the phrase 'client-centred'. The import of this new term was
that the therapist should not try to formulate the client's experience
or goals in terms of any external theory. What is important for the
therapist is to be with the client in their own frame of reference, and
to help the client to articulate their concerns in their own way.
'Client-centred' contrasts essentially with 'theory-centred', though it
is important to see that this does not entail any disparagement of
theory: if the client should formulate their experience in terms of
concepts drawn, say, from Freud, and these concepts should have
experiential meaning for the client, then the client-centred therapist
should do their best to enter into the client's Freudian world.
'Client-centred' does not

4

Person-Centred Therapy

mean rejection of theories (after all, theories of all sorts are
embodied in all our experiencing, even in what we call 'common sense'),
but it does mean centring on the client's theories rather than on the
therapist's theory. One further terminological change in the development
of Rogers' work was the shift from 'client-centred' to 'person-centred'.
This change was primarily to allow for the fact that Rogers' approach to
human problems came to be employed beyond the limits of psychotherapy.
For example, Rogers came to think that in large groups the basic
listening procedures of client-centred therapy could be helpful in
facilitating mutual understanding. In this kind of context it would be
inappropriate to speak of 'clients', so the term 'person-centred' is
used to convey that the listener stays with the other person's way of
being and experiencing. The person-centred/client-centred distinction
marks a difference in the range of application of Rogers' ideas, not in
their essential content. One curious development has been that in spite
of the approach being referred to as 'client-centred', Rogers and his
successors have given far more attention to the attitudes of the
therapist than to the experiencing of the client. This anomaly has begun
to be noticed (Mearns and Thorne, 2000, p. 193), and Gendlin's work
could be seen, in part, as a thoroughgoing effort to redress the
balance. Rogers came to see the therapist attitudes of empathy,
acceptance and genuineness -- what came to be known as the 'core
conditions' of therapy -- as the crucial ingredients in what made his
non-directive reflective procedure effective. He went on to elaborate a
theory of why this procedure was effective. This was, in brief, that
psychological disturbance arises from the introjection of the values of
significant others. He saw human beings as having a deep need for the
respect and appreciation of others, a need which often conflicts with
the other felt needs a person has. Such conflict does not itself
constitute psychological disturbance, according to Rogers; there is such
disturbance only when the person denies or distorts their own felt needs
so as to develop a self-concept which fits the 'conditions of worth' of
those around them. The process of therapy then consists in the undoing
of the conditions of worth: in the situation where the therapist
genuinely and empathically accepts the client for who they are, the
conditions of worth dissolve. Beginning from the observed effectiveness
of the non-directive reflective approach, Gendlin's thought moved in a
rather different direction. Before he became involved with Rogers' group
in Chicago,

Introduction

5

Gendlin had been working on a philosophical theory of experiencing.
Essential to this theory is the idea that lived experiencing is distinct
from the concepts through which we make sense of our experiencing. The
ways in which we experience the world are determined in part by the
conceptual patterns of the culture in which we are brought up, but at
the same time, Gendlin insists, a human being is not a blank slate upon
which just any old patterns can be drawn. The concepts and principles
which we acquire from our culture are often modified by our own
experiencing. We are not entirely trapped in the ways of seeing the
world which are handed down to us; there is something in us which
engages with the concepts and which determines whether these concepts
are useful to us or not. This -- our lived experiencing of the world --
is something on which we can focus our attention, and to which all our
ideas and thoughts are answerable. I will discuss Gendlin's basic ideas
later; for the present we need just to get a glimpse of them in order to
see how it was that on encountering Rogers' work at the University of
Chicago Counselling Center, Gendlin was struck by the fact that there
was a group of people who were actually working in just that borderland
between lived experiencing and conceptual understanding, which so deeply
interested him. For, in client-centred therapy there are so often
moments when the client is trying to find ways of expressing what they
are experiencing. The stock concepts often will not do. For example:
What I feel when I am with him is not exactly embarrassment, but there
is a sort of awkwardness -- there is something about how I am with him
that is sort of 'pulled in', so I can't quite be myself . . . it is a
quite specific feeling that goes with this situation . . . yet it is
sort of familiar . . . a bit like I used to be with my uncle when he
offered to help me when I was making those model planes . . . yes, that
feeling. Aaah. \[Takes a deeper breath\].

Here there is an attempt to articulate, to find a form for, the feeling.
And when the form is found there is a sense of release -- 'Yes, that's
what it is' -- followed perhaps by a slightly deeper breath, or a sigh,
or the shedding of a few tears. This is what Rogers (1956, 1961, p. 130)
calls a 'moment of movement', and Gendlin (1996, p. 20) a 'shift' or
'change-step'. In such moments, something physically shifts a little,
and in some sense the person 'moves on'. Gendlin and Rogers see such
movements as characteristic of the therapy process although, of course,
they also occur in non-therapeutic contexts. It is important to realise
that what is being described is

6

Person-Centred Therapy

something quite familiar. Novelists sometimes portray it. For example,
in The Glass Palace (Ghosh, 2001, p. 328) Alison reflects as she is
driving with Dinu: Now, when I wake up in the morning those things come
back to me in just that way -- I have to do this or that, for Mummy or
for Daddy. Then I remember, No, I don't have to do any of those things;
there's no reason to. And in an odd way, what you feel at those moments
is not exactly sadness but a kind of disappointment. And that's awful
too, for you to say to yourself -- is this the best I can do? No: this
isn't good enough. I should cry -- everyone says it's good to cry. But
the feeling inside doesn't have an easy name: it's not exactly pain or
sorrow -- not right then. It feels more like the sensation you have when
you sit down very heavily in a chair: the breath rushes out of your body
and you find yourself gagging. It's hard to make sense of it -- any of
it. You want the pain to be simple, straightforward -- you don't want it
to ambush you in these roundabout ways, each morning, when you're
getting up to do something else -- brush your teeth or eat your
breakfast . . . The car veered suddenly towards the side of the road.
Dinu snatched at the wheel to steady it. 'Alison! Slow down -- careful.'
She ran the car on to the grassy verge that flanked the road and stopped
under a tree. Raising her hands, she touched her cheeks in a gesture of
disbelief. 'Look,' she said, 'I'm crying'.

On the basis of the empirical studies with which he was involved as a
member of Rogers' group, Gendlin came to believe that the kind of
process that went on in client-centred therapy was in principle no
different from that which went on in other forms of therapy when they
were therapeutically effective. In all forms of therapy the crucial
factor seemed to be whether the client was able to relate effectively to
their own experiencing. Clients who spent their sessions in discussing
external events tended not to make much progress. Nor did those who
approached their problems in a purely intellectual way, and nor did
those who simply allowed their feelings to take them over. The way of
talking which did seem to be therapeutically effective was that which is
encouraged by Rogers' listening-and-reflecting procedure. It is a way of
talking in which the client gives attention to what is going on inside
them and seeks to give expression to that experiencing. We will
encounter many examples of this way of talking in the course of this
book. The differences between Rogers and Gendlin lie less in clinical
practice than in the theory which underpins the practice. For Rogers

Introduction

7

the crucial point is that through embodying the core conditions the
therapist provides a receptive, non-judging ambience which functions as
an antidote to the conditions of worth which the client has absorbed.
Rogers pictures therapy in terms of an agricultural metaphor: people are
like plants which can flourish only if they are provided with suitable
conditions for growth. Just as plants require sunlight and water, people
require genuine acceptance and understanding. We will consider the
aptness of this metaphor later, but it is by now well-recognised in
person-centred thinking that there is another aspect of Rogers' thought
which does not sit entirely comfortable with the agricultural metaphor.
This second theme is Rogers' emphasis on the therapeutic relationship.
In practice, person-centred therapists do not simply provide a receptive
ambience of genuine empathy and acceptance. They interact with the
client, reflecting what the client says, sometimes asking questions, and
sometimes expressing their own feelings. As we will see later, the
practice of person-centred therapy changed significantly in the
mid-1960s following the experience which Rogers and his colleagues had
of working with schizophrenic patients in the large-scale Wisconsin
Project. Instead of the emphasis on non-directive reflection there came
to be an emphasis on how the therapist interacts with the client. The
core conditions came to be seen more as ways of relating than simply as
attitudes. For Gendlin, who had directed the Wisconsin Project, this
emphasis on the interaction between client and therapist tied in closely
with his understanding of human life as always an interaction between
the felt flow of experiencing and something else. The 'something else'
could be what someone else said or did, or it might be something which
one had read, or the impact of a dream on waking experience, or of
reading one's diary, or of watching a sunset, or of hearing a piece of
music and so on. For Gendlin, human living is always a process of
interaction between felt experiencing and all that which has an impact
on our experiencing. It is through such interaction that our
experiencing changes. Gendlin sees psychological disturbance as due to
difficulties which have arisen in the interaction process which
constitutes human living. Such difficulties often arise through our
spontaneous responses being blocked through our fear of what other
people will think, but the crucial point is that there is a block in the
ongoing interaction process. Provision of the core conditions often
helps to free up the blocked process, but from his experience of
schizophrenic patients, Gendlin became convinced that more than this may
be needed. Even in cases of less-extreme disturbance it seems true that
some clients are helped

8

Person-Centred Therapy

by empathic listening much more than others, and it is important to know
why this is so. Gendlin's view is that a lot depends on the client, a
view which has been confirmed by much psychotherapy outcome research
(for instance Orlinsky et al., 1994). Some clients start from a place
where they can respond to the therapist's interventions in a way which
frees up their blocked process. These are rewarding clients for the
therapist. But there are others who seem unable to make effective use of
what is offered to them. For example, they may use the session to talk
about the events of their week without referring to how these events
struck them, or how they felt about the events, or what meaning these
events had for them. Other clients speculate about the causes of their
problems, perhaps analysing their difficulties in terms of some
psychological theory. Still others simply remain immersed in their
anxiety or depression and cannot relate to it. In the years following
the Wisconsin project, Gendlin and his colleagues studied thousands of
recordings of client sessions and were often able to identify at the
start those clients who would be unlikely to make significant progress.
This was a disturbing development because it meant that much therapeutic
effort was quite likely to be unhelpful. As a result of these studies
Gendlin and his colleagues looked at the possibility of developing ways
of reaching out to clients who would otherwise not be reached. The
'focusing' procedure was one possibility: clients could be taught to
engage with their own experiencing in the way that successful clients
did naturally. On the other hand, if the therapist assumes the role of a
teacher this can have bad consequences for the client. The
person-centred approach is premised on clients discovering their own
resources, rather than relying on the knowledge of 'experts'. There is a
tension here which I will explore in various contexts in this book. It
is the tension between knowing that therapeutic change is likely to
follow from the client's relating to their own experiencing, and the
need in many cases to help the client to realise that this is so. In
person-centred therapy we do not direct the client along a path which we
think is best for them; we facilitate their following their own path.
But what if the client is not on any path of their own? What if they are
following rules laid down by other people, or tracks laid down by long
irrelevant events, or generalised theoretical notions? Can we then in
effect say to them 'Listen to yourself, listen to your own experiencing
now. Don't even listen to me unless what I say resonates with you'?
Whether this very particular kind of therapist

Introduction

9

directivity is alien to the person-centred approach will be one of the
themes of this book. In Chapter 1 I outline the theory of person-centred
therapy as developed by Rogers, and the main developments in the years
since Rogers ceased to write about the theory of therapy. In Chapter 2 I
discuss some areas of person-centred theory which are problematic. Later
in the book I hope to show how many of these difficulties can be
resolved if we adopt Gendlin's view of therapy. In Chapter 3 we will
look at how focusing developed in relation to the early development of
client-centred therapy. Then in Chapter 4 I give a short account of
'Focusing' as a taught procedure. (I will always capitalise 'Focusing'
when I am referring to this procedure.) Focusing understood in this way
is the part of Gendlin's work which is best known, and it would be
eccentric not to include this chapter. However, as will become clear in
the course of the book, I think it is important to see that Focusing as
a taught procedure is just one application of a whole way of thinking
about therapy, and about many other aspects of human life. In Chapter 5
I discuss in some detail how Gendlin's ideas can inform therapeutic
practice. This chapter is not in itself a manual for practice, but I
hope it will provide enough material to entice some therapists to
explore further how Gendlin's approach could enrich what they already
do. These chapters will inevitably give rise to questions and objections
in some readers' minds, and in Chapter 6 I deal with what I take to be
the main difficulties in Gendlin's approach, especially as seen through
the eyes of more orthodox person-centred practitioners. The implications
of Gendlin's approach for training and supervision are explored in
Chapter 7, at least in connection with training which remains fairly
close to the standard forms of person-centred therapist training. As we
shall see, Gendlin's view of therapy involves a radical rethinking of
the relationship between the person-centred approach and other schools
of therapy. In brief, what is central to person-centred therapy belongs
in any kind of effective therapy. The procedures of any school of
therapy can be 'experientialised' or oriented towards the principles
involved in focusing, so that Gendlin's work is relevant to all the
schools of therapy. However, in this book I will, for the most part,
restrict the discussion to the relationship between focusingoriented
therapy and the more standard person-centred approach. In Chapter 8 I
attempt to lay out the philosophical underpinnings of Gendlin's views.
It has often been said that the person-centred approach is 'thin on
theory', but I do not think anyone who has read

10

Person-Centred Therapy

Gendlin will be likely to retain such an opinion. Gendlin's views are
rooted in philosophical considerations which involve a thoroughgoing
rethinking of many of the assumptions underlying our modern 'scientific'
world view. Because of this, his thinking has implications far beyond
the field of psychotherapy. This aspect of Gendlin's work will not be of
interest to every reader, so I have relegated it to an appendix
(Appendix A). However, I think myself that these further implications
have an important bearing on therapy -- for, if support for Gendlin's
general approach can be found in how it illuminates these other areas,
we will have extra reason to take his views more seriously when we turn
our attention to psychotherapy itself. While up to now Gendlin's
contribution has usually been seen as the development of his Focusing
procedure, I hope that this book will show how focusing-oriented
psychotherapy embodies very deeply the spirit of the person-centred
approach. I also hope that the book may whet the reader's appetite for
further exploration of a deeply original view of the world which goes
far beyond the realm of psychotherapy, while offering an explanation of
just what psychotherapy is, and why it can be effective.

1 Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

Rogers' work In his book Counselling and Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts
in Practice, published in 1942, Carl Rogers presents what he sees as a
new method of therapy 'in which warmth of acceptance and absence of any
form of coercion or personal pressure on the part of the counsellor
permits the maximum expression of feelings, attitudes, and problems by
the counsellee ...In this unique experience of complete emotional
freedom within a well-defined framework the client is free to recognise
and understand his impulses and patterns, positive and negative, as in
no other relationship' (Rogers, 1942, p. 113). The book contains the
first complete recorded transcript of a series of therapy sessions, with
a commentary by Rogers on how the therapist's responses in the session
embodied the non-directive principles which Rogers was advocating.
During the following few years, while Rogers was based at Ohio State
University, he and other therapists applied the principles of
non-directive responding in a variety of contexts, including work with
the adjustment problems of servicemen returning from wartime activities.
It was in his next book (co-authored with John Wallen) Counselling with
Returned Servicemen (1946) that Rogers first used the term
'client-centred', along with 'non-directive', as characterising his
approach. It is the client's frame of reference which is emphasised,
while '\[i\]t is the counsellor's function to provide an atmosphere in
which the client, through the exploration of his situation, comes to see
himself and his reactions more clearly and to accept his attitudes more
fully' (Rogers and Wallen, 1946, p. 5). What the counsellor actually did
in the sessions was mainly to accompany the client with 11

12

Person-Centred Therapy

reflective restatement and clarification of what the client said,
without judgement, comment or interpretation. This work became widely
known, and in 1945 Rogers accepted an invitation to a senior appointment
at the prestigious University of Chicago, where he proceeded to set up a
Counselling Centre which incorporated both clinical and research
activities. In the following years Rogers and his colleagues continued
to refine their theory and practice of 'non-directive reflective'
psychotherapy, and in 1951 Rogers published Client-Centred Therapy. As
Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 60) points out, there are, in this work,
incipient changes of emphasis in Rogers' account. The emphasis on the
therapist targeting the client's frame of reference is still there, but
this mode of responding is now seen less as a technique than as the
embodiment of certain attitudes. Also in this book Rogers begins to
develop a theory of the self which was needed to explain why the
client-centred approach was therapeutically effective. The essentials of
this theory were that as a child develops, a 'self-structure' or
'self-concept' forms in which what is valued arises partly from
immediate experiencing and partly from values introjected from others,
which are experienced as if they were the child's own experience
(Rogers, 1951, p. 500). As the child continues to develop, new
experiences are assimilated into the selfstructure or, if they are
incompatible with it, are denied or distorted. Psychological disturbance
is constituted by such denial or distortion. By contrast, psychological
adjustment exists 'when the concept of self is at least roughly
congruent with all the experiences of the organism' (p. 513). Any
experience which is inconsistent with the self-structure is likely to be
perceived as a threat, but the therapeutic situation provides a safe
setting in which all the client's experiences can be examined, and the
structure of the self then becomes re-organised so as to assimilate
these experiences. Two further important concepts in client-centred
therapy were developed in the mid-1950s. Rogers took up Standal's (1954)
notion of unconditional positive regard as a crucial element in
effective therapy, and at the same time came to emphasise the importance
of therapist 'congruence'. The 'congruence' involved was that between
the self as it actually is and the self as perceived. 'Congruence' soon
came to be used rather more broadly as a synonym for 'genuineness',
which was seen as having two aspects: those of (a) consistency between
experiencing and awareness, and (b) consistency between awareness and
expression. Roughly speaking, people are fully congruent if they deceive
neither themselves nor others.

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

13

In 1957 Rogers published his paper 'The necessary and sufficient
conditions of therapeutic personality change'. In this he claims that
just six conditions need to be obtained if there is to be therapeutic
change. Three of these conditions have subsequently come to be known in
client-centred writing as the 'core conditions' of therapy, namely the
therapist conditions of empathic understanding, unconditional positive
regard and congruence. The other conditions are that client and
therapist are in psychological contact, that the client 'is in a state
of incongruence, being vulnerable or anxious' (Rogers, 1957, p. 96), and
that the client must register the therapist's empathy and unconditional
positive regard. I will refer to the full set of six conditions as the
'therapeutic conditions', and to the three conditions which the
therapist needs to embody as the 'therapist conditions'. (I prefer this
latter phrase to the more familiar 'core conditions', since it does not
misleadingly suggest that the therapist conditions are more central to
therapy than the other three conditions.) In subsequent years, much
research effort was devoted to exploring the validity of Rogers'
'necessary and sufficient' claim, which was a claim about not just
client-centred therapy but psychotherapy in general. Prior to 1957,
Fiedler's research (Barrett-Lennard, 1998, p. 262) had already suggested
that therapeutic effectiveness was correlated more with how experienced
the therapists were than with their theoretical orientation. Further,
work by Quinn (ibid., p. 262) suggested what seemed to characterise the
experienced therapists was essentially their receptive and sensitive
attitude towards their clients. Heine (ibid., p. 263) found that,
regardless of the theoretical orientation of the therapist, what clients
themselves found helpful were such things as 'assisting the patient by
asking questions which have the effect of clarifying feelings or
attitudes', 'expressing for the client straight-forwardly feelings which
the client approaches hesitantly and hazily' and 'feelings of trust, of
being understood, and of independence in reaching solutions to
problems'. Further, at least some of the studies conducted around this
time indicated that there was a correlation between therapeutic movement
and how effectively the therapist embodied the therapist conditions
(ibid., pp. 82, 264--7). In 1959 Rogers published his major theoretical
paper, which explains in greater detail why the six therapeutic
conditions are to be seen as causally effective. In brief, Roger's view
is that human beings have, amongst their other needs, a deep need for
the positive regard of others. This need can give rise to conflict in
situations where the positive regard of others is conditional upon the
individual having

14

Person-Centred Therapy

feelings or attitudes which they do not in fact have. The individual is
then in effect faced with the choice of satisfying their own
'organismic' needs while losing the positive regard of significant
others, or of retaining the positive regard while giving up their
organismic needs. The latter option, however, is not really possible
since the organismic needs are there. What is possible for the
individual is to deny or distort their awareness of their needs. In this
way a view of themselves, a selfconcept, is set up which is congruent
with the 'conditions of worth' set by others, but incongruent with their
actual experiencing. Subsequently, when life situations arise which make
it difficult to maintain the distortion or denial, the person will
become anxious or behave defensively, and generally exhibit some degree
of psychological disturbance. Further, because greater awareness of
their own experiencing will render the person liable to anxiety, he or
she will be disinclined to give much attention to their experiencing.
Instead of looking within to determine what they really feel or value,
they will look outwards to what other people are thinking or valuing; in
Rogers' terminology they will have an 'external locus of evaluation'.
This, while reducing anxiety, undermines the person's sense of themself
as 'solid' and trustworthy, thus increasing the person's sense of
vulnerability. In Rogers' view, client-centred therapy is effective
because it provides an antidote to the introjected conditions of worth:
in their relationship with the therapist, the client has the experience
of being seen as they are (the therapist is empathic), and of being
unconditionally accepted for what they are. Further, the client
experiences this empathic acceptance as being fully genuine on the
therapist's part -- it is not a pretence. In these circumstances the
client no longer needs to deny or distort their experiencing, so that
their self-concept can return to a state of congruence with their
experiencing. As a result the client's psychological disturbance is
relieved. In the background of this account is Rogers' notion of the
'actualising tendency'. He held that the primary motivation of all human
behaviour is the actualisation of the person's potentialities. However,
once a concept of self is set up which is at variance with the person's
organismic experiencing, self-actualisation becomes problematic. The
person is torn between actualising that 'self ' (self-concept) which is
constituted by the conditions of worth (that is, becoming what one
'should be' in the eyes of others) and actualising their organismic
potential. Rogers sees the actualising tendency as common to all living
beings. Given the right environmental conditions, an organism will grow
--

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

15

actualise its potentials -- without the need of any outside assistance.
If the environmental conditions are less favourable then the organism
will still grow, but perhaps in a bizarre way. Rogers (1980, p. 118)
refers to the example of potatoes which, stored in his family's basement
several feet below a small window, grew long, pale spindly sprouts as if
they were seeking the light. This is not the 'natural' form of a potato
plant; it is not the form the plant has in its natural environment.
However even this distorted kind of potato is the result of the
actualising tendency which moves the potato sprout to seek the light.
Rogers sees this not just as an analogy for what happens in human lives,
but as another example of the way in which organisms move towards
actualising their potential. For human beings, as for potatoes, the
environmental conditions may not be favourable or nurturing, and in that
case the organism may develop an unusual form. For Rogers even the most
bizarre and seemingly inappropriate forms of human behaviour are the
results of the organism coping as best as it can with noxious
environmental conditions. As with the potato an unnatural form of
development renders the organism more vulnerable (the long potato
spindles are easily broken), and there may be no way of reversing what
has already happened. However, once the environmental conditions are
changed (in the human case, once the conditions of worth are withdrawn)
the organism will from there on be able to develop its potential more
fully. To summarise, Rogers first proposed a hypothesis, that
therapeutic change will take place if and only if the six therapeutic
conditions are present. I will call this the Therapeutic Conditions
Hypothesis. Secondly he offered a theoretical explanation of why his
hypothesis is likely to hold true, namely the Conditions of Worth
Theory. The Conditions of Worth Theory came relatively late in the
evolution of client-centred therapy, some years after the client-centred
practice had been established. It can look as though the theory simply
emerged from the practice, but this seems unlikely, given modern views
on the way scientific theories develop. In fact, Rogers' views were
deeply influenced by his knowledge of Freudian psychotherapy. He does
not use the word 'repression', but the 'distortion and denial of
experience' of which he speaks are recognisably close to what Freudians
mean by 'repression'. Indeed, Rogers (1951, pp. 498--503) himself makes
this explicit. In connection with the internalisation of conditions of
worth, Rogers uses the psychoanalytic terminology of 'introjection'. He
avoids speaking of 'unconscious thoughts and feelings' but this is more
an avoidance of the terminology, than of the concepts.

16

Person-Centred Therapy

This is not to criticise Rogers; it is often worthwhile to say old
things in new ways, and in addition there were many unwanted
connotations of the Freudian terminology which Rogers wished to avoid.
In particular, I suspect, Rogers wanted to get away from the Freudian
idea that there is 'an unconscious' about which the therapist -- armed
with his theory -- could know more than the client; for that idea runs
counter to Rogers' fundamental belief that the therapist's aim should be
to help the client articulate their experience in the client's terms.
Rather than seeing Roger's theory as simply growing out of his clinical
experience I think we should see it arising from the interplay of that
experience with Freudian ideas, with notions drawn from his knowledge of
scientific agriculture, with ideas taken from many other thinkers.
Nevertheless, it is true that Rogers' own theory emerged only some years
after the practice of what Barrett-Lennard calls 'non-directive
reflective therapy' had evolved. This is important for one of the themes
of the present book, which is that while person-centred therapy is a
demonstrably effective form of therapy, there are difficulties in its
theoretical formulation which have some implications for clinical
practice. It is important to be able to separate the practice of
non-directive reflective therapy as it evolved in the 1940s and 1950s
from the theoretical explanation of its effectiveness in terms of the
Conditions of Worth Theory, which Rogers presented in a fully fledged
form in 1959. I will say more about the development of Rogers'
theoretical ideas in Chapter 3, but two important points need to be made
here about the later development of his thinking. One is that from the
early 1960s, following his involvement in the Wisconsin schizophrenia
project, Rogers came more and more to emphasise the importance of
therapists being real and spontaneous in their relationships with their
clients. One might say that the balance between the Therapist Conditions
shifted from an emphasis on empathy and acceptance to an emphasis on
genuineness. In practice this meant that client-centred practitioners
were less restricted in the forms of response they might make. While
previously questions, counsellor self-revelations, interpretations,
suggestions and so forth were prohibited, such forms of response were
now allowed so long as they were made in a way which still embodied the
therapist conditions. The emphasis shifted from particular kinds of
response (non-directive reflective responses) to the embodiment of
particular attitudes (the therapist conditions) in whatever kinds of
response came to the therapist spontaneously in the moment. The other
important aspect of Rogers' later thinking is that from the mid-1960s he
became very much involved in working with

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

17

groups. It was the time at which 'encounter groups' were becoming very
popular in North America, and Rogers' interest was caught by the fact
that the conditions which facilitated group understanding and
co-operation seemed to be very much the same as the conditions which
were facilitative in individual therapy. In the succeeding years nearly
all of Rogers' professional energy was devoted to this new interest, and
he wrote nothing significantly new in connection with counselling
theory. Rogers' own enthusiasm for groups, together perhaps with
something in the spirit of the times, led to a strong emphasis on
unstructured group-work in the world of person-centred counselling,
regardless of whether it was appropriate to the context. Mearns (1997,
p. 11) recalls some of the more extreme examples of this trend, such as
the trainer who 'began his weekend introductory course in person-centred
counselling skills with a time-unlimited, unstructured encounter group
without giving any warning or explanation'. Such episodes are less
common today, although many people become interested in 'the
person-centred approach' through encounter with person-centred
group-work, and are sometimes surprised to learn that it was not in this
context that Rogers' ideas originated. Paths of development in PCT In
the years following the establishment of client-centred therapy as a
distinctive school, several lines of development can be traced. I will
briefly discuss each of these, with a view to seeing later how
focusingoriented therapy fits into the wider picture. Some of these
alternative views within the broad spectrum of the person-centred
tradition will be familiar to readers who come to person-centred therapy
in what might be called the standard way, that is, through the writings
of Rogers, and the experience of training courses which emphasise the
centrality of the therapist conditions. Other views may be less
familiar, and I will devote more space to some of these. In Britain,
especially, there has been little awareness of how many distinct
'tribes' there are in the person-centred 'nation' (Warner, 2000a),
although this situation is now beginning to change (Sanders, 2004). The
standard view By 'the standard view' I mean the view of person-centred
therapy which is set out in widely read books which frequently appear as
'recommended reading' on person-centred training courses. Examples of
such

18

Person-Centred Therapy

books are Dave Mearns' and Brian Thorne's Person-Centred Counselling in
Action (1988; second edition 1999), Tony Merry's Learning and Being in
Person-Centred Counselling (1999) and Mearns' Developing PersonCentred
Counselling (1994). The 'standard view' follows closely what I have
called Rogers' Conditions of Worth Theory. It sees psychological
disturbance as originating through the imposition of conditions of worth
which alienate the person from his or her 'organismic valuing process',
and sees the role of the therapist as providing 'conditions for growth'
in the form of the therapist conditions of empathy, acceptance and
congruence. Psychologically healthy persons are seen as those whose
relationships with others have enabled them to develop self-concepts
which allow them to be in touch with their own experiencing, and to
trust in their own experiencing rather than in the judgements of others.
Mearns (2003) puts it in Rogers' terminology: 'an implicit aim of
person-centred working is to help the client to internalise his locus of
evaluation'. Since the role of the therapist is seen as one of embodying
the therapist conditions as a means of undoing restrictive conditions of
worth, and encouraging the client to internalise their locus of
evaluation, the main emphasis in the standard view of counsellor
training is on the development of the core attitudes of congruence,
empathy and acceptance in prospective counsellors. Hence on counselling
training courses, 'personal development', in the sense of developing
these attitudes, is seen as the most important aspect of training
(Mearns and Thorne, 1988, p. 57; Mearns, 2003). The standard view echoes
Rogers' early concern about the imposition of theoretical categories on
the client's experiencing. Mearns (2003), for example, speaks of 'the
importance of centring the work in the experience of the client rather
than in terms of other people's experience of the client issue'. The
standard view opposes the introduction of diagnostic categories into
counselling sessions, but allows that some general knowledge of
conditions such as depression or post-traumatic stress can help the
counsellor in understanding the client. Psychopathology is discussed
largely in terms of conflict between conditions of worth and organismic
experiencing (Lambers, in Mearns, 2003), and different therapist
conditions are held to be especially important in connection with
different pathologies: for example, congruence is emphasised in
connection with psychotic clients (p. 114), and acceptance in connection
with clients who have personality disorders (p. 120). The standard view
thus allows for

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

19

a differential emphasis in the therapist conditions depending on the
nature of the client's difficulties. Following Rogers, the standard view
is wary of introducing specific therapeutic techniques. On the whole it
remains committed to the view that the presence of the six therapeutic
conditions is sufficient for therapeutic change. However, it does not
insist that procedures which are employed in other therapeutic
traditions are always inappropriate. It is rather that the bringing in
of specialised techniques is seen as running into the grave danger that
the client may come to trust in the expertise of the therapist rather
than in their own experiencing. On the whole, the standard view
discourages therapeutic moves which aim to teach or direct the client,
but in the end the context and the therapist's own spontaneous feelings
about what is appropriate to do at the moment are held to be paramount.
The introduction of specific procedures does not necessarily go against
the notion that the therapeutic conditions are sufficient; the
employment of specific procedures can be seen as a manifestation of the
therapist's congruent response to what the situation requires. In this
respect the standard approach tends to take a pragmatic view of what is
helpful, as against the 'purists' who would ban any kind of directivity
on the part of the therapist. Brian Thorne (1992, p. 94) writes: I had
always considered myself to be somewhat of a 'purist' until a member of
the 'purist camp' walked out of a video demonstration of my work when he
witnessed what was clearly, for him, a directive response from me to my
client, even if delivered with extreme respect and tentativeness. At
that moment, in his eyes, I had ceased to practice client-centred
therapy. I sense that Carl Rogers would have stayed to see what happened
next.

Thus the standard view follows the later development of Roger's thinking
in that it allows the therapist to be active in the relationship so long
as nothing is imposed on the client (Mearns, 2003, Chapter 19). Standard
person-centred counselling training usually begins with an emphasis on
listening and empathic tracking, but the trainees are later encouraged
to develop their own individual ways of embodying the therapist
conditions. The importance of the counsellor's presence in the
relationship is emphasised. This reflects the development in Rogers'
views to which I referred in the last section, that is, his increasing
emphasis on therapist genuineness. Such genuineness involves the
therapist in trusting, and where appropriate expressing, their natural

20

Person-Centred Therapy

responses to the client (Mearns, 2003). This is often referred to as
'use of the self in therapy', and it clearly requires a high level of
self-awareness, if it is to be facilitative. Hence the growing emphasis
on being genuine in relation to the client further reinforces the stress
placed on personal development in counsellor training. If Focusing
procedures are discussed in training, they will normally be introduced
as unobtrusive invitations to the client to move towards or remain in
contact with what Gendlin calls the 'edge of awareness'. It is the
counsellor's presence with the client at the edge of awareness that is
emphasised, rather than Focusing as a matter of 'techniques' (Mearns,
2003; Mearns and Thorne, 1988, pp. 47--51). The standard view has
maintained something of Rogers' later enthusiasm for group-work, while
letting go of any dogmatic assertion that such work is the only possible
context for training in personcentred therapy. It is recognised that
while personal development groups can provide experiences which are
unattainable in one-to-one sessions, the converse is also true (Mearns,
1997, p. 102). In sum, the standard view stays close to Rogers'
principle of 'clientcentredness' without taking this term in a
completely literal way. The literalist or 'purist' approach, which I
discuss below, would involve asserting that the person-centred approach
has no goals for the client beyond those which the client has for
themself. Mearns (2003) explicitly opposes the literal interpretation,
asserting that personcentred therapists are at least committed to the
goal of helping a client 'to find and exercise more of his own personal
power with regard to understanding and evaluating his actions'.
Integrationists Richard Worsley (2004) draws attention to two distinct
ways in which person-centred therapists have sought to integrate their
approach with ideas and procedures taken from other approaches. One way
involves the attempt to integrate Rogers' theoretical concepts with
those of other schools, through the development of a variant theory. The
other is rather a matter of the individual practitioner assessing to
what extent they can integrate ideas and procedures taken from other
schools of therapy into their own conception of what it is to be
person-centred. An example of the first approach would be that of
Wijngaarden (1990), who sees human beings as having destructive
potentials which cannot be accounted for simply as the frustration of
funda-

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

21

mentally positive impulses, and draws on Jung's work in elaborating a
variation on Rogers' theory. Examples of people who adopt the second
approach include Worsley himself, Reinhard Tausch (1990), who advocates
supplementing person-centred therapy with such procedures as relaxation
techniques and behavioural counselling, and Rose Battye (2003), whose
subtle position is hard to classify as either clearly person-centred or
clearly integrationist. There is something congenial to this second kind
of integrationist approach in Rogers' thought itself. Rogers held that
neither the theoretical orientation of the therapist, nor the techniques
used, matter very much. So long as the therapeutic conditions are
present, therapeutic change will occur regardless of the theoretical
orientation of the practitioner 'whether we are thinking of classical
psychoanalysis, or any of its modern offshoots, or Adlerian
psychotherapy, or any other' (Rogers, 1957, p. 101). Similarly Warner
(2000a) quotes Rogers as saying '\[i\]f a therapist has the attitudes we
have come to regard as essential, probably he or she can use a variety
of techniques'. But if it is unimportant what theoretical notions or
techniques are employed by a therapist, then presumably a wide variety
of notions and techniques can be brought together without detracting
from the efficacy of the therapy. There are two reservations which may
be felt here. One is centred around the question of whether it really is
compatible to use 'techniques' such as relaxation procedures or the
Gestalt two-chair procedure with the person-centred approach. Many
person-centred therapists would say that for the therapist to introduce
such techniques is to go against the principle that the client knows
best what will be helpful; others, including it would seem Rogers
himself, have no objection to the use of special techniques so long as
their use does not interfere with the person-centred therapeutic
attitudes. The second reservation centres around the question of whether
the theoretical concepts of other schools can be employed along with the
concepts of Rogers, but without going so far as to set up a variant
theory as in the first kind of integrationist position. It would seem
that to employ different and perhaps incompatible conceptual schemes at
the same time can only lead to confusion, unless there is some
meta-position which shows how the different schemes can all be used. As
we shall see, Gendlin's account can be seen as just such a metaposition,
which allows for the possibility that almost any theory of
psychotherapy, and almost any procedure, can be practised in a
person-centred way. For Gendlin the person-centred approach does

22

Person-Centred Therapy

not exist on the same level as the theories and procedures of the other
schools. I hope to show that it is in that way fundamentally different
from all the other approaches. Process-experientialists Another path of
development is that found in the work of Laura Rice, Leslie Greenberg
and Robert Elliotz. Here the emphasis is on the micro-processes of
therapy, and the development of particular forms of therapist
intervention which are thought to be appropriate in different
circumstances. The therapeutic conditions remain, but they are now more
in the background. This kind of development in client-centred therapy is
often now referred to as 'experiential psychotherapy' or
'process-experiential psychotherapy'. Gendlin's own approach is
sometimes regarded as belonging here, and Gendlin (1973b) himself at one
time used the term 'experiential psychotherapy' to characterise what he
was doing. The development of the processexperiential approach can be
briefly sketched as follows. Laura Rice, who completed her doctorate at
Rogers' Counselling Centre in Chicago, drew attention to a common kind
of therapeutic event in which clients described and explored an incident
in which they found themselves reacting in an inappropriate or
unexpected way (Rice, 1974). She found that when clients were describing
such 'problematic reaction points', it was often therapeutically helpful
if the therapist encouraged the client to become more vividly aware of
the detail of the incident. If the therapist did this, the client would
often become aware that they were construing the incident in a way that
did not adequately reflect their experience of what happened. For
example, a client is unhappy about how he reacts when entering a room
full of people, and they turn to look at him: he freezes or rushes out.
The therapist reflects back what the client has been saying in a vivid
way, such as 'You open the door, walk into the room and all the heads
swivel. The eyes focus on you, they get big and terrifying.' This
'evocative reflection' gets the client back into his experiencing of the
situation, and he may then notice things which are not part of his
construal, for example, that the people are actually looking at him with
indifference or even interest. In the therapy session the experiencing
as a whole is recalled and reprocessed. There is no need for the
therapist to give any interpretation of the situation; the client's own
experiencing provides the corrective elements which enable the
reprocessing to take place. Of course, if a client is to go back into

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

23

frightening or painful experiences in this way, it is essential that
they feel safe and supported. The therapist conditions are thus very
important in maintaining that safe atmosphere, but the more evocative
reflections go beyond this in helping the client to get into his or her
own experiencing, so that the experiencing can be reconstrued in a more
appropriate way. Rice acknowledges that there is an element of therapist
directivity in this; the therapist is directing the client towards their
own experiencing, but in all other ways the non-directive nature of the
client-centred approach is maintained. A little later Leslie Greenberg
(1979), who also began his therapeutic career within the client-centred
approach, drew attention to a kind of change event which is often
referred to in Gestalt therapy. When a client is experiencing an inner
conflict the Gestalt therapist may use a two-chair technique in which
the client speaks from each 'part' of themself while sitting first in
one chair and then in the other. This brings the two parts more into
awareness, and the resulting dialogue between the two often reduces the
differences between them, so that the inner conflict is ameliorated.
Greenberg presents evidence that the two-chair procedure can be more
therapeutically effective than the procedure of staying empathically
with the conflict, but whether or not this is generally so we have an
example here of another kind of therapeutic procedure, marked this time
by what Greenberg calls a 'conflict split'. It should be emphasised that
Rice and Greenberg see Rogers' therapeutic conditions as providing an
essential setting for procedures such as evocative reflection and
two-chair work, and that the procedures are suggested to clients as
possible ways of working which the client may prefer not to use. In that
case the process-experiential therapist returns to a client-centred
baseline of empathic responding. Another type of therapeutic situation
is marked by the client having 'unfinished business' with some
significant person in their life. Here a helpful form of therapeutic
intervention might be the suggestion that the client should imagine the
significant other in an empty chair and express to him or her what the
client needs to express. Of especial interest in the context of this
book is the kind of therapeutic situation in which a client has a vague
sense of a problem, but is unable to articulate it. Here the most
appropriate form of intervention might be Gendlin's Focusing procedure,
which Greenberg and Rice (Greenberg et al., 1993) see as one example of
an 'experiential search' procedure. Greenberg and Rice (joined later by
Robert Elliott and others) have thus developed a form of therapy in
which the provision of the

24

Person-Centred Therapy

therapist conditions is supplemented by attention to the kind of
'process difficulty' which the client is having. By 'process difficulty'
they mean such things as the client being in conflict, finding themself
responding to situations in problematic ways, not being able to 'let go'
of something in their experiencing and so on. These difficulties are not
content-specific: what the conflict is about or what the situation is,
is another matter, and only the client can speak with authority about
that content. In classical client-centred therapy the client is the
expert on what they are experiencing; however in process-experiential
therapy the therapist is seen as having special expertise in ways of
working with one's experiencing. The importance of the therapeutic
conditions is not denied, and the process-experientialists emphasise
that the conditions can be directly effective in therapy (where for
instance the client's main need is to be understood or valued). However,
they add that the conditions may also provide a setting for work with
specific difficulties which are arising in the client's processing of
their experiencing. There is a diagnosis of process difficulties in
processexperiential therapy, and the therapist assumes a directive role
in suggesting procedures which may help with the difficulties. The
therapist makes no diagnosis in connection with the content of the
client's experiencing (there is no 'interpretation'), and does not in
any way direct or suggest ways in which the client might view their
situation. The slogan of the process-experiential school is 'Direct the
process but not the content'. One further development in
process-experiential theory has been the work of Greenberg and his
associates on the nature of emotion (Greenberg and Safran, 1987;
Greenberg et al., 1993; Greenberg, 2002). In their view it is
therapeutically important to target those places where the client's
experiencing is constrained or distorted by construals that are
inappropriate to the full range of the client's experiencing. These
construals should not be seen, as they tend to be seen in some other
forms of therapy, as essentially cognitive. They are, rather, emotional
schemes, and the function of procedures such as Focusing or Two-chair
work is to access, and hence allow the restructuring of, these emotional
schemes. The theory of emotion and hence of psychotherapy which
Greenberg and his associates have developed is rather different from
that of Gendlin, but the details lie beyond the scope of the present
book. Process-experiential therapy is not widely known in Britain,
although this situation is beginning to change with the recent
publications of Worsley (2002) and Baker (2004). However, in Europe

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

25

and in the United States it has become a quite widely researched form of
therapy, with its own literature, clinical handbooks and training
courses. In addition to Greenberg, Rice and Elliott, who have been the
central figures in this approach, there are others who are more or less
closely aligned with it, such as Alvin Mahrer (1996) and David Rennie
(1998). All these workers see themselves as operating within the broadly
client-centred tradition, emphasising the centrality of the client's
conceptualising of their experiencing, as opposed to a conceptualisation
based on the categories of a psychotherapeutic theory. They differ from
many client-centred therapists in that they see the client as needing
context-sensitive therapeutic help in working effectively with their own
experiencing. The client is the ultimate authority on what they are
experiencing, and on what that experiencing means to them, but a client
may need very specific forms of help from the therapist in getting to
know what that experiencing and meaning are. Within the
process-experiential tradition, Focusing is seen as a procedure which is
appropriate in connection with certain specific client problems, which
are marked by the fact that the client has a vague sense of something
which they are currently unable to articulate. Gendlin's view of the
place of focusing in psychotherapy is rather different, as we shall see,
but there is much in the work of the process-experientialists which is
relevant to focusing-oriented psychotherapy. 'Purists' The development
of 'integrationist' and 'experiential' approaches within the broad sweep
of person-centred therapy has led to a reaction from those who think
that such developments undermine the crucial insights of Rogers. These
theorists hold that the therapist should have no goal but to follow the
client's goals. Barbara Brodley has for several decades resisted what
she sees as distortions of the person-centred approach. She writes
(Brodley, 1991, her emphasis): Any specific goal for a client,
systematically pursued by a therapist for a client, functions and
communicates as an expression of authority over the client. It is an
expression of knowing what is good for the client. Having specific goals
for clients, including process goals, expresses a conception of the
therapeutic relationship that assumes the capability and the right of
the

26

Person-Centred Therapy therapist to constructively direct the client. I
believe that these are deluded assumptions.

And: the client-centred therapist, guided by his non-directive attitude,
has no directive intentions in relation to the client. The therapist's
intentions are distinctly and only to experience and to manifest the
attitudinal conditions in such a way that unconditional positive regard
and empathic understanding can be perceived by the client. (Brodley,
1990, p. 90)

Very similarly, Jerold Bozarth (1998, p. 12) writes The therapist's
intent is not to promote feelings or to help the client become more
independent or 'to get' the client anywhere. The goal is not
self-actualization, actualization, independence, or to help the client
become a 'fully functioning' person. The only therapist goal is to be a
certain way and by being that way a natural growth process is promoted
in the client.

Bozarth grounds his view in his understanding of Rogers' theory: Rogers'
view of psychological dysfunction is that individuals are thwarted in
their natural growth by conditions of worth being introjected by
significant others. Psychological growth results from the individual
being freed from these introjections. When the individual experiences
unconditional positive regard from a significant other, the person
begins to develop unconditional positive self-regard. As this occurs,
the individual becomes increasingly able to deal with problems and life.
If the therapist is congruent in the person-centered relationship,
experiences unconditional positive regard and empathic understanding
towards the client, and if these attitudes are, at least minimally,
perceived by the client, then therapeutic change will occur. (p. 117)

Bozarth's understanding of Rogers' theory makes the client's
'actualising tendency' the cornerstone of therapeutic change. The
therapist's task is simply to create the conditions under which the
actualising tendency can operate effectively. Interestingly, Bozarth
(pp. 41--2) concludes from this that the therapist conditions are not
strictly necessary; other things may elicit self-regard, and the
actualising tendency will make use of whatever is available for
constructive change:

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

27

There are certainly individuals who report significant change and
improved function from experiencing a religious conversion, a sunset, a
smile, a traumatic experience, and so on . . . The remarkable resiliency
of humans in terms of the actualising tendency leads me to conclude that
the conditions may not necessarily be necessary.

What Bozarth does insist on is that the therapeutic conditions are
sufficient. He sees the 'fundamental curative factor' as the client's
perception of the therapist's unconditional positive regard. Empathy is
seen as 'the purest way to communicate unconditional positive regard'
(p. 51), and congruence is entwined with empathy in that the therapist's
awareness of their own experiencing is bound up with their openness to
the client's experiencing (p. 80). The therapist conditions are aspects
of a way of being in which the therapist is fully receptive of the
client, and it is that full presence and receptivity which dissolves the
conditions of worth. Bozarth notes that late in his life Rogers himself
remarked: I recognize that when I am intensely focused on a client, just
my presence seems to be healing . . . (and) I am inclined to think that
in my writing perhaps I have stressed too much the three basic
conditions (congruence, unconditional positive regard, and empathic
understanding). Perhaps it is something around the edges of these
conditions that is really the most important element of therapy -- when
my self is clearly, obviously present. (Rogers cited in Baldwin, 1987,
p. 45)

So far as the use of specific procedures such as 'reflection of feeling'
are concerned, Bozarth sees these as possible vehicles for communicating
the therapist's positive regard and empathy. Bozarth follows Rogers in
holding that other procedures (even such things as interpretations and
advice) are acceptable if they communicate the crucial attitudes. What
matters is not what the therapist does, but whether what is done conveys
the healing attitude. Tomoda Another development in person-centred
therapy lies in the work of the Japanese therapist Fujio Tomoda, who was
a major figure in the introduction of client-centred therapy to Japan.
Tomoda had been having deep doubts about the value of advice-giving in
student counselling sessions, when in 1948 he was given a copy of the
book to which I referred at the start of this chapter, Rogers'
Counselling and

28

Person-Centred Therapy

Psychotherapy. He was deeply impressed by Rogers' approach, and
proceeded to translate the book into Japanese. In 1955 he published a
translation of Client-Centered Therapy, followed a year later by his own
major work in Japanese. He continued to play a major role in translating
Rogers, and the Complete Works of C.R. Rogers was published in Japanese,
in twenty-three volumes, in 1969. While much of person-centred therapy
in Japan has subsequently followed the 'standard' path, Tomoda has a
distinctive perspective which emphasises the role of the therapist in
helping the client to be alone with their own experiencing (Hayashi et
al., 1998). Tomoda was very struck by an episode in the earliest
published transcription of a complete series of psychotherapy sessions,
which was included in Rogers' Counselling and Psychotherapy as 'The case
of Herbert Bryan'. The therapist is not identified, but is widely
understood to be Rogers himself. The central passages which struck
Tomoda are (Rogers, 1942, pp. 393, 412): In Session Six: Bryan: So the
ideal for me would be to -- well, perhaps it's too yogi-istic or
something, but I want to sort of effect a cure by myself, apart from the
environmental problem. Then after the cure, why, I'll go out and tackle
the problem. Therapist: You feel that growth can sort of take place in a
vacuum, and then once you have developed the growth, then you would be
capable of dealing with the situation. Bryan: Well, growth hasn't
occurred in the environment, so perhaps it could occur by some sort of
solitary meditation or whatever you'd want to call it. That doesn't
sound so good, does it? Therapist: Well, I don't know of growth taking
place that way, but I can understand your feeling in regard to it.
Bryan: You know certain religious mystics will meditate in solitude for
a long time. Then that seems to gird their loins, as it were. Then they
go out and make achievements. So there must be some sort of building up
of power there while they're in their solitude.

In Session 7: Bryan: . . . a person can resolve in a vacuum when they
really sincerely mean it, but it's too hard to keep meaning it in a
vacuum.

Rogers and the Development of Person-Centred Therapy

29

Tomoda comments: 'The true leap or growth of a person occurs when he is
utterly alone. It is in human relationships or in the actual world that
he makes sure of his own leap or growth. But it is not in the actual
human relationship that true growth occurs.' This helped Tomoda to
'grasp the significance of the Zen ascetic standing under a waterfall on
a mountain or sitting in religious meditation in solitude. In regard to
counselling, the true meaning of the Rogerian techniques is that these
techniques help the client to be in a state of being utterly alone'
(Hayashi et al., 1998). As Hayashi et al. put it, 'Rogers' core
conditions . . . have crucial importance and are absolutely necessary,
but they are themselves not the sufficient conditions for therapeutic
personality change. They are, in fact, prerequisites for the vacuum
state . . . The essential meaning of client-centred therapy is in the
paradoxical relationship in which a person becomes "utterly alone"
through another person's empathic understanding' (p. 113). The way in
which this happens is, briefly, that when we sit down with our troubles
by ourselves we tend to remain caught in them. We are physically but not
psychologically alone (p. 114). The presence of the therapist helps to
create a safe space, a 'vacuum', within which we can be with ourselves
without being distracted by what Tomoda calls the 'inner strangers', all
those parts of ourselves which criticise, undermine and distract us from
being who we really are. This kind of view, as Hayashi et al. point out,
is very closely paralleled in some of Gendlin's concepts, such as those
of 'clearing a space' and 'the client's client'. Tomoda's work gives us
a different perspective on person-centred therapy, a perspective which
connects in a fascinating cross-cultural way with that which Gendlin has
quite independently developed. Rennie David Rennie's (1998) approach
'fits between the person-centred and experiential genres' (p. vi).
Rennie follows Rice (see Chapter 5) in emphasising the value of
'evocative reflection' and the use by the counsellor of metaphor and
imagery. He follows the processexperientialists generally in seeing a
need for process identification and process direction (Chapter 7) in
certain circumstances. However, he does not emphasise the use of
specific techniques (such as two-chair work) in response to 'markers' of
process difficulties (such as 'inner conflict'). Rather, he sees clients
as sometimes needing help in dealing with themselves, which can take the
form of either process identification

30

Person-Centred Therapy

or process direction. In process identification the counsellor draws the
client's attention to what they are doing, such as 'remembering' or
'telling a story' or 'complaining'. One function of such process
identifications is to facilitate the client's awareness of what they are
doing, thus opening up the possibility that they may not wish to be
doing it. In process direction the counsellor suggests that the client
might do something different from what they are currently doing, for
example, by suggesting that the client give some attention to a feeling,
or asking the client if they can identify what it is about their
situation which is so threatening. Rennie's approach emphasises
throughout the self-reflexive aspect of human experiencing. We not only
have our experiences, but also reflect upon them, and this
self-reflection is crucial to our sense of ourselves as active agents in
the world. As Rennie acknowledges (p. 143), the ideal form of living may
be one of non-reflective 'flow', but when the flow is blocked, or is in
some way unsatisfactory, we need to stop and reflect, to turn our
attention to our experiencing. 'Process identification' is involved in
the reflexive awareness of what we are doing, such as 'I am experiencing
fear' in contrast to the non-reflexive awareness of simply being afraid.
As Rennie (pp. 4, 12) remarks, while Rogers' theory has nothing to say
about reflexivity, his practice suggests otherwise. Fred Zimring (1990,
p. 442) in effect draws attention to this when he concludes from his
analysis that 'Rogers's focus was on the person's present reaction to
and interest in his or her problem or concern, as well as on the problem
or concern itself.' Rogers did not respond just to the problem or to the
feeling; he responded to the client's response to the problem or the
feeling. As we shall see, this separation of the immediate experiencing
from the awareness of the experiencing (the creation of a space between
me and my fears, for example) is something that is central also in
Gendlin's approach. Like Rogers, Gendlin relates to the client in a way
that will help the client to relate to their experiencing.

2 Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

Any theory has its weak spots or 'fault-lines' -- those places where it
is not fully consistent, or where what it predicts does not entirely fit
with actual experience. These fault-lines are places from which the
theory can grow. In this chapter I will discuss several such fault-lines
in the theory of person-centred therapy, and later in the book we will
see how Gendlin's work suggests ways in which the theory can be
re-structured in ways that eliminate these fault-lines. Of course, new
fault-lines may then develop! The agricultural metaphor The picture of
human beings as organisms which actualise themselves in environments
which may be more or less favourable is central to Carl Rogers' thought.
However, as Brian Thorne points out, it is not altogether consistent
with Rogers' emphasis on the importance of the client's relationship
with the therapist. It seems, as Thorne (1992, p. 88) puts it, that the
therapist 'only has to provide a particular psychological environment
and the therapeutic process will unfold spontaneously and inevitably'.
Thorne remarks that Rogers' 'tendency to employ images culled from
agriculture and his emphasis on the actualising tendency and the wisdom
of the organism can lead to a highly positive view of the human being
but one which is strangely non-relational'. Thorne simply acknowledges
'the inconsistencies and, at times, the logical contradictions in
Rogers' point of view' (p. 89), but I think we see here a fault-line in
client-centred theory which needs to be taken seriously. 31

32

Person-Centred Therapy

Rogers uses the life of plants as an analogy for human life. He sees a
plant as an organism which has certain innate developmental tendencies,
which will be realised if 'environmental conditions' are favourable,
'environmental conditions' being such things as adequate air, warmth,
sunlight and water. The analogy is that human beings have an innate
actualising tendency which will be fulfilled if their environment
contains the favourable interpersonal conditions of genuine empathy and
acceptance. However, even in the case of plants, to think in this way is
a serious oversimplification. In order to live fully, a plant needs not
only background conditions such as air and sunlight, but specific
interactions with elements in its environment. It needs insects to come
and pollinate it, and it needs its flowers to be open at the time when
the insects are abroad. It needs birds to come and eat its fruit so that
its seeds can be distributed. A plant has, or rather is, a set of
complex interactions with elements of its environment. The same is true
for human beings. In order to live fully, a human being needs not only
favourable environmental conditions such as understanding and respect,
but a whole range of interactions with other people, animals and
material objects. Consider for example the learning of language which is
so crucial to being human. A child learns one particular language
through detailed ongoing interactions with other people. It is not that
the child is ready-programmed with its language (although some aspects
may be innate), and only requires the favourable environmental
conditions for speech to emerge. And what is true for language is true
for everything that involves the child's initiation into its culture,
and that culture's ways of seeing and doing things. The background
conditions of empathy and respect are crucial, but much detailed
interaction needs to go on in the foreground if the child is to develop
normally. The picture of a human being as an organism which will
flourish so long as its natural growth process is not interfered with
has a deep appeal, but I would like to probe it a little more. A picture
may help our understanding, but if pressed too far it may mislead. A
religious person may say, and mean, that 'the eye of God sees
everything' but if someone then insists on asking about God's eyebrows,
we know that they have misunderstood the use of the picture. It was not
meant to be developed along those lines (Wittgenstein, 1966, p. 71). Let
us press Rogers' picture of the biological organism a little bit. First,
it is clear that that the natural growth and behaviour patterns of
organisms are not oriented entirely towards the survival and flourishing

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

33

of the individual. Think of the bee that dies as a result of its
stinging behaviour. Bees are 'programmed' to sting intruders and it is
generally to the benefit of the species that this should be done, even
if the individual bee dies. Human beings also may well be 'programmed'
with instinctive tendencies that involve self-sacrifice. The human
mother who will risk her life for her children can be seen as motivated
in the same way as the bird mother who makes herself visible to a
predator in order to lure the predator away from her nest. Tennyson (In
Memoriam, Lyric LV), reflecting on the death of his friend Hallam in
relation to Darwin's theory, wrote of Nature as 'So careful of the type
she seems/So careless of the single life.' In the background of
biological thought is the principle not of the flourishing of the
individual but of the species (or, in modern biology, of the genes
involved). This is not altogether consonant with Rogers' ideas. But
also, according to Darwinian principles, there is no 'goal' or 'general
tendency' towards the evolution of the species. It is just that, under
the pressure of competition for resources, organisms which are
structured in certain ways survive better and leave more offspring than
the others. In circumstances where there is no competition for
resources, the form and behaviour of organisms (e.g. trilobites) can
remain unchanged for millions of years. What was so distinctive, and
disturbing, about Darwinian biology was that it eliminated any need for
the notion of 'purpose' or 'inherent tendency' in the formation of the
organic world. In terms of the evolutionary process we can see how it is
that the structure and instinctive behaviour of organisms are oriented
towards the occurrence of certain states or the activation of certain
processes. There are indeed these specific tendencies, but there is no
overall tendency oriented towards the survival or flourishing of either
the individual or the species. In other words there is no single
'potential' to be 'actualised'. This way of rethinking (or eliminating)
the notion of the actualising tendency is similar to that suggested by
Seeman (1988) and by Greenberg and Van Balen (1998, p. 46). The latter
suggest that 'it is the biologically adaptive emotion system which
provides the scientific basis for the actualising tendency and the
associated organismic valuing process'. They accept the actualising
tendency as a tendency towards increased complexity which results in
greater adaptive flexibility, but reject the notion that it involves the
actualisation of potential, or the 'becoming of all that one can be'.
However, we do not have to take what Rogers says about 'the organism' as
literally as this. Instead we can take what he says as a metaphor for
what he knows about certain aspects of human life.

34

Person-Centred Therapy

If we follow that line of thought, the notion of human life can be
illuminated by the notion of organic life, rather than reduced to it.
Our hopes and fears, and our needs and tendencies can be seen as the
many interacting processes which go on in a living organism. Our plans
develop and come to fruition. We take time to digest a surprising
experience. We hear a new idea, and a seed is planted in us which later
develops. Overall, our lives involve the growth of experience, maturity,
and then the autumn of our days in which we can allow the leaves to fall
away. There is an overall pattern in our lives to which all the
particular events and processes contribute. Our life is the life of a
living whole and we can, if we give attention, become aware of what this
living whole needs at any particular time. The metaphor of a human being
as an organism seems a very apt one. Indeed, we may now feel unsure
again about whether it really is just a metaphor -- for, surely we are
living things, as well as being conscious animals and rational thinkers.
We really do grow, breathe, feed, reproduce and decline in the same way
as plants and animals do. We are alive in those ways, as well as 'having
a life' in the way that only a human being has a life. If it is said
that human beings are different because they are social beings, and that
they exist only in interaction with a whole social context, it could be
replied that, as I suggested above, plants too exist only in interaction
with a whole environmental context. There is no doubt that we really are
living things and that therefore our sense of ourselves as actualising
wholes must in some way be embodied in our organic nature. Gendlin
(1997a) argues that what this shows is that the concepts of modern
biology themselves need to be re-thought to allow for creatures like
ourselves to be in the world. I will touch on this matter later in the
book (in Appendix A), but here I just want to suggest that while it may
not be useful to tie Rogers' notions to the scientific concepts of
evolutionary biology, there is every reason to relate them to our
everyday notion of a living thing. The issue which then remains is not
one which relates especially to Rogers or to psychotherapy; it is the
issue of how modern biology can connect with our ordinary sense of the
distinctive nature of living things. Gendlin has much to say about this
in his more philosophical work. 'Being oneself' and 'social restraint'
The notion that the nature of human life is essentially social and
interactional is very widely accepted today. However, as a number of

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

35

commentators (e.g. Thorne, 1992, p. 88; Holdstock, 1996; Schmid, 2000)
have pointed out, this notion seems not to fit well with some aspects of
Rogers' thinking. Rogers tends to see human beings as individual
organisms which would develop happily, and flourish, if only other human
organisms did not come along and impose conditions of worth on them. It
can seem, at least, that in Rogers' scheme society comes into the life
of the individual in an inhibiting and potentially damaging way.
Conflicts are set up between the 'actualising tendency' which is rooted
in the organism's biological needs and the requirements -- the 'oughts'
and 'shoulds' -- of society. In the 1960s and 1970s this aspect of
Rogers' thought was warmly welcomed by those involved in the 'human
potential' movement. It provided support for a counter-culture which, as
Mearns and Thorne (2000, p. 178) put it, had a strong preference for
'feelings' over 'thoughts'; for non-self-conscious 'being' over
considered action; for 'free expression' over 'censoring'; for 'radical'
choices over 'conservative' choices and for 'volume-up' expression of
feeling over 'volume-down' expression of feeling.

In short, Rogers was seen as advocating 'following one's feelings'
rather than 'adapting to society'. In response to this, Mearns and
Thorne (pp. 177--86) suggest a reformulation of Rogers' theory which
replaces the notion of the actualising tendency with the notion of a
balanced interaction between actualising tendency and social restraint.
They see human beings as social beings in whom the actualising tendency
generates a reaction of concern for the impact of one's action on one's
social relationships. Their examples include such cases as 'I fought my
way out of a relationship previously, and I lost more than I ever
imagined' or 'Everything seemed to point in the direction of leaving the
job -- I needed to be free of it. But my family would have lost too much
-- and that would mean me losing too much. So I rolled up my sleeves and
made the best of it.' These are examples in which there is a pull
towards doing something which one wants to do, which is counteracted by
a concern for the impact on other people and on one's relationships with
them. However, I think that without any modification to his theory,
Rogers can (and did) allow that people have social impulses as well as
purely individual impulses. A man both wants to get out of his job and
wants his family to be secure. Both these impulses can be seen as
aspects of his actualising tendency, just as an animal may have an

36

Person-Centred Therapy

impulse to protect its young as well as an impulse to seek its own
safety. The examples which Mearns and Thorne give are not obviously
examples of conflict between actualising tendency and conditions of
worth; they seem rather to be examples of conflict between wanting to
promote one's own well-being and wanting to promote the wellbeing of
others. I think that the distinction between impulses which come from
the actualising tendency and impulses which come from conditions of
worth is not a distinction which can be specified (a) in terms of the
content of the impulses or (b) in terms of where the impulses come from.
(a) I think that it is not simply that the person's actualising tendency
favours the welfare of that person, while what comes from the conditions
of worth favours the welfare of others. It is often that way, but it
need not be: imagine a residential community which is devoted to
self-development principles which include the principle of living out
one's own needs and not being drawn into 'rescuing' others when they get
into emotional difficulties. Everyone agrees that during their time
together they will resolutely 'look after themselves'. Then there comes
a day when one participant is deeply touched by someone else's pain. Her
spontaneous feeling is to put aside her own very real concerns and reach
out to this person, but the conditions of worth which she has
internalised in the group are very strong, and they prevent her from
doing what is natural for her to do. Here her actualising tendency is
directed towards the welfare of the other person, while the conditions
of worth are directed towards her own welfare. (And situations similar
to this really can arise in person-centred training courses.) The
distinction between actualising tendency and conditions of worth needs
to be made in a quite different way. To act from the actualising
tendency should be seen as a matter of acting authentically, which is a
matter of giving attention to one's whole sense of the situation one is
in, noticing the conflicting impulses, being aware of the moral and
prudential principles which seem to apply, and acting from one's felt
sense of all that. To act from conditions of worth, by contrast, is to
act from some general rule, such as 'You don't reach out to people in
this group', without checking the appropriateness of following the rule
against everything else which one thinks and feels. The actualising
tendency is a tendency that gives expression to the whole person's
experiencing of a particular situation, and only that person in that
situation can know what the appropriate expression

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

37

will be. Conditions of worth, by contrast, embody general rules which it
is important to take into account, but which cannot possibly do justice
to the intricacy of the lived situation. The important distinction,
then, is not between impulses which will benefit self and impulses which
will benefit others, but between impulses which come from deep down in
one's whole felt sense of a situation (which takes into account the
needs of both self and others), and impulses which arise directly from
general principles or rules without any sensing of whether, or how, the
rules apply in this situation. The relevant distinction is not that
between 'my needs' and 'the requirements of society', but that between
'what I deeply sense is best, taking everything into account' and 'what
the rules say'. It is very easy to run these two distinctions together,
and then we get caught in the equally unsatisfactory positions of either
'We need to follow our feelings and set aside the rules of society' or
'We need to follow the rules, and set aside our personal feelings.' Part
of the confusion here comes from the ambiguity of the word 'feelings'
(Gendlin, 1959; Moore, 2002). I think that what Rogers meant when he
advocated following one's feelings was what Gendlin means when he says
we should be guided by our felt sense of situations. Following feelings
is not a matter of indulging emotions or ignoring the needs of others or
setting aside moral principles. It is a matter of getting a bodily sense
of what the whole situation requires, a feeling which implicitly takes
into account one's own emotions and needs, those of others, one's past
experience, various principles of morality and so on. Acting from
feeling means acting from what Gendlin calls the 'felt sense', rather
than acting simply from some strong emotion, or out of habit, or in
deference to 'the rules'. (b) A second confusion which complicates the
discussion of 'conditions of worth' is that it can look as if conditions
of worth are bad because they come from outside us, whereas the
actualising impulses are good because they come from inside. This again
fuels the idea that if we are to be ourselves, if we are to be
authentic, we should always go by our feelings, in the sense of what we
want, and take no notice of what anyone else says. It is true that some
of our feelings and attitudes seem to come from inside us, and others
seem to come more from what we have learned from others. But it is often
hard to know which feelings come from where. A child may develop a
strong feeling that people should always be truthful, and we might trace
this to certain strongly held principles in their family. But the fact
that the child has in this way

38

Person-Centred Therapy

learned to be truthful does not mean that they have 'introjected a
value' which is not theirs. When they grow up they may be genuinely
grateful to their parents for having taught them the value of
truthfulness. It is a value to which they can authentically and
wholeheartedly assent. The fact that it 'came from their parents' does
not challenge its authenticity any more than the fact that our knowledge
that water is H2O is invalidated by the fact that it 'came from our
teachers'. Whether an attitude or value is 'ours' is not a matter of
where it came from but that of whether we now can give it our full
assent, whether it resonates for us so that we can live it. Of course,
some of our feelings and attitudes which 'come from other people' are
not authentic. We have taken them in and maybe even act from them,
without feeling their validity. But what makes this undesirable is not
that the feelings or attitudes have 'come from others' but that they
have come from others without our checking whether they are right for
us. Much of what is valuable to us 'comes from others' (otherwise
education would be impossible); the point is that if our feelings and
attitudes are to be authentic, we must not skip the step of checking
what has 'come from others' against our own felt experiencing. One final
point is that there are cases where we cannot yet feel what other people
say is good and valuable, though we can sense that we might come to feel
it if only some other things in our makeup could shift. We can sometimes
sense, after the matter has been brought to our notice, that it would be
a good thing to feel a certain way (for instance to feel accepting of
some minority group), but we do not yet feel that way. Working towards
such a change in our feelings in the light of a general principle which
others have suggested to us need not be inauthentic. It is only
inauthentic if 'in our heart' (that is, if, taking everything into
account, our felt sense is) we do not really want to change. In this
section I have made use of Gendlin's notion of the 'felt sense'. I will
be explaining, examining and using this notion throughout the book, but
hope to have given a sufficient glimpse here of how such a notion is
essential if we are to make sense of Rogers' idea of 'following one's
feelings', and to defend it against distortion and trivialisation. The
necessary/sufficient debate The issues here are central to the
disagreements between the purists and other person-centred
practitioners. The most common version

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

39

of the disagreement is over whether Rogers' therapeutic conditions are
sufficient as well as necessary for therapeutic change to occur. (The
necessity of the Conditions -- as I shall call them for brevity -- tends
to be conceded by the integrationists although, as we saw in Chapter 1,
Bozarth, who can reasonably be called a 'purist', has doubts about it,
on the grounds that circumstances other than the Conditions can be
facilitative.) The issue here may seem a straightforward empirical one.
That is, it may seem at first sight that what are needed are more
studies of whether the Conditions by themselves really are sufficient.
In reality, of course, there is no easy way to set up such an empirical
test. The classical research studies in client-centred therapy suggest
that where the Conditions are present, therapeutic change often does
ensue, but not always. The question then is whether in the cases of
'failure' this is because the Conditions were not sufficiently embodied
in the therapeutic situation, or because there was some further
necessary condition which was absent in the 'failure' cases. Or again it
might be that it is not the Conditions which are ever sufficient because
there is some other factor which often, but not always, tends to
accompany the Conditions. The difficulty here is that although it has
been demonstrated fairly conclusively that there is some correlation
between the Conditions and therapeutic progress, it has not been shown
what the causal connections actually are (Watson, 1984). I will return
to this question in Chapter 6. In the absence of conclusive empirical
studies, the question of the sufficiency of the Conditions can be
approached only through consideration of whether it is theoretically
plausible. The purist position would be that what is central to the
client-centred view of the person is the actualising tendency of the
human organism. The only thing which stands in the way of the
actualising tendency, and of therapeutic progress, is conditions of
worth, and all that is needed to neutralise conditions of worth is the
presence of the Conditions. This is a valid argument, but it presupposes
that the only thing which stands in the way of the actualising tendency
is conditions of worth. I doubt that this is true, for reasons which I
will give in the next section.

Psychological disturbance and conditions of worth According to the
Conditions of Worth Theory, the aim of therapy is to provide an antidote
to the introjected conditions of worth. This

40

Person-Centred Therapy

view follows from the idea that it is the setting up of conditions of
worth which is at the root of psychological disturbance. I think most
therapists would agree that a great deal of psychological disturbance
does originate in this way, but does it all? For example, traumatically
induced phobias and post-traumatic stress difficulties are not obviously
related to the imposition of conditions of worth. There are several
hypotheses about what is involved in the generation of post-traumatic
stress, but the introjection of conditions of worth is not one of them.
Many clients come to counselling because they are faced with some
predicament in which they have to choose between equally difficult
courses of action. For instance, Barbara is a young mother who, before
her marriage, had begun a promising musical career. She now has a young
son, and a husband whose pattern of work allows little time for
childcare. There is the possibility of some regular musical performance
which would help her to pick up her career again, but this would mean
leaving her son in the care of people she does not altogether trust. She
is torn between the responsibility she feels for her son's welfare and
the responsibility she feels she has to her own personal and
professional development. Of course, conditions of worth may lurk in the
background here (Barbara's parents might have strong views about
'looking after yourself ' or about 'putting your children first'), but
equally that may not be so. Certainly there can be deep anxiety and
confusion in such predicaments without the addition of conditions of
worth. Then again, in bereavement and other cases of loss, such as
miscarriage, or loss of a job, or loss of opportunities, there is
psychological distress which can be worked on through counselling, but
there is no necessity for conditions of worth to be involved. Consider
also cases where the roots of a client's difficulties lie not in the
parents' imposition of conditions of worth but in their being physically
or emotionally absent. Disturbance often seems to arise from a client's
not having been related to adequately in their early life. If for any
reason a mother is unable to 'mirror' her child effectively then the
child may not find it easy to acquire a strong sense of what they feel
and want. The psychological disturbance comes not from the mother
imposing conditions of worth, but from her being unable to connect
sufficiently with her child. I think it will be agreed that examples
such as these are not exceptional. They and probably dozens of other
kinds of case which do not involve introjection of conditions of worth
are part of the daily

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

41

experience of most counsellors. Person-centred therapists as much as any
other therapists work with clients who come with issues such as these.
The Conditions of Worth Theory suggests that person-centred therapy is
effective because the client's perception of the therapist's congruent
and empathic unconditional positive regard provides an antidote to the
conditional regard which the client has experienced in the past. Once
the conditions of worth are removed, the client's actualising tendency
will automatically propel the client towards fuller functioning. But
this cannot be the explanation of why personcentred therapy is effective
in the cases I have just referred to, that is, those in which
conditional regard played no role in the generation of the disturbance.
I know of no empirical research which would suggest that person-centred
therapy is ineffective in these kinds of case, and I will assume that
such a suggestion is too implausible to be taken very seriously,
although the matter is of course open to empirical investigation. It is
an interesting question why, in spite of these rather obvious
counter-examples, the Conditions of Worth Theory has been so widely
accepted in person-centred circles. Part of the reason may be that
difficulties due to introjection of conditions of worth are very common,
and that even where such introjection is not the primary factor, it can
exacerbate the trouble (for instance, conditions of worth which
interfere with the expression of grief ). More speculatively, it may be
that in Rogers' own life conditions of worth played a very prominent
role, so that his attention would naturally have been drawn to that kind
of difficulty. Then, as the person-centred approach became better known,
people with that kind of difficulty would themselves be drawn to the
approach and feel that Rogers had expressed what they 'had always
known'. (This speculation no doubt appeals to me partly because it fits
with my personal experience, in which early trauma seems to have played
as prominent a role as conditions of worth.) However that may be, it
seems clear that there is a range of common-enough kinds of case in
which, it is reasonable to assume, person-centred therapy can be
effective, but in which the reason for its being effective cannot be
that which the Conditions of Worth Theory asserts. What is needed is a
theory of person-centred therapy which will explain its effectiveness in
these cases, as well as in those cases which do involve the introjection
of conditions of worth. As we shall see, Gendlin provides such a theory.

42

Person-Centred Therapy

Directivity In the early days Rogers characterised his approach to
therapy as being 'non-directive': The counselling relationship is one in
which warmth of acceptance and absence of any form of coercion or
personal pressure on the part of the counsellor permits the maximum
expression of feelings, attitudes and problems by the counsellee.
(Rogers, 1942, pp. 113--14) Nondirective counselling is based on the
assumption that the client has the right to select his own life goals,
even though these may be at variance with the goals that the counsellor
might choose for him. (Rogers, 1942, pp. 126--7)

Later, the term 'non-directive' was dropped in favour of
'client-centred', although it is not clear whether this terminological
change reflected any significant change in Rogers' views (Wilkins, 2003,
p. 87). Directing a client needs to be distinguished from having an
influence on them (Brodley, 1999, p. 79; Wilkins, 2003, p. 90). Clearly,
whatever the therapist does has some influence on the client, and there
would be little point in the therapist being there if they had no
influence. But the client may not be influenced in the way the therapist
intends. Jung once said that it is usually quite safe to give clients
advice because they so rarely take it! A client is quite likely to
respond to the therapist's advice by doing the opposite, because they
wish to be independent, or because when they hear the advice it brings
into focus that they do not wish to follow it. The important issue is
not whether the client does what the therapist suggests, but whether the
client reflects and consults their own experiencing before going along
with, or against, the therapist's suggestion. Mearns and Thorne (2000,
pp. 190--5) argue in a similar way that the important issue is not
whether the therapist is 'directive' but whether the client is directed.
They give a nice example: Jeri: Okay, Dave -- tell me what I should do
-- should I take this job or not? Dave: Take it. Ring them now before
they change their minds. It's a great job. Jeri: \[pauses\] . . . No, it
doesn't feel right . . . I don't know what's wrong with it yet . . . but
it's not right. . . .\[Jeri\] is entirely uninfluenced by the
therapist's opinion but she can make good use of it as a means of
'focusing' . . . it allows Jeri to imagine her Self, in that moment,
telephoning to accept the job . . . and immediately she

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

43

experiences the reaction which tells her that something is not right.
She makes good use of the therapist's advice.

There is also a difference between directing a person and coercing or
manipulating them (Lietaer, 1998, pp. 62--4). An air traffic controller
directs the aircraft into a safe landing, but does not coerce or
manipulate the pilot. The controller can see what the pilot cannot see,
so the pilot follows the controller's directions. This is close to a
model of therapy in which the therapist can see better than the client
what is going on and what is needed. But this is precisely what Rogers
denies. His view is that the therapist simply is not in a position to
know what the best course is for the client. Bozarth (1998, p. 121)
quotes Rogers as saying 'If I thought that I knew what was best for a
client, I would tell him.' What the therapist can do, and this is a
central theme in Gendlin's work, is to help the client to experience
more fully and more explicitly what their situation is, and what the
possible ways forward may be. But given this, the therapist has a
responsibility to behave in ways that will facilitate the client's own
experiencing of their situation. The therapist should, for example,
discourage the client from taking what the therapist says as necessarily
right, or from dwelling inordinately on what other people want the
client to do. Following their belief that the client is the only person
who can really know what they should do, the therapist will want to
direct the client away from what other people think, and gently press
the question 'And what do you think? How is it for you?' There is
directivity here, but not of the sort that would come from the therapist
having a superior understanding of the client's situation. The therapist
cannot know the client's situation better than the client, but they do
know something that the client may not know; that therapeutic change is
likely to follow if the client can move from an external locus of
evaluation to an internal one. That is, what the therapist knows is that
for anyone's life to move forward the person must give attention to
their own perceptions and values. It is their life that is in some way
blocked, and their life is constituted precisely by their own
experiencing. If the client wishes their life to move forward, the
client has to begin by giving attention to where they are. This is not
to deny that reflecting on what other people say can be important, or
that it may be valuable to reflect on and take seriously the attitudes
of society or the position taken up by one's secular or religious
teachers. But in the end the individual has to decide whether they wish
to

44

Person-Centred Therapy

identify with these views and attitudes of others. The point here is
that elucidated by existential philosophers such as Sartre; that if
there is anything essential to being a person it is that people have
choices in what they are to become. Perhaps because of the ambiguities
in the term 'directivity', Rogers later came to call his approach
'client-centred': it centres on the client. But this does not imply that
the therapist is totally non-directive. On the contrary, one of the aims
of the therapeutic situation is that of facilitating the
client-centredness of the client. This aim is not a personal aim of the
therapist which they, as it were, impose on the client; it arises rather
from the fact that the client has come for therapeutic help and that in
the client-centred view of things what is central to therapeutic
helpfulness is the centring of attention on the client's own
experiencing. Should the client have different views on what is
therapeutically effective, should they for instance believe that therapy
involves the therapist discovering what is going on in the client's
unconscious and informing the client of what has been found, then the
responsible client-centred therapist would need to point out that they
cannot work in terms of that assumption. Client-centred therapy is
directive in that it holds that therapeutic interventions should
normally be responses to the client's experiencing. If the client moves
towards centring the sessions around what the therapist believes, or
around what significant others believe, the responsible client-centred
therapist will gently direct the client back to the question of what the
client themself thinks or feels. The responsible client-centred
therapist will do this because they believe that it is only through
attention to one's own experiencing that one can change, and after all
the client has come to therapy precisely because in some sense they do
wish to change. The directivity towards the client's own experiencing
is, however, the only way in which client-centred therapy is directive.
The clientcentred therapist does not try to direct the course of the
client's experiencing, or its content, or its evaluation as satisfactory
or unsatisfactory. This is not, as is often assumed, because the
therapist does not wish to be powerful in the relationship; therapist
power, harnessed to the client's aims, would be helpful to the client.
(To repeat Rogers' words, 'If I thought that I knew what was best for a
client, I would tell him.') Rather, the therapist does not try to direct
the course, content or evaluation of the client's experiencing, partly
because he or she usually just does not know enough even to make helpful
suggestions, and partly because if the client is to know what to do,
this knowledge -- to be real knowledge -- must be rooted in their own
experiencing.

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

45

It is not that the ideas or advice of a therapist can never be helpful;
of course they can, but for there to be therapeutic progress the client
has to reflect and digest what the therapist and other people have said,
to check it against their own experiencing. There is nothing opposed to
client-centred principles in the therapist offering their own ideas
about the client's situation, but the extent to which this is done has
to be very limited because for each comment of the therapist the client
needs time to reflect on how that feels for them. In sum, the therapist
cannot direct the course of the client's experiencing; it is not that
they should not because of ethical considerations about the exercise of
power. The attitude of the person-centred therapist is 'I really don't
know how your difficulty can be resolved, but I may be able to help you
to stay with your own experiencing so that out of that a way will
emerge.' It is not the attitude 'Of course, as an experienced therapist
I know precisely what the way forward is, but it will be better for you
if you find it out for yourself.' But while the therapist cannot direct
the client's experiencing, what they can do, and need to avoid doing, is
to block the client's experiencing. With a client who is not well
grounded in their own experiencing, an instruction to do something will
take them out of their experiencing and centre them in the therapist's
frame of reference. The difficulties about the notion of directivity can
thus be resolved if we place the emphasis on the client's experiencing,
which, as we shall see, is what Gendlin's focusing-oriented therapy
consistently does.

The nature of congruence The notion of congruence plays a double role in
Rogers' theory. Congruence in the therapist is one of the Conditions for
therapeutic movement, but it is also what is lacking in the client. The
psychological disturbance of the client is understood theoretically as a
lack of congruence, a lack of 'fit', between the client's experience and
their conceptualisation of their experience. From the point of view of
Rogers' theory, progress in therapy consists in the increasing
congruence of the client and reaches its ideal term when the client
becomes fully congruent and therefore fully functioning. Rogers' (1959,
p. 206) explanation of congruence is: when self-experiences are
accurately symbolized, and are included in the self-concept in
accurately symbolized form, then the state is one of congruence of self
and experience.

46

Person-Centred Therapy

Rogers took the term 'congruence' from geometry (Kirschenbaum, 1979,
p. 196), where two triangles are congruent if they are of exactly the
same shape and size, and therefore correspond exactly to each other. For
Rogers, self-concept and experience are congruent if they exactly match
up and if the self-concept accurately represents the experience. Rogers
continues: This is a concept which has grown out of therapeutic
experience, in which the individual appears to be revising his concept
of self to bring it into congruence with his experience, accurately
symbolised. Thus he discovers that one aspect of his experience if
accurately symbolized, would be hatred for his father; another would be
strong homosexual desires.

Congruence, then, is essentially the accurate symbolisation of
experience. And 'experience', for Rogers, is 'all that is going on
within the envelope of the organism at any given moment which is
potentially available to awareness. It includes events of which the
individual is unaware, as well as all the phenomena which are in
consciousness' (p. 197). Thus a man who discovers that he hates his
father has moved from a position in which his experience of his father
was inaccurately symbolised as, for example, 'admiring', to a position
where he symbolises it accurately as 'hating'. The experience of hatred
was there all the time, but it had not until now been symbolised
(conceptualised, recognised) as hatred. It is important to see that the
term 'experience' is being used here in a novel way. The more usual
thing to say would be that the man did not at the earlier time
experience hatred; his hatred was there, but unconscious and therefore
not experienced. If asked at the earlier time whether he experienced
hatred, the man could truthfully say 'No'. Later he may truthfully say
he now experiences hatred, but up until now he had not been aware of it.
Using the term 'experience' as it is normally used, if a person says
they are not experiencing something then they are not experiencing it
(assuming that they have an adequate command of the language, and are
not lying). Rogers' way of thinking here is little different from
Freud's. For Freud the man does not consciously experience hatred; this
experience has been repressed, and is unconscious. Rogers (1961, p. 237)
himself occasionally uses the term repression:

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

47

Our theory is that in the psychological safety of the therapeutic
relationship the client is able to permit in his awareness feelings and
experiences which would ordinarily be repressed, or denied to awareness.

Rogers does not explicitly speak in terms of 'the unconscious' because
he sees that once we allow that sort of talk, it opens the way to the
therapist knowing better than the client what the client's experience
is, and that would go against the basic principles of his approach.
However, as Ellingham (2001) has recently argued, Rogers does follow
very closely in the footsteps of Freud. It seems to me that Rogers
cannot have it both ways. Either there are, as he says, events in the
client's experience 'of which the individual is unaware', 'experiences
denied to awareness', or there are not. If there are, then his position
is not significantly different from Freud's; if there are not, then we
need a new way of thinking about situations in which a person, for
example, comes to realise that they hate their father. How can we think
about this if not in terms of the Freudian kind of picture of something
having been there all the time, unknown to the client, but quite
possibly known to the therapist? For Rogers, as for Freud, the
experience of hatred may be there even if the person says the experience
is one of admiration. But what is the criterion for saying the person
experiences hatred? Perhaps his behaviour shows subtle signs of
aggression which can be seen by others as typical of hatred. But it is
notorious that feelings, especially more intricate feelings, cannot be
read off from a person's behaviour. Suppose that instead of realising
that he hated his father the man realised that he experienced his father
as someone who subtly put him down. We could easily see that his father
subtly put him down, but how could we see whether he experienced (in
Rogers' sense) his father as subtly putting him down. In the ordinary
sense of 'experience' he clearly did not experience this at the time; in
Rogers' sense there is no way of knowing. Rogers was aware of this
difficulty. At the end of his 1959 paper he writes (p. 250): We are
urgently in need of new and more ingenious tools of measurement. .. most
urgently needed of all is a method whereby we might give operational
definition to the construct experience in our theory, so that
discrepancies between self-concept and experience, awareness and
experience, etc. might be measured. This would permit the testing of
some of the most crucial hypotheses of the theoretical system.

48

Person-Centred Therapy

Needless to say, no such 'ingenious tools of measurement' have ever been
devised. It is hard to see how they could be, since the problem is one
about concepts rather than about measurement. If we stick to the
phenomenological view of 'experience' as that which is in one's
awareness then 'unconscious experiences' is a contradiction in terms. On
the other hand if we allow that there are unconscious experiences then
there must be ways of establishing when these experiences occur. The
client, by definition, cannot know when they occur, so if they are
accessible at all they must be accessible by others, such as therapists
or researchers. But then the therapist or researcher knows better than
the client what the client experiences. A similar problem arises in
connection with the therapist's congruence. If incongruence is a matter
of the therapist having certain experiences of which they are not
conscious, how can the therapist know that they are having such
experiences? And if they do not know, how can they know whether they
should be trying to be more congruent? Rogers (1963, p. 11) himself
acknowledged that 'a lack of congruence is usually unknown to the
therapist himself at the time', but as Haugh (2001, p. 121) says 'he
does not adequately address this problem, and it is not possible to get
out of the dead end of Rogers' reasoning'. Gendlin has important things
to say about this issue. His view is that talk of what is 'unconscious'
needs to be replaced by talk of what is 'implicit'. The process of
therapy, for Gendlin, is not a matter of making conscious what was
unconscious, but of making explicit what was implicit. We will be
exploring this view in later chapters. For the moment I hope at least to
have shown that there are serious problems with the notion of congruence
as Rogers understood it. The client-centred response The hypothesis
which Rogers formulated in the late 1950s -- what I have called the
Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis -- is not specific about the form
which therapist responses should take. What is seen to be crucial is
that the response should be genuinely empathic and accepting.
Nevertheless, one important way of embodying these attitudes so that the
client will experience them has remained that of 'active listening' or
'non-directive reflecting' of the client's experience. Just what is
involved in this distinctively client-centred mode of therapist
responding has not often been made explicit. In personcentred training
courses it is often said that 'reflection' should not be done in a
'wooden' way. That is, it is unlikely to be helpful if the

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

49

therapist simply repeats back what the client has said with appropriate
changes of pronouns. For example, Client: I have been feeling really low
this week. Therapist: You have been feeling really low this week.
Client: It has actually been worse since I talked about all that stuff .
. . Therapist: It has actually been worse since you talked about all
that stuff . . .

If the session continues like this, the client may well feel that they
might as well have bought a parrot! Rogers himself said (1986a, p. 376):
I am not trying to "reflect feelings". I am trying to determine whether
my understanding of the client's world is correct -- whether I am seeing
it as he or she is experiencing it at this moment.

On the other hand, clients could experience what Rogers was doing in a
different way: for example, Slack (1985) writes: It was like Dr Rogers
was a magical mirror. The process involved my sending rays towards that
mirror. I looked into the mirror to get a glimpse of the reality that I
am . . . This experience allowed me an opportunity to get a view of
myself that was untainted by the perceptions of outside viewers.

Rogers (1986a) says in response to Slack only that 'in understanding the
client's experience, we can realise that such responses do serve as a
mirror', which rather suggests that he saw the mirroring function as
incidental; he was not intending to mirror the client. On the other
hand, around the same time, Rogers (1986b, p. 202) writes in connection
with a reflective response he made in a demonstration session: 'My
response has the advantage of bringing fully into awareness her positive
aims and goals. There is value in holding up a mirror to the client.' It
is as if Rogers rather reluctantly accepted the mirroring function of
reflection. It was not what he was primarily trying to do, but he saw
that it could be of value to the client. Rogers usually reflected what
his clients said in his own words, which is clearly important if the
main concern is to check understanding. However, it is also true that at
times the literal reflection of the client's words can be
therapeutically effective. Consider the following example taken from
Leijssen (1993, p. 137):

50

Person-Centred Therapy C45: A kind of . . . hum . . . a mixture of
things I think. (T: Hmh.) Something to do with darkness and something to
do with, hum . . . I can only . . . can I give you an image? T46: Hmh.
Please do. C46: A sort of fog. T46: A sort of fog. C47: Mhm, a creeping
fog. (T: Mhm) That's what I'm sort of picking up. (T: Mhm) A creeping
fog. T47: A creeping fog.

Here the client is moving a bit more deeply into their experiencing, and
there is considerable evidence that such movement is associated with
therapeutic change. Rogers would say that what matters is that the
therapist has understood, and has conveyed that understanding to the
client. Yet while it is undoubtedly true that feeling understood is
likely to be helpful to the client, it is not obvious that such
understanding is the only helpful factor in the kind of interchange just
considered. In Leijssen's session the therapist, not being a native
English speaker, did not understand the words 'creeping fog'. She
decided to wait to ask for an explanation, meanwhile just reflecting the
keywords. Here in spite of the lack of understanding, the therapist's
response still served the function of helping the client to articulate
her experiencing, and go further into it. This second therapeutic
function of reflection seems to be undervalued by Rogers. It is central
to Gendlin's therapeutic practice, and we will encounter many examples
of it as we proceed. There is, I suspect, a third therapeutic function
of reflection which is not discussed explicitly by Rogers, though
Gendlin (1996, Chapter 22) makes some reference to it. It is that in
'seeing their own experiencing in the therapist's mirror' the client
gets a stronger sense of that experiencing and of their own existential
reality. Psychodynamic writers as different as Winnicott, Kohut and
Lacan have all emphasised the importance in early childhood of the
mother's mirroring of the child. The child gazes into the mother's eyes
(or the equivalent in other sensory modes) and becomes aware of their
own reality through their awareness of the mother's awareness of them.
(This is an experiential version of Bishop Berkeley's famous
philosophical dictum 'To be is to be perceived.' It is also something
which is strongly suggested by some of Henry Moore's sculptures in which
the reflective 'lines of force' between mother and child are portrayed
by threads connecting the eyes.) Where the mother is unable to provide
good enough mirroring,

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

51

because of the pressures in her life, or her own troubles, or her
selfabsorption, or her lack of interest in the child, the child finds it
more difficult to acquire a strong sense of their own reality. However,
such a developmental deficit is remediable (Schore, 1994, 2003). It
simply requires other people, later on, to respond to the client in the
mirroring way which is characteristic of much person-centred therapy.
The difficulties of clients with this kind of background come not from
the imposition of external conditions of worth on a strongly felt and
differentiated experiencing, but from the relative lack of such
experiencing. If person-centred therapy is effective with such clients,
it is not through restoring the client's sense of their own experiencing
through the dissolution of conditions of worth, but through helping the
client to find their own experiential centre for the first time. All
this is implicit in Gendlin's theory of therapy, which emphasises the
interactional nature of human life, and the fact that often in the early
stages of therapy the client can only be themself in the relationship
with the therapist (Gendlin, 1964b/1973, p. 469). I will return to that
theme in Chapter 3. The counsellor as well-functioning In the
person-centred approach there is sometimes a tendency to disparage
expert knowledge and skills. This attitude derives from the
person-centred belief that in the end it is only the client who can be
an expert on their life. Instead of valuing a therapist's knowledge and
skill, the person-centred approach tends to value the therapist's
attitudes and 'way of being'. Therapeutic movement is seen as movement
from incongruence to congruence under the benign influence of a
congruent, empathic and accepting counsellor, a counsellor who if not
fully functioning, is at least well-functioning. For trainee counsellors
this takes away one problem (you do not have to be an expert) but
replaces it with another (you do need to be well-functioning). I suspect
that person-centred counsellors are not always aware of how, from the
perspective of other schools, the person-centred position can seem to be
setting itself up as morally superior. In other schools of therapy the
view is that a trainee therapist works hard to acquire their knowledge
and skills, becomes to some extent an 'expert', and then uses their
expertise to help their clients. No claim is made that through their
training the trainee becomes a better person. Yet that is how the
person-centred view can come across: the training should make the
trainee more understanding, more accepting and more genuine. These

52

Person-Centred Therapy

traits that the training should develop are morally tinged attitudes;
they are not 'neutral'. To be a good counsellor it seems that one has to
be a good person. This is a tangled area. I think it is undeniable that
a counsellor (of whatever school) is likely to be more effective the
more they embody the attitudes of genuineness, empathy and acceptance.
But I imagine that that is true for almost any profession in which one
is working with people. Person-centred therapy does not have a monopoly
on the values of understanding, respect and honesty. In professions
other than person-centred psychotherapy the 'core conditions' are
facilitative of what is being done: the empathic teacher teaches better
than the unempathic teacher. But embodying these conditions does not
constitute teaching; someone could embody these conditions to perfection
but fail to have the knowledge and skills of a teacher. There is a
question here of to what extent psychotherapy resembles teaching in this
respect. Is it that there are therapeutic skills which are facilitated
by the presence of the therapist conditions, or are the Conditions all
that is required? Person-centred therapists are very wary of reducing
therapy to the possession of skills, but I think it is important to
appreciate the other point of view, which is that being a good therapist
should not be identified, in effect, with being a good person. That is
surely to set the standard for being a good therapist far too high, and
to invest it with a moral tone that is not entirely comfortable or
plausible. Gendlin remarks in this connection, 'The essence of working
with another person is to be present as a living being. And that is
lucky, because if we had to be smart, or good, or mature, or wise, then
we would probably be in trouble' (Gendlin, 1990, p. 205). Just what
Gendlin means by 'being present as a living being' we will need to
explore later. The equal effectiveness of the major approaches In his
early research work Rogers was trying to establish what are the
conditions of therapeutic change. His aim was not to establish a new
school of therapy but to determine what was involved in effective
therapy, whatever the school. Out of this work grew the view that there
are certain therapist attitudes which are conducive to therapeutic
change, together with the stronger suggestion that these attitudes are
all that is needed. Thus what I am calling the Therapeutic Conditions
Hypothesis came into being.

Fault-Lines in Person-Centred Theory

53

The assertion of the Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis in effect
established a new school of therapy. If this theory is correct then all
other schools either leave out at least one of the Conditions, or add
other things, which according to the Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis
are unnecessary. The effectiveness of other schools of therapy should
therefore be less than that of the person-centred school because the
work of the other therapists will either leave out something that is
essential for therapy, or waste time and effort on things which are not
essential. But in fact the evidence suggests that all the major forms of
therapy are about equally effective, including the person-centred form
(Smith and Glass, 1977; Stiles et al., 1986; Lambert and Bergin, 1994;
King et al., 2000). The question arises of whether this is because the
research studies are inadequate (or in some way biased against
person-centred therapy), or whether the Therapeutic Conditions
Hypothesis is flawed -- for, if it really is true that there is little
difference between the effectiveness of the different therapies,
including person-centred therapy, then it means that we have not in fact
identified satisfactorily the necessary and sufficient conditions of
effective therapy. As I will detail in Chapter 6, what the research
studies suggest is not that there are no differences between the
effectiveness of therapists, but that effectiveness is not correlated
significantly with the type of therapy. What does seem to make a
significant difference is the quality of the therapeutic interaction and
the client's own capacity to engage in the therapeutic work. This is not
quite what the Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis says. The Hypothesis
says nothing about client capacity (only that the client is anxious or
vulnerable), and restricts the notion of therapeutic interaction to the
providing of the therapeutic conditions. A more satisfactory view would
have more to say about the client side of the relationship, and also
more about what exactly is involved in effective therapeutic
interaction. As we shall see, Gendlin's theory has much to say about
both of these issues. In Chapters 3 and 4 we will look at his views in
some detail, and then return to the question of how his
'focusing-oriented psychotherapy' relates to the more familiar
formulations of personcentred therapy.

3 The Origins of Focusing

Eugene Gendlin joined Carl Rogers' group at the Counselling Center of
the University of Chicago in 1953. He was at the time working on his PhD
in philosophy, having completed a philosophy MA three years previously.
Gendlin's interest in philosophy centred around the question of how we
symbolise our experience, and what the relation is between our
experiencing and the symbols in terms of which we articulate our
experiencing. The philosopher Richard McKeon (to whom Gendlin referred
as 'my great teacher') had emphasised what today has become a
commonplace: that there are alternative ways of conceptualising our
experience. The world is not simply there, already divided up into
natural categories; rather, our ways of thinking and living have an
important part to play in how the world is for us. Today this is often
referred to as the 'social construction of reality'. But for Gendlin it
is not the whole story. Although there are many ways of conceptualising
our experience some of these ways lead somewhere, or 'carry us forward',
while others do not. Gendlin holds that in thinking about the
relationship between concepts and experience we have to avoid not only
the trap of saying that there is just one way in which our experience
can be conceptualised, but also the trap of saying that an experience
can be conceptualised in any way we please. When, in the early 1950s,
Gendlin came across the work of Rogers' group it struck him that these
people in psychotherapy were doing just the thing which interested him.
Gendlin (1983, p. 78) says in an interview: I actually went into the
Counselling Center while I didn't belong there, and discovered that the
papers the staff members were writing were available in the waiting room
. . . And so, I sneaked in there and pretended I was a client, so that I
could borrow one of those. And then I got more

54

The Origins of Focusing

55

and more interested, since indeed they were doing this; they were
letting a person have directly this experience and slowly to work at how
to express that, how to symbolize that, how to say that.

Gendlin was trained in 'non-directive therapy' by Rogers' group and
began to participate in the research work of the Counselling Center. One
important study by Kirtner and Cartwright had strongly suggested that it
is often possible to predict from the first few sessions whether a
client was likely to be successful in therapy. Much seemed to depend on
the personality of the client (Kirtner and Cartwright, 1958a), and on
how the client related to their own experiencing (Kirtner and
Cartwright, 1958b). Recalling this period Gendlin (in Rogers and
Russell, 2002, p. xviii) remarks: In 1956, when Kirtner distributed his
study, the center staff was outraged. We could not believe that we
worked with some clients in a way that was failure-predicted from the
first few interviews. Surely there must be an error in the study, we
declared. Only Rogers was calm. He told us, "Facts are always friendly."
When I came to his office to argue about it, he said "This study will
help us with the next study." As I was leaving and we stood in the
doorway, he put his hand on my shoulder for emphasis and said "Look,
maybe you will be the one to discover how to go on from this." He meant
me only as an example, but I may have heard him on a deeper level.

One early question which Gendlin worked on in the 1950s was the role of
the counsellor--client relationship in the process of psychotherapy.
Many theorists, including Freud and Rogers, held that the interpersonal
relationship is crucial, yet some research studies had suggested that
there was in fact no correlation between therapeutic outcome and the
extent to which clients focus on the relationship in therapy. With
Richard Jenney and John Shlien, Gendlin (1960) designed a study that
would 'distinguish between observations of relationship focus as a topic
of discussion and observations indicating use of the relationship for
significant experiencing' (p. 211). The conclusion was that there was no
general correlation between therapeutic outcome and the degree to which
the client focused on their relationship with the counsellor; what was
significant, rather, was whether in referring to the relationship the
client was involved in his or her own immediate experiencing, for
instance: 'I feel guilty when I want to be independent. And I feel that
way with you also' or 'I've never been able to let go and just feel
dependent and helpless, as I do now.' Similarly, this

56

Person-Centred Therapy

study suggested, there is an important difference in connection with the
question of whether client reference to feelings is important. The
conclusion was that clients who simply talk about their feelings
(e.g. 'I was scared last night'; 'Often I am depressed') make little
progress, whereas those who express their feelings (e.g. 'It comes to me
now how scared I was last night'; 'Gee, I feel low') are more likely to
make progress. Gendlin, along with others in Rogers' group, believed
that much psychological disturbance is associated with a
'structure-bound' manner of experiencing. Freud (1936, p. 105) spoke of
'repetition compulsion' where past perceptions are imposed on, and
distort, present perception, but Gendlin emphasised not so much the
content of the perceptual distortion but the manner of experiencing
which is involved. 'There is experiencing of structures and patterns
instead of the richly detailed immediacy of present events' (Gendlin and
Shlien, 1961, p. 69). Gendlin held at this time a view which he has held
ever since, that the efficacy of psychotherapy has much to do with
whether the client can direct their attention to their own immediate
experiencing. Such directed attention has physiological effects, as
Gendlin and Berlin (1961, p. 73) demonstrated in another early paper, on
'Galvanic skin response correlates of different modes of experiencing'.
Gendlin and his colleague wrote in this paper, 'Personality change
during psychotherapy is held to involve many brief periods during which
the individual refers his attention directly, and in a continuous way,
to these immediately felt data of experiencing.' The results of the
study showed that attention to one's immediate experiencing results in
increased galvanic skin-resistance (and hence tension-reduction), even
in cases where the content of what is experienced might in normal
circumstances be associated with increased tension. As we shall see,
this is a phenomenon which is characteristic of the 'focusing'
procedure. Working with Fred Zimring (Gendlin and Zimring, 1955) Gendlin
developed a Process Scale which was designed to measure the extent to
which clients refer directly to the process of their own experiencing. A
version of this scale was used in the large Wisconsin study on
schizophrenia, and it was later refined as the Experiencing Scale. In
this period, the mid-1950s, Rogers had been developing two lines of
thought about what is involved in successful psychotherapy. One was
concerned with what the therapist was doing; the other was concerned
with what takes place in the client. The line of thought concerning the
therapist is what is best known about Rogers' work, that is, that
therapy is effective when the therapist embodies the

The Origins of Focusing

57

Conditions of genuineness, empathy and unconditional regard. As we have
seen, Rogers presented his first full statement of this view in the
paper 'The necessary and sufficient conditions of therapeutic
personality change' (Rogers, 1957). However, Rogers was equally
interested in the question of what happens in the client. In 1956 he
gave an address to the American Academy of Psychotherapists on 'The
essence of psychotherapy: moments of movement' (Rogers, 1956). This
address was unfortunately never published, but shortly before his death
Rogers sent a copy to Jerold Bozarth with the comment 'I just discovered
this 1956 paper and I like it' (Bozarth, 1996, p. 495). In the paper
Rogers says: Is it possible, in the richly interactional relationship of
psychotherapy, to discern some essential or crucial element, to which
all the rest of the experience is subsidiary? This is a question which
has compelled my interest for a long time. It is a question to which,
during the past two decades, I have given a variety of answers. In years
gone by I believed that insight, properly defined, was such a crucial
element. I have long since given up this view. I have spoken as though
the relationship is the crucial element, and in one sense I think this
is true. It is the crucial element for the therapist, since the quality
of the relationship is the one element he can directly influence. But
when I think of psychotherapy as personality change, and ask myself
whether there is any one essential or crucial element in such change,
then I find myself giving a different answer . . .

He goes on to say that he is not going to try to specify the conditions
which lead up to this experience, though I believe they are specifiable.
In a recent paper \[this is his 'necessary and conditions' paper, at
that time in press\] I have tentatively formulated these conditions, and
several research projects are now getting under way to test this
formulation.

The experience itself he characterises partly by an example taken from
an earlier book, Psychotherapy and Personality Change (Rogers, 1954). It
is from the transcript of a session with Mrs Oak: In the thirty-first
interview she is trying to discover what it is that she is experiencing.
It is a strong emotion. She thinks it is not guilt. She weeps for a
time. Then: Client: It's just being terribly hurt! . . . And then, of
course, I've come to see and feel that over this . . . see, I've covered
it up.

58

Person-Centred Therapy A moment later she puts it slightly differently.
Client: You know, its almost a physical thing. It's . . . sort of as
though I were looking within myself at all kinds of . . . nerve endings
-- and bits of . . . things that have been sort of mashed. (weeping)
Therapist: As though some of the most delicate aspects of you --
physically almost -- have been crushed or hurt. Client: Yes. And you
know, I do get the feeling, oh, you poor thing. Therapist: You just
can't help but feel very deeply sorry for the person that is you. This
moment in her experience is what I have come to think of as a 'moment of
movement' in therapy, generally as a moment of personality change. I
would hypothesise that therapy is made up of a series of such moments of
movement, sometimes strung rather closely together, sometimes occurring
at long intervals, always with periods of preparatory experiences in
between . . . . It is not a thinking about something, it is an
experience of something at this instant, in the relationship. . . .
There are of course many qualities in the relationship which lead up to
it and make it possible, but once it has occurred, it has an almost
irreversible quality, even though it may take the client a long time
fully to assimilate what has occurred.

The following year Rogers presented a paper to the American
Psychological Convention on 'A process conception of psychotherapy', a
shorter version of which was published in 1958 (Rogers, 1958). Rogers
revised the paper again to form Chapter 7 of On Becoming a Person
(1961). I will quote from this final version in some detail, since much
of what Rogers says here is almost indistinguishable from Gendlin's
views. Rogers (p. 128) writes that during this past year I have spent
many hours listening to recorded therapeutic interviews -- trying to
listen as naively as possible. I have endeavored to soak up all the
clues I could capture to the process, as to what elements are
significant for change. I have tried to abstract from that sensing the
simplest abstractions which would describe them. Here I have been much
stimulated and helped by the thinking of many of my colleagues, but I
would like to mention my special indebtedness to Eugene Gendlin, William
Kirtner and Fred Zimring, whose demonstrated ability to think in new
ways about these matters has been particularly helpful, and from whom I
have borrowed heavily.

In this paper Rogers distinguishes again between the experiential
process of change in the client and the conditions which facilitate this
change. He refers to his 'necessary and sufficient conditions' paper,

The Origins of Focusing

59

but says 'For our present purpose I believe I can state this assumed
condition in one word . . . that the client experiences himself as being
fully received' (p. 130). Given this condition, clients will change in a
characteristic way (p. 131): Individuals move, I began to see, not from
a fixity or homeostasis through change to a new fixity, though such a
process is indeed possible. But much the more significant continuum is
from fixity to changingness, from rigid structure to flow, from stasis
to process. I formed the tentative hypothesis that perhaps the qualities
of the client's expression at any one point might indicate his position
on this continuum, might indicate where he stood in this process of
change.

As in his 1956 paper, he speaks of 'moments of movement -- moments when
it appears that change actually occurs' (p. 130). He then goes on to lay
out the continuum of change, roughly dividing it into seven stages. In
the first stage the client typically talks about external events, and is
unwilling to communicate anything of him- or herself. 'The ways in which
he construes experience have been set by his past, and are rigidly
unaffected by the actualities of the present. He is (to use the term of
Gendlin and Zimring) structure-bound in his manner of experiencing'
(p. 133). In the second stage there is more reference to self, but in a
rather external way, such as 'Disorganisation keeps cropping up in my
life.' In the third stage there is a freer flow of expression about the
self, and much talk about feelings in the past, some recognition that
the client's way of constructing their experience is a construction,
rather than a settled fact. In the fourth stage there is a further
loosening of constructs, a greater tendency to experience feelings in
the present, though little acceptance of those feelings. At the fifth
stage, feelings in the present moment are freely expressed and
'\[t\]here is a beginning tendency to realize that experiencing a
feeling involves a direct referent' (p. 140). 'Gendlin has called my
attention to this significant quality of experiencing as a referent'
(p. 150). The 'direct referent' is what Gendlin later came to call the
'felt sense'. Rogers (p. 140) gives the following illustrations:
Example: "That kinda came out and I just don't understand it (Long
pause) I'm trying to get hold of what that terror is." Example: Client
is talking about an external event. Suddenly she gives a pained,
stricken look.

60

Person-Centred Therapy Therapist: "What -- what's hitting you now?"
Client: "I don't know (She cries). I must have been getting a little too
close to something I didn't want to talk about, or something." Example:
"I feel stopped right now. Why is my mind blank right now? I feel as if
I am hanging on to something, and I've been letting go of other things;
and something in me is saying, 'What more do I have to give up?' "

Rogers comments (p. 140) on these three examples: In each case the
client knows he has experienced something, knows he is not clear as to
what he has experienced. But there is the dawning realization that the
referent of these vague cognitions lies within him, in an organismic
event against which he can check his symbolization and his cognitive
formulations. This is often shown by expressions that indicate the
closeness or distance he feels from this referent. Example: "I really
don't have my finger on it. I'm just kinda describing it."

At this stage There is a strong and evident tendency toward exactness in
differentiation of feelings and meanings. Example: " . . . some tension
that grows in me, or in some hopelessness, or some kind of
incompleteness -- and my life actually is very incomplete right now . .
. I just don't know. Seems to be, the closest thing it gets to, is
hopelessness." Obviously, he is trying to capture the exact term which
for him symbolizes his experience. (p. 142)

In Rogers' sixth stage of process The moment of full experiencing
becomes a clear and definite referent. The examples given should
indicate that the client is often not too clearly aware of what has "hit
him" in these moments. Yet this does not seem too important because the
event is an entity, a referent, which can be turned to again and again,
if necessary, to discover more about it. The pleadingness, the feeling
of "loving myself" which are present in these examples, may not prove to
be exactly as described. They are, however, solid points of reference to
which the client can return until he has satisfied himself as to what
they are. It is, perhaps, that they constitute a clear-cut physiological
event, a substratum of the conscious life, which the client can return
to for investigatory purposes. (pp. 149--50)

In the seventh and final stage, which Rogers says often occurs beyond
the end of formal therapy,

The Origins of Focusing

61

Experiencing has lost almost completely its structure-bound aspects and
becomes process experiencing -- that is, the situation is experienced
and interpreted in its newness, not as the past. . . . Personal
constructs are tentatively reformulated, to be validated against further
experience, but even then, to be held loosely . . . There is the
experiencing of effective choice of new ways of living. (pp. 152--4)

The view of therapy which was emerging in the 1950s from the work of
Rogers, Gendlin and others in the group at the University of Chicago
Counselling Center, can be summarised in the following way: Therapeutic
change takes place when the therapist can, in Rogers' phrase, 'receive
the client'. Such reception of the client leads to a kind of
experiencing in the client which is increasingly less 'structurebound'.
The therapist's part in the process consists in creating the 'receiving'
atmosphere, which Rogers explicated further in terms of genuineness,
empathy and unconditional regard. What goes on in the client is a new
mode of experiencing which increasingly involves attention to that
experiencing followed by loosening of the structures in terms of which
the experiencing is symbolised. This view of the therapeutic process
seemed to be open to experimental testing. Rogers' group already had
some experience in working with psychometric techniques, and it seemed
an appropriate time to set up a large-scale test of their theory. What
was required was a battery of tests which would assess (1) to what
extent, on the therapist's side, the conditions of empathy, congruence
and unconditional regard had been present, (2) to what extent, on the
client's side, the client's experiencing had become less structure-bound
and (3) to what extent the therapy had been effective. Rating scales for
therapist empathy, unconditional regard and congruence were developed by
members of Rogers' group; Rogers' seven stages of process were
operationalised into a Process Scale, and Gendlin developed a related
Experiencing Scale which measured the extent to which the individual was
remote from, or engaged with, their experiencing; finally, the
effectiveness of therapy was measured by a variety of indices, such as
the MMPI personality questionnaire, hospitalisation release rates and
the judgement of clinicians (Rogers, 1967). Since up to that time
client-centred therapy had been used almost exclusively with 'neurotic'
rather than 'psychotic' clients, it was decided to centre the project
around a schizophrenic population in a psychiatric hospital. Rogers and
his group believed that their theory of therapy was a general one which
would apply to any kind of

62

Person-Centred Therapy

psychological disturbance, so that in choosing a schizophrenic client
group they hoped that they would be able to demonstrate the general
applicability of their theory along with the more specific hypotheses
about therapist conditions and client process change. The 'Wisconsin
project', as it came to be known, was one of the largest projects ever
developed to test a theory in psychotherapy. Involving over a hundred
researchers, counsellors and assistants, it took five years (1958--63)
and something like \$500,000 to complete. Rogers maintained an overall
responsibility for the project, but handed over its direction to
Gendlin. In a letter written in 1966 he says 'I felt so gleeful because
Gene \[Gendlin\] had agreed to come and initiate the project and I knew
he had the skills and aptitudes which would make that possible where I
did not. I felt then and feel now enormous gratitude that he was willing
to undertake that task and for all he has done since to carry the
project through' (Kirschenbaum, 1979, p. 286). The project was beset
with difficulties: there was its sheer scale, the difficulties of
working within the setting of a psychiatric hospital and the
extraordinary theft by one of the participants of a significant part of
the data (which then had to be re-worked) (Kirschenbaum, 1979, Chapter
9). It was nevertheless brought to completion, and the results are of
great interest, though they have been little discussed in person-centred
circles. Rogers (1967, Chapter 5) wrote a summary of the findings for
the published account of the project. The first of these findings was
that 'a theory of therapeutic change can be put to empirical test' and
that this 'may in some respects be our most important finding. . . .
Some of our hypotheses were at least partially confirmed. Others were
disproved. New evidence was unearthed which did not fit the theory from
which we had started. Thus a rethinking of the theoretical basis of our
therapy became necessary' (pp. 74--5). More specifically, it was found
that the schizophrenics generally rated very low on the Experiencing
Scale, and 'showed little change in the level of experiencing over the
period of therapy' (p. 79). Regarding outcome, In many respects the
therapy group taken as a whole showed no greater evidence of positive
outcome than did the matched and paired control group. It had, however,
a slightly better rate of release from hospital. And this differential
was maintained a year after the termination of therapy. The therapy
group also showed a number of positive personality changes which were
not evidenced by the control group.

The Origins of Focusing

63

Regarding these apparently rather minor effects of therapy Rogers
comments that members of the control group were receiving occupational
and recreational therapy from which they may well have benefited, while
in the therapy group there were a number of patients who were
particularly resistant to any helping relationship, so that 'the
question might be raised whether they were actually in therapy at all'
(p. 82). In short, it was not altogether surprising that the effects of
therapy were not great; rather, it is significant that there was at
least some observed difference between the therapy group and the control
group. Turning to the relationship between therapist attitudes and
client process, Rogers (pp. 82, 83) acknowledges that one of the
findings was disappointing: there seemed to be no significant
relationship between the degree of therapist empathy, congruence and
acceptance, and the degree of process movement shown by the patient . .
. Thus, in general our expectations and hypotheses in regard to a
progression of stages of development in therapeutic movement throughout
the process of therapy were not upheld in our work with these
schizophrenic individuals.

On the other hand (p. 83, Rogers' emphasis): The story was quite
different when we examined the relationship between the therapist
attitudes and conditions and the process level exhibited by our
schizophrenic individuals. Here we found that the deeper the level of
the therapist's understanding and genuineness in his relationship with
his patient, the more his patient was likely to exhibit a deeper level
of self-experiencing and self-exploration at every point of therapy --
initially, throughout therapy, and at termination.

These results were puzzling. The expectation had been that high levels
of the therapist conditions would lead to an increased process level in
the client, which would in turn be associated with a better therapeutic
outcome. Rather, it turned out that client process level was not
increased by the therapeutic interaction, but that clients who began at
a higher level made better therapeutic progress. Curiously, though, the
therapists of the clients with higher process levels showed higher
levels of the therapist conditions. Rogers concluded that what needed to
be re-thought were the causal connections between the three variables:
therapist conditions, process level and positive outcome (p. 89). The
facts appear to be that

64

Person-Centred Therapy

both high process level and high therapist conditions are correlated
with constructive personality change, and with each other. But it is not
that the high therapist conditions cause the high process level; that
level remains as it is from the start of therapy. So why is it that high
therapist conditions are correlated with high process level from the
start? Rogers writes: The main thrust of these findings . . . appears
clear. The characteristics of the client or patient influenced the
quality of the relationship which formed between himself and his
therapist.

In this connection Rogers notes other factors which were correlated with
higher therapist conditions, including higher client socioeconomic
status, higher verbal IQ and greater expressivity in the early
interviews. He then concludes (pp. 89--90, 91): High levels of empathic
understanding, genuineness, and warm acceptance in the therapist's
behavior are more likely to be evident when he is dealing with a
reasonably expressive individual with a socio-educational level closer
to his own. The therapist's attitudes are clearly important, but the
patient's characteristics appear to play a definite part in eliciting
these qualities . . . . All of this points to the conclusion that an
early assessment of the relationship qualities and the process level of
any given relationship is a good prognosticator of the probability that
constructive personality change will occur.

Thus what this mammoth study suggested was not that therapist conditions
lead to a higher process level in the client which is associated with
constructive personality change. Rather, some clients begin therapy at a
higher process level than others, and it is this higher process level,
maintained throughout, which helps to elicit the higher therapist
conditions and the constructive personality change. Rogers was pleased
that the study had been completed successfully and that its design had
enabled new discoveries to be made. The content of these discoveries
was, however, a disappointment to him (p. 82). Clearly the theory needed
modification, but Rogers had meanwhile become deeply interested in
another field of study, that of the application of his basic ideas to
groups. On completion of the Wisconsin project in 1963 (although four
years before its publication) Rogers moved to La Jolla in California,
and from then on most of his writings were concerned with groups.
Because members of groups could not appropriately be referred to as
'clients' he changed the name of his

The Origins of Focusing

65

approach from 'client-centred' to 'person-centred' and it is in this
form that 'person-centred therapy' has become widely known. We might try
to imagine how Rogers felt in 1963. He had developed a striking and
plausible theory of psychotherapy which had received some empirical
confirmation. His new book On becoming a person (1961) had been an
almost instant success. He had expected the Wisconsin project to be a
large-scale confirmation of his theorising over the previous ten years.
But the project had run into many practical and interpersonal problems,
and the final results were disappointing insofar as they failed to
confirm his theory. Kirschenbaum (1979, p. 275) refers to this period in
his life as 'a time which Rogers himself often wished he could forget.
He once called it "the most painful and anguished episode in my whole
professional life".' Yet whatever the findings of the project suggested,
Rogers clearly did not take them as refuting his view that the attitudes
of empathy, acceptance and genuineness are deeply helpful in human
relationships. This was for him an experiential fact which was
increasingly confirmed for him in his new work with groups. To continue
from where the Wisconsin project had ended would have involved more
theoretical work, and more again of the time-consuming empirical
research which had yielded such a meagre harvest of clear results. By
contrast, the development of the person-centred approach outside of the
therapy room must have seemed full of promise. In a 1963 letter to
Godfrey Barrett-Lennard (1998, p. 154) Rogers wrote of some of the early
groups, ' . . . with the establishment of a few simple conditions, which
are close to but not identical with the conditions we have described for
establishing a therapeutic relationship, these . . . groups all went
through an experience that must have been so parallel as to be almost
identical'. Thus Rogers at the age of 61 was launched on a whole new
phase of his career, through which his work became much more widely
known. Meanwhile, Gendlin's experiences in Wisconsin led to a deeper
articulation of the theory of therapy, and to changes in his therapeutic
practice. I will discuss the changes in practice first. Gendlin (1983)
recalls that although the schizophrenics in the Wisconsin project had
not shown very marked changes as the result of therapy, the therapists
were significantly changed by the experience. Working with hospitalised
schizophrenics was very different from working with clients in an office
in the University of Chicago Counselling Center. There were often long
periods of silence, but it was not the sort of silence in which a client
is exploring or sensing into their experiencing; it was,

66

Person-Centred Therapy

rather, an empty, resisting silence. The schizophrenics did not come to
therapy with a sense of having problems with which they wished to work;
they were not oriented towards personal exploration. They were isolated,
disconnected people who would often reject the therapist. Gendlin
(1964a, pp. 169--70) wrote of his experience: I was not, at least then,
accustomed to seeing someone who did not want to see me. It had always
been the other person's need that was my excuse for being there, for
living, for working. He needed me and I had nothing to do with it . . .
. But here was a person who said "Leave me alone. Go away. I don't want
to talk. I talk to some people, but I don't want to talk to you. Aren't
there other patients you can see?" . . . I slowly learned that there is
another reason why I might go to see someone. It might not be because he
needs me, which makes it very easy. Instead it might be because I want
to, because I decide to . . . This happened repeatedly to almost every
one of the therapists. And it is invariably a painful experience . . .
The patient is ill, afraid and withdrawing. You know that but it is
still painful -- particularly painful not to be able to reach out to him
for such a long period, when you want to.

In the face of these challenges the Wisconsin project therapists found
that they had to drop many of their preconceptions and favourite
methods. This, more than anything else, has moved us away from a concern
with technique, a concern with being 'client-centred' or being any other
particular way . . . We have shifted from talking about the optimal
response behavior to much more basic and global factors: the attitudes
of the therapist, the approach that as one person he takes towards the
other person, how to make interaction happen where it isn't. (Gendlin,
1964a, pp. 171--2)

Rogers had already made the theoretical move from the technique of
reflection towards the embodiment of therapeutic attitudes, but it was
only through working with schizophrenics that it became clear that some
clients may absolutely require 'a much wider range of what one might do,
what one might be pushed into doing by one's own feelings and own needs,
in order to reach a person not being reached' (ibid., p. 172). In the
post-Wisconsin years Rogers expressed the same conclusion through his
increasing emphasis on the importance of therapist congruence. To 'reach
a person not being reached' requires the therapist to be more active in
their relationship with their client, and this can seem

The Origins of Focusing

67

to clash with the original principles of non-directive therapy. The
therapist may need to make interpretations, express their own feelings,
ask questions, answer questions, express opinions, refer back to what
the client said previously and so on. These forms of therapist response
were deliberately inhibited in non-directive therapy because they were
seen as having the undesirable effect of distracting the client from his
or her own therapeutic track. Yet with the schizophrenics such
inhibition had the consequence that no therapeutic relationship was
established. The schizophrenic was not on any therapeutic track and did
not make any use of what the therapist was offering. In these
circumstances the Wisconsin project therapists found themselves doing
just the things which non-directive therapy would have ruled out. Now in
Gendlin's view the therapists were not going against the spirit of
Rogers' approach -- the point of the non-directive 'rules' was to avoid
deflecting the client from their own process. But in schizophrenia a
person's process is blocked; personal process flows primarily in
relation to other people, and the schizophrenic's estrangement from
their own process is all of a piece with their estrangement from other
people. Hence what is needed is the re-establishment of relationship:
the relationship of the schizophrenic to other people and to his or her
own experiencing. This requires the therapist to do things which could
in other circumstances detract from the client following their own
therapeutic track. The 'relaxation of the non-directive rules' must of
course be limited and appropriate to what is happening in the
relationship. The therapist needs to make some move (ask a question,
express a feeling and so on) and then check how that is with the client.
The therapist is not directing the therapeutic process, but enabling it
to occur. One way of understanding Gendlin's focusing-oriented
psychotherapy is to see it as extending the principles of the work with
schizophrenics to psychotherapy clients in general (Gendlin, 1963/1968).
The problems of working with schizophrenics could be seen as the general
problems of psychotherapy writ large. That is, when clients come to
psychotherapy what happens in the session is not always therapeutic. In
particular, clients may talk continually about external events in their
life, or analyse in Sherlock Holmes style the connections between
childhood events and present troubles, or live out the same feelings
they have lived for years in other relationships. After a while the
therapist becomes uncomfortable, in the way that the Wisconsin project
therapists became uncomfortable with the schizophrenics. If the client
always just talks about the events in their week, even the

68

Person-Centred Therapy

most orthodox client-centred therapist is unlikely to let this go on
indefinitely. There is a sense that 'nothing is happening', and the
therapist might express their discomfort, or ask a question such as 'And
how did that strike you?' Similarly with the client who continually
analyses or intellectualises the therapist is likely after a while to
want to introduce a feeling or experiential element into the
conversation. 'It does seem likely that you feel this way because of the
way it was in your family, but I'm wondering how all that feels for you
right now?' And with the recurrently emoting client the therapist may
come to the point of saying something like 'This anger you are feeling
again . . . maybe we could try to stand back from it a little and just
see what is in it . . . what this is all about?' In these situations, as
with the schizophrenics, the therapist is trying to reach out to the
client in a way that will help the client to engage in a therapeutic
process. These moves which the therapist makes do not interfere with the
therapeutic process; they help to initiate it. One of Gendlin's early
insights was that psychotherapy does not always take place in what are
called psychotherapy sessions; what goes on may be largely
non-therapeutic externalising, intellectualising or emoting. Of course,
talking about the events of one's week, or reflecting upon childhood
experiences or releasing pent-up emotion may be therapeutic, but it is
not always so, and what is crucial for an understanding of therapy is
what it is that makes the difference. Let us return now to the
theoretical implications of the Wisconsin project findings. As we saw,
before his departure for California, Rogers was at least considering the
possibility that high experiencing level in the client tends to bring
about therapeutic progress while also eliciting high therapist
conditions. The evidence for the second point was not very conclusive
(Gendlin et al., 1967, p. 61), but what did seem clear was that in
therapy much depends on 'where the client is' at the start, as well as
on what the therapist does. The Wisconsin results strongly suggested
that therapist conditions do not cause high experiencing levels, if by
that is meant that the stronger the conditions the higher the
experiencing level. My own interpretation is that it is rather that if
the therapist conditions fall below a certain level they will tend to
block the client's experiencing. It is not so much that high therapist
conditions are the cause of high experiencing and hence of therapeutic
progress, but that low therapist conditions block the process which
would otherwise take place. An analogy might be: a car cannot run if it
does not have wheels, but also the tyres on the wheels must be pumped
up.

The Origins of Focusing

69

Pumped-up tyres are a causal factor in the car's running effectively,
but it is not that the more you pump up the tyres the better the car
runs. It is misleading to say that pumped-up tyres cause cars to run
effectively; it is rather that flat tyres cause cars to run
ineffectively. Similarly it is misleading to say that therapist empathy,
acceptance and genuineness result in therapeutic progress; it is rather
that therapist misunderstanding, criticism and phoneyness block the
therapeutic process. Such a view is consistent not only with the
thinking of Gendlin but also with that of Rogers. For Rogers, personal
development is driven by the 'actualising tendency'; other people can
have an impact on growth but it is not that the therapeutic conditions
cause the growth. Rather, it is that their opposites stand in the way of
growth. To see things this way is to put the client back at the centre
of clientcentred therapy. Too much emphasis on the therapist conditions
can distort our view of what takes place in therapy. As we shall see, it
is important for the therapist to be there, but it is equally important
for the therapist not to get in the way of the client's process. The
therapist conditions, from this perspective, are a matter of not
blocking the client, rather than a matter of giving the client anything.
We can turn now to Gendlin's own account of psychotherapy. The essence
of it can be found in a paper published in 1964 entitled 'A theory of
personality change', which drew upon his more philosophical work in
Experiencing and the Creation of Meaning (1962/1997). It was in this
paper that he first introduced the term 'focusing'. Central to Gendlin's
thought is the idea that human experiencing has a rich intricacy which
can be rendered conceptually and linguistically only to a limited
extent. There is always far more to our experiencing than we can put
into words or concepts. Yet it is not that our experiencing is
ineffable; if we stay with our experiencing, words and symbols may arise
which then do render the experience in a communicable form. We can check
the words against the experience, and then sometimes at least we are
able to say 'Yes, that expresses it exactly.' Gendlin often uses the
example of a poet who is struggling to complete a poem, the last line of
which eludes him. He reads the already written lines over and over again
and has a sense of what the last line needs to be. This sense -- what
Gendlin calls a 'felt sense' -- is definite enough for him to be able to
reject various possible lines which come. The felt sense is vague in
that there are as yet no words for it, but quite precise in that only
certain words will 'fit' it. When those words come the poet takes a deep
breath and says 'Ah, that's right', and then he can move on. This is
clearly similar to what often

70

Person-Centred Therapy

happens in psychotherapy. A client may say 'I have a strange feeling
about all this which I can't put into words. It's not that I feel guilty
about it . . . it is something else . . . it's more a sort of fear . . .
a fear of what people will say . . . no, I don't really care what they
say . . . what is this? . . . it's as if I'm afraid of really being me .
. . (sigh). . . yes, that's it . . . if I did it I would really be me,
and then I couldn't pretend any more . . .' In looking at psychotherapy
transcripts one finds endless examples of this characteristic form of
reflecting. The client is focusing their attention on their own
experiencing and trying to formulate it in words or images. When the
'right' word or image comes there is a feeling of release, which has
nothing to do with whether the client likes what has come. It may be
that in the course of reflection on a problem that the client says 'Now
I see what it is . . . (release) . . . and it's much worse than I
thought. Now I really don't know what to do.' In Gendlin's view the
articulation of our implicit experiencing is what is central to
psychotherapy. This is what for Gendlin corresponds to what in Freud is
conceptualised as 'making the unconscious conscious' or in Rogers as
'bringing the self-concept into congruence with organismic experience'.
To understand Gendlin's view of psychotherapy we need first to see how
it differs from the views of Freud and of Rogers. Consider this example
from Gendlin (1964b/1973, p. 485. Page references to this paper are to
the 1973 version): An individual leaves a certain situation feeling
quite happy. Four days later he becomes aware that really he has been
quite angry about what happened. He feels that he 'has been' angry all
along but 'wasn't aware of it'.

Freud would say that this person has been unconsciously angry during
those four days; Rogers would say that his organismic experiencing has
been that of anger, but that he has not conceptualised it as such: his
(self-)concept has been incongruent with his organismic experiencing.
Gendlin's view is that the individual's situation was one in which anger
would have been the natural response, but that this response has been
blocked. In the four days since the events occurred, the person has not
been angry; rather he has been in a state which 'implies' anger, a state
in which anger is incipient, but not yet occurring. Now, four days
later, the anger is there. He says he has been 'angry all along', but
what this amounts to is that he has been in a blocked state of incipient
anger, which is now being expressed.

The Origins of Focusing

71

The expression of the anger is not a matter of him having had the anger
all the time, but is only now able to verbalise or conceptualise what he
felt. His now exclaiming 'I'm really furious about that!' is not a
description of a feeling which he has not up to now been able to
describe accurately; it is the 'discharging' or 'completing' of the
condition he has physically felt for the past four days. I will discuss
this aspect of Gendlin's theory further in Chapter 8. Gendlin's view is
that effective psychotherapy involves the release of blocked process. By
'process' he means the natural flow of our experiential interaction with
the world. Rather analogously to Rogers' notion of the 'actualising
tendency' Gendlin sees people (and other organisms) as in constant
movement-towards-future-states. A person cannot be understood fully in
terms of what they are now, but in terms of what they are becoming. Or
rather, what we are now can only be specified in terms of where we are
going. To be hungry now is to be on the way to eating. We may not get
there, but the 'implication' of eating is there now, and constitutes the
hunger. (Even in the physical world, Gendlin suggests, the present
states of things cannot be expressed independently of where they are
heading. That a body has such-and-such a momentum tells us something
about the future as much as about the present.) The present state of an
organism 'implies' future states, but these future states may not be
realised; for example, there may be no food for the hungry animal. This
leads to a state of physiological tension and the animal begins to
search for food. In its hunting behaviour we see the implying of
feeding, but that implying is not yet satisfied. Similarly the insulted
person is in a state which implies angry behaviour, but there may be no
safe way of being angry. This leads to physiological tension and the
person becomes irritable with his wife, phones a friend, goes for a
drink and so on. In this unsettled behaviour we see the implying of
anger, but that implying is blocked, not yet satisfied. In human beings
the ways in which our living and experiencing can be blocked are
multifarious, but in each case there is the failure to express or
satisfy something that is implied. We are stuck; our experiencing does
not, in Gendlin's phrase, 'carry us forward'. Nevertheless, in that
'stuck' state there is the implying of what would release it. The
present state implies what needs to come in order that there will not
any longer be that implying. Hence through giving attention to our stuck
states we may find what it is that needs to come. This, for Gendlin, is
the fundamental principle of psychotherapy, but it needs more
elucidation.

72

Person-Centred Therapy

Our lives may become blocked in many ways which do not require the help
of psychotherapy. Because of circumstances we may no longer be able to
continue with our work, or with a friendship, or with an activity. Then
we are sad and upset and cast around for other ways in which the
'implying' can be carried forward. When we are blocked our lives do not
stop; they carry on in new, and perhaps strange, ways which involve a
seeking for something which will satisfy the blocked 'implying'. If we
can stay in touch with our experiencing we can sense what does or does
not lead in the direction of satisfying or expressing the implying. At
such times we often feel painfully alive. It can help to have another
person there to be with us in our searching, but it is not absolutely
essential. At other times we lose touch with our own experiencing.
Instead of noticing how we are right now feeling about the situation in
all its intricacy, we respond to it in what Gendlin (1964b/1973,
pp. 461--3) calls a 'structure-bound' way. For example, someone reacts
to their boss's behaviour in the same way that they react to anyone whom
they perceive as an authority. They react to him just as 'an authority'
and not as a person in this particular situation. They experience their
boss only in this very limited schematic way. It is as if their
experiencing has become frozen into a particular form, rather than being
a living awareness of the present situation. In the structure-bound way
of experiencing there is a lack of immediacy which may extend to a sense
of one's life as a whole. Then we feel 'I do everything right, but I'm
not in it' or 'Life is going on all right, but I'm in some back room. I
merely hear about it, I'm not living it' (ibid., p. 461). When we are in
this kind of state and reflect on our problems we tend to move along
intellectual and conceptual tracks. We may say 'I am in this situation
because I am that sort of person, and I got to be this way because of
this and this, so I suppose what I really need to do is such-and-such,
but when I do things like that they always go wrong, but what else can I
try . . . ' This way of thinking moves from one idea to another in a
logical fashion, but does not dip down into the felt sense of the
situation. Nothing new emerges because the problem has already been
structured in a particular way, and we are circling around within that
structure. For something new to emerge we have to let ourselves dip back
into the rich intricacy of our immediate experiencing, and see if some
new structure can emerge, which may then again be checked against our
experiencing, so that it may itself be replaced by something new.

The Origins of Focusing

73

Structure-bound states are states in which our experiencing is stuck in
particular forms, in particular ways of seeing and being. When we are in
such states we do not respond effectively to the intricacy of our
situation. From the structure nothing new can come, but if we can, as it
were, get behind the structure, into what it is rooted in, then there is
the possibility of a restructuring which will truly express what has
become blocked. For example, so long as the man with a problem about his
boss keeps saying to himself 'I have an authority problem, and this
comes from the way it was with my father, and I need to distinguish
between my father and my boss, of course, don't I? . . . ' little change
can occur. Everything he says is true, but such understanding of one's
problem does not make it go away! What might make a difference would be
if he took some time to stay with the whole felt sense of his problem
with his boss. He sits down and gently asks himself 'Now what is all
this? . . . what am I feeling about this whole thing with the boss . . .
?' He may notice a tension in his chest, and a sinking feeling in his
stomach. His body is responding to the situation in a quite definite
way. There is a whole 'something' there which he physically senses. He
immediately thinks, 'Well of course I'm feeling like this -- it's fear
-- I'm afraid of the boss aren't I? People get all tense like this when
they are afraid, don't they? And I got to be like this because . . .'
But now instead of following the well-trodden track which he usually
follows he pauses and comes back to the physically felt sense of the
situation. There it is -- that feeling. If he stays with the felt sense
new aspects of the situation may emerge. For example, there, in all
that, along with the fear, is a kind of pain . . . a memory comes, or an
image . . . something to do with his longing to connect with his father
. . . the pain is disturbing, but the sense of being in touch with
something new is releasing. Tears come to his eyes, he does not quite
know what all this is. But the felt sense of the situation is a bit
different. He is a bit different, and the next time he sees the boss he
will behave a little differently. 'Focusing' is Gendlin's term for the
whole process which takes place when we give our attention in a
sustained way to our felt sense of something. For some people this kind
of attending comes naturally, while for others it may be quite a novel
idea that one can turn one's attention to 'how it feels in here about
all that business to do with such and such'. In his 1964 paper Gendlin
divides the focusing process into four broad phases (ibid., p. 451).
There is first the felt sense of some whole issue or problem. 'I always
feel this when people do that to me' or

74

Person-Centred Therapy

'There is something about this which could lead to dreadful things
happening to me.' We can refer directly to the 'this', bring our
attention to it. It may be conceptually vague, yet experientially it is
quite distinct. In Gendlin's terminology the felt sense is a 'direct
referent' for us. It is interesting that if what is involved is
anxiety-provoking, then giving attention to the felt sense decreases the
anxiety. Gendlin's interpretation of this is that through giving
attention and expression to the felt sense we are already carrying a
process forward. The interaction between the experiencing and the
attention results in a change in the experiencing. This process is often
seen in therapy, where the client formulates their experiencing in one
way, and then finds that this formulation must be replaced by another
which now feels more 'accurate'. Gendlin's concept of the felt sense
developed partly through his philosophical work on the nature of
experiencing (Gendlin, 1962/ 1997). In this work he was concerned with
the important fact that in a conversation people can make the same point
in different ways. If one way of getting my point across fails, then I
can reformulate it in different words. Similarly, if two people approach
an issue from very different standpoints they may be able to agree that
they are making the same point in two different ways. This situation can
often arise when therapists belonging to different schools discuss a
client issue. They do not share the same framework of concepts, but may
be able to agree that they are 'saying the same thing' in their
different ways. Gendlin's way of expressing this is that in spite of
there being a difference of words and concepts, the two people share a
felt sense of the point that is being made. It is a sense of that point
which they wish to make; each of them can sense it. The words which they
use are attempts to formulate it; but they may need to stay for some
time with the uneasy feel of it until words come which effectively
express it. It should be clear from this that by 'felt sense' Gendlin
does not mean any kind of feeling which we may notice when we turn our
attention to our experiencing. We may notice body sensations of soreness
or tightness, or we may be conscious of emotions such as fear or anger.
But neither body sensations (of that sort) nor emotions constitute a
felt sense of a situation. A feeling of soreness may be caused by the
way we are sitting, but that is different from having a sense of oneself
as sitting in an odd way. A felt sense is a felt sense of something.
Unlike body sensations, emotions are of (or about) something. Fear is
fear of something, anger is anger about something. Where the felt sense
differs from emotion is that emotions are specific to kinds of

The Origins of Focusing

75

situations. Fear is the way we feel inside when danger threatens, anger
is what we feel inside when something important to us has been violated.
Emotions like these can get in the way of a felt sense of our situation.
When we are frightened or angry we are less able to sense the intricacy
of the whole situation (Gendlin, 1973a, 1991a). Some emotions, such as
remorse or hope, come closer to involving a felt sense. Such emotions
have no universal form of physical expression (as anger has fighting or
stomping), but they are still characteristic of specific kinds of
situation. The felt sense, by contrast, is the sense of this situation.
If we give our attention simply to the remorse, we can miss what is
specific to this situation, what it is in the situation which generates
the remorse. The remorse is not the felt sense of the situation; rather
the felt sense of the whole situation includes the emotion of remorse.
It may help to clarify the distinction between emotion and felt sense if
we reflect on another distinction: that between emotion-inaction and
emotion as something we feel inside (Gendlin, 1997a). Take anger as an
example. By 'emotion-in-action' I mean shouting, stomping around or
hitting out, in a situation in which something we value is in some way
being violated. Here the emotion is there in the action. Animals can
have emotions in this way. But as human beings we can also turn our
attention to what we are feeling inside, to how our body is registering
the situation. We can sense the anger as a feeling. Now behaviour such
as stomping around is a very specific, 'narrow' form of behaviour. In
stomping we are likely to lose track of the intricacies of the situation
we are in. We are, as we say, 'overcome' by the emotion. But most of the
time we are not stomping around; most of the time we are acting in terms
of a much broader sense of our situation. We are sensitive to the
context and to the implications of what we are doing. In moving our
chair to make room for another person we are sensing the whole
situation, the need for this person not to feel excluded, the positions
of the other chairs, the impact which the movement of our chair will
have on the people next to us, the disturbance which this will make. . .
.There is an implicit sensing-in-action of what the situation requires,
which it would be impossible fully to put into words. Again, it seems
clear that animals have this sensing-in-action of whole situations. The
dog adjusts its behaviour not only to the direction and speed with which
the rabbit is running, but also to the shouts of its human companion.
There is an implicit weighing up of the situation which results in

76

Person-Centred Therapy

a particular form of behaviour. Now just as we as human beings can bring
our attention to how our body is registering specific aspects of the
situation (e.g. as 'violating', or 'threatening', corresponding to the
emotions of anger and fear), so also we can bring our attention to how
our body is registering the current situation as a whole. To bring our
attention to an aspect of the situation as of a specific kind is what is
involved in experiencing an emotion as a feeling. To bring our attention
to how our body is registering the situation as a whole is what is
involved in having a felt sense. (I will say more in Chapter 8 about the
theory which lies behind the notion of the felt sense.) The felt sense
is usually less noticeable than an emotion. It can take a little time
for it to come into focus. We look at a painting and are aware of the
colours and shapes. We try to get a sense of this picture as a whole.
That sense is not yet there, but we try out some words or phrases, such
as 'formal', 'civilised, but with an undertow of something' or 'energy
contained'. As we do this the felt sense of the picture begins to form.
We may not be able yet (or ever) to find words which are quite right,
but as we focus our attention on our response to the painting a felt
sense of it begins to form for us -- there is that feeling. We can, as
it were, gesture at it, and continue to seek for a way of expressing it.
The felt sense is now there, and as we continue to 'stay with it' or
'probe' it we may find that it 'opens' for us, and we say 'Oh, yes . . .
this is about containment creating energy . . . (deeper breath) . . .
yes . . . I see it now . . . ' And then further thoughts, feelings and
images may come. This takes us to the second and third phases of
focusing. The second phase Gendlin (1964b/1973) calls 'unfolding'.
Through giving attention to the felt sense one finds that it begins to
'open up'. For example: Yes, of course he is afraid, he realises. He has
not permitted himself even to think about dealing with this and this
aspect of the situation, and this has been because he has not believed
that these aspects really existed. Well, yes, he did realise they
existed, but he also felt compelled to blame himself for them as if he
merely imagined them. And if they do exist (and they do), he does not
know how he could possibly live with them. He has not allowed himself to
try to deal with them (he how realises) or even to consider them
anything other than his imagination, because, my God, if they are really
there, then he is helpless. Then there is nothing he can do! But they
are there. Well, it is a relief to know at least that. (p. 454)

The Origins of Focusing

77

In that felt experiencing which was initially labelled as 'fear' there
is a whole multiplicity of aspects, and in making some of these aspects
explicit there is a change in the quality of the experiencing. Sometimes
the unfolding of the aspects may lead to a different view of the
problem, such that action can now be taken to do something about it, but
this is not always so. As in the example above, it may rather be that
the quality of the problem has changed: "How is everything different?"
"Well, it just seems OK now!" "Do you still feel that such-and-such
might happen and you couldn't deal with it?" "Yes, but now I kind of
feel, well, that's life. That's the way it is, you have to accept things
like that." And that is just what he had said to himself over and over
again, without any effect, before the process in which he focused on the
felt meaning and it unfolded! (p. 455)

The third phase of the focusing process is 'global application'. This
refers to the fact that when a felt sense has unfolded, the person often
experiences a flood of associations with other situations, circumstances
and memories, which in spite of their diversity share the same felt
sense. 'Oh, and that's also why I can't get up any enthusiasm for
this-and-this' or 'Yes, and another thing about it is, this comes in
every time somebody tells me what to do or think. I can't say, well,
what I think is important because, see, this way of making myself wrong
comes in there.' Gendlin rejects the view that what is happening here
can properly be called 'insight'. The insights which come are the
results of the process of change which has taken place; for each
explicit thought which comes there may be thousands which now could
arise from the change which has taken place. The important shift in the
person is one which has taken place at a level which is not conceptual,
yet in which a multitude of conceptual shifts are implicit. The fourth
phase of focusing is that of 'referent movement'. This is the change
which occurs in the experienced 'direct referent' when we focus
attention on it, or try to conceptualise it. It may follow immediately
from our attending to the direct referent, or may be something we notice
after having been through a phase of 'unfolding' and 'global
application'. It is the shift in 'how it all feels', a shift in the
whole felt sense of the issue, which may be the starting point for
another cycle of focusing.

78

Person-Centred Therapy

The process which Gendlin is describing here is one that happens
naturally when we give direct attention to our experiencing. It is a
process in which the links between the steps are not determined by logic
or conceptual understanding. What is said at one point may be logically
contradicted by what is said next. 'I really don't like him. . . . Well,
its not that I dislike him, but I don't know how to be with him. . . . I
could be with him quite OK if Charlie wasn't always there seeing how I
am with him. . . . ' In this process the changes occur in the spaces, in
the silences indicated here by ' . . .'. In these spaces the person is
'listening inside', referring directly to their own experiencing. If the
context is that of a therapy session it is important that the therapist
respect these silences, and not distract the client by too many comments
or ideas of their own. On the other hand, Gendlin remarks that 'I have
also learned that my questions and self-expressions can be useful,
provided I always intend what I say to refer to the individual's felt
referent and I show that I would like him to continue to focus on it'
(ibid., p. 459). The therapist's role is thus that of a facilitator for
the feeling-process of the client, which to a large extent is
self-propelled, and is 'the essential motor of personality change'
(ibid., p. 459). The question arises of how it is that the presence of a
therapist or other listener is facilitative. Rogers' view was that the
empathic acceptance of the therapist contributes to the undoing of the
client's conditions of worth. Gendlin sees the presence of another
person as facilitative in a different way. He draws attention to the
fact that there can be a great difference between how we think and feel
when alone and how we think and feel when with another person: Consider,
for example, the type of listener who interrupts with his own concerns
and is inclined to be annoyed and critical long before he understands
what is said. With him, my manner of experiencing will be quite
constricted. . . . I will not tend to feel deeply, or intensely, or
richly. Certain things will never occur to me when I am with him, or if
they do occur to me, I will save them for the time when I am alone, and
can feel them through without the constricting effects of his responses.
. . . Similarly there are others (we are fortunate to know one) with
whom we feel more intensely and freely whatever we feel. We think of
more things, we have the patience and the ability to go more deeply into
the details . . . If we are sad and dry-eyed alone, then with this
person we cry. If we are stopped by our guilt, shame and anxiety, then
with this person we come to life again . . . (p. 460)

The Origins of Focusing

79

The presence of another person can make a difference to the manner of
our experiencing. In particular, it can make a difference to what extent
our experiencing is 'structure-bound', that is, repetitive, 'frozen',
lacking in immediacy, presentness, and openness to fresh detail. To the
extent that we are structure-bound we are not really experiencing the
world at all. Instead we are moving along fixed tracks governed by
earlier experiences and generalised notions. We are not dipping into our
immediate feelings before making our next step, and hence the process of
articulating our feelings cannot take place. Another way of putting this
would be to say that to the extent that we are structure-bound the
things we say and do cannot carry forward what we are feeling. The
feelings remain in an implicit form, as in our earlier example of
implicit anger. The anger is implied, but its expression or articulation
is blocked. For the anger to become explicit the person has to turn
their attention to their implicit experiencing. Simply giving attention
to the felt sense in the body may be enough for the anger to become
explicit. Or it may be that the person will need to ask themself what
they are feeling, or to try out various articulations of the feeling,
such as 'Maybe I'm a bit hurt? . . . or irritated? . . .' In one way or
another the person needs to relate to their implicit experiencing, so
that what was implicit is carried forward into something explicit. Just
what will carry forward the implicit experience cannot be known in
advance; we have to try out possible expressions such as 'Maybe I'm a
bit hurt', and see what happens. Most of the expressions we could try
out will do nothing for us; the sense of unease and unfulfilledness
simply remains as it was. But then a word or image comes which brings
with it a characteristic sense of release -- 'Oh, I'm really angry with
him -- that's what it is'. That articulation expresses or carries
forward the implicit experience, and then things feel different. The
process of carrying-forward requires that we turn our attention to our
felt awareness and seek to articulate it. The structure-bound state is
one in which we are not doing this in connection with certain aspects of
our experience; we are not relating to, not responding to, our felt
awareness. Once we respond, we 'come alive' again and the implicit
meanings are carried forward. The presence of another person makes a
difference because that person can respond to our felt awareness. Then
they are doing for us what we cannot, for the moment, do for ourselves.
They can direct their attention to our felt awareness through saying
such things as 'There is something you are feeling there', as we are
lost in an account of external events, or in an

80

Person-Centred Therapy

analysis of why we are the way we are. They can say 'Is it exactly hurt
that you are feeling', or 'Is hurt all that you feel?' They can point
towards our felt experiencing without knowing what that experiencing is,
and in doing so they can help us to relate again to that experiencing,
so that it can be carried forward. Gendlin (1964b/1973, p. 469) writes:
Personality change is the difference made by your responses in carrying
forward my concrete experiencing. To be myself I need your responses, to
the extent to which my own responses fail to carry my feelings forward.
At first, in these respects, I am really myself only when I am with you.
For a time, the individual can have this fuller self-process only in
just this relationship. That is not dependence. It should not lead one
to back away, but to fuller and deeper responses carrying forward the
experiencing, which, for the time being, the individual says he can feel
"only here".

By the late 1960s it seemed clear to Gendlin and his colleagues that a
crucial aspect of effective psychotherapy was the client's ability to
direct their attention to their own experiencing. In 1970 Gendlin wrote:
We have tape-recorded several thousand therapy sessions over the last
few years. We asked: what are patients doing when therapy is successful?
What are they not doing when sessions fail to help them? One finding has
emerged consistently from a series of studies: there is indeed a
characteristic of patients who improve that is not shared by those who
fail. Successful patients are able to work with felt meanings . . .
(Gendlin, 1970, p. 57) We are presently engaged in experiments to see
whether experiential focusing can be taught. Since research indicates
that therapy will fail if it is nonexperiential, can failure-predicted
patients learn this focusing procedure? If our teaching turns out to be
effective, then possibilities open up for teaching experiential
procedures to everyone as a problem-solving skill. This would be a
preventive step in mental health, since people could solve more of their
own problems and help others to do so. (ibid., p. 59)

There are several ways in which a client can learn to relate to their
experiencing. One is through explicit teaching. From time to time
therapists interested in Focusing have experimented with giving clients
the opportunity to be taught an explicit Focusing procedure. The
Focusing teaching has usually been carried out by someone other than the
client's own therapist, and after the client has learned how to focus
they resume their normal therapy sessions. Most people who know a little
about Focusing have come across it as a taught procedure,

The Origins of Focusing

81

either through attending a Focusing workshop or through reading
Gendlin's popular self-help book Focusing. I will discuss Focusing as a
taught procedure in Chapter 4, but there are other ways in which clients
can learn to relate better to their experiencing. One way is to
introduce the basic focusing ideas to the client as and when they seem
appropriate in the session. This seems to have been what Gendlin (1969)
did at the time he wrote his first article on focusing. In this early
paper he emphasises three main points. First, that focusing involves a
sharp change in one's approach to one's problems. The usual approaches
involve such things as telling the story of the problem, lecturing
oneself on what one has done wrong, speculating about how the problem
has arisen, determining to act differently in the future and so on. By
contrast, the focusing approach is to bring one's attention to one's
experiencing, as it is bodily felt, gently ask 'What's wrong?' and then
wait. Then there is the point that one must understand that words can
come from a feeling, and can have an experiential effect. 'Sometimes
such words are not in themselves very impressive or novel, but just
those words have an experiential effect, and no others do. (For example:
"I'm scared . . . " might not be new, but when the words arise from
one's quietly listening, they often have the effect of: "Yeah, that's
what it is all right, (long exhale breath), (shakes head), yeah, boy, I
didn't know how true that was"). Yet, perhaps he has been saying for
days, among other things, that he was scared.' (Gendlin, 1969, p. 5).
Finally, it is important to 'sense a problem as a whole and let what is
important come up from that bodily sensing. People rarely let the crux
of the problem come freshly to them from their feel of the problem as a
whole.' (ibid.). Gendlin suggests that the therapist should discuss each
of these points with the client, so that the client understands what is
involved. A third way of helping a client to relate to their
experiencing is not to talk about what is involved in focusing, but to
respond in a focusing-oriented way. As we will see in Chapter 5 this way
of responding is often little different from the way a classical
client-centred therapist responds. It is a matter of responding in a way
which 'points' at the client's felt edge of experiencing, and helps the
client to relate to that place from which change steps can come.
Chapters 4 and 5 will first introduce Focusing as a taught procedure and
then show at greater length how the principles of Focusing can inform
therapeutic practice.

4 Focusing as a Taught Procedure

Before introducing the procedure itself it may be helpful to give a
summary of Gendlin's basic concepts as they were in the 1970s, when the
Focusing procedure was being developed. They can be found in a paper he
published in the volume Current Psychotherapies (Corsini, 1973). In this
paper Gendlin lists (p. 322) his four basic concepts as (1) existence,
which is 'preconceptual, internally differentiable and bodily felt'; (2)
encounter, the principle that people exist only through interaction with
others and with their environment; (3) authenticity, which involves
acting in a way which carries forward one's experiencing and (4) value,
the principle that experiencing is purposive or evaluative. 1.
Existence. It is central to Gendlin's thought that there is a
preconceptual aspect to existence and experiencing; there is that which
can be conceptualised in a variety of ways. But the preconceptual is not
a blank void; it contains within itself the possibilities of
distinctions. In therapy this is illustrated by those situations where
the client says 'I am aware of something here...but I don't at all know
what it is.' The client is referring to something but this is a bare
reference or 'pointing': what is being pointed to has not yet been
differentiated or articulated. The client may then try out various
possible articulations, which will be framed in concepts with which he
or she is familiar. A client familiar with Freudian theory might say
that they sense something 'oedipal' about the situation they are in.
Someone familiar with Jung might find themself thinking in terms of
'absorption in the Great Mother'. A third person might simply
conceptualise their experience in terms of 'lacking assertiveness'. Any
of these conceptualisations 82

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

83

could draw out aspects of the situation which were previously
undifferentiated, and allow the individual's experiencing to be carried
forward. However, there is no way of determining in advance which
concepts will prove useful, and there is no finite list of possible
conceptual frameworks which we may use to structure our experience. In
other words there are no fixed units into which our experiencing must be
fitted. Gendlin (1973b, p. 322) writes: What are the units of 'this
situation' or of 'yesterday' or of 'now' or of 'life'? . . . A small bit
of experiencing, like 'now', if articulated, could be seen to include
the words written here, the page, the context of the book up to now, the
reader's feelings and incipient thoughts about it, and many other
present feelings all included in the feeling or experiencing now. There
is no way of getting them 'all', nor is there a single definite set of
'all'. There are no definite units, nor a definite number of units -- so
the smallest bit we called 'now' does not include less in number than
what we called 'life'. Both are endlessly differentiable and, as
experienced, preconceptual, pre-defined, yet not committed to any one
way of defining.

Our existence has the aspects of being preconceptual and differentiable;
it also has the aspect of being bodily felt. Throughout his work Gendlin
emphasises the importance of the body, but 'body' here does not mean the
body as conceptualised in physiology. It is rather the body as 'felt
from inside', the bodily sense of situations. One can come into a room,
look around and get a sense of the place. From this felt sense words and
phrases may arise, but before they do there is the feel of the place, a
feel which is sensed in the stomach or chest or some other bodily
location. By 'felt from inside' Gendlin does not mean the feel of bodily
sensations such as those arising from a tightly fitting shoe or a
painful shoulder. It is rather the bodily sense of a place, or a
situation or a problem. 2. Encounter. This is the principle which
Gendlin later came to call 'interaction first'. It is the principle that
nothing exists except through interaction with other things. In
particular, human experiencing is not to be regarded as something purely
subjective, but as the experiencing of something. Experiences and
situations are inseparable. To be jealous is not simply to have a
sensation (like having an itch); it is to be involved in an
interpersonal situation. In Focusing it can seem as if we are paying
attention to something quite 'inner' and private, but this is an
illusion. What we are paying attention to is our
experiencing-of-a-situation.

84

Person-Centred Therapy

3.  Authenticity. This is a notion found in much existential philosophy,
    but Gendlin associates it with his central concept of
    'carryingforward'. The connection may not be obvious, but can be
    explained as follows. Someone may have the experience of having a
    'funny' feeling. What she then says may or may not carry her feeling
    forward. If she says 'Really, I'm quite OK and ready to get on with
    my work', that does not carry her forward. In spite of what she
    cheerfully says the feeling stays as it was. But if she is able to
    give attention to the feeling and words come such as 'Oh, it has to
    do with being caught in a situation in which I'm going to appear . .
    . sort of unsophisticated' then there may be a felt shift, 'Ah
    (deeper breath) that's what it is.' Here the feeling has been
    carried forward by just those words, and now she feels different.
    Those words are for Gendlin the authentic words in the situation.
    The words 'Really. I'm quite OK' were not authentic. Authentic words
    and deeds are those which carry us forward.
4.  Value. Experiencing has a direction; only certain words or deeds
    will carry us forward. If we let ourselves sense the whole feel of a
    situation, a sense of direction emerges. This sense of a direction
    is distinct from any concept of what we ought to do. Concepts of
    what we ought to do often bring with them a sense of tension or
    burden, whereas the felt sense of what to do is experienced as a
    release. Gendlin (ibid., p. 327) emphasises the holistic aspect of
    the direction in experiencing. It is different from giving in to one
    urge or one intense emotion. It is not a question of just any kind
    of feeling 'good'. Some people may feel 'good' when they kill
    someone. To give in to an urge often feels good. The holistic sense
    of direction in experiencing differs from this. It is not just any
    release from any pressure, but a whole body sense of one's life or
    specific situation which is used implicitly, without having to
    separate out all its many facets.

There are clearly important implications for ethics in this view (which
I discuss in Appendix A); for the moment it will be enough to appreciate
Gendlin's view that our experiencing has a purposive, directed quality
to it, which shows up in the fact that some words and actions carry us
forward, whereas others do not. Focusing as a taught procedure Gendlin
first gave a set of focusing instructions in his 1969 paper on
'Focusing'. These were instructions which could be introduced to

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

85

clients in an informal way, or could be used more formally in research
projects. They can be summarised as: • pay attention to that place
inside where you usually feel sad, glad

or scared; • see what comes to you when you ask yourself 'How am I now?'

'How do I feel?'; • select a meaningful personal problem to think about;
• try to get a sense of the problem as a whole. Let yourself feel all of

that; • as you pay attention to the whole feeling of it, you may find
that

one special feeling comes up. Let yourself pay attention to that one
feeling; • if this one feeling changes, follow it and pay attention to
it; • take what is fresh and new in the feel of it now, and try to find
some new words or pictures to capture what your present feeling is all
about; • if the words or pictures you now have make some fresh
difference, see what that is. Let the words or pictures change until
they feel just right in capturing your feelings. In the same paper he
writes that the focusing process is one of very intently keeping quiet,
zeroing one's attention in, and then -- within this deliberately made
focus and quiet -- only then and there, letting come what comes . . . .
Even though therapists are an introspective lot, I find that I and my
colleagues do not do this sharply distinct focusing even in our own
introspections, unless we set ourselves to do so specifically. I am as
likely to go about in a stew as anyone else, until I specifically bring
myself to focusing and say "All right, now. Shut up," and then wait
gently as I ask my body sense: What's wrong?". (Gendlin, 1969, p. 7)

Gendlin emphasises that we sense our difficulties in a bodily way: How
one lives and reacts is a bodily process going on in situations. When
someone is about to jump at you, you feel it in your 'gut'. When someone
in complicated ways is going to hurt you, again you feel it in your gut.
Just as a golfer feels in his body, in the position of his feet, and in
the muscular sense of his swing, the whole scene in front of him, so do
we bodily experience the complexity of our situations and interactions.
(ibid., p. 8)

86

Person-Centred Therapy The body-sense of a problem is pre-verbal and
preconceptual. To attend to it or speak from it is a further living and
therefore a further structuring, a 'carrying forward' . . . As one acts
one perceives one's own acting. This is then a new experiencing which
can again lead to an action which is again experienced and leads to
another action. This 'zig-zag' between body-sense and visible action is
such that each carries the other forward. (p. 8)

In subsequent years Gendlin elaborated and modified the focusing
instructions. It seemed clear that they could be used by people as a
self-help procedure, and this led to the publication of Gendlin's
bestknown book, Focusing, in 1978/2003. The book has sold nearly half a
million copies, and Gendlin still receives notes of thanks from people,
sometimes scribbled in pencil on scraps of paper, in which they say that
it saved their lives (Hendricks, 2003, p. 69). The account of Gendlin's
instructions which I will now give is not a sufficient guide for
practising Focusing. (This is because various difficulties can arise,
different for different people, which Gendlin discusses in detail.) In
order to learn Focusing the reader should consult the details in the
book itself, and preferably attend some Focusing workshops. Although
Focusing can be learned from the book, most people find it very much
easier to learn from a teacher. One can also learn ways of assisting or
'guiding' someone in their Focusing, but that is another topic which is
rather outside the scope of the present book. Gendlin presents the
Focusing process in six steps, but he has always insisted that these
steps are only a guide, that they do not always happen in the same
order, and that not all of them are always present. With those
qualifications, the steps are: 1. Clearing a space. Here the focuser
takes a few moments to bring their attention into the centre of their
body, to the place where we usually feel our emotions, and then notices
what comes there when they ask, in a friendly way, 'How is my life
going? What is the main thing for me right now?'. Usually there are
several concerns which can be felt. The focuser is instructed not to go
into any of them but just to notice that they are there. 'Clearing a
space' has two distinct aspects to it. There is first what Gendlin calls
the 'Inventory', that is the listing of the various concerns. This is
like making a 'things to do' list; it does not get the jobs done, but it
sorts them out and reduces the feeling of being overwhelmed by them all
(Gendlin, 1978/2003,

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

87

p. 75). The other aspect is that of 'finding the right distance' from
the concerns, that is, standing back from them sufficiently for them not
to feel threatening or overwhelming, but still being able to feel them.
Gendlin (1984a, p. 268) has a whole range of practices to help with
this, such as imagining the concerns as packages which can be set down
at a distance which feels right. This is often referred to as 'putting
things down'. On the other hand, one may sometimes prefer to gently hold
or 'be with' a problem. 2. Felt sense. The focuser senses which of their
concerns most needs attention. The concern will usually have many
aspects, too many to think about explicitly, but they can all be felt
together. The felt sense is a sense of what all that problem feels like.
3. Handle. The focuser now asks whether there is a word or phrase or
image which fits the physical felt quality of the problem. Words such as
'heavy', 'jumpy' or 'bubbly' are helpful in catching the physical feel
of the problem. The focuser is looking for a word which 'gets a handle
on' how the problem is being registered in the body. (For some people
the terminology of 'getting a handle on it' feels uncomfortable, but the
metaphor is simply that of something -- like a suitcase handle -- which
enables one to hold on to something. Having the word or image allows one
to pull the felt sense back if it is lost.) 4. Resonating. The focuser
goes back and forth between the felt sense and the handle-word, noticing
if the felt sense changes as attention is given to it, or if the
handle-word really 'fits'. For instance, is 'jumpy' quite the right word
for this, or is it more 'pulled-in'? 5. Asking. Now the focuser can ask,
for example, 'What is it about this whole problem that makes it feel so
pulled-in?'. They then wait until something comes which brings with it a
slight shift or release. 6. Receiving. The focuser receives in a
friendly way whatever comes in a shift. It is not queried or analysed.
Whatever comes can then be focused on again. If what came from the sense
of 'pulled-in' was 'being seen' the focuser could then return to Step 4
and resonate 'being seen' with the felt sense, and then (new Step 5) ask
'What is this being seen thing?' and await what might come. Steps 4 and
5 are thus the central ones in the procedure. The first step, that of
'clearing a space', was not in the original (1969) instructions, but it
is something the importance of which

88

Person-Centred Therapy

Gendlin has increasingly emphasised. It can be used on its own as a
method of stress reduction (Gendlin, 1984a, p. 267): One uses just this
first movement in the times between one setting and another, that is to
say on the bus, or while waiting for the elevator, or while waiting for
food in a restaurant. One senses what one's body is just then carrying,
puts it down one by one, and feels a physical relief. One works on no
problem at all. Just putting them all down enables one to clear oneself
of accumulated tension and unease. One is then ready for the next
activity. Most people spend every day chronically at maximum tension, so
that one more troubled situation does not make any more difference. They
never feel the physical easing and reduction of stress which the first
movement alone can bring.

Whether used in this way for stress reduction, or as the first movement
in Focusing, 'clearing a space' depends crucially on one's ability to
sense one's body from the inside. 'Putting down' can be visualised as
placing packages on a shelf, for instance, but if when this has been
done there is no physical relief, then the problem has not been put
down. The putting of packages on the shelf is an image of the process
which is taking place; just what that process is in itself is another
matter. Gendlin (1997a, Chapter 8) has important things to say about
this in his philosophical work A Process Model, and I have said a little
about it elsewhere (Purton, 2002). If a particular form of imagery does
not work, then one needs to try something different, such as sitting
forward in one's chair, and slowly moving back so that the problem is
left where it is. Gendlin (1984a) suggests several things which can be
done to get the right distance from a problem, but whatever is done, one
has to be able to sense in one's body whether there is any release of
tension. People vary a great deal in being able to sense what is going
on in their bodies. Responses to the question 'How does this problem
feel right now, there in the middle of your body?' can range from 'What
do you mean?' or 'Nothing special' to 'There is a wound up feeling in my
chest, which sort of needs to be released, but also something, lower
down -- like a heavy thing -- which kind of stands in the way.'
Awareness of body feelings is important to the whole Focusing process,
so that it may need to be practised as part of learning Focusing. One
way is to practise bringing attention first into the toes, then the legs
and so on, moving through the body, and ending with the central region
of throat, chest, stomach and abdomen, the region in which

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

89

we mostly register our feelings. It can also help at the start of a
Focusing session to make a practice of first bringing one's attention
into the body. Along with putting a greater emphasis on 'clearing a
space', Gendlin has, since the Focusing book, emphasised the importance
of finding a good place (or space, or feeling) from which one can work
with one's problems. Sometimes we can get to the 'good place' by putting
problems down, but the putting down is itself not easy unless there is
already a sense of space and the possibility of change. The constricting
feelings which we have from our problems cramp our ability to work on
the problems. This is a vicious circle, but Gendlin suggests that the
way through is first to find a way of experiencing what it would feel
like if the problem were resolved: When have you last felt really
wonderful? It would be a long time ago. Many people have to search their
memories, way back. But the first movement of focusing (and really,
every movement of it) depends on having a good feeling as a background
against which the problem is sensed . . . One asks in effect. "What
would it take to feel good? What would be a step toward feeling better?"
Or "What is now between me and feeling fine?" . . . The instruction is
now phrased "Suppose your life is going just perfectly . . . you feel
glorious . . . now wait for your body to talk back and give you, how you
now do feel. Then see, one by one, what that is about, in your life . .
. at every step in focusing one really asks "What's in the way of
feeling good?" or "What would be a step toward feeling better?" All the
while there is an all-good feeling, from which one asks about this whole
problem. (Gendlin, 1984a, p. 271)

Although the problem is not yet resolved, one can feel how it would be
if it were resolved, and from that good place it becomes more possible
to work towards resolving it. Other Focusing teachers, such as Ann
Weiser Cornell (1993, 1996), Peter Campbell and Edwin McMahon
(1985/1997), have their own variants on the Focusing instructions, and
in general the development of Focusing as a taught procedure continues
to be a lively affair. Kevin Flanagan (1998) provides a useful
introduction, but the most thorough practical handbook is Ann Weiser
Cornell's and Barbara McGavin's The Focusing Student's and Companion's
Manual (2002), which is based on many years' Focusing teaching, and is
the culmination of several different ways of formulating the Focusing
'steps' (see Cornell, 1993, 1996). I would recommend this work to

90

Person-Centred Therapy

anyone who wishes seriously to pursue Focusing as a self-help procedure.
The authors divide the Focusing process into four stages: 1. 'Coming
in', which involves bringing awareness into the body, sensing and
inviting what wants one's awareness now, and waiting until something
comes. 2. 'Making contact', in which one begins to describe what has
come, acknowledges it and finds the kind of contact it would like. 3.
'Deepening contact', which involves settling down with it, keeping it
company, sensing in the body, the emergence of symbols, resonating and
adjusting, sensing its point of view and letting it know that one has
heard it. 4. 'Coming out', which involves sensing for a stopping place,
receiving and experiencing what has changed, letting it know that you
are willing to come back, thanking it and bringing one's awareness out.
Cornell and McGavin emphasise strongly what they call 'Presence'
(McGavin, 2000; Cornell and McGavin, 2002, p. 56). Presence is
'being-with' a felt sense, and what comes from it, in a quiet friendly
way. Cornell (2001) quotes Gendlin in this context: The client and I, we
are going to keep it, in there, company. As you would keep a scared
child company. You would not push on it, or argue with it, or pick it
up, because it is too sore, too scared or tense. You would just sit
there, quietly . . . What that edge needs to produce the steps is only
some kind of unobtrusive contact or company. If you will go there with
your awareness and stay there or return there, that is all it needs; it
will do all the rest for you. (Gendlin, 1990, p. 216) Focusing is this
very deliberate thing where an 'I' is attending to an 'it'. (p. 222)

The state of Presence contrasts with two other states which Cornell and
McGavin call 'merged' ('identified') and 'exiled' ('dissociated'). The
merged state is what Cornell (1993) earlier called Too Close process,
and the exiled state is what was earlier called Too Distant process. The
distinction is closely related to Gendlin's early distinction between
clients who are caught up in their emotions, and those who distance
themselves from their problems by 'externalising' or
'intellectualising'.

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

91

Cornell and McGavin (2002) have developed linguistic ways of responding
which are designed to help the Focuser 'come into Presence'. These
include: (a) Gendlin's (1996, pp. 46--8) way of using 'something':
Almost anything can be phrased in a way as to point to something. Let me
use as trivial example: "I like that movie." "You can sense a liking
there; something in you likes that movie" . . . The effect is to point
the person's attention inward to something that is directly sensed. The
response also turns something that was clearly defined into something
that is still unclear and could therefore lead further.

(b) Reflecting 'I' statements such as 'I want to run' in forms such as
    'There's a wanting to run', 'Something in you wants to run' or 'Part
    of you wants to run' (this, and the following examples are taken
    from Cornell, 2001). I have argued (Purton, 2002) that there can be
    problems with speaking of 'parts', but this way of talking is much
    less prominent in Cornell and McGavin's manual than it was in
    Cornell's

<!-- -->

(1996) earlier book.

<!-- -->

(c) Clarifying 'who' is speaking: F: I'm feeling this part of me that's
    so . . . angry, I guess. Like a little kid who hates everyone. L:
    That part of you feels like a little kid who hates everyone. F: Just
    get away from me! L: It's like that kid is saying, "Just get away
    from me!"

(d) Making it explicit that the Focuser is experiencing or sensing
    something: F: This part needs to change quicker. L: You're sensing
    something in you that's needing this part to change quicker. F: It's
    scary. L: You're sensing something in you that's feeling scared, and
    something that finds it scary.

These formulations are designed to help the Focuser (the 'I') relate to
a feeling or a 'something' (the 'it'). In Gendlin's terms, they help to
create or preserve a space within which the 'I' can relate to the 'it'.

92

Person-Centred Therapy

The nature of this 'I', and the nature of the 'space' within which it
relates to the 'it' is a theme which needs further exploration. Gendlin
(1980, p. 70) writes: It is not in the usual image space, nor in the
body as usually attended to. There is a new level, a new kind of
awareness. One senses a new kind of 'it', that felt sense there. Along
with sensing such as 'it', one also senses in a fresh direct way that
'Oh . . . I am not it.' There is a discovery that one is none of these
contents. But this is no mere disembodied watcher. Rather, a new flow of
energy and a new sense of self-in-touch, makes this new self very
concrete and alive, no mere observer. And yet one finds this newly
formed 'felt sense' over here, and oneself over here next to it, with a
new kind of space in between.

Some further development of Gendlin's thinking about this 'self' and its
'space' can be found in A Process Model (Gendlin, 1997a, Chapter 8). To
return to more practical issues, Cornell and McGavin (2002) are
concerned with an issue in teaching Focusing. It is not always easy for
people to grasp what a felt sense is, and then much time can be spent in
wondering whether what one feels really is a felt sense. This can lead
away from one's experiencing, and the authors seldom use the term 'felt
sense', preferring simply to refer to 'something' or 'it'. In Cornell's
(1996) earlier book this -- to my mind at least (Purton, 2002) --
created the impression that the concept of the felt sense was not of
great importance. However, in their Manual, Cornell and McGavin make it
clear that they do not wish to play down the importance of Gendlin's
concept (on p. A15 they say 'This is perhaps the central term for
Focusing'), but they prefer to introduce it in an implicit way. They
have in other ways modified Gendlin's steps in the light of their
experience of teaching Focusing. They prefer not to teach 'clearing a
space' as a standard part of the Focusing process, but suggest it as an
option where someone is overloaded by many issues. Further, they have
found that 'putting things down' can be used as a way to push away an
exiled part. (Cornell (1995) has for some time emphasised relating to
feelings rather than finding the right distance from them.) They have
also come to expand Gendlin's 'Asking' step into a series of stages,
since they found that people will often 'ask' too soon, before there is
enough of a relationship with the felt sense. In the place of 'Asking'
they now have 'Settling down with it', 'Keeping it company' and 'Sensing
its point of view'.

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

93

In another interesting development Cornell (1990, pp. 69--72) suggests
that the felt sense can be approached from different starting points:
Recently I have been picturing the Full Felt Sense as having four
aspects: body sensation, emotional quality, imagery or symbolism, and
life connection or story. I have observed that a person usually enters
Focusing through one of these four avenues. Then, as the session
progresses, the felt sense typically 'fills out' so that more and more
of these are present. The person may begin by telling a story about an
issue in their life, and then begin feeling an emotion, and then sense
something in the body. Or the person may begin with a body sensation,
then get an image for it, then sense its emotional tone, then realize
what it's about in their life. From this we learn two things. First,
that it's legitimate to enter Focusing by any of these four roads. Body
sensation is not the only way to begin. Second, if the session gets
stuck, the guide might notice which of these four aspects is present,
and if any are missing. The missing ones can be invited.

She goes on to give examples of each type of situation, and examples of
how to invite missing aspects. This theme has been taken up by Mia
Leijssen (1996, pp. 433--5). She notes that some people begin with an
emotion, such as fear. They may then become aware of the physical
sensations involved. An image may then arise (in Leijssen's example, 'a
creeping fog'), and finally they may connect the image with a life
situation (in her example, a danger of loss of self in a relationship).
There is then in awareness the whole felt sense of the situation, and
the fear which it arouses, symbolised by the image of the creeping fog.
From this the client carries forward the symbolisation first with 'That
is threatening', then with an awareness of the hurt she had sustained in
the relationship and finally with 'To lose myself, that is what is
painful'. Another person may describe in detail a bodily sensation such
as a pain in the arm, which 'nags' and 'pulls'. This leads into emotions
of anger and sadness, and then into a pervasive life situation in which
'she wants to have everything her way, and that life is a big burden
like that'. Often people start with a situation. Leijssen's example is
of a man having to address a nasty colleague, and expressing this
experience with the image 'I'm like a rat in a trap'. He becomes aware
that he is moving so as to protect himself as he did when, as a child,
he was beaten by a tyrannical teacher; there is awareness of bodily
reactions.

94

Person-Centred Therapy

He then notices how an authoritarian man still provokes intense fear in
him. The situation, the symbolisation, the body reactions and the
emotions now constitute a complete felt sense which he now words as
follows: 'Now, that is what bothers me: I start already by setting
myself up as the one who will get beaten so that even the most neutral
question on his part becomes threatening!' These words provoke an
important shift; he even literally sits up straight and looks securely
at the therapist.

Occasionally people start with symbolisation, such as an image, or a
sentence from a book. This may then lead to a bodily reaction such as
tears, an emotion such as sadness, and then connect with a life
situation such as missing a parent. Leijssen agrees with Cornell that
where the Focusing process becomes stuck it may be because one of the
four elements (emotion, physical sensation, symbols and life situation)
is missing. She writes (ibid., p. 433): I do not name these four
components . . . at random. In studying fragments of therapy sessions we
have noticed that, regardless of the entry chosen, the felt sense only
fully emerges when contact is made with all four components. This model
of a complete felt sense is particularly useful at times when clients
remain stuck in one or several components and feel that it does not help
them to keep exploring those.

In speaking of the 'components' of a felt sense in this way there is
perhaps some risk of losing the central notion of the felt sense as the
bodily awareness of a situation. Emotions are often there as one element
in the awareness of the situation, but I do not think they are not
necessarily present. The other three aspects are essential, but that is
because they belong to the concept of a felt sense: a felt sense is the
bodily registering of a situation as an implicit whole, which is already
specified symbolically in some way, even if only by the linguistic
symbols 'all that thing'. Nevertheless, Cornell and Leijssen are
undoubtedly right that people can begin at different places, that the
felt sense can therefore emerge in different ways, and that through
giving attention to a missing aspect a stuck process may be freed up.
Further variations and developments of the Focusing procedure include
the Interactive Focusing of Janet Klein and Mary McGuire, which is
concerned especially to enhance personal relationships; the

Focusing as a Taught Procedure

95

Wholebody Focusing of Kevin McEvenue, which integrates Focusing with the
Alexander technique; and Barbara McGavin's and Ann Weiser Cornell's
Treasure Maps to the Soul, which works with many ways of transforming
inner struggles through recognising the value of critical and rebellious
parts of ourselves. Details of these developments can be found on the
Focusing Institute website. A final word seems important on the
relationship between Focusing and action. Gendlin (1996, p. 237) notes
that Focusing can be used as a way of avoiding action: Very
introspective people resist trying action steps directly. They think it
is artificial. They believe that it must be ineffective to act in a way
that does not come directly from how they feel. In a difficult
situation, instead of attempting an action, they eagerly find some
familiar inner conflict. It is as if they said, "What a relief; there is
still an inward problem that can be worked on, so it's not yet time for
action." But a change in action can alter the whole body, and may bring
about just the feeling that is most lacking.

Christiane Bucher (2000), in an article titled 'Why it was crucial for
me to quit Focusing, and what came next' writes: Where does action come
into our Focusing settings? One way would be to stop the
"What-is-all-there-and-will-it-shift-and-change-and-get-me
closerto-the-origins-of-my-issue-and-let-it-solve-itself-by-going-pregnant-withit
Focusing" and stay tuned to the signs from within, and just ask, This
way? That way? Action-oriented. Life-oriented. Non-psychology oriented.
I have a pretty good idea about our tasks in life. Classic Focusing can
even distract us from them. It did for me for a while. . . . My body has
always been very attentive to the "greater knowledge". Hearing the inner
voice has never been difficult for me. It's trusting it and following it
which can be so hard.

Focusing should not be seen as a retreat into a subjective world of
'feelings'. Rather it is a practice of felt awareness of one's
situation, of how one is -- bodily -- in interaction with the world.
Having outlined what is involved in Focusing as a procedure, I now turn
to how the principles involved can be incorporated into therapy sessions
in a person-centred way.

5 Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

In this chapter I will explore how the principles of focusing can inform
therapeutic practice, without the therapist explicitly teaching the
Focusing procedure. In the first section I will look at how the
therapist can help the client to engage more effectively with their
experiencing. This is the most important part of the chapter. In the
second section I will discuss some things which can prevent the client
from relating effectively with their experiencing, and in the third
section I will consider what Gendlin calls specific 'avenues' of
therapy, such as working with images, emotions, cognition or specific
elements of the therapeutic relationship. These are possible ways of
working, which the focusingoriented therapist can draw on, depending on
the needs and wishes of the client, and on what the therapist feels
comfortable with. The Focusing procedure could be seen as just one such
avenue, as one specific way of proceeding. But each of the avenues needs
to be oriented towards what is most characteristic of Focusing, that is,
the interaction between experiencing and something that carries the
experiencing forward. Helping the client to relate to their experiencing
In focusing-oriented psychotherapy, as in person-centred therapy
generally, the most important thing is to create a receptive atmosphere
which will encourage the client to explore what they are experiencing.
The therapist's receptive and non-judging attitude is usually crucial to
the client feeling safe, and without that sense of safety nothing which
the therapist does is likely to be of much use. The maintenance of 96

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

97

the sense of a safe, protected place is something to which everything
else is secondary. If in the course of the session the therapist senses
that the client no longer feels safe, then that must be attended to as
the top priority. Focusing-oriented psychotherapy is client-centred
therapy: the client, and the client's frame of reference, is central to
whatever the therapist does. This is not to say that the therapist
brings nothing of their own to the session. In addition to the crucial
fact that they are present as another human being, the therapist may
have relevant personal experience of difficulties which are in some ways
like the client's difficulties. Or the therapist may have experience of
working with other clients with rather similar difficulties. The
therapist may know something in general about what can often help in
working with this sort of difficulty. Much lies in the background of the
therapist's responses to a client; far too much to be set out
explicitly. The therapist needs to bring all their experience and
knowledge to their work with the client, but not in a way which imposes
it on the client, or distances the therapist from the immediate
experiencing of the client. Gendlin (1996, p. 286) writes: 'When I
expect a client, I put my own feelings and concerns to one side. I don't
put them far, because I need to sense when something registers there. I
also put aside theories and procedures . . . All that is on the side. In
front of me the space is free, ready for the other person.' The
therapist responds as a whole person who has considerable resources on
which they can draw to help the client. But whether or in what way those
resources will be engaged depends on 'where the client is', and on what
happens in the relationship with the client. The relationship with the
client may draw out ideas and responses in the therapist which are
rooted in the therapist's general knowledge and experience, but what is
drawn out is something specific to this interaction, something whose
precise form could not have been known in advance. Client-centred
therapy is not centred around hypotheses about what a particular client
needs. It is centred on the client, and on discovering in the
interaction with the client what the client needs. The therapist does
not come armed with a theory, but with an open-armed attitude that
allows the client to find their own path. Gendlin characterises the
essential attitude as one of 'putting nothing between'. On meeting the
client the therapist puts aside whatever they have just been engaged
with, puts aside their own personal troubles, and puts aside what they
know of theory and procedures. Then they are there for

98

Person-Centred Therapy

the client, but all their past experience and learning is available as
an implicit resource upon which they may draw at any time. Although
focusing-oriented psychotherapy is much concerned with clients'
experiencing, there is an important sense in which the therapist's
attention is centred on the client, rather than on the client's
experiencing. It is a central theme of focusing that we are not to be
identified with our experiencing. We have our experiences of anxiety,
depression and so forth, but these experiences are not us; they are what
we need to relate to and work with. In focusing-oriented psychotherapy
the therapist works with the client in helping the client to relate to
their experiencing. The experiencing is, in Gendlin's (1984b) phrase,
the 'client's client', but the therapist's direct relationship is with
the client, not the client's experiencing. If this is forgotten, a
client may experience focusing as a technique in which the therapist
works with the client's experiencing rather than as a relationship in
which the therapist works with the client. In relating to a client we
relate to the person, to that which has the feelings. We relate to 'the
person in there' (Gendlin, 1996, pp. 286--7) who struggles with their
feelings. Given this, the essential question is how the therapist can
respond to the client in a way which will help the client to engage with
and move forward in their experiencing. There are many things which can
get in the way of the client doing this, some of which I will discuss in
more detail in the next section. Here I will discuss in a more general
way the principles of responding to clients in a focusing-oriented way.
At the heart of focusing-oriented therapy is Rogers' procedure of close
listening and reflecting. Even the most literal 'saying-back' of what
the client has said can be enormously helpful. It is something the
therapist can do when it is unclear what else might help, and it is
something that is unlikely to do any harm. Careful reflection maintains
the therapist's relationship with the client and helps the client to
maintain a relationship with what they are experiencing. As we saw in
Chapter 2 ('The client-centred response'), it provides the client with a
'mirror' in which they can see themselves without distortion. It also
plays a role in attuning the therapist to the fine details of what the
client is experiencing. The words which a client uses may express very
subtly and exactly what they are feeling, and in reflecting the words
exactly the therapist connects with the intricacy of the client's
experiencing. For example, if a client says that someone 'has kind of
twisted me round inside so that I can't be straight with myself', it
will be better to reflect this word-for-word than to respond with a
general sense of the feeling such as 'You feel twisted up' or, even less
helpfully,

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

99

'He really upset you'. In the same way, if a client says they feel
hopelessly lost, it may not be very helpful to reflect this as 'You feel
lost'. The 'hopelessly' was part of what the client said, part of what
they felt. Sometimes clients will correct the therapist when the
reflection is inadequate -- 'Not just lost, hopelessly lost'. And then
it is important for the therapist to reflect the correction, in a way
which makes it clear that they value being corrected. Of course there
needs to be some discrimination in what we reflect. We are reflecting in
order to show that we understand the meaning that something has for the
client, and to help them experience this meaning. Often clients will
tell in detail the story of something which has happened to them, and it
would not be helpful to reflect the story details. What the events meant
to them, how the situation struck them, may get lost in the convolutions
of the story; often clients simply do not pause enough to get a sense of
what they are experiencing. Here it will be necessary to find some way
of helping the client to be more conscious of their own responses, and
it can sometimes help if the therapist simply repeats a word in a
reflective way: T: Can I just interrupt a minute? You were saying that
you felt sort of embarrassed . . . C: Yes. It was embarrassing, because,
you know, we only met last week, and as I was saying, we went along to .
. . T: But it really was . . . sort of . . . embarrassing . . . C: Yes,
made me feel all . . . I don't know . . . T: There's a sort of feeling
there . . . something . . . C: It really makes me feel quite churned up
. . .

Without such interruptions, and the encouragement to pause and look, the
client may be quite unable to relate to their experiencing. With clients
who talk about external events and rarely pause in their stories, the
therapist needs to watch for places where an intervention could be
helpful. These will usually be at points where the client has been moved
or struck by something, where they refer to their responses rather than
to the external situation. Gendlin (1980, p. 279) has the metaphor of
watching traffic go past: a car, a car, a car, a car, a fire engine, a
car, a car. We need to respond to the fire engine: here is a point where
the client may be able to connect with their experiencing. If after
several sessions no opportunities have arisen, then the therapist may
need to create them, for example, by asking questions such as 'And how
did you react to that?'

100

Person-Centred Therapy

In focusing-oriented therapy, as in person-centred therapy generally, we
'respond to feelings', but it needs to be made clear exactly what that
means. It is not so much feelings in the sense of specific emotions, but
the client's feeling-response to their situation. As Rogers in effect
recognised in the early years of client-centred therapy, 'reflection of
feelings' needs to be done in a way which points towards the client's
felt sense of a situation rather than simply labelling the client's
experience as a feeling of a particular kind. Rogers wrote (1951,
p. 28): Here is a client statement: "I feel as though my mother is
always watching me and criticizing what I do. It gets me all stirred up
inside. I try not to let that happen, but you know, there are times when
I feel her eagle eye on me that I just boil inwardly." A response on the
counselor's part might be: "You resent her criticism." This response may
be given empathically, with the tone of voice such as would be used if
it were worded "If I understand you correctly, you feel pretty resentful
toward her criticism. Is that right?" If this is the attitude and tone
which is used, it would probably be experienced by the client as aiding
him in further expression. Yet we have learned, from the fumblings of
counsellors-in-training, that "You resent her criticism" may be given
with the same attitude and tone which would accompany "You have the
measles" or even "You are sitting on my hat". If the reader will repeat
the counselor response in some of these varying inflections, he may
realise that when stated empathically and understandingly, the likely
attitudinal response on the part of the client is, "Yes, that is the way
I feel, and I perceive that a little more clearly now that you have put
it in somewhat different terms."

The counsellor's response needs to be to 'that whole situation' which
the client is experiencing. The counsellor is not trying to fit the
client's experiencing into the counsellor's category of 'resentment'
but, in Rogers' words, 'aiding in further expression'. The counsellor's
response should 'point' towards the felt intricacy of the client's
experiencing, since it is only from that intricacy that change steps can
come. In 'reflecting' what the client said, the counsellor is helping
the client to engage in a focusing process. Two distinct situations can
arise here. Where the client is already engaged in focusing on a felt
sense, and trying to find words to articulate it, it is important for
the therapist to reflect these words fairly exactly. The client is
trying out just that form of expression, and needs to hear it back
exactly. But often a client will report feelings as if they were

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

101

distinct things which are 'just there', and here an exact reflection may
be worthless or even irritating to the client: C: She did it again last
night, and I got angry. T: You got angry. C: Yes, I just told you. And
who wouldn't have?

The therapist here needs to find a way of responding not to the simple,
packaged way in which the client has expressed their experience, but to
what the therapist can imagine as the more intricate situation in which
the client is involved. What the client is experiencing cannot possibly
be fully articulated by 'I got angry'; his experiencing will be of a
whole intricate situation involving what exactly she did, maybe the way
she did it, the fact that she had done it again, perhaps that she had
not taken any notice of his earlier complaints, and that he resented
that, and how all this reminds him of what someone else used to do and
how exasperated he is with himself about getting caught in this pattern
again, but he would not be so caught in it if only she would give him a
break. The therapist cannot know the intricacies of the client's
experiencing, but can still respond in a way which points the client
towards that intricacy. For example, the therapist could respond with
'So there it was again last night . . . and her doing it again brought
up a real feeling of anger in you . . . there was all that anger and . .
. resentment, maybe? . . . something really strong . . .'. As in the
example from Rogers above, much depends on such things as timing and
tone of voice. A client might say in a way that indicated that they were
focusing: C: She did it again last night, and . . . I got . . . angry .
. . T: You got angry . . . C: Well, sort of angry . . . but there was a
kind of sadness as well . . . I don't know . . .

With a client who is not focusing, it may sometimes be possible to
respond as if they were, to take what they say as if they were in touch
with their experiential intricacy. As a result the client may be helped
to experience a bit more: C: She did it again last night, and I got
angry. T: You got . . . angry . . . C: Yes. Yes I really did -- really
angry.

102

Person-Centred Therapy

What is hoped for in therapy is usually experiential change, not
insight. Certainly in person-centred therapy the therapist's aim is not
to acquire a deep understanding of the client. Rather, the aim is to
interact with the client in a way that will help the client to carry
forward their life. The therapist knows in advance that whatever they
come up with is unlikely to correspond exactly with the client's
experiencing. The 'right' response is not so much the one that 'fits'
but the one which facilitates a client response in which the client's
experiencing moves on: C: She did it again last night and I got all
worked up. T: You were . . . angry with her . . . C: No, not angry . . .
definitely not angry . . . but sort of . . . despairing. Yes, despairing
. . . I hadn't wanted to admit that . . .

From that point the session might continue just as effectively as it
would have done if the therapist's response had been 'right' in the more
obvious way. When the therapist's response is wrong (in the more obvious
way), the important thing for the therapist is to respond to the
client's experiential reaction. In the last example the therapist will
naturally respond to the 'despairing', but sometimes a 'wrong'
reflection may block the client, and then the therapist may need to
backtrack: C: She did it again last night and I got all worked up. T:
You were . . . angry with her . . . C: No, not angry, not angry at all.
Definitely not angry. T: You weren't angry at all . . . but you were all
worked up . . .

Rather than being 'wrong', the therapist's response may be irrelevant to
what the client is experiencing. Gendlin writes (1968, p. 213): . . . if
my client's answer to me is "Yes, that must be true . . . er," I know my
response is no good. People say something must be true if they have to
infer it -- i.e., when they don't feel it directly. The "er" also
indicates that there is nowhere to go with what I said. Now I reply
"That sounds sort of right to you, but it isn't what you mainly feel
now." And I thus invite him to attend, once more, to what he does feel,
so that he won't get hung up on my useless response.

The therapist needs to sense for, and be guided by, those client
responses which carry the client forward. 'Forward' here is not a

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

103

direction which is specified by the therapist, but what Gendlin has
called 'the direction of fresh air', that is, a direction specified by
whether the client feels less stuck or unhappy or confused. The
'forward' direction is the direction specified by experiential shifts in
the client's felt sense. Sometimes a client will talk at length about
their issues and their feelings, but at the end of it nothing has
shifted, and nothing has been resolved. The felt sense of the problem
has not changed. At other times, as the client explores their feelings,
there is a sense of something releasing. What the client has come to may
not be pleasant in itself, but there is a felt shift. The whole problem
now feels just a little different, and now the client may express the
problem in a slightly different way. But it is not just a different way,
it is a way of having the problem which is no longer quite as 'tight' or
'stuck' as it was before. It is important to notice, and to help the
client to register, those places where there is experiential release. In
the midst of what seems an impossible situation there will also be
life-enhancing tendencies. Human problems only arise because of desires,
hopes and aspirations which are blocked or conflicted. The client
inevitably senses mainly the blocks or conflicts, but may at times also
sense the energies out of which the difficulties arise. The notion of
'stuckness' brings with it the notion of 'release'; the sense of
stuckness is precisely a sense of a forward energy which has been
blocked. The client can get glimpses of that forward energy in the small
releasing steps which occur in the process of therapy. At a releasing
step the client feels a bit of physical relief; for a short while, at
least, the problem does not weigh them down so much, and if the feel of
that lightening can be fully registered the client will be in a better
state to continue working with the problem. It is also important for the
therapist to be aware of their own emotional reactions to the client. A
client's difficulties are often associated with the self-defeating ways
in which their fundamentally 'forwardoriented' life energies are
expressed. A client's impulse to assert their own rights may emerge as
hostility or resentment. An impulse to communicate clearly may come
across as stilted or artificial. The need for closeness and affection
may emerge as demandingness or clinginess. These ways in which the
client expresses their needs and impulses inevitably have an impact on
the therapist, who in their own feelings will register something of the
self-defeating modes of expression. The therapist, just like anyone else
with whom the client interacts, may find themself reacting with anger to
the client's hostility,

104

Person-Centred Therapy

disengaging from the client's artificiality and rejecting the client's
clinginess. But simply to respond in these ways to the client, as other
people naturally do, will clearly not be helpful. Instead, the therapist
needs to be aware of their own emotional reactions, and then to find
ways of responding not to the client's distorted self-defeating
behaviour as such, but to the positive energies which have become
distorted. For instance, if the client says in a hostile way that the
therapy is clearly useless and they are going to stop coming, the
therapist's immediate feeling might be something like 'Well, bugger off
then. I don't want you to keep coming.' This is no doubt the kind of
response which the client will have experienced in the outside world.
But if the therapist can sense, beyond their immediate reaction, the
client's underlying need, they might respond with something like 'You
really want to get some help, and are angry that nothing much seems to
be happening.' Or in response to a client's continuous talking the
therapist may want to put their hands over their ears, or just walk
away. No doubt in the outside world people do just make excuses and
leave; the client's longing to communicate is defeated by the way in
which they express it. The therapist needs to register in themself the
feeling of wanting to get away, and then find a way of responding which
acknowledges the whole of what is going on -- perhaps something like 'I
can really feel the importance of all this, but I'm finding it difficult
to stay with you and respond because there are no spaces to take each
bit in . . .' With some client difficulties it may be especially helpful
to work with versions of the difficulties which arise in the interaction
between therapist and client. I will discuss in the next section some of
the interpersonal difficulties which can interfere with the therapeutic
process, and in the following section say more about interpersonal
interaction as one specific avenue of therapy. In focusing-oriented
psychotherapy the therapist helps the client to articulate what is
implicit in the client's whole felt sense of their difficulty, but is at
the same time trying to respond from their own felt sense of what will
help in the moment. The client needs responses from the therapist which
are, as far as possible, responses to 'all that which is right now
standing in the way of forward movement'. Such responses cannot be
worked out logically, nor are they simply guesses or flashes of
'intuition'. They are responses which come from the therapist's whole
felt sense of what is needed. The therapist's felt sense of what is
needed can be informed by their experience of Focusing as a taught
procedure. The procedure is

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

105

not introduced explicitly, but several elements in the procedure may be
drawn into play by the needs of particular clients. There is, above all,
the basic Focusing attitude of friendliness to whatever comes, an
attitude of welcome for, and interest in, whatever the client is
feeling. However, more specific elements in the Focusing procedure can
also find their place. For instance, some clients come to a session with
a range of pressing concerns, each of which is generating anxiety. The
client jumps from one anxiety-provoking situation in their life to
another, but is unable to relate effectively to any of them. There is an
overall anxiety which is being fed from several different sources. Here
it can often help to suggest some version of the Inventory element in
'clearing a space' 'Maybe it would help if we first made a list of all
these different things which are troubling you. How would that be?' If
the client starts going into one of the anxieties, the therapist can
remind them 'We can look properly at all that in a minute, but right now
we are just making the list.' Then when the list is complete the
therapist invites the client to get a sense of which issue feels most
urgent, and to check if it feels all right for the other issues to wait
their turn. I think that most clients find this a very natural
procedure; they know that it is hopeless to try to sort out everything
at once, and just need a little support in staying with one thing at a
time. The other element in 'clearing a space', that of 'putting things
down' can also be very helpful to clients who are feeling overwhelmed by
their emotions. But here the therapist needs to be sensitive to what
kind of imagery, if any, is helpful to the client. A client may not want
to 'put down' a very sore and painful issue; they may want to hold it
and care for it. Or it may not be possible to put down an issue because
it is so closely intertwined with another issue which can't be put down.
Here the therapist's experience in Focusing as a procedure can be very
helpful in sensing what might be helpful with particular client
difficulties. Bringing attention into the body can be helpful,
especially with clients who have little awareness of their bodily
reactions to situations. If the therapist says something like 'How does
all that actually make you feel physically?' then this may help to
direct the client's attention to their bodily felt sense of the
situation. If the client does not understand the question, the therapist
can suggest some possibilities: 'Clenched-up? Jittery? Deflated? . . .
How does it feel . . . ?' Then, therapist and client can then stay a bit
with the physical feel -- 'There's that jittery there . . . it is
jittery . . . is it OK for us just to stay

106

Person-Centred Therapy

with that for a minute . . . that whole jittery feel . . .' Often
something then emerges from the bodily felt sense, such as a thought, a
memory, an image, and the process can carry forward from there.
Gendlin's question 'What stands in the way of me feeling just fine?' is
another useful suggestion, especially with clients who have a vague
sense of their lives not being satisfactory. It is an invitation to the
client to sense what is blocking them, and once the block is made
explicit it can itself be given attention. It may be helpful at this
point to reproduce a segment from a focusing-oriented therapy session
(adapted from Gendlin, 1980, pp. 290--4) in order to give a better sense
of how focusing-oriented responses can fit into a session. Other
examples, which are well worth studying, can be found, for example, in
Gendlin (1996), Iberg (2001) and Hendricks (2002). In the example which
follows, the client is already familiar with focusing. The italicised
sentences are those especially characteristic of a focusing-oriented
approach. The client is trying to find a job in her own field, meanwhile
working at something she doesn't care about. She says (this excerpt has
been altered to make it unrecognisable): C1: I'm still avoiding those
job interviews (in her field). And men too. T1: There's something
similar about your avoiding in those two areas. C2: Yes. I think I'm not
willing to take the chance of failing. I go on till there's a real
opportunity, and then I run away. I get nervous. T2: Nervous is the word
that fits it. C3: Yes. Uh, well . . . I run away. T3: Run away is it.
C4: Yes, being nervous isn't what does it. T4: The nervous doesn't make
the running away. C5: No. T5: So we don't know what the wanting to run
away feels like, what it is that wants to run away. C6: Well, I think
it's that I'm scared to fail and that makes me fail. I'm scared to find
out that maybe I won't be any good where I really care about it. T6: Can
you feel the wanting to run away now, if you imagine going ahead? C7:
Yeah, I can feel I want to run, but if I decide not to go ahead then I
don't need to. T7: As long as you don't think you'll go ahead, that need
to run isn't there. And you suspect it's that you're afraid of finding
out you're not really good at it. C8: Right!

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

107

T8: I was also interested in just the feel-quality of it, for a minute
you could feel the wanting to run, just now. Can you still? C9: Yeah. I
could feel it. T9: Let's tap it lightly and see what turns up. (silence)
C10: I'm bad, I feel crummy about me. T10: You feel crummy to yourself.
(silence) C11: I can feel it right under there, this crummy. It comes
and goes. I can feel OK too, and if the crummy comes, I can ignore it
and feel OK too, if I want. (laughs) T11: The crummy is right there,
just underneath, and you don't have to feel it. (silence) T11a: Let's
just be with this crummy, just hear from it, why it feels crummy. C12: I
used to dance when I was little, just my own way around and round, but
they said I was showing off. T12: They called it something bad.
(silence) C13: I used to fight with my mother. She would get very upset.
She even went to a psychiatrist. One time my father came and said to me
"Look what you're doing to your mother!" T13: He made out you were doing
something very bad to her. C14: I was only going along my way, not
fitting in with what she wanted. T14: You were just going along but it
was supposed to be very bad for her. C15: Like I was hurting them. T15:
Made you feel you were hurting them. (silence) C16: It was always like
that . . . T16: This part of you experienced that many, many times.
(silence) T16a: Can you now really be glad this part of you came and
that it is speaking to us and can you welcome it? (silence) C17: It
would rather run away than feel so crummy and bad. T17: If it has to
feel it's bad, it would rather run away. (silence) C18: Well. That's
sure different than I thought.

Here we can see fairly straightforward client-centred reflecting at T4,
T7, T10, T14, T15, T17. T1 is an example of the use of 'something' which
I discussed in Chapter 4. There is a 'pointing' at the 'something'; it
would not be a focusing-oriented response if the therapist

108

Person-Centred Therapy

had said 'Avoiding the job interviews is like avoiding men.' At T2 the
therapist emphasises the word 'nervous'; this might well have been a
place from which changes could come. But the client emphasises instead
'run away', and the therapist (T3) reflects this emphasis. T5 is a
focusing-oriented response which again draws attention to a 'something',
to 'what it is that wants to run away'. In C6 the client is thinking
about her feelings, and T6 is the therapist's move to bring out the felt
sense. (Imagining going ahead will draw out the wanting to run away,
just as imagining that one's life is fine will draw out what is not
fine.) However the client does not go along with this but comes back to
what she was saying in C6. At T7 the therapist responds fully to this
and the client (C8) is satisfied. The therapist then tries again to
elicit the felt sense (T8, T9), and this time the client, begins to stay
with it. Silences now begin to appear at places where the client is
focusing. T11 and T11a help the client stay with the felt sense, and in
C12-- C16 something of what is in it begins to unfold. T16 is a move to
help the client distinguish between herself and the 'part' which was
made to feel bad. T16a is important in helping the client to preserve a
friendly attitude to whatever may come. Many sessions in
focusing-oriented therapy would not look like this. This is how it can
look when the client has (naturally, or through experience of therapy or
training) some feel for the focusing way of proceeding. In other
sessions, much of the time will be spent in maintaining good empathic
contact with the client, in helping the client to move from 'the story'
to how the client felt, in working with difficulties which prevent
focusing, and in getting a sense of the client's preferred way of
working. In practice, much of a typical focusing-oriented session will
involve a kind of orientation towards the possibility of focusing, and
the consequent 'moments of movement' which focusing can bring. I just
referred to 'difficulties which prevent focusing' and 'the client's
preferred way of working'. This leads us to the next section of this
chapter. Focusing-oriented psychotherapy requires the therapist to be
sensitive both to the kinds of difficulty which the client has in
relating to their experiencing and to the client's preferred modes of
working with their difficulties. By 'preferred modes' I mean that some
clients prefer to approach their problems through working with images
and metaphors, some are oriented more to action and to trying out new
forms of behaviour, some need to understand what is going on before they
can act and some need above all to express feelings which they have
never before expressed. Gendlin refers to these different preferred
modes as distinct 'avenues' of therapy.

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

109

In the next two sections I will discuss first some general kinds of
difficulties which clients may have in relating to their experiencing.
Then I will consider some of the different 'avenues' along which clients
may prefer to work with their difficulties. Difficulties in relating to
experiencing Analysis of recordings of Rogers' work with clients (Merry,
2000, p. 2) suggests that over 80 per cent of his responses were
empathic reflections of what the client had said. Such reflection
maintains the empathic attunement with the client, and allows the client
to follow a path which they sense is right for them. In
focusing-oriented psychotherapy this close empathic following of the
client occupies much of the time in most therapy sessions, and in some
sessions it may occupy the whole of the time. Where the client is
relating to their own experiencing, reflecting on it, processing it and
reframing it, all that is required for the therapist is to accompany
them in what they are doing. However, there are many things which can
prevent the client from working effectively with their experiencing. In
this section I have drawn on the work of the process-experiential
therapists, as well as that of Gendlin. Much of what is done in
process-experiential therapy can be relevant to a focusing-oriented
approach, although the philosophy behind the approaches is rather
different. The more we reflect on the different kinds of difficulties
which clients may have, the more sensitive we are likely to be in our
responses to our clients. But it is sensitisation rather than diagnosis
which is important. (I will say more about 'diagnosis' in Chapter 6,
which is concerned with possible objections to focusing-oriented
psychotherapy.) In none of the sections which follow do I mean to imply
that the therapist should 'diagnose a process difficulty' and then adopt
a specified response. There is too much in human beings which is subtle,
intricate and implicit for this diagnostic approach to be very
effective. And yet there are general patterns, and the more we are
familiar with them the greater our sensitivity can be to the individual
difficulty. This point is crucial if focusing-oriented therapy is to
retain Rogers' fundamental insight that the client is the authority on
what they experience and what they need, while acknowledging that the
therapist may have knowledge and experience which may be helpful to the
client. It may be useful here to reflect that in working with a client
from another culture it can be very important to know something about

110

Person-Centred Therapy

that culture. It can be important to read up on the cultural differences
because otherwise one will be likely to miss things that are important
to the client. For instance, one may not know that in that culture it is
seen as disrespectful to sit with one's feet pointing towards someone.
Without that bit of knowledge one might not notice the client's
discomfort with how one is sitting. But to say that is quite different
from saying that one should adopt a rule of sitting in a particular way
with all clients who are known to have a particular cultural origin.
Obviously, this client who appears today may be different. Perhaps they
no longer wish to identify with certain of their culture's traditions,
or perhaps they belong to a sub-culture which, unknown to the textbook
writer, does not have those traditions, or perhaps they do not want
people from our culture to adapt to them. We do not know for sure how we
need to be with this client, but that is not to deny that the more we
know about other cultures the better. It is not knowledge of general
patterns which is to be disparaged, but the application of such
knowledge in a rule-bound way that is insensitive to the subtleties and
intricacy of the particular situation. I think that the same principle
applies in connection with our knowledge of the different kinds of
difficulty which people can have in relating to their experiencing. Such
knowledge can sensitise us to what may be difficult for this client now.
It is not a matter of having a set of rules which tell us what to do in
each kind of situation, but of developing an awareness of possibilities
which will be there for us in an implicit way when we open ourselves to
the uniqueness of the client, and to what can help that client as they
relate to us in the present moment. For each kind of difficulty which I
discuss I will give references to books and papers through which the
interested reader can follow up the themes in greater detail. This part
of the chapter may need to be read rather differently from the rest of
the book, perhaps as a reference section. I will begin with the kind of
difficulty in which the client feels so vulnerable that they cannot even
begin to explore their feelings. Client vulnerability and 'fragile
process'

Often when a client speaks of a painful or distressing experience it
will be helpful for the therapist to reflect what they say, or otherwise
help them to 'be with' the experience, to explore it and to 'go into'
it. But sometimes the therapist may sense that the experience is so
desperately painful that it is not appropriate to encourage such

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

111

exploration. The client may be feeling that anyone who has done what
they have done, or who is feeling what they feel, is totally
unacceptable. Consequently, it may be impossible for the client to
acknowledge fully what the feeling is, or how intense it is. Having had
another child which was not planned, a mother may wish that the child
had not been born, and that is totally unacceptable. That is something
she cannot tell to her closest friend, it is something she can scarcely
bear to admit to herself. In attempting to speak about it at all she
experiences an intense vulnerability. Here there is a block to being
with the painful feelings, which comes from the sense of the feelings
being totally unacceptable. What may be helpful is for the therapist to
be sensitive to the 'totally unacceptable', and to respond in ways which
show that they experience the client's feelings exactly as they are. The
mother condemns herself, and expects others to condemn her. Even with
the therapist she has deep reservations about whether she is really
accepted. The aspect of the client's experiencing which may need to be
worked with first is the fear of being condemned. The client needs to
know that the therapist both genuinely appreciates what she feels about
her child and still respects her, the person in there who struggles with
these feelings. As the therapist continues to stay with, and affirm the
client, the client becomes a little less vulnerable, and then may be
able to begin to explore those feelings of which she was so frightened.
The therapist always needs to be sensitive to what the next step might
be for a particular client at a particular time. Is it a time for
exploring a feeling, or for exploring what makes it difficult to come
near the feeling? Does the client need to make changes in their life
situation before they can begin to reflect on their feelings? The
therapist can only be guided by their felt sense of where the client is,
but a background awareness that such choices may need to be made helps
in being more open to the client's experiencing. This theme is closely
related to what Margaret Warner (2000b) calls 'fragile process'. Warner
discusses recent work which suggests that infants who are securely
related to their caregivers are able to modulate their levels of
emotional arousal, while less securely attached infants are unable to do
this. For the less-secure infants, fear and anger become chronic
responses to new situations, with the result that they either cut off
from attachment feelings or seek continual contact with a caregiver. A
secure relationship with the caregiver involves good empathic
responding, and it seems likely that this is what has been missing in
clients whose process is 'fragile'. Correspondingly, effective

112

Person-Centred Therapy

therapy with such clients 'requires high quality listening skills.
Clients typically need more than an accepting presence. They need to
know that their experience has been understood with exactness and
sensitivity as to its emotional vulnerability' (Warner, 2000b, p. 153).
There is evidence (Schore, 1994, 2003) that the pattern of moderation of
emotion in the presence of an empathic caregiver results in
physiological changes in the brain which allow for the toleration of
higher emotional arousal, and that similar physiological changes take
place through the therapist's empathic relating to the client. These
themes are discussed further in Greenberg et al. (1993, Chapter 13) and
Warner (2000b). 'Too close' and 'too distant' process

Extreme client vulnerability could be seen as a variety of the more
general difficulty that a client may be so close to, so involved with,
so caught in their experiencing that they cannot relate to it. There are
clients who repetitively express their feelings, but no change results.
I think of someone who was repeatedly asked to express his anger in a
personal development group. He was encouraged to beat a cushion with a
tennis racquet, and this indeed elicited the anger. But the only change,
so far as he could tell, was that he was getting blisters on his hands
from wielding the racquet! In the same way clients may express their
depression and feelings of hopelessness week after week without any
changes occurring. Sometimes, of course, a client needs to do this in
order to plumb the depths of their despair; to touch the bottom before
they can come up. In such cases one can sense the movement even though
it is a downward one. But in other cases the sense is one of repetition
and of being caught in the depressed mood. If the therapist simply
continues to empathise with the client then they may well themselves get
caught in the client's depression. To avoid this the therapist clearly
needs to get a certain distance from the client's mood, to hold on to
themself. But this is also what the client needs to do in relation to
their mood. The therapist needs to relate to the client -- the person in
there -- rather than the mood, and the standard Focusing moves can help
here. For example, the therapist might respond to the client's saying 'I
just can't see any point in doing anything' with 'There's something
there -- like there's no point in doing anything . . . that's there . .
. would it be OK for us just to stay with that for a bit?' The point of
this is to help the client to

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

113

get a little distance from the feeling and, as Gendlin says, it is often
helpful to say something like 'can we be with that feeling', since it
may be impossible for the client to relate to the feeling on their own.
As we saw in Chapter 4, use of the words such as 'something' or 'that'
can be very helpful in relating to what the client is experiencing. They
bring attention to what is there without fitting it too quickly into a
specific form. Once the client's experience is categorised as 'anger' or
'hurt' it is less easy to sense the whole of what is there. Where a
client has already specified a feeling as 'hurt', for example, it may
help the therapist to 'de-specify' it, for instance by saying something
like 'There is that . . . kind of hurt . . . all that feeling about him
. . . can you sense how all that is for you right now?' Getting a felt
sense of all that brings a sense of release; it is as though the whole
cloud of painful experiencing condenses into a droplet to which the
client can relate. But the droplet is not specifiable as 'hurt' or
'anger'; it contains within it the whole complexity of the situation.
Nevertheless, it is a limited emotional whole with which the client can
interact. They can now feel 'That is there; I'm here', and this
'separation' from the feeling brings a greater capacity to work with the
feeling. As we have seen in earlier chapters there are other ways in
which we can lose touch with our own experiencing, and so be unable to
work creatively with it. In particular there are the cases in which, far
from being caught in our immediate bodily experiencing, we are too
distant from it for it to make its proper contribution to what we do.
The chief examples of this, as we have seen, are 'externalising' and
'intellectualising'. As in the case of being too close to experiencing,
the client may need to spend time in their preferred mode of being. If a
client is distant from their experiencing there will be good reasons for
this, and it is unlikely to be helpful simply 'to be congruent' and
express one's frustration that the client is not expressing their
feelings. This would probably mean little to the client, or would be
experienced as some sort of criticism. The appropriate response, for a
focusing-oriented therapist, is to watch for those places where the
client comes a little closer than usual to their experiencing, and to
respond more at those places. If the client tells the story of their
week as a series of external events, the therapist notices the place
where they say 'I didn't want to go, but I did anyway, and then my
mother said she'd come too --' and if necessary interrupts to say
something like 'You didn't want to go -- is that right?' This may help
the client to be aware of what they experienced, and may lead to some
small discussion of what it was like to go when she did

114

Person-Centred Therapy

not want to. But if the client responds by saying 'No I didn't, but
there it was, and in the end my mother came too, and we went down to see
Auntie Flo on the way, because . . .' then the therapist lets the client
continue until there is another opportunity for engagement with the
client's experiencing. Ann Weiser Cornell (1996, Chapter 10) has a
useful sequence of therapeutic moves in connection with clients who
always narrate events from an external perspective. She suggests first
questions of the form 'And how did you feel about that?' or 'What was
your reaction to that?' Then once such feeling reactions have been
expressed the therapist might elicit feelings in the present through
asking questions of the form 'And how is that for you right now?' or 'I
wonder if you are feeling that disappointment right now?' Finally, there
is the move towards how the feelings are held in the body: 'Can you
sense in your body where you're feeling that disappointed?' This may
help to bring the client into contact with their felt experiencing. In
focusing-oriented psychotherapy we are helping the client to engage with
their experiencing. But 'experiencing', as we have seen, is not the same
as 'feeling' or 'emotion'. Helping the client to be more aware of their
emotions is an important first step, but the change steps in therapy
come not from awareness of emotion as such, but from those places where
the client's experiencing is not articulated in terms of familiar
emotional categories. For a client who has never acknowledged their
disappointment it is important for them to become aware of their
disappointed feelings. That is in itself a shift. But deeper therapeutic
movement comes from the client staying with 'all that around this
disappointment I have now'. Where the client can express some of their
emotional reactions the focusing-oriented therapist's task is to help
them be with 'all that'. Bringing attention to the emotion in a focusing
way can change the emotion. It is no longer anger but a sort of
bitterness, or it is no longer just anger, but also a sort of being
hurt. One of Gendlin's fundamental insights is that when we stay with
our experiencing, when we give our attention to it, when we try out our
concepts on it, the experiencing changes. Much of this book has been
devoted to explaining this procedure of bringing attention to
experiencing, which is the essence of focusing. The therapist can help
the client to focus in the session, not by teaching Focusing as a
procedure but through responding to the client in a way which encourages
the client to give attention to their own experiencing. There is an art
to this which is not easy to explain or to put into practice, but is
essentially a matter of helping the client to

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

115

stay with those places where experience is not yet clearly articulated.
If a client announces that they are 'angry' or 'depressed', there is as
yet little opportunity for change. But the client is not simply angry or
depressed. They are experiencing a whole aspect of their life which is
full of an implicit intricacy. They are angry because of what this
particular person did at that time in that way, and also angry with
themself because they did not get angry at the time. This anger has a
repetitive feel about it -- it is almost boring; the client is fed up
with being this way, and they are annoyed that they still get like this,
though they do not think it helps to criticise themself. This whole
wodge of experiencing forms an emotional whole. It could not possibly be
articulated fully, but it can be experienced as a whole in the body as a
felt sense of 'all that'. A felt sense of it forms. It is from the
intricacy of that felt sense that change can come if attention is given
to it; if the client (or therapist) asks, for example, 'What's all this
really about?' or 'What's the worst of this?' The skill of the therapist
here lies in an ability to help the client stay with the vague
not-yet-formulated felt sense. The therapist may say things like
'There's something there -- can you sense it in your body?' 'Can we just
stay with that for a while?' 'There's anger there, but is that all? Can
you sense around the anger?' 'How does this anger feel, there in the
centre of your body?' or perhaps just keep muttering things like 'Oh yes
. . . that's there . . . there's that sort of angry thing . . . there it
is . . . we'll just be with it a bit . . .'. This is a sort of patter
just to keep attention on that place from which the change steps can
come. This theme is discussed further in Leijssen (1993) and Gendlin
(1978/2003, Chapter 8). Difficulties in the client--therapist
relationship

What often interferes with our responding to (and from) our own
experiencing is the way other people respond to what we say. What we
mostly need when we are troubled is a friendly, understanding response
which does not add anything of the other person, and which does not try
to frame our experience in their concepts. This client-- centred way of
responding is at the heart of effective therapy, so that anything in the
client--therapist relationship which draws the therapist away from this
kind of responding is to be avoided. More generally, clients cannot
relate effectively to their experiencing if they do not feel safe. The
classical 'core conditions' are usually the

116

Person-Centred Therapy

best way of creating the safe place which the client needs. Above all,
the client needs to feel that they are not being judged; that whatever
the therapist may feel about what they have done, they respect them --
the person in there -- in their struggles with what they have done. This
central theme of client-centred therapy remains central in
focusing-oriented psychotherapy. When there is something not quite right
in the relationship with the therapist, the client will be less able to
relate to themself. The client's relating to their own experiencing
takes place within the framework of their relationship with the
therapist. The relationship with the therapist provides a sustaining,
holding function which stabilises the client in relation to the
difficult feelings which they are encountering. (We can Focus on our
own, but it is much more difficult when no one is relating to and
affirming us, the one in there who is having the feelings. Without a
companion we can easily get caught in, or shy away from what we are
experiencing.) So any significant disturbance in the relationship
between client and therapist normally needs to be addressed as a top
priority. I say 'normally' because there can be exceptions here, as in
the case of any other decision about therapeutic procedure.
Focusing-oriented psychotherapy emphasises the felt sense of situations;
it is incompatible with any view which lays down explicit rules about
what a therapist should or should not do in a particular kind of
situation. Where a client is well able to engage in the focusing process
and is doing so effectively, it could be quite inappropriate for the
therapist to draw attention to an aspect of the relationship which is
troubling the therapist. Focusing does not always require the support of
another person; where the client is fully engaged in their experiential
process it may not matter much what the therapist does. This theme is
discussed further in Gendlin (1996, Chapter 23). Inner critics

Our ability to engage with our experiencing can be interfered with not
only by other people's inept or judgemental responses but also by our
own self-criticism. It seems to be a universal phenomenon that we have
within us a 'voice' (or set of voices) which interrupts and criticises
us. For some people the experience is literally that of an inner voice;
for others it is more a matter of a vague feeling of being stupid or
lazy or wrong. Inner critics may 'say' things like 'You are hopeless,
you always mess things up', but some are more subtle and

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

117

insidious: 'You wouldn't want to do that', 'That wouldn't be you, would
it?' The inner critic develops, presumably, from the ways in which we
were spoken to as young children. It is an internalised version of what
was once external criticism. It is important to distinguish the critic
from other 'parts' of ourselves which may have objections to what we are
doing. Gendlin identifies the critic with Freud's 'superego' but, unlike
Freud, distinguishes it sharply from the voice of conscience or moral
sense: For example, suppose you have hurt someone. The superego attacks
you and grinds you down; it makes you feel guilty. It is all about you
and only you. This shows that it is not concerned with morality. Only
when the superego attack has subsided, do you become concerned about the
other person whom you have hurt. From you arises your care for that
person; you can now think about what you can do for that person. Rather
than constricting you as the superego does, your care and concern causes
you to expand. You come forth more; you reach outward. You judge that
something should be done. You wonder how you might fix the situation.
Should you write? Should you call? Now you want to find out where the
event left the other person, and how you might still help. That is
morality. (Gendlin, 1996, pp. 251--2)

The inner critic can be distinguished from conscience (and from
suppressed or split-off parts of the self -- see below) largely by its
manner. It has a destructive or undermining tone, it gives scant
attention to the facts of a situation, and its remarks are simplistic
and repetitious (e.g. 'You always get it wrong', 'You aren't like
that'). The critic comes at us, as if from outside. It is like a
finger-wagging parent or teacher. Focusing-oriented therapists have
suggested two different procedures for working with the critic
(Stinckens etal., 2002). I think that both procedures have their place.
The first involves setting the critic aside. We can say to it 'Go away
and come back when you have something new to say' or 'I don't have to
listen to anybody who talks to me in that tone' (Gendlin, 1978/2003,
p. 98). Or we can ask it 'to stay in the waiting room', or provide it
with a soundproof cubicle from which it can observe but not interfere.
The inner critic often has to be treated like an outer critic who
constantly interrupts with disparaging remarks. Such a person first has
to be stopped . Once this has been done, and the client is able to
regain a sense of their own experiencing, it may be possible to begin to
relate to the critic. The energy of the inner critic is energy which we
have

118

Person-Centred Therapy

absorbed from external critics, but it has become part of our energy,
and may have a positive role to play. The inner critic often attacks us
in a misguided, rather than a malicious, way. For example, a client
criticises herself for being lazy: C: It's like it says 'You didn't get
that essay done on time, you always leave it till it's too late'. T: How
do you respond to that? C: But I do need to take some time for my social
life, and being a day late doesn't really matter. T: You need some time
for yourself -- it's OK to be a day late. How does it feel about that?
C: It's sort of anxious . . . I want to get a good degree. I don't want
to sort of drift through life . . . sort of passive, like my mother. T:
You don't want just to drift . . . as if it needs a bit of help not to
drift . . . C: Yes, my father didn't drift -- he made sure things got
done. No slacking . . . and I kind of admire that . . . But he didn't
need to push so hard . . . T: So there's the not wanting just to drift,
and the need for some sort of . . . discipline . . . but not to go at it
too hard . . . C: I don't need to be so hard on myself . . . but I don't
want to end up like my mother.

Here the critic which attacks her laziness has her interests at heart
but, as is typical of critics, it tries to protect her in a rigid and
unhelpful way. When a client is no longer cowed by their critic it often
happens that, through relating to the critic, the latter's attitudes
soften as the client comes to appreciate that the critic is, in a
misguided kind of way, trying to help. Some focusing-oriented therapists
believe that in the end all critics have the person's interests at
heart, but I am not convinced of this. It seems more likely that some
critics are simply introjections of parental attitudes, and in an
important sense are not 'parts' of that person at all. A child may, for
example, 'absorb' something of their mother's timidity and be afflicted
by a 'critic' which says 'You don't want to do that -- you are not the
sort of person who would push yourself forward.' It may well have been
that in their mother this kind of attitude was playing a protective
role, perhaps protecting her from an unpredictable parent, but the
client as a child has taken it in without it having any real function in
their life. In these situations, by focusing on the timid feelings, the
client may come to sense that they are not their feelings, but their
mother's (Purton, 2000b).

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

119

However, Barbara McGavin and Ann Weiser Cornell suggest an interesting
alternative in this connection. They propose that 'when the criticising
part is created, if it is based on a harsh parent, its job is to
criticise the person before the parent would, to save the person from
the parent's criticism . . . most people are identified with "the
critic's victim", and the part that feels criticised feels like "me". So
naturally the other part, the critical one, feels "other" ' (Cornell,
2003). In helping a client to work with their critic it is important to
try to sense what needs to be addressed first; which bit of the client's
experiencing needs attention most immediately? It may be important first
to 'wave the critic off ' (Gendlin, 1996, p. 254), but sometimes a
critic will not be waved off, and then it is necessary to relate to it
to some extent, to ask if it will at least wait for a while before
putting its view and, if that fails, to sit down with it first and sense
what it really wants. Where this is necessary it will usually be
important to come back as soon as possible to what it was that the
critic interrupted. This theme is discussed further in Gendlin (1996,
Chapter 19), Cornell and McGavin (2002, pp. 172--81), and Stinckens et
al. (2002), the bibliography of which provides a number of further
references. Divided experiencing

The inner critic can be seen as one example of a division in
experiencing. The client may be divided between wanting to leave their
job and the feeling that this is irresponsible. Wanting to leave may
have an excited, slightly anxious, but forward-moving feel to it but as
soon as this is experienced, a critical voice comes with familiar
comments about 'being responsible, being realistic, thinking of others'
and so on. This sort of division is the one most emphasised in classical
clientcentred therapy, where all psychological disturbance is seen as
arising from the imposition of 'societal oughts' on 'organismic wants'.
However, there has been a growing awareness that this is an
oversimplified picture of psychological conflict. Human beings are
social creatures from the start, so there cannot be a fundamental
conflict between 'the needs of the individual' and 'the requirements of
society'. Nevertheless, there is an important distinction to be made
here. It is one thing to absorb a way a thinking or responding from
other people in a way which carries forward one's own experiencing and
allows one to live more fully (think, for example, of learning to play a
musical instrument). It is another thing to take in other people's ways
of being as 'rules' which do not resonate in oneself, and which block

120

Person-Centred Therapy

one's own experiencing. The crucial difference is not between what comes
from society and what comes from the organism, but between what is
experientially valid and what is not. Focusing is all about finding that
which is experientially valid, but often two things seem experientially
valid, yet both cannot be lived. A client may deeply experience a sense
of responsibility for his family, and equally deeply know that he needs
to leave a soul-destroying job. Where there are two or more 'parts' of a
person which pull in different directions, it is clear that both 'parts'
need to be deeply heard. But they cannot be heard together. As in a
conflict between two people, each side needs to be given time to express
what it feels fully, without the other side interrupting. The therapist
may need to check with the client which 'side' needs to be heard first.
Often one side is what Perls (1969) calls the Topdog which lectures the
other side, the Underdog. Where this is so the therapist may need to
intervene to allow the Underdog's point of view to be expressed fully.
The general therapeutic procedure is to work with each side separately,
so that the full experiential complexity on each side can begin to
emerge. For example, the client does not simply want to leave his job,
but rather to get away from the confining pressures coming from the way
his office is run. But it is not even quite that . . . there is
something about how he cannot withstand these pressures which is a much
more general issue . . . Then on the other side it is not just that he
feels responsible for providing for his family, but that there is
something about his wife's expectations, which is frightening . . . he
cannot even discuss with her the possibility of leaving his job because
. . . it is unthinkable . . . there is a huge fear . . . As the two
sides are allowed to express themselves, changes often come about. It
may be that the client begins to get an increasing sense that the real
problem is to do with him not being able to stand up for himself, either
with his boss or with his wife. This is in itself a new problem, but the
getting to it is experienced with a sense of relief -- 'Oh, that's what
it's all about'. In Gestalt therapy the two sides are often worked with
through the two-chair procedure, in which the client role-plays each
side while seated first in one chair and then in the other. However,
this is not an essential part of working with the two sides in a
conflict. What the client does need to do is to get a full sense of
first how one side feels, and then the other. The topic of 'divided
experiencing' extends well beyond the kinds of inner conflicts just
discussed. Many people experience themselves as being different
personalities at different times, or as having different

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

121

'parts' which form relatively stable configurations, such as 'my
frightened part' or 'my bit that knows I'm always right'. Therapeutic
work with such configurations has been discussed at some length by
Mearns and Thorne (2000, Chapters 6 and 7), who draw on the
family-therapy concept of 'multi-directional partiality', which
emphasises the importance of engaging strongly with each family member.
This way of working seems to be much the same as that suggested above in
the case of conflicts and inner critics. 'Divided experiencing' is a
notion which has been developed in different ways in many systems of
thought, from Plato's rational, desiring and spirited parts of the soul,
through Freud's ego, id and superego, Jung's complexes and archetypes,
to the Parent, Adult and Child of Transactional Analysis. From Gendlin's
perspective any of these ways of conceptualising divisions in one's
experiencing may be helpful; but what is helpful is a matter of how
these conceptual forms engage with the individual client's experiencing.
It is a matter of which formulation, if any, carries the client forward.
Divided experiencing takes a more extreme form in 'dissociated process'
(Warner, 1998, 2000b). In dissociative identity disorder (previously
known as multiple personality disorder) there is greater
personification, a greater separation between the parts, and some parts
may not be aware of the others (Ross, 1999; Mearns and Thorne, 2000).
Working with dissociative states requires specialised knowledge, as
Margaret Warner (2000b, p. 165) notes: 'In my experience, very few
clients come to therapy describing dissociated experiences in ways that
are obvious to therapists who are not experienced in working with
dissociation.' However, as with other cases of working with divided
experiencing, it seems that a crucial element in therapy is that of
welcoming each part (ibid., pp. 168--9). Various aspects of the theme of
divided experiencing are discussed further in Greenberg et al. (1993,
Chapter 10), Gendlin (1996, Chapter 13), Mearns and Throne (2000), and
Cornell and McGavin (2002, pp. 155--86). Suppressed experiencing

Often there are parts of us which are not themselves in explicit
awareness, though we experience the impact of their presence. For
instance, we may experience a sense of being confined or controlled,
which we may attribute to the way certain people treat us, or to the
nature of the society we live in. Through staying with this experience
we may come to sense that there is really less external control than we

122

Person-Centred Therapy

think. We may become aware that the control is exercised by ourselves,
that it is we ourselves who do the confining or restricting. Often
external people have some role to play, but our extreme sensitivity to
their attitudes often comes from something in ourselves. The reason that
one part of us suppresses the expression of another part may be that
when, in the past, we did express that part, we were criticised or
humiliated, and something in us decided that we would never let oneself
be hurt in that way again. Or it may be that we need to suppress what we
feel simply in order to be able to cope with an intolerably difficult
situation. In either case, the suppressing part is not in explicit
awareness; rather, we experience what it does to us. We feel squeezed,
paralysed, shutdown, suffocated. Once we realise that this may be so, we
can begin to sense what the suppressing bit of us feels and wants. Often
the suppressing bit has considerable energy, which it has been directing
against us. It has determinedly been keeping us from acting because it
is afraid that if we act we will be hurt or criticised. What we
experience is the sense of constriction, of not being able to act, but
as we become aware of the other bit of ourselves we can begin to sense
its energy, the feeling of 'I'll make quite sure you don't do anything
like that!' Once that is in awareness we can work with the two sides in
the same way as with any other division in our experiencing. Both the
suppressing bit and the suppressed bit need to be given attention, and
allowed to express themselves, and the therapeutic situation is then
much the same as in any other conflict. It seems likely that some of the
things we see in dreams are visual representations of the suppressing
aspects of ourselves. Someone dreams of being attacked by a murderer,
and the experience of this is one of intense fear. But the dreamer can
then be asked, as is done in Gestalt therapy, to be the murderer, to
experience how it is from the murderer's side. That experience is not
one of fear, but of wanting to kill; perhaps wanting to kill the part of
the dreamer who feels vulnerable. If the dreamer is a kind, gentle sort
of person, this murderous energy can be indeed disconcerting, but also
liberating. The theme of suppression of experiencing is discussed
further in Greenberg et al. (1993, Chapter 11) and Gendlin (1996,
Chapter 13). Curtailed experiencing

The natural process of our experiencing can be curtailed in many ways.
What would naturally be expressed through crying or shouting

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

123

can be blocked by a sense of inappropriateness. In cases of trauma,
powerful feelings of rage or terror may not be expressed, or not fully
expressed. In close relationships, one partner may leave, or die, with
the result that the one left behind cannot go through the process of
expressing to them what needs to be expressed. This is the traditional
arena of 'unfinished business' and of 'catharsis'. In focusing-oriented
psychotherapy we do not push the client into the expression of emotion,
or into completing the unfinished business. Only the client can sense
when it will be helpful to move into what has been curtailed. But we can
be sensitive to expressions of emotion, and welcome them. If the client
seems to be sitting tightly on their anger, we can respond to what they
say in a light and friendly way so that the client can pick up that it
would be perfectly all right to say angry things. Or if the client seems
to be holding back their tears, the therapist might explicitly say
'Those tears are welcome if they want to come.' The signs of there being
'unfinished business' may be more subtle than tearfulness or clenched
fists. There may only be a sense of complaining, of resentment, of
stuckness, of resignation. In the usual way the focusing-oriented
psychotherapist helps the client to stay with and articulate these
feelings. But where there is curtailment of experiencing there is the
impulse to complete what was not completed. There is something that was
not done, yet needs to be done. The client needs to be given the space
and safety to do what they were not in the past able to do, to feel the
feelings fully. Where the unfinished business comes from the loss of a
significant person it can help if the client can express the feelings as
if that person were there. Many therapists will suggest that the client
writes a letter to the departed person, and there is no reason why this
should not be done in focusing-oriented psychotherapy. Of course, if the
client does not like the suggestion it is immediately dropped. Gestalt
therapists encourage clients to imagine the departed person in an empty
chair, and to say to them what they would like to have said in real
life. This again is a perfectly valid option in focusing-oriented
psychotherapy, so long as the therapist does not impose it on the
client, so long as it does not occupy the whole session, and so long as
the client has plenty of opportunities to process what is done and to
get a full sense of any changes which have come. The spirit of
focusing-oriented psychotherapy is to offer such procedures as
possibilities which could be helpful, but not to present them to the
client as an expert view of 'what needs to be done in this situation'.
The therapist never knows

124

Person-Centred Therapy

what is to be done, but at times may have a felt sense that this might
help. Then it can be tentatively offered. Post-traumatic stress
difficulties seem to involve aspects of curtailment of experiencing, as
well as aspects of dissociation. This is a somewhat specialised area of
therapy, but the relevance of focusing has been stressed by writers such
as Peter Levine (1991, 1997), Ton Coffeng (1996) and the
process-experiential theorists (Elliott etal., 1996, 1998). Babette
Rothschild (2000) has recently presented an approach to trauma work
which is very much in consonance with focusing-oriented principles. A
whole issue of The Folio: A Journal for Focusing and Experiential
Therapy (Volume 17, No. 1, 1998) has been devoted to working with trauma
in a focusing-oriented way. Further discussion of the general theme of
curtailment of experiencing can be found in Greenberg et al. (1993,
Chapter 12), Gendlin (1996, Chapter 16) and Goldman (2002). I will say
more about the focusing-oriented way of working with emotion below.
Misconstrued experiencing

There are situations in which we misconstrue our experiencing. That is,
we construe our experiencing in a way which does not do justice to that
experiencing. In Chapter 1 I referred to Laura Rice's notion of
'problematic reaction points', that is, points at which people find
themselves reacting in a way which they feel is inappropriate to the
situation they are in. Rice's procedure here is that of 'evocative
reflection', in which the therapist directs the client back to the
details of what they experienced, and this fresh experiencing then
corrects the construal. In focusing-oriented terms what is happening
here is that the client's experience has become structure-bound; that
is, there is a response to the situation which is determined by a
general pattern or 'scheme' (Greenberg et al., 1993), rather than by the
current experiencing in the situation. What is required is for the
client to stay with their experiencing and let that modify the scheme. A
slightly different kind of case is where we misconstrue an emotion as
some other emotion. We can be mistaken about what we feel, just as we
can be mistaken about anything else. An example which I have used before
(Purton, 2000a, p. 42) is: Emma comes to her adviser in connection with
her academic work and it emerges that she is feeling over-pressured in
her life. She is thinking of easing this feeling of pressure by ending a
relationship which has been

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

125

taking a lot of her time and energy. But it is the end of term, and the
adviser feels that it is a bit odd to end the relationship now, just
when she could reasonably devote more time to it. She remarks upon this
to Emma, who agrees that it does seem a strange time to do it;
nevertheless she really does feel afraid of the pressure which the
relationship brings. She is afraid of letting it continue. The adviser
suggests that Emma focuses on the uncomfortable pressured feeling a bit,
and encourages her to talk a little about the ideas and thoughts which
come to mind in connection with it. It emerges that there have been
several little incidents recently in which Emma felt rather insecure in
the relationship, moments when she felt jealous, though quite
irrationally. She comes to acknowledge that the discomfort she feels
involves anxiety about the man ending the relationship, leading to the
feeling that she would rather do it first. So while she was correct in
construing her feeling as some sort of anxiety, she has misconstrued the
nature of the anxiety. It is the sort of anxiety that is involved in
jealousy and fear of rejection, rather than the sort that is involved in
not having enough time. Having realised this, Emma goes off and talks
with her boyfriend about the incidents which gave rise to the jealousy,
and they work out ways in which similar misunderstandings can be avoided
in future. As a result the emotion which she misconstrued as 'feeling
pressured' dissipates, and the relationship improves.

Here Emma herself recognises that there is something 'strange' about her
construal, and when she gives her attention to her actual experiencing,
the construal changes. The original construal of her feeling as
'over-pressured' was a misconstrual in the sense that if she had acted
on it she would have made all the wrong moves in trying to alleviate her
distress; she would probably have ended the relationship, yet that was
not what she wanted. One could speculate about why she misconstrued the
feeling, but whatever the reason, the important point is that the
construal did not arise freshly from her actual experiencing. Once she
gave her attention to that her feelings (and her situation) changed.
Extreme structure-bound experience

Gendlin (1964b/1973) introduced the term 'structure-bound' to refer to
situations where there is a lack of free flow between symbols and
immediate experience, and hence little opportunity for either experience
or symbolisations to change. Focusing-oriented psychotherapy can be seen
as the facilitation of the experiencing process in which experience is
put in contact with symbols and symbols with experience. Psychological
disturbance is conceptualised in focusing-oriented psychotherapy as

126

Person-Centred Therapy

a disturbance in the process of relating experience to its symbolic
expression. Such disturbance is a matter of degree. We have already seen
something of the factors which can interfere with the experiencing
process, and which the therapist can help to alleviate. The therapist
can be seen as helping the client to do what they cannot -- yet -- do on
their own. For instance, on their own, the client cannot stand back
enough from their emotion in order to relate to it, but with the
therapist there to 'hold their hand' they can begin to do this. Or the
client is caught in a conflict, and on their own cannot attend to either
side of it effectively, but with the help of the therapist they can
attend first to one side and then to the other. Or the client on their
own distances themself from their emotions, and puts everything in a
very abstract way, but with the therapist there they can begin to allow
the emotions a little closer and begin to relate to them. In more severe
psychological disturbance, the process of relating to experience is
correspondingly more impaired. However, the general principle remains
that the therapist's role is to facilitate the client's relating to
their experience. We can think in this way about the ground-breaking
work of Gary Prouty (1976, 1990, 1998) with schizophrenic clients.
Prouty has developed a way of working which centres around making
contact with very withdrawn or disturbed clients in a way which
facilitates the client's contact with the world. The contact is made
through various forms of reflection, such as wordfor-word reflections,
situational reflections ('There is traffic noise outside') or body
reflections ('You are holding your head in your hands'). The therapist
is at the same time making contact with the client and helping the
client to be in contact with their own experience. Catatonia is an
extreme form of a structure-bound state. Prouty (1998, p. 394) describes
a 12-hour-long session with a young man who had withdrawn from his
family to live in isolation in the lower part of their farm house in
Europe. His family wished him to enter therapy in the United States. A
trip there was planned, but the client was in such a withdrawn state
that the plan seemed unworkable. Prouty writes that he 'was sitting on a
long couch, very rigid, with arms outstretched and even with his
shoulders. His eyes were straight ahead, his face was mask-like.' The
therapist initially sat at the other end of the couch and over a period
of an hour and a half made ten responses such as 'I can hear the
children playing', 'I'm sitting with you in the lower level of your
house', 'Your body is very rigid.' There was no response from the
client. The therapist then brought a

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

127

chair, sat in front of the client and mirrored his body posture. After
about fifteen minutes she said 'I can no longer hold my arms
outstretched. My arms are tired.' There was no response from the client
and the session continued: T: Your body is very stiff. T: Your arms are
outstretched. T: Your body isn't moving. C: (Put his hands on his head
as if to hold his head, and spoke in a barely audible whisper.) My head
hurts me when my father speaks. T: My head hurts me when my father
speaks. T: (Therapist puts her hands as if to hold her head.) T: My head
hurts when my father speaks. C: (Continued to hold head for 2--3 hours.)
T: It's evening. We are in the lower level of your home. T: Your body is
very rigid. T: Your hands are holding your head. T: My head hurts when
my father speaks. C: (Immediately dropped his hands to his knees and
looked directly into therapist's eyes.) T: You are looking straight into
my eyes. C: (Immediately he talked in a barely audible whisper.) Priests
are devils. T: Priests are devils. T: Your hands are on your knees. T:
You are looking right into my eyes. T: Your body is very rigid. C: (He
talked in a barely audible whisper.) My brothers can't forgive me. T: My
brothers can't forgive me. C: (Sat motionless for approximately an
hour.) T: It is very quiet. T: You are in the lower level of the house.
T: It is evening. T: Your body is very rigid. C: (Immediately, in slow
motion, put his hand over his heart and talked.) My heart is wooden. T:
(In slow motion, put her hand over her heart and talked.) My heart is
wooden. C: (Feet started to move.) T: Your feet are starting to move. C:
(More eye movement.) The therapist took the client's hand and lifted him
to stand. They began to walk. The patient walked with the client around
the farm and in a normal conversational mode spoke about the different
animals. He brought the

128

Person-Centred Therapy

therapist to newborn puppies and lifted one to hold. The client had good
eye contact. The client continued to maintain communicative contact over
the next four days and was able to transfer planes and negotiate customs
on the way to the United States.

Prouty describes his procedure as 'pre-therapy' because he sees it as a
prelude to therapy proper in the form of classical client-centred
therapy. Prouty was one of the first to draw attention to the fact that
in the client-centred tradition the therapeutic emphasis had been on the
three therapist conditions of empathy, acceptance and congruence, to the
neglect of the others, and in particular to the neglect of Rogers' first
condition that client and the therapist need to be in psychological
contact. So if 'therapy' involves work embodying the three therapist
conditions, establishing psychological contact can be seen as
'pre-therapy'. From a focusing-oriented point of view the distinction
between 'therapy' and 'pretherapy' seems rather artificial. All of
focusing-oriented psychotherapy is concerned with facilitating contact
between experience and whatever impinges on experience, such as external
events, or other people's actions and words. All these things which
impact on and change experiencing come in structured symbolic form. With
most clients there is already in place some significant relationship
between client and therapist, so that with the help of this relationship
the client can begin to relate better to their own experiencing.
However, with severely disturbed clients who are cut off from
relationships with others, the first necessity is to establish some kind
of relationship with the therapist. Without the client having a sense of
relationship to another person they cannot have any sense of relating to
themself. In the young child the relationship with others comes first;
only later is the child able to be with themself as other people are
with them. Avenues of therapy In any effective therapy something new
needs to come, which is not part of the client's normal consciousness
(Gendlin, 1980, p. 282). Freud had the procedure of asking clients to
lie on a couch and freeassociate. The procedure opened the client to
whatever might come when they were in this unusual frame of mind. Jung
worked much with clients' dreams. Dreams are of great therapeutic
potential because they bring a perspective on the client's problem which
is different from the waking perspective, yet still comes from the
client

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

129

(Purton, 1989). Even in cognitive-behavioural therapy something similar
applies; the client and therapist together work out a programme of
action which the client will try out, but then the client has to go out
into the world and encounter new situations. Something new has to come
in if there is to be change. In classical client-centred therapy what is
new is the therapeutic setting in which the therapist listens and
reflects in the way Rogers discovered. This encourages a novel mode of
experiencing for the client, in which they are open to their own
experiencing in a way that is new and different. In his early work
Rogers was interested in psychotherapy generally. Given that there were
different 'schools' of therapy, including his own newly developed
'non-directive' form of therapy, Rogers wanted to find out what it was
that made any form of therapy effective. His conclusion was that it is a
matter of whether the therapist's attitude to the client embodies the
familiar Conditions. Given that these Conditions are present, it does
not matter much what procedures are used or what theoretical views the
therapist holds. Rogers was primarily concerned not to set up his own
school of therapy, but with how therapy should be conducted irrespective
of the particular theories and procedures being used. In the same way,
Gendlin sees the different 'schools' as enshrining different theories
and different procedures, but believes that almost any theory or
procedure can be helpful if it is employed in an experiential way.
Gendlin and Rogers have an approach to therapy which is radically
different from that found in other schools. In Gendlin's view it does
not matter much what theoretical views the therapist has; what matters
is whether framing the client's experience in those terms is helpful to
the client. The important question is not whether the client is
suffering from an 'unresolved Oedipus complex', or has 'introjected
certain conditions of worth', but whether, when their difficulties are
formulated in those terms, there is any shift in the client's
experiencing. The only theoretical formulations which are relevant for
the client are those with which the client's experiencing 'resonates'.
This is not an anti-theoretical stance. Theories are important, but not
in the sense of 'corresponding with reality'; they are important in the
impact which they can have on clients. The more theories with which the
therapist is familiar, the more likely it is that they may find ways of
putting things which can resonate with the client's experiencing.
Similarly with procedures. It is not that certain procedures are to be
recommended or rejected because they are grounded in 'true' theories.
Rather, a procedure is a good procedure for a particular

130

Person-Centred Therapy

client simply if the procedure is helpful to the client. That should be
obvious, but it is often held that adopting certain (or even any!)
procedures is not right because 'it is not person-centred'. This strikes
me as a curious reversal of what Rogers stood for. Rogers centred
therapy on the client, not on the theory or practices of therapy, and
that principle should be retained even when what is in question is
'person-centred' theories or practices. Gendlin makes this fundamental
principle very explicit. He welcomes the fact that there are many
schools of therapy, each with their different theoretical perspectives
and favourite procedures. Of course he himself has a theory (which I
will discuss further in Chapter 8) but it is a meta-theory, a theory
about theories, and about how theories relate to experiencing. He has no
first-level theory of therapy beyond the principles which are involved
in helping clients to formulate their own 'theories' in a way which will
carry forward their experiencing. Similarly he has no theoretically
based procedure apart from the 'procedure' of trying to do whatever will
help the client to engage with their own experiencing. Gendlin suggests
in effect that instead of thinking of different kinds of psychotherapy
we should think simply of psychotherapy, within which many different
perspectives are possible and many different procedures can be employed.
Often, what can be expressed in one way from a person-centred
perspective can be expressed in a different way from a
cognitivebehavioural or psychodynamic perspective. In the main body of
one paper, Gendlin (1968) discusses client-centred therapy while in a
set of footnotes he suggests how the same things can be expressed in
psychoanalytic terms. This is not to say that the client-centred and
psychoanalytic concepts are the same; it is rather that a particular
point can be formulated in different ways, in terms of different
concepts. That there can be such points, distinct from their conceptual
formulations, is of course Gendlin's most fundamental claim. To examine
the different theoretical perspectives in psychotherapy is beyond the
scope of this book, but I will now discuss some of the different
procedures, or different ways of helping clients to engage with their
experiencing. Gendlin (1996) calls these the different avenues of
therapy. These avenues can all be followed in a person-centred way, and
are likely to be effective only if followed in that way. In the actual
practice of therapy, of course, these 'avenues' cross and merge with
each other, but we can nevertheless make some distinctions which may be
helpful in thinking about how we might best help a client. A client will
inevitably prefer some avenues to others, and the

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

131

more the avenues with which we are familiar the more likely we are to
find a way of working which is right for that client. Working with
imagery

In imagery, in dreams and stories, we can live what we cannot yet live
in reality. The image is not -- yet -- the real thing, but it can bring
with it the bodily feel of the real thing. It often seems that if only
we could have the confidence that would come from having acted, then we
could indeed act. But in imagination we can act, and get something of
the feeling we need in order to act. For instance a client always
prepares himself carefully for what his day may require. He makes sure
that he has all that he needs, so that he will not have to ask anyone's
help. But this is associated with a sense of unease and of isolation. An
image comes of himself as a snail, which carries its house with it, and
therefore has a safe place to retreat to whenever danger looms. He
experiences this whole sense of self-sufficiency and isolation in the
image of the snail and its shell. Then as he stays with the image, it
changes. He sees himself coming out of his shell and feeling more free,
although also very vulnerable. He decides that tomorrow he will
deliberately leave behind his spare watch, his spare pair of spectacles.
If his watch stops he will ask someone what time it is, if he breaks his
spectacles, well then that will be a whole new experience. Clients can
in this way make spontaneous therapeutic use of imagery. But there can
be a tendency to move from one image to another without the images
making much impact on the client's experiencing of their situation. This
is analogous to the familiar scenario in which a client moves in logical
fashion from one thought to another without dipping back into their felt
sense of their situation. The client just discussed might have moved
from the image of the snail to images of a bird coming to attack the
snail, the snail withdrawing into its shell, the bird picking the snail
up and flying off with it and so on. Then the client might have returned
to talking about other things, and little would have been achieved.
Imagery is therapeutically powerful when it emerges from and is related
back to life-situations. Some people conscientiously write down their
dreams, and are intrigued by the dream images. But this by itself is
unlikely to make much difference to the person's life: the dream can
only have an impact if one stays with the felt sense of it, and relates
that felt sense to what is going on in the life-world.

132

Person-Centred Therapy

For the therapist what this suggests is the importance of helping the
client to relate the felt sense of the imagery to their felt sense of
their situation. The image needs to be brought up to the life situation,
and then something may move. To return to my example above, if the
client speaks of his snail image the therapist might say something like
'What is the whole feel of that -- of being a snail?', or 'As you see
that image, what does it feel like in your body?' The client might then
say that he feels sort of snug and safe, but after staying with that
experience for a while the felt sense may shift to 'pulled-in' and
'constrained'. The therapist might then ask about this 'pulled-in
constrained' feel, and this could lead to what that involves in the
client's life, that is, his tendency to live over-cautiously and protect
himself from new experiences. In the image of coming out of his shell,
feeling vulnerable yet more free, he already experiences something of
what he may experience shortly in his life. Something of that increased
freedom is already there, and this will help him really to become more
free. To a limited extent it can be helpful to ask the client more about
the content of the imagery -- for instance, 'Where is the snail? What is
it doing?' -- but with clients for whom imagery comes easily it is
unhelpful to encourage the client simply to watch the images as they
come. Working with dreams is a special case of working with imagery.
Gendlin has written extensively both on the theory of dreams and on the
practice of dreamwork, but because of space limitations I will not try
to explain his views here. A summary of the theory, which also
constitutes a useful introduction to Gendlin's general theory, can be
found in an Appendix to Let Your Body Interpret Your Dreams (1986a), and
some of Gendlin's thoughts about working with dreams in therapy sessions
can be found in Chapter 13 of Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy (1996).
See also Hendricks and Cartwright (1978). Working with emotion

The release of pent-up emotion, or catharsis, is sometimes regarded as
the essence of psychotherapy, and as something to be encouraged by the
therapist. In the person-centred approach, however, it is a central
principle that only the client can sense when such a release of emotion
will be helpful. Focusing-oriented psychotherapy takes the same view
(Gendlin, 1996, p. 225). The therapist does not aim to elicit catharsis;
on the other hand whatever emotions come are welcomed.

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

133

Emotions are only one aspect of the felt sense of a situation or, to put
it another way, the felt sense always involves far more intricacy than
can be captured under the heading of an emotion word such as 'anger'. It
may be quite true to say that the feeling is a feeling of anger, but it
is this person's unique anger here in this situation with that person,
as a result of .. . When clients use emotion terms to express their
feelings this is the beginning rather than the end of the process of
relating to their experiencing. The simple reflection of what the client
has said will often lead to a further step. Having said that they are
angry, the client then goes on to say that it's not really anger, or
it's not just anger, but . . . It is important for the therapist to stay
with the overall sense of what the client is saying, and to respond to
this sense. Hence if in response to the therapist's wondering how a
client reacted to being ignored, the client says 'Well, I was angry,
wasn't I?' and then begins to go on into more details of the events, the
therapist might say something like 'You really felt something there . .
.', or 'There was all that angry sort of feeling', in order to point the
client towards what they were experiencing. Experiencing which is
already packaged-up in terms of familiar emotion terms is not open to
change. What the focusing-oriented therapist tries to do is to help the
client re-open the package. The client's experiencing is always much
richer than the emotion labels which have become attached to it, and it
is only from that implicit and more intricate experiencing that change
can come. It is a familiar fact that we can get caught up in our
emotions. This is why in earlier times emotions were regarded with
suspicion. Gendlin (1973a, 1991a, 1996, p. 223) points out that strong
emotions can narrow our experiencing so that we react in a way which is
not appropriate to the whole complexity of the situation we are in. The
focusing-oriented therapist helps the client to stay in touch with the
whole of their experiencing, with 'all that' which is 'around' or
'under' the emotion which is being expressed. In catharsis, emotions
from the past are being re-lived. But if there is only this re-living of
the past then nothing will change. There are therapies in which clients
are encouraged to 'let out' their emotions, as in the case I mentioned
above of pounding a cushion with a tennis racquet. The first time this
is done, there may be a genuine release of feeling and the client feels
different. But repeating the process over and over does not lead to much
further change. What the initial release may accomplish is the bringing
of the past into the present. But the client then needs to relate the
newly recovered feelings to

134

Person-Centred Therapy

their current situation. It is a matter not so much of re-living the
past, but of restructuring the past through its relationship to what is
present. There is a sense (which I will discuss later in connection with
Gendlin's account of time) in which the past is determined by the
present as much as vice versa. The focusing-oriented therapist accepts
whatever emotions come but tries to help the client relate to their
emotions. There are times when pent-up emotions need to be released, and
such release will be welcomed. But after there has been such release the
therapist will help the client to sense the changes which the release
has brought. There is more to the client than their emotions, and the
therapist tries to relate to the whole person, the person who has the
emotions. Where a client remains in an intensely emotional state the
therapist will help them to be with the emotion, rather than being
overwhelmed by it. The Focusing procedures of 'clearing a space' and
'putting things down' provide models of the kind of help which the
therapist may be able to provide. In sum, the situation with regard to
working with emotions is similar to that with regard to working with
imagery. Both these therapeutic avenues can be valuable, but when
imagery or emotion becomes disconnected from the client's wider felt
sense of their situation the therapeutic impact is much reduced. The
experience of imagery and emotion is not always in itself therapeutic,
but becomes so when brought into relation with the client's felt living.
This avenue is discussed further in Gendlin (1991a, 1996, Chapter 16)
and McGuire (1991). Working with thoughts

It is a therapeutic commonplace that intellectual interpretations of a
client's troubles have little impact. Nor do the client's own
intellectual insights by themselves make much difference. Freud himself
made it clear that it is one thing to understand one's conflicts but
quite another to face them and work them through. And although Rogers
(1942, Chapter 7) did speak of the importance of insight in some of his
early writings, he later (Rogers, 1956) remarked that he had long since
given up the view that insight is the crucial element in therapy.
Gendlin, (1964b/1973, pp. 445--6) wrote, 'An Adlerian therapist some
years ago told me: "Of course interpretation is not enough. Of course
the person doesn't change only because of the wisdoms which the
therapist tells him. . . . The change comes through some kind of
emotional

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

135

digestion, but then you must admit that none of us understand what that
is." ' However, from the fact that intellectual insight is not
sufficient for therapeutic change we should not conclude that the
intellect has no role at all to play in therapy. It seems undeniable
that some of the procedures used by cognitive therapists, such as
combating negative thoughts or challenging assumptions, can be
therapeutically effective. Person-centred therapists, too, may sometimes
give their own view of a situation through their wish to be open and
genuine in their relationship with the client. From the perspective of
focusing-oriented psychotherapy the important issue is whether what is
expressed cognitively 'resonates' with what the client is experiencing.
When a therapist reflects what they take to be the essential meaning of
what the client has just said (rather than just the words), this is a
cognitive act; it is not in principle different from an
'interpretation'. However, such 'person-centred interpretations' arise
not from any general theory about how human beings are, but out of the
therapist's felt sense of what the client is saying. The client may then
find that either the 'interpretation' helps them to move on to further
experiencing or it may not help at all. If it does not help, the
therapist will immediately drop the idea and come back to what the
client now wants to say about their experiencing. Cognitive
interventions in focusing-oriented psychotherapy are therefore brief,
whether or not they are helpful to the client. If there are many of
these interventions in the course of a session, the flow of the client's
experiencing is likely to be disrupted, but it is important for many
clients to articulate their experiencing in words, and such articulation
can actually carry forward their experiencing rather than disrupting it.
Ann Weiser Cornell has suggested to me that thoughts, like emotions,
images and body sensations can have felt sense 'edges' around them, and
that one can therefore respond to a client's thoughts in a
focusing-oriented way. This seems right. For example, if a client
remarked that she thinks that her problem is connected with her parents'
relationship, then rather than discussing this in a speculative way, or
asking the client not to speculate, one could respond with 'There's
something in you that says this is to do with your parents'
relationship', and the client might then say 'Yes -- I feel it here'
(pointing to her chest). Thoughts can be a way into the felt sense as
much as emotions, images or sensations. Just as imagery and emotions are
not always therapeutically helpful, so thinking and cognitive activity
are not always therapeutically

136

Person-Centred Therapy

harmful. Whether an intervention along one of these avenues is helpful
or not is a matter of how it connects with the client's experiencing.
Does the intervention bring the client to a more vivid experiencing, and
help them to move further, or does it close the client down? That is the
important question. This avenue is discussed further in Gendlin (1996,
Chapter 18). Working with action

Clients often come to therapy because they are unable to live and act in
the way they would like. It is then natural to explore the inner forces
and conflicts which stand between them and how they would like to live.
Through working with what is inside we can begin to be different in our
outer behaviour and relationships. But the relationship between the
'inner' and the 'outer' works both ways. A small act which runs counter
to a deeply embedded way of feeling can have a big impact on that way of
feeling. A client who is afraid to go into large crowded shops may be
able to go into smaller shops, or less-crowded shops. There is still
anxiety, but through choosing an outer action which challenges the fear,
without evoking so much fear as to make the action impossible, the
client becomes different inside. They now experience themself as someone
who can go into at least some kinds of shops; they feel physically that
bit freer. And then another small step can be taken. Just as images,
emotions and thoughts can have an impact on the whole feel of a
situation, so can actions. Just as an image can be checked out for
whether it really resonates and helps us to move on, so can an action.
The action which is performed is not the action which the client would
like to be able to do. That action, obviously, is impossible at present.
What can be done is something which is sufficiently close to that action
to cut into the feelings which prevent it. There are several ways in
which an action can be 'sufficiently close'. One involves the kind of
'small steps' I referred to above. Together the client and the therapist
may consider what would count as steps of 'the right size'. The client
then tries a step out, or finds that they cannot yet carry this step
out. Then -- if the client wants to continue working in this way -- they
look together at what might be possible. This of course is related to
procedures used in 'behaviour therapy', but I imagine that people have
always experimented with such ways of overcoming their fears (De Silva,
1984). Behaviour therapy does not have a monopoly on such procedures.

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

137

Another way of getting 'sufficiently close' to the action is to attempt
the action not 'for real' but, as a client said to me, 'just as an
experiment' (Gendlin, 1996, p. 228, calls this 'doing it for practice').
In one session the client announced that he was going to experiment with
doing the thing he was so afraid to do. He said that if it is an
experiment it will not matter what the results are. He tried it, and
failed. But that was all right, that was like the experimental apparatus
blowing up. That was interesting. If that happens, he said, then you can
try it again with new apparatus. Other ways of 'practising' actions are
through role-play, or through imagining oneself doing the action. These
are familiar procedures, but they are sometimes seen as incompatible
with a person-centred approach. It will be evident by now that I think
that this is a mistake. The person-centred approach does not rule out
any particular way of being with the client so long as the client's own
experiencing is made central. Such possibilities as role-play are
introduced in focusing-oriented psychotherapy as possibilities which the
client might like to experiment with. The client is never directed to do
a role-play, and if they show little interest in the possibility then
the idea is immediately dropped. Only the client can sense whether a
particular procedure might be helpful for them, but without the
therapist's suggestion of the procedure they might never even consider
something which, in fact, could make all the difference to their
progress. The therapist, of course, needs to be sensitive to the matter
of whether the client will take up the suggestion simply to please the
therapist, or simply because they see the therapist as an 'expert' who
must know best. As with any other procedure in focusing-oriented
psychotherapy there is no diagnosis of what is needed; rather the
therapist relies on their felt sense of what is appropriate in this
situation. The therapist needs to sense what might help the client, but
also whether he or she feels comfortable with the procedure in question.
Therapy is generally a pause in the activities of the client. The client
often comes to therapy because their actions in the outside world are
not working out for them. They are moving from one action to another,
but the result is that things are getting worse. What is needed is
reflection, certainly. But this does not mean ceasing to act. It means
dipping into one's felt sense of the situation before and after acting,
to check whether the action carries forward one's felt sense of what is
needed. In this way the relation between felt sense and action is like
the relation between felt sense and imagery, emotion or thought. When
these partial aspects of us become detached from the

138

Person-Centred Therapy

felt sense and continue autonomously (jumping from one image, emotion,
thought or action to another) they do not serve us well. These partial
aspects of our lives only fulfil their function as they arise from and
drop back into that broader sense of our life as a whole. This avenue is
discussed further in Gendlin (1996, Chapter 17). Working with personal
interaction

One of the most important kinds of impact on our experiencing comes from
our relationships with other people, and it is widely acknowledged that
the relationship between therapist and client is of crucial importance
in therapy. This is so in several different ways. First, there is the
role which the therapist plays in creating a safe atmosphere in which
the client can freely explore their feelings. Secondly, there are the
moves which the therapist can make to help the client relate to the
'edge' of their experiencing. Thirdly, there may be specific things
which arise in the relationship with the therapist, which can be helpful
to the client. We have already discussed the first two elements. We have
touched on the third in connection with 'difficulties in the
client--therapist relationship', but more needs to be said about it.
Psychodynamic therapists place great emphasis on the details of what
goes on between client and therapist, and help the client to connect
these details with events in the client's earlier life. Through being
brought into the present and re-lived, the old feelings begin to lose
their power over the client. The focusing-oriented therapist tries to
respond to all that the client is feeling. For example, the therapist
will try to respond both to the client's genuine disappointment with the
therapist and the disappointment which relates not to the therapist but
to significant figures in the client's early life: 'You are disappointed
that I can't see you next week. I really understand that. But also I'm
wondering if there is more to it . . .' Gendlin (1996, p. 294) notes
that clients sometimes know that something that we would characterise as
transference is involved in the interaction. For example, a client may
say "I'm mad at you! Well, not really you, uh, only partly you . . . uh,
it's confused . . ." I respond so as to keep both the present and the
past open: "You are saying (both at me and at someone else here), that
you are really mad at me."

There are many aspects of the client--therapist interaction which may or
may not involve transference. For example, there are often issues

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

139

to do with power and control within the session. If a client tends to be
shy and in awe of experts and authority figures, it is important for the
therapist not to allow themself to become cast in such a role. Or if a
client controls the session by speaking continuously so that the
therapist cannot get a word in, the therapist may need to interrupt.
Trainee counsellors who are a bit shy often find it difficult to
interrupt clients, but such interruption is often important in creating
a space in which the client can encounter their experiential edge. The
therapist needs to be able to remain 'solid' within the relationship
when the client's emotions threaten to become overwhelming, or when they
are directed at the therapist. Gendlin (1996, p. 293) discusses some of
the complexities which are involved where the client is angry with the
therapist: When I reflect a client's anger at me, I firmly stand my
ground very solidly, so that the client's anger can come out more. I
don't want the client to pull back in guilt for fear of hurting me. I am
vividly undamaged when I reflect: 'I think I did all right, but you feel
I did . . .' In the implicit concrete interaction we are both solid and
undefeated. As a therapist I may be glad the anger came out more. But
before I say 'I am glad your anger can come out more,' I have to
consider what interaction this would be. Some clients might experience
such a statement as patronising, that somehow I am out of reach of their
anger. I could say this to other clients who share a reflective level
with me. I might say it also to a client who feels that by getting angry
she will lose me. 'You and I are now like this,' I sometimes say,
bumping my fists together. 'I don't think you're right, but I know you
feel . . .' I want the implicit interaction to be one in which there is
equality and room for conflict.

The avenue of personal interaction is the one used by those
personcentred therapists who emphasise 'the use of the self in therapy'.
As we saw in Chapter 1, Rogers moved from a non-directive reflective
mode of therapy to one which allowed for the spontaneous expression of
the therapist's feelings. In Gendlin's terminology these are distinct
therapeutic avenues, both of which can be facilitative. Neither of these
avenues constitutes what person-centred therapy is, and both can be used
in ways which are not person-centred, that is, which do not facilitate
the client's contact with their own experiencing. Simply 'saying back'
whatever the client says is unlikely to be helpful; nor is spontaneous
expression of whatever the therapist feels. When the procedures
characteristic of the different avenues become 'techniques'

140

Person-Centred Therapy

which are employed irrespective of the therapist's felt sense of the
client and of the current interaction with the client, they cease to be
person-centred procedures. The avenue of personal interaction is
discussed further in Gendlin (1996, Chapter 23). Working with groups

Each of the avenues provides something that the others cannot provide,
and group-work is no exception. For example, only in a group can a
client experience the positive regard of many people at once. While in a
one-to-one relationship the client may be able to discount what they
experience as an anomaly ('Well, you may accept me, but then you are a
bit peculiar'), with a group this attitude is more difficult to sustain.
Again, it is only in a group that a client can encounter and re-live a
pattern of personal dynamics which may parallel situations which they
encountered as a child. And whereas in personal therapy it is the client
who brings what they experience as problems, in a group they may be
faced with difficulties that other people have with them. Further,
groups undoubtedly provide a challenging context for maintaining one's
connection with one's own experiencing in the face, sometimes, of a
barrage of other people's responses and different ways of seeing things.
Groups can provide an arena for moving back and forth between roles and
immediate experiencing, and between explicit task-oriented purposes and
personal expression. Such movement between the explicit and the implicit
is central to the therapeutic process, and groups provide a distinctive
way in which it can be embodied. Of course, groups can only provide an
effective therapeutic avenue if they are set up and facilitated in a way
which enables the participants to feel that they belong, that they will
be listened to, and that whatever they experience and express will be
valued (even if not always liked). The main role of the facilitator is
to 'protect the belonging of every member' (Gendlin, 1968, p. 202), and
to ensure that no one is ignored or attacked to the extent that their
membership of the group seems to come into question. Group-work thus has
its value alongside the other avenues of therapy, but as with all the
avenues sustained therapeutic movement is unlikely unless the client can
relate their experience of the group to their own edge of experiencing.
Group process which does not arise from, and dip back into, the felt
senses of the participants is likely to

Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy

141

be at best irrelevant and at worst harmful. Group process without the
felt sense is as unlikely to be therapeutic as intellectual process, or
image process, without the felt sense. Group-work is discussed from a
focusing-oriented perspective in Gendlin (1968) and Gendlin (1978/2003,
Chapter 12). Working with the body

There is a sense in which focusing always involves working with the
body. It is in the body that we feel our emotions, and in the body that
we have a felt sense of a problem. A shift in the felt sense -- what
Rogers called a 'moment of movement' -- is experienced physically. The
shift is a shift in how one's body as a whole is registering the
problem. After the shift it is not just that one feels a bit different,
but that one is a bit different. After the shift one will respond to
some aspects of one's life situation just a little differently.
Different responses will involve different patterns of physical
movement; the muscles and nervous system will be functioning in a
slightly different way. The changes that occur in therapy are physical
changes, changes which can be physically felt. Gendlin (1996, Chapter
12) notes that it can be important to let a physically felt change
register fully. Sometimes a client may experience a shift (such as 'It
feels a bit lighter now') and then move quickly on to something else. It
can help the client at this point to ask them to pause for a moment, and
really feel the shift, to experience fully the lightening. Letting this
energy register in the body will help to consolidate the change, and
also help the client to be in a stronger position from which to approach
the next issue which faces them. The bodily felt change in a 'moment of
movement' always has a freeing quality to it, even if it leads to an
awareness of something painful. It is a step in a direction which is
experienced as 'forward', a direction that Gendlin calls 'the direction
of fresh air'. It is often a movement in a direction of 'being oneself'
rather than of 'doing what others say', but it does not necessarily take
that form. One could feel freed from the necessity of 'having always to
find an original way of doing things' and relaxing into 'doing things in
the familiar prescribed way'. As always in focusing, the emphasis is on
the process, rather than on the content. Sensitivity to bodily felt
changes runs through all of focusing-oriented therapy; the felt sense is
something physically felt. However, 'working with the body' can also be
understood in another way. There are

142

Person-Centred Therapy

many different forms of therapy which work directly with body changes,
and it seems likely that these procedures will be more effective if used
in a focusing-oriented way. Some work is already being done in this
area. For example, Hakomi therapy (Kurtz, 1990) is a body-oriented form
of therapy which makes explicit use of focusing, Kevin McEvenue (2003)
has integrated Alexander Technique with focusing in his Wholebody
Focusing, Pam Geggus (2002) refers to focusing in her person-centred
approach to Zero Balancing, and Shapiro's (1995) EMDR (Eye Movement
Desensitization and Reprocessing) has been used with focusing in the
treatment of trauma (Armstrong, 1998). In this chapter I have outlined
the principles of focusing-oriented therapy and have tried to show
something of how these principles can be applied in practice. Various
difficulties and reservations may have come to the reader's mind, and I
will turn now to look at some of the possible objections which can be
raised, especially from the point of view of 'standard' person-centred
therapy.

6 Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

In this chapter I will consider some objections which can be made to
Gendlin's focusing-oriented psychotherapy. One important kind of
objection is raised by the client-centred therapists to whom I referred
in Chapter 2 as 'purists'; namely that focusing-oriented psychotherapy
has a directive and diagnostic element which runs counter to the basic
principles of client-centred therapy. A second kind of objection is that
although focusing may often be therapeutically important, it is not
essential to therapeutic change. Third, there is the objection that
focusing can detract from the relationship between therapist and client,
which person-centred therapists see as central to their practice.
Finally, there is the objection that the empirical research studies to
which Gendlin refers are not as convincing as he suggests. Issues of
principle Is focusing-oriented therapy diagnostic?

It is central to person-centred therapy that the therapist should work
within the client's frame of reference, that the therapist should work
with how the situation is, as conceptualised by the client. Unlike other
forms of therapy, which bring to bear their own theoretical perspectives
on what the client is experiencing, the person-centred approach is
concerned with the client's perspective. Now it can seem that
focusing-oriented psychotherapy goes against this person-centred
principle. The focusing-oriented therapist has a theoretical perspective
in which, for example, 'intellectualising', 'externalising' and
'emotional submergence' are seen as being, for the most part, not
conducive to therapeutic change. In accordance with 143

144

Person-Centred Therapy

this theoretical perspective, the focusing-oriented therapist will do
things which help to release the client from these ways of being which
cut them off from engagement with their own experiencing. But if the
therapist is to do this, he or she must in some sense make a 'diagnosis'
of what the problem is; for example, a judgement about whether the
client is distancing themselves from their experiencing through talking
about it in an intellectual way, or whether they are too caught up in
their emotion to be able to relate to it. Now in practice, of course, a
therapist is unlikely to experience the making of such a judgement as a
'diagnosis'. As I suggested in Chapter 5, it is rather that the
therapist is sensitive to the different ways in which a client can be,
and responds to the differences in an appropriate way. This is not
different in principle from the fact that when a client turns up in
tears we respond differently from the way in which we usually respond.
It may be objected that the latter case is a spontaneous difference in
response which has nothing to do with theoretical knowledge, but that
would be to draw an implausibly sharp line between responses that are
based on theoretical knowledge and those which are not. Our theoretical
knowledge (we hope!) becomes part of us, and comes to inform our
responses. It seems to me that there are two kinds of situation which
contribute to person-centred doubts about the value of 'diagnosis'. One
is where the therapist imposes on the client's experiencing a set of
concepts which are not the client's concepts. For example, if a
therapist says to a client who does not think in terms of Freudian
concepts 'This situation seems to re-activate your Oedipal complex',
that will be of no use to the client at all. The client cannot do
anything useful with this, it does not connect with their experiencing,
and they are likely to be distracted from their experiencing by this
sort of intervention. (However, it is different if the client does find
it natural to think in Freudian terms; then the therapist's concepts may
engage with the client's experiencing, and the client's experiencing may
be carried forward by what the therapist says.) The second kind of
situation is that where having conceptualised a client's difficulty in
some way the therapist (or the client) moves forward along a purely
conceptual track, without checking whether what they now say is
experientially valid. Gendlin (1964b/1973, p. 463) calls this 'process
skipping'. For instance, having correctly sensed that a client is
feeling bereaved, the therapist (or the client) might then deduce from
what they have read about bereavement that the client must be angry,
even if the client does not feel it, and that if the client

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

145

really is angry she had better not do such-and-such, but rather . . .
What is wrong here is not necessarily the general principle, but how it
is being applied in this case. Having got to the sense of being
bereaved, the therapist's (or client's) background knowledge may
sensitise them to the possibility of anger being present. It may help
them to see what they might otherwise not have seen. But they need to
look, to check. Whether they are angry is a matter of what they are now
experiencing, not of what the books say. These two objections which
person-centred theory has to 'diagnosis' are valid ones. But the
objections are not objections to the use of general concepts and
principles in therapy. They are objections to two kinds of misuse of
general concepts and principles. Gendlin's (1962/1997) theory is
grounded precisely in this issue of how concepts can effectively relate
to experiencing. In finding a way forward in any difficulty which we
have, we need concepts to specify and formulate the difficulty, but
equally we need to relate the concepts back to our experiencing. When we
formulate our experiencing in concepts, the experiencing changes; but it
is also true that our concepts change through being brought into contact
with our experiencing. That is what happens in focusing. Where things go
wrong is where we follow a purely conceptual track without periodically
dipping back into the relevant experiencing. Is focusing-oriented
therapy directive?

Probably the most persistent critic of Gendlin's focusing-oriented
psychotherapy has been Barbara Brodley. In a paper presented at the
University of Chicago Counselling Center as early as 1966 she 'tried to
clarify the non-directive nature of client-centred work in order to
counter Gene Gendlin's influence which was stimulating some junior staff
and students at the Center to think of themselves as client-centered
while pursuing the goal of helping their clients to raise their levels
of experiencing as they talked in therapy' (Brodley, 1991, p. 1).
Brodley sees the essence of client-centred theory in the actualising
tendency. The role of the therapist is to 'foster the optimal
functioning of the inherent growth tendencies in the person' (Brodley,
1990, p. 88) through embodying and communicating the therapist
conditions of empathy, acceptance and congruence. The therapist does not
in any way direct the course of therapy, but simply provides an
environment in which the client's actualising tendency will find its own
way forward. 'The non-directive attitude results in the therapist's
surrender of

146

Person-Centred Therapy

control . . . to the client' (pp. 88--9). Brodley's fundamental
objection to focusing-oriented psychotherapy is that the latter does not
fully surrender control to the client, but instead directs the client's
attention towards their own experiencing. Although focusing-orientated
therapists do not see themselves as authorities on how their clients
should live, or on how clients should see the world, they do have a view
on what is therapeutically effective; and associated with this view
there is an element of authority, and of direction of the client towards
a goal that the therapist sees as valuable. I think there are two things
which can be said in response to this. One is that the kind of
directivity involved is a very special one. The focusing-oriented
psychotherapist is encouraging the client to listen to their own
experiencing. It is as if he or she is saying 'Don't listen to anyone
else for a moment, just listen to yourself.' This instruction has an
element of paradox to it, since in following it (doing what the
therapist suggests) the client could be said to be listening to the
therapist and not themself ! In reality, of course, the therapist is
simply suggesting to the client that it may be helpful to them to focus
on their own experiencing, and if the client did not want to do this,
the therapist would of course back off. Directing the client to listen
to and trust their own experiencing is clearly a unique kind of
directivity which should not be put on a level with other kinds of
directivity. There is perhaps an analogy with the familiar paradox of
tolerance: one should tolerate everything except intolerance. The
intolerance of intolerance is a quite special case which should not be
allowed to cast doubt over whether tolerance is a good thing. The other
reply would be to turn Brodley's argument back on herself -- for,
Brodley, like any person-centred purist, has her own theoretical
position on what makes for effective therapy. It is the view that
clients should be exposed to the therapist conditions without anything
else being done in a systematic way. Such a view can be argued for -- as
Bozarth (1998) argues for it -- through appeal to Rogers' Conditions of
Worth Theory (see Chapter 1). The purist adopts a way of being with the
client which derives not from the client's wishes but from a theory
about what is helpful to people. Clients, as any person-centred
therapist knows, do not always welcome the non-directive attitude; they
get treated non-directively because the therapist thinks that is what is
best for them. Purist person-centred therapists, like any other
therapists, cannot avoid the responsibility of responding to clients in
ways which the therapist thinks will be helpful. Clients normally come
for help; not just for theoretical understanding,

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

147

and also not just for acceptance and empathy. The purist honestly thinks
that the client will be best helped simply by an offering of the
therapist conditions; the focusing-oriented therapist honestly thinks
that the client will be best helped through being encouraged to relate
better to their own experiencing. In practice, the issue is much less
stark than this, since the purist welcomes focusing which arises
spontaneously, and the focusing-oriented therapist sees the therapist
conditions as providing the context for focusing. What does seem clear
is that the purist cannot reasonably criticise the focusingoriented
therapist on the grounds that the latter is guided by theoretical
assumptions while the former is not. On the issue of directivity,
focusing-oriented therapy diverges to some extent from the
process-experiential approach. As we saw in Chapter 1, the slogan of the
latter approach is 'direct the process but not the content'. The
focusing-oriented therapist does not direct the client's process; the
directivity is limited to the attempt to direct the client towards their
own experiencing. As we have seen, the focusingoriented therapist may
have important general knowledge about 'process difficulties' and such
knowledge may sensitise them to what might help in the immediate
situation with the client. But the attitude of the therapist will not be
one of diagnosing process difficulties and directing the client
accordingly. It will be one of trying to sense what would be
facilitative for the client in the present moment, sometimes suggesting
a particular move, then checking how the client responds to the
suggestion, and getting a sense of where the client needs to go next.
For instance, one bit of 'process knowledge' which the therapist has
could be that of the value of Making a List: where we are overwhelmed
with many problems it often helps to separate them and so create the
space to deal with each one individually. Nevertheless, with this new
client, who complains of being overwhelmed by all their problems, the
therapist may sense that the client really needs to stay with that sense
of being overwhelmed; that the client's most urgent problem is not any
of the specific issues, but their difficulty in standing firm in
relation to problems, and what gets in the way of doing that. I am not
convinced that the process/content distinction is very useful in
connection with the issues of diagnosis and directivity. It is central
to person-centred thinking that the therapist is not in a position to
direct clients effectively, whether in regard to content or process. At
the same time, interaction with the therapist may constructively
influence both process and content. I have discussed at some length some
of the ways in which the interaction can make a difference to how the
client

148

Person-Centred Therapy

processes their experiencing, but I do not think that there is anything
in person-centred principles which rules out interactions which
influence content. For example, Gendlin (1996, p. 267) remarks that on
occasion he will say to a client 'Every child should be cared about' as
an expression of the content of his own values. He continues: Another
person's statement can have a carrying-forward effect, or it can
engender blockage and difficulties. Therefore, if my statement gets in
the way, I drop it. I might quietly reaffirm it once, but if there is no
carryingforward step, I go back to reflecting the client's side.

As an example of a case where there is a carrying-forward step, Gendlin
(ibid.) gives the following: C: It's so hard to reconcile that she \[his
wife\] might die \[of cancer\]. T: (Listens for a long while.) This
shouldn't be happening. A person in their forties with a small child --
that's not the right time to die. That shouldn't be happening. It's not
right. (He stares at me, and then a huge amount of relief shows in his
face and body. Tears come. He sits a long while, just exhaling long
breaths. I did not know why, until he explained.) C: I was trying to
feel that it was a right thing to happen. What I said so briefly had
connected to and carried forward something inside him that had been
pushed down and silenced.

Similarly, when a therapist tentatively formulates their sense of what
the client is saying, that may well help the client to find a
formulation which carries them forward. In the pre-Wisconsin phase of
clientcentred therapy the making of 'interpretations' was banned; but
postWisconsin it was realised that the important question is not whether
the therapist behaves in any particular way, but whether the therapist's
behaviour carries the client forward. Dave Mearns' example, in Chapter
1, of a therapist telling their client that they should take the job is
another illustration of this principle. I think it is important to see
that such therapist responses cannot be justified simplistically in
terms of 'congruence'. However strongly the therapist may feel that
children should be cared for (or that mothers should not die while their
children are young, or that the client should take the job), the point
of expressing the views is not that the therapist holds them and that
therefore they must be expressed, but that in the moment the therapist
feels that such expression might be facilitative for the client. If it
is not then the therapist

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

149

needs to notice this, and to return to what the client is experiencing.
Gendlin (1996, p. 267) gives the following example: C: I could never
give my mother what she needed emotionally. T: You felt her need, but
you could never give her enough of what she needed. C: And that always
made me feel insufficient, inadequate; I ought to be able to do better
and I can't. T: This shouldn't have been that way -- you shouldn't have
had to try to give her what she needed. She should have tried to give
you what you needed. A little child should be mothered. The mother
shouldn't mostly need to be mothered. C: Oh well. It sure wasn't like
that. T: But you do know that you should not have had to meet her needs
and feel insufficient? C: Well, not really, I don't know it. It sounds
good. But I still feel the same way. I have to try, and I'm always
insufficient. T: Can we touch where that boy you were still feels he
should have been able to do it? Can we tell him he shouldn't have had
to? C: (Silence) Sort of. (Silence) There's a hopeless feeling. I can
never do it right. My assertion has moved nothing at all. Therefore I
now pursue the feeling he finds there, the one he tried to express at
the outset: T: It feels hopeless to you. It's a feeling of "You can
never do it right." Does focusing detract from the depth of the
therapeutic relationship?

While some person-centred counsellors object to focusing in any form,
due to what they see as its diagnostic and directive elements, others
are more open to it so long as it is practised within a close
relationship with the client. For example Mearns (2003) writes: these
variants of a focusing response will only carry an impact if the
counsellor is close to the client's experiencing and the client
perceives that closeness. It is useless to endeavour to mimic these
responses as a technique

There may also be concern about whether focusing may actually militate
against entering into a relationship of 'relational depth' with the
client (Thorne, 2002, p. 7); that it could help the client to be in
touch with their experiencing, but draw them away from relationship with
the external world. However, Gendlin (1990, pp. 205--6) himself has
always emphasised that the use of focusing in therapy takes place within
a personal relationship:

150

Person-Centred Therapy

I want to start with the most important thing I have to say: the essence
of working with another person is to be present as a living being . . .
Do not let focusing, or reflecting, or anything else, get in between. .
. . the first thing we need to do is to communicate that attitude. That
is so necessary in a field that is becoming more and more
"professional", which is to say useless and expensive.

Other therapists within the broad experiential tradition also emphasise
the importance of not separating focusing as a procedure from the
therapeutic bond with the client. For instance, one conclusion from a
research project on focusing carried out by Claudia Clark (1990, p. 153)
is that 'Therapists using a heavily task-oriented form of therapy must
be particularly careful to pay attention to the bond aspect of the
therapeutic alliance.' Similarly, Leijssen (1997) urges the need for a
balance between therapeutic relationship and experiencing process.
Gendlin emphasises that although there is sense in which we turn
'inwards' when we focus, what we are turning our attention to is
actually our awareness of our situation. Feelings and situations go
together; a felt sense is a felt sense of a situation. And when our
feelings change, our situation is no longer the same. In focusing we are
not retreating into an inner subjective realm, but bringing our
awareness to the intricacy of what we are living. I will return to this
point when we look at Gendlin's theory of psychotherapy in Chapter 8.
There is a further dimension to the question about whether focusing
could detract from the depth of relational experiencing. Brian Thorne
(2002) argues that person-centred therapy has a mystical dimension. He
draws on some remarks which Carl Rogers (1986b, p. 198) made towards the
end of his life: I find that when I am closest to my inner, intuitive
self, when I am somehow in touch with the unknown in me, when perhaps I
am in a slightly altered state of consciousness in the relationship,
then whatever I do seems to be full of healing. . . . At those moments
it seems that my inner spirit has reached out and touched the inner
spirit of the other. Our relationship transcends itself and becomes a
part of something larger. Profound growth and healing and energy are
present.

Thorne (2002, p. 7) does not doubt the effectiveness of focusing, but he
wonders whether the move into focusing can be a flight for the therapist
from the challenge of entering into the kind of relational depth where
greater spiritual truth

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

151

can be encountered . . . Could it be that the client ends up in touch
with his or her body, attuned to the inner flow of experience,
emotionally literate and yet still alone and existentially bereft of
meaning?

I think that part of the answer to this is that there are indeed ways of
doing Focusing which are open to Thorne's objection. If the therapist is
not relating to the client in a way which makes the client feel safe and
at home with the therapist, then suggestions that the client might turn
their attention towards their inner experiencing can make the client
feel very alone. Focusing can only work effectively in a context in
which the client feels safe enough to explore their experiencing.
Sometimes we can feel safe enough on our own, at other times the
presence of another person is crucial, and where another person is
required it is essential that the person should 'receive' the focuser in
the warm, respectful way which is central to person-centred therapy.
Often in Focusing it helps if the therapist (or other listener) says
something like 'Maybe you and I can spend a bit of time with this hurt
bit . . . not probe it, just sort of keep it company . . . would that
feel OK?' Gendlin sometimes uses phrases like 'Can we sit down with it .
. . pitch a tent beside it.' The therapist is deeply with the client in
these moments, accompanying the client in being with their painful
experiencing. In Focusing, the therapist stays with the client as the
client engages with their experiencing. I think that Thorne has two
related concerns: one is that Focusing might isolate the client from the
therapist and from relationship with the world in general; the other is
that it might isolate the client from 'the greater spiritual truth'.
Thorne writes from a point of view which takes for granted that there is
a greater spiritual truth, and that this 'mystical reality' forms a
deeply important backdrop to the whole endeavour of counselling and
psychotherapy. I share his view, and I think that there is much in
Gendlin's philosophical position which can be used to articulate such a
view. I will return briefly to this point in Appendix A, along with some
brief discussion of the relationship between the 'spiritual' and the
'paranormal', but it may be worth just saying at this point that Gendlin
thinks in terms of an order of reality which has an intricacy and
responsiveness which can be expressed, but not exhaustively expressed,
in many different ways. We bring our symbols (our concepts and theories)
up to the infinite intricacy of the world, and the world responds to
them. It responds in different ways to different approaches, and Gendlin
takes this in a radical way. It is not just that we might approach a
client with the

152

Person-Centred Therapy

alternative perspectives of, say, Freud, Jung or cognitive theory, but
that all our concepts, including our most basic concepts of space and
time, are just possible ways of approaching the world. Certain
'paranormal' experiences, such as Jung's (1983, pp. 159--60) experience
of a thud in his head at the time a client shot himself, suggest that
our current notions of human beings as essentially separate in space and
time are not always useful concepts. There may be ways of thinking which
better accommodate the sphere of the 'paranormal', and Gendlin's
philosophy, far from cutting us off from this sphere, may begin to
provide a way of thinking about it more effectively. Is focusing
necessary for therapeutic change?

We have seen that focusing-oriented therapists do not hold that explicit
teaching of focusing is necessary for effective therapy. Nor is it held
that large portions of therapy sessions should involve focused
experiencing. Gendlin has always asserted that focusing is simply one
important element in therapy, while maintaining that procedures which
are carried out in non-experiential ways are unlikely to be effective.
So far as the debate between purist person-centred and focusingoriented
therapy is concerned, the question arises of whether there are typical
therapeutic changes which take place in purist personcentred therapy,
which are not in any significant way related to experiential focusing.
Brodley (1991, p. 5) says explicitly that 'focusing . . . is not
necessary for therapeutic change in clientcentered therapy'. She goes on
(p. 10) to list some 'change processes occurring in successful, helpful
client-centered work other than focusing'. 1. There is first the kind of
case where a client seems to become increasingly self-confident through
being understood and valued by the therapist. There seems here to be a
direct impact on the client of the therapist's empathic acceptance.
Rogers always emphasised the impact of being understood by another human
being: such understanding can make us feel that, after all, we belong to
the human race. Wilhelm Dilthey held that 'nothing human can fail to be
understood', from which we may derive the rather alarming corollary that
if we cannot be understood we are not human. The therapeutic importance
of being understood seems undeniable, but there is nothing in this which
contradicts Gendlin's view of psychotherapy. If we feel that

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

153

our experience does not make any sense, we will be unlikely to put much
trust in it. Nor will we be inclined to reveal what seems to be confused
nonsense to anyone else. Hence there will be both a block to any full
awareness of our experiencing, and a block to anyone else's attempts to
carry our experiencing forward. Being misunderstood alienates us from
others and from ourselves; correspondingly, empathic understanding helps
to put us back in touch with ourselves and with others. 2. Brodley
writes: 'Another non-focusing involved process that I have observed is
the gradual shift from self-hating feelings towards self-acceptance as a
direct result of the client receiving the therapist's acceptance in the
context of the client's confessions' (p. 10). This is of course a common
phenomenon, but it has a clear and indeed central place in
focusing-oriented psychotherapy: if we do not accept our feelings we are
unlikely to spend much time with them. Selfhatred is a powerful block to
looking patiently at what is 'in' our feelings. Hence the experience of
the therapist's acceptance can encourage our own acceptance of our
experience, and from there therapeutic movement can take place. However,
it seems unlikely that such movement would take place if, in spite of
the therapist's acceptance, the client did not become themselves more
accepting of their own experience. Both the above change processes can
be illuminated by Gendlin's (1984b, p. 83) conception of 'the client's
client': The felt sense is the client inside us. Our usual conscious
self is the therapist, often a crudely directive one who gets in the way
of our inward client all the time. That therapist frequently attacks in
a hostile way or at least wants to use all the old information, claims
to be smarter than their client, talks all the time, interrupts, takes
up time with distant inferences and interpretations, and hardly notices
that 'the client' is prevented from speaking. That 'directive therapist'
hardly knows the client is there . . . Research shows that those clients
succeed who are client-centered with their felt sense . . . But it would
be imprecise to call it being client-centred 'with oneself'. Rather, one
needs the distinction between the usual self and the felt sense. The
latter is exactly that part to which client-centered responses are
directed. From Plato to Freud people have distinguished different parts
of the psyche. Here now arises a distinction that is best delineated in
clientcentered terms.

154

Person-Centred Therapy

Just as with an external client, the felt sense responds to an attitude
which is accepting and understanding. The therapist's embodiment of
these attitudes can encourage the client to take the same sort of
attitude towards their felt sense; it is when that shift takes place
that therapeutic change is likely to follow. The two change processes
just discussed (changes resulting from therapist empathy and acceptance)
can thus be seen to be closely connected with the client's need to
engage with their own experiencing -- they are not 'processes other than
focusing' but processes which are involved in, and which facilitate,
focusing. 3. Brodley says 'Another non-focusing process I have observed
involves the supportive impact of the relationship resulting in actions
taken outside of the therapy that raise the client's confidence or
involve new learnings about the self.' This comment usefully draws
attention to an aspect of focusing-oriented therapy which can easily be
missed. The point of focusing is not to gain insight but to facilitate
change. The therapist's task is to be with the client in a way that
frees the client up, so that what is implicit in the client can be
expressed and lived. It is often true that a change in how one
experiences things can spontaneously lead to new forms of action, but at
other times one must act first, and then the experience will be
different. As I have discussed in Chapter 5, focusing-oriented
psychotherapy can and does work through the avenue of action.
Nevertheless, it would be quite wrong to say that all therapeutic change
results from the client relating to their experiencing in a
focusing-oriented way. Mia Leijssen, in a study (in Bozarth, 1998,
p. 281) of what clients found most helpful in their focusing sessions,
found that some of the helpful things were not to do with focusing at
all. One female client reported that the most important thing had been
the experience of being treated respectfully by a man. Here is something
specific to the client, and which happened (presumably) just by good
fortune. In a comment on Gendlin's philosophical work, Hatab (1997,
p. 245) says 'I can imagine anxiety being resolved by uncovering early
childhood traumas, by bootstrapping or coping skills, by the grace of
Jesus, by Buddhist emptiness, or even by some success or a little good
news.' To this Gendlin (1997b, p. 251) responds 'I love Hatab's list of
what might alleviate anxiety, including "a little bit of good news".
Yes, we also play without a . . . , and we can do mathematics where

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

155

the answer is prefigured.' By 'without a . . . ' Gendlin means without
the felt sense (I will explain the (. . .) device further in Chapter 8):
while focusing-induced therapeutic change results from a restructuring
of experience that comes out of a '. . .', there can be significant
emotional changes which happen in a more direct way. It may be true that
some phobias can be deconditioned without proceeding via a felt sense,
and it is certainly true that good news can alleviate depression, that
finding out that you were not responsible for some bad result can
alleviate guilt and so on. Life changes can give more relief than any
therapy, but such changes cannot often be arranged in order. Some direct
therapeutic interventions may also bring change (the intuitive therapist
just happens to hit on the right image; the charismatic therapist
inspires; the Zen master hits you over the head). All this is
undeniable: focusing is not the only source of help there is, but it is
one of the few resources which are available, however impoverished, or
lacking in grace, the external world may at times seem to be. Empirical
issues The empirical testing of theories in psychotherapy raises a whole
range of complex issues. Carl Rogers himself was the first to take the
possibility of such testing seriously, and client-centred therapy
probably remains the form of therapy on which the most empirical
research has been done. Regarding the Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis,
Neill Watson (1984), after a thorough review of the evidence, concluded
that the hypothesis has never been effectively tested. This has been
partly because the presence of the three therapist conditions has often
been assessed by external judges rather than by how the Conditions have
been perceived by the client, partly because in those cases where client
perceptions have been used, not all of the six therapeutic conditions
have been included, and partly because not enough has been done to
establish whether the sometimes-observed correlation between the
Conditions and therapeutic change is a matter of the conditions causing
the change in the client. (As we saw in Chapter 3, even Rogers himself
at one time wondered if it might not be the other way round: that the
way the client is determines which attitudes are called forth in the
therapist.) Yet while Rogers' Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis has not
been satisfactorily tested, there have been many general tests of the

156

Person-Centred Therapy

view that the client-centred counselling (at least as much as other
forms of counselling) is correlated with therapeutic improvement. In
Britain there has recently been a commonly accepted view, at least in
the medical profession, that cognitive-behavioural therapy is more
effective than client-centred therapy, but a recent large-scale study on
depression by King et al. (2000) showed that while psychological therapy
had a greater impact than normal medical care alone, there was no
difference between the effectiveness of cognitive-behavioural and
client-centred therapy. This, and many other studies, indicate that
counselling and psychotherapy do contribute to therapeutic change, but
there is little evidence that any particular form of therapy is better
than any other (Smith and Glass, 1977; Stiles et al., 1986; Lambert and
Bergin, 1994). This conclusion is consistent with Gendlin's view, which
is that all the major forms of therapy are likely to be effective if
conducted in a way which encourages the client to be more in touch with
their own experiencing. As we have seen, for Gendlin the different forms
of therapy are best regarded not as different therapies but as different
avenues along which therapy can be conducted. What is important is not
which avenue is used (whether dreamwork, Gestalt procedures, reflection
of feeling, psycho-analytical interpretation and so on) but whether what
is done is done in a client-centred way, that is, a way which
continually refers back to the client's own experiencing. If Gendlin is
right, one would expect studies of any therapeutic approach to indicate
that sometimes the approach works well, and sometimes not, depending on
whether it was conducted in a client-centred way. What one would not
expect would be any overall difference in the effectiveness of the
different approaches. The negative aspect of this prediction -- that
there should be no significant differences between the effectiveness of
the different approaches -- seems well confirmed. We can turn then to
the positive aspect of the prediction -- that Focusing should be
therapeutically effective, and that therapeutic procedures which are
focusingoriented should be more effective than those which are not so
oriented. Gendlin's empirical evidence for the efficacy of Focusing goes
back to the time of the Wisconsin schizophrenia project. Gendlin and his
colleagues had initially expected that exposure of the client to the
therapist conditions would result in a gradual increase in experiencing
level, which would be correlated with therapeutic progress. In fact the
results seemed to show that the impact of the Conditions was not very
great, and that the clients who made

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

157

progress were often those who, from the start, had higher experiencing
levels. Through the years Gendlin has referred to a number of studies
which appear to support this view. Klein et al. wrote in 1969: The most
powerful and consistent finding in the early studies (Gendlin and
Tomlinson, 1967; Gendlin, Beebe, Cassens, Klein and Oberlander, 1968) is
that successful therapy patients start, continue, and end therapy at a
higher level of experiencing or process than do less successful
patients.

Gendlin (1986c, p. 133) wrote: We had predicted that success cases would
increase on the Experiencing Scale. Instead we found (Gendlin, Beebe,
Cassens, Klein and Oberlander, 1968) and continue to find
(Mathieu-Coughlan & Klein, 1984; Klein, Mathieu-Coughlan & Kiesler,
1986) that scores on the Experiencing Scale are significantly higher
also in the first period of successful therapy . . . The challenge . . .
was to get failure-predicted people to do what we found
success-predicted clients doing.

Brodley (1988) surveyed the evidence provided by these studies and
others, finding a total of forty-eight articles, monographs or chapters
in books 'which were mentioned by Gendlin and others as providing
support for the generalization that early-in-therapy experiential level
predicts therapy outcome' (p. 6). However, only seventeen of these were
original empirical studies of the relation between early-in-therapy
experiential level and outcome; the other thirty-one were theoretical
studies, or studies relating experiencing to variables other than
outcome, or reports which repeated the findings of the seventeen
relevant studies. Of these seventeen, eight studies seemed to confirm
Gendlin's hypothesis, while the other nine did not. Brodley then went
through each of the eight 'confirmatory' studies, and suggested various
reasons why in each case the research procedure was inadequate. Typical
reasons were lack of a high correlation between the ratings made by the
process raters, and the possibility that even in very early sessions
therapist conditions might be affecting experiencing level. Brodley
concludes (p. 12) that '\[t\]here is not sufficient scientific evidence
for believing that there is a positive relation between earlyin-therapy
experiencing level and outcome at this point in time. Therefore the
generalization, though often stated, cannot be a reason to be led away
from client-centred therapy.'

158

Person-Centred Therapy

The view that high experiencing level is essential for therapeutic
success has been widely doubted even by many who are otherwise
enthusiastic about Focusing. Mia Leijssen, who has been involved in
research in Focusing since 1981, writes (Leijssen, 1997): Fifteen years
of intensive process research make me conclude that the capacity to move
smoothly along an experiential continuum, and to shift the attention
from inside to outside and back, may be a better indicator of healthy
functioning than the one-sided fixation about one particular
experiencing level. . . . A balanced theory of therapy which leaves room
for internal and external dialogue, in which following and steering are
allowed to alternate, in which the two vital components,
i.e. relationship and experiencing process, remain in interaction is the
most fruitful combination for a client to grow in.

Gendlin himself said in the early days (Gendlin etal., 1968, pp. 227,
228) We can conclude that less than one third of those who start low are
successful, but still, it is incorrect to conclude that this never
occurs! . . . there is a fairly strong relationship between initial EXP
level and case outcome, but there are enough exceptions to warrant
consideration . . . There may be two patterns. In some people, effective
therapy behavior is present all along. In others, a good outcome occurs
because they do develop their experiencing capacity as therapy proceeds.

And in connection with a recent study in which clients were trained in
Focusing and their experiencing levels recorded in the two sessions
before and the two sessions after the training, Gendlin remarks (Durak
et al., 1997, p. 14): The findings show that while the focusing process
contributes substantially to successful outcomes, it is not impossible
to succeed in therapy without focusing ability. One client of the
seventeen succeeded despite not being effectively trained, and beginning
and remaining low on the EXP scale.

The reason for this is presumably that, as discussed above, there are a
range of non-focusing processes which have therapeutic effects. Gendlin
has never claimed that focusing constitutes the whole of therapy, only
that it has a substantial contribution to make. Marion Hendricks (2002)
has provided a comprehensive review of the empirical evidence in support
of focusing-oriented psychotherapy. She lists twenty-six studies showing
that higher experiencing levels

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

159

correlate with successful outcome in therapy. (However, thirteen of
these are studies which Brodley maintains are open to criticism.) One
sophisticated recent study (Goldman, 1997), showing higher Experiencing
in session two to be correlated with greater reduction in depressive
symptoms over the course of therapy, may be especially worthy of study.
Hendricks (2002, pp. 231--3) notes twenty-three studies in which
Focusing, measured by instruments other than the Experiencing Scale, is
correlated with successful outcome, including studies with prison
inmates, psychotic patients and patients with health-related issues. She
also cites a number of studies which provide empirical evidence that
focusing training can increase experiencing level, and lead to increased
therapeutic success. Orlinsky et al. (1994), in an extensive review of
process research based on a literature search from 1985 to 1992, provide
some incidental support for Gendlin's general position. Amongst their
conclusions are that the therapeutic relationship is almost always
important (p. 308), that it is not what clients talk about but how they
talk about it which is significantly associated with outcome (p. 296),
and that client's selfrelatedness (in Gendlin's terms, 'experiencing
level') is very significant (p. 339). Not all research into focusing and
focusing-oriented psychotherapy is directly concerned with therapeutic
outcome. The 'evidence' in favour of a theory is not confined to
deducing its consequences and testing them against experience. In
addition there is the question of whether the theory is fruitful in
uncovering new relationships between phenomena, or in showing that what
was expected does not in fact occur, or in generating new concepts and
new lines of research. In this connection it will be worth looking
briefly at some studies which indicate the potential of the
focusing-oriented approach. There is an interesting series of studies by
Rainer Sachse (1990a,b) on the effects of therapist responses on the
'depth' of client experiencing. Sachse introduces a scale of processing
ranging from 'shallow' to 'deep'. At the shallow extreme the client does
not process their experience at all. Then there are successively deeper
modes of processing, the later ones being focusing processes: (1)
intellectualising (using knowledge without reference to own feelings or
personal data); (2) report (concrete descriptions without explicit
reference to opinions, evaluations and feelings);

160

Person-Centred Therapy

(3) assessment/evaluation (assessment labelling such as 'A is stupid';
    the assessment is seen as a characteristic of the content);
(4) personal assessment (recognition that the assessment is part of the
    client's own frame of reference);
(5) personal meaning (the client senses a felt meaning about the content
    and says so explicitly);
(6) explication of relevant structures of meaning (the client verbalises
    aspects of meaning which the content has for them);
(7) integration (making connections between the verbalised meanings and
    other meanings). The therapist's responses can be assessed by a
    similar scale, and then for each therapist response it can be noted
    whether the therapist matches the client's level of processing
    (e.g. the client speaks at the level of reporting events, and the
    therapist comments on those events), or whether the therapist
    exceeds the client's processing level (e.g. the therapist stimulates
    personal assessment when the client is still on the level of
    reporting events) or whether the therapist keeps at a lower level of
    processing than the client (e.g. the therapist asks about the events
    when the client is at the level of personal assessment). Sachse
    (1990b, p. 325) gives the following illustration: A client says,
    "Yesterday, I had again a terrible quarrel with my husband." This
    statement is of a purely reporting nature. What the therapist can do
    now is to encourage the client to continue with her report (the
    therapist offers a level-maintaining proposal, e.g., by saying, "You
    have had quarrels like that quite frequently", or by asking "Have
    you had quarrels like that often?") On the other hand, the therapist
    could make a proposal that encourages the client to attend to
    emotional aspects of the comment (in this case, a deepening proposal
    is offered that raises the level from 3 to 6) for example by
    commenting, "This must have been a terrible experience for you," or
    asking "What did you feel at that moment?". However the therapist
    may also flatten the level by prompting the client to speculate
    about her husband's motives (this will bring the process to the
    intellectualizing level), for example, asking a question like "What
    do you think causes your husband to get involved in such a quarrel?"

Sachse found (Hendricks, 2002, p. 232) that 'depth' of client
experiencing is related to therapeutic success as measured by
personality tests and therapist estimates of success. He also showed
that the therapists of successful clients tended to make more 'deepening
processing proposals' than the therapists of less-successful clients.

Objections: Issues of Principle and Empirical Issues

161

A study by McMullin (1972) suggested that client-experiencing level
could be increased by Focusing instructions, even when therapist empathy
and positive regard were kept deliberately low. This suggests that there
can be circumstances in which clients can feel safe enough to engage in
Focusing without the presence of those conditions which usually create
the necessary safety. From a process-experiential perspective, Claudia
Clark (1990) has investigated in detail what takes place when clients
engage in focusing in the course of experiential therapy. Her method
involved the use of Robert Elliott's (1989) Comprehensive Process
Analysis (CPA), which is a way of describing significant therapy events
in context. The context includes such things as general client
background (conflicts, style, symptoms), therapist background
(orientation, level of experience), recent extra-therapy events, client
task (what the client is trying to do), therapist task (what the
therapist is trying to do), client actions and style in the session,
therapist action and style in the session, impact on client of the
therapeutic event and effectiveness of the event as assessed
psychometrically. The CPA framework analyses the 'pathways' of
significant therapy events in terms of what contributes to them and what
flows from them. Amongst Clark's conclusions (pp. 138--53) are (1) that
focusing may be of value to unassertive clients where their inability to
assert themselves comes from their difficulty in knowing what their
experience is; (2) that focusing is interrupted not so much by strong
emotion as by the intrusion of the 'inner critic'; (3) that the impact
of problematical affect can be ameliorated through helping the client to
be aware of the positive aspects of painful experiencing (for instance
that although it is painful, the client really wants to work through
it); (4) that trainees can be helped to use focusing with clients
through focusing being presented as a 'natural' attitude of receptivity
towards internal processes rather than as a prescribed set of six
'movements'; (5) that therapists using focusing need to give attention
to the 'bond' as well as the 'task' aspect of the therapeutic alliance.
James Iberg (2002) has developed scales for measuring the extent to
which focusing has taken place in a session. The scales incorporate
subscales which assess how clients relate to their experiencing (to what
extent they have the friendly, curious, patient focusing attitude), to
what extent feelings 'open' in the session (to what extent a felt sense
forms) and to what extent there is release or 'carrying-forward'. One
scale (the Focusing-oriented Session Report) is based on a questionnaire
which the client completes after the session; the other (the Therapist

162

Person-Centred Therapy

Ratings of Client Focusing Activity) is based on a questionnaire which
the therapist completes. Iberg reports good correlations between client
and therapist ratings on each subscale, and also good correlation
between the level of focusing present and the level of client
satisfaction with the session. Part of the evidential basis for
focusing-oriented psychotherapy lies in its potential for generating
creative research. Indications that this potential exists can be seen
not only in works such as that of Sachse, Clarke and Iberg within the
broad client-centred tradition but also (Gendlin, 1969) in research into
experientially oriented versions of procedures used in other schools of
therapy, such as Gestalt (Greenberg, 1979), desensitisation procedures
(Weitzman, 1967, pp. 311--12) and work with post-traumatic stress
disorder (Levine, 1997; Rothschild, 2000). So far as coherence with
other knowledge is concerned, views which we hold in psychotherapy
generally have connections with, and implications for, fields such as
ethics, education, psychology, sociology, biology, linguistics, art,
spirituality and philosophy. A plausible theory of psychotherapy needs
to maintain its place in relation to all these fields, and the extent to
which it can do so will be part of its evidential basis. In Appendix A,
I will explore how Gendlin's view of psychotherapy fares in this regard,
but I hope in this chapter to have given reasons for thinking that even
if we take the simpleminded view of evidential support which
unfortunately is current in many contemporary discussions,
focusing-oriented psychotherapy has as good an evidential basis as any
other form of therapy. I will discuss the theoretical foundation of
focusing-oriented therapy further in Chapter 8, but before doing that
will discuss briefly the question of how the general principles and
practice of focusingoriented therapy can be incorporated into
counselling and psychotherapy training courses. There are as yet rather
few such courses, so that Chapter 7 has the character of a preliminary
reconnaissance.

7 Training and Supervision

We have seen that in Gendlin's view focusing-oriented psychotherapy is
not so much another 'school' of therapy as an 'experientialising' of the
procedures of any school. There could therefore be training courses
grounded in the procedures of, say, cognitive-behavioural or
psychodynamic therapy, which would differ from the standard courses only
insofar as they explicitly incorporated focusing-oriented principles.
Although the procedures of the specific schools (such as
desensitisation, free association or dreamwork) would be retained, there
would be a fundamental re-orientation towards the primacy of the
client's experiencing. Whether such courses will be developed is an open
question. The relationship of focusing-oriented to person-centred
therapy is a special one, as we have seen. In standard person-centred
training courses there are characteristic procedures which are already
closely connected with focusing principles, especially active listening,
reflection and the provision of safety through the therapist conditions.
In addition, as the person-centred approach has developed, there has
been a growing emphasis on the presence of the therapist, and on the
therapist's need for self-awareness and self-acceptance. Person-centred
training courses already incorporate much that is focusing-oriented, at
least so long as listening, reflection and the presence of the therapist
are taught with a view to helping trainees to help clients to engage
with their own experiencing. Training at diploma level The institutional
structures for counselling and psychotherapy training vary widely from
one country to another. In this section I will refer mainly to the
situation in Britain, where the award of a diploma 163

164

Person-Centred Therapy

typically follows a two-year part-time, or one-year full-time course.
Such training is usually preceded by a one-year certificate course in
counselling skills, and is followed by a period of at least three years
in which sufficient hours of supervised clinical practice are built up
in order for the practitioner to apply for registration as an Accredited
Counsellor. Gendlin's work, and experiential therapy generally, is much
less familiar in Britain than the 'standard' person-centred therapy
which I outlined in Chapter 1. Standard person-centred training books
such as Mearns (1997) or Mearns and Thorne (1988) include short sections
on focusing and on basic focusing-oriented concepts such as the 'felt
sense'. Some person-centred training courses include a brief
introduction to focusing, and so do some integrative courses. The
full-time diploma course in counselling on which I teach at the
University of East Anglia has for a number of years included one or two
sessions on Focusing. Beginning in the 2003--2004 academic year we have
added a focusingoriented component to the course which runs through most
of the year, and trainees also work regularly in individual focusing
partnerships. The University of East Anglia course can provide an
illustration of how focusing-oriented principles can be integrated in a
person-centred training course. The main components of the course
currently are: • twice-weekly meetings of the student community along
with two tutors; • weekly skills training groups; • fortnightly group
supervision; • weekly individual supervision; • weekly personal
development groups; • theory sessions; • fortnightly listening/focusing
groups; • focusing partnerships. These course components, which largely
follow the pattern described in Mearns' (1997) book on person-centred
counselling training, can be seen slightly differently from the
perspectives of 'standard' person-centred and of focusing-oriented
therapy. I will sketch how the components of the course look from a
focusingoriented point of view, which can be compared with the
'standard' view presented in Mearns' book. On this course some of the
tutors are more 'focusing-oriented' than others, but this does not seem
to create any difficulties.

Training and Supervision

165

From a focusing-oriented point of view the different components of the
course provide a range of opportunities for trainees to experience
interaction with other individuals, with different groups, with various
procedures, with different theoretical viewpoints and, crucially, with
themselves. Out of these interactions come changes and developments in
the trainees' experiencing which should enable them to interact with
clients in an increasingly therapeutic way. The learning process is not
seen as a matter of learning discrete skills which are then applied to
specifiable client problems. Rather, each learning experience is seen as
deepening the resources which the trainee has available to them when
working with a client. Just how those resources will be deployed in the
moment will be a matter of the trainee's felt sense of what is needed at
that moment in the relationship with that client. As with any other
training process, much depends on the general ethos and atmosphere in
which the training takes place. It is central to person-centred and
focusing-oriented thinking that counselling education is a drawing-out
of what is already a potential in the trainee. The training should
facilitate the trainee becoming the kind of therapist which they can
become. It sometimes happens that trainees coming on to a person-centred
training course feel that they must jettison all their old ways of being
with people and take on the new 'person-centred' way. But this can
involve simply the adoption of a new set of conditions of worth, which
may cause more trouble than the set which was jettisoned! A
person-centred training course needs not only to introduce notions such
as the therapist conditions and conditions of worth, but also to
encourage the trainee to explore what these concepts can mean for them.
Person-centred concepts, like any concepts, can be adopted in a
'structure-bound' way which skips over the trainee's lived experiencing.
Being 'person-centred' cannot be pinned down to any specific forms of
behaviour, or even any specific attitudes; it is a matter of whatever,
in the circumstances, encourages the client's ongoing interaction with
their own experiencing. However, only certain kinds of interaction will,
at any particular moment, carry the individual forward. Hence a
counselling training course needs to provide a wide range of learning
opportunities which can be taken up by trainees. The different
components of the course provide different opportunities for
interaction, analogous to the different 'avenues' of therapy which I
discussed in Chapter 5.

166

Person-Centred Therapy

Community group

The community group fulfils several functions on the course. As well as
having an administrative function, it provides an opportunity for the
trainees to feel connected with the course as a whole. It tends to draw
out certain kinds of personal difficulties, especially those related to
conflicts between the need to belong and the fear of being rejected
(Draper, 2002, p. 46). It also provides a place in which to practise
being empathic, accepting and genuine. Mearns (2003) sees the community
group as above all an arena for the development of congruence, and this
remains the case if we consider the community group from a
focusing-oriented perspective. If counsellors are to help clients relate
to their own experiencing they need to be able to do this effectively
themselves, even in difficult circumstances which can sometimes arise in
the client--therapist interaction. For many people, the setting of the
large group provides genuinely difficult circumstances for speaking
authentically from one's own immediate experiencing. This is true both
for the shy trainee who finds it difficult to stay in touch with their
own experiencing, in the midst of the fear which the group situation
arouses, and also for the trainee who is used to relating to people in
groups in a more superficial kind of way, but not used to speaking from
the level of their own felt sense. The community group also provides
experience of a situation in which one almost has to work from the level
of the felt sense. The interactions which go on in a group of twenty or
more people often cannot be understood in terms of any familiar concepts
or patterns. Nevertheless people can still speak and act. Personal
development group

The function of the personal development group centres around the issue
that trainees need to work through their own personal difficulties
sufficiently for those difficulties not to interfere significantly with
their client work. Counsellors need to be able to provide a safe, yet
stimulating, environment for their clients, and personal issues which
interfere with this requirement need to be worked on. Examples would be
trainee tendencies to push their own views on to clients, or not really
listen, or over-intellectualise, or get caught in clients' projections,
or get lured into clients' games, or not be aware of their own 'sore
spots'.

Training and Supervision

167

Personal development groups, as distinct from individual therapy, are
important here because some of the things which can interfere with a
counsellor's effectiveness may not constitute a problem from the
trainee's point of view; they may be unaware that there is a problem for
other people. Clearly there is an overlap of function between the
community group and the personal development group, but there is
undoubtedly a difference in the quality of the group experience which
has to do simply with the difference in numbers. (On the UEA course
there are normally twenty trainees in the community group and ten in the
personal development group.) In the personal development group there is
more time for a trainee to work uninterruptedly with an issue, in the
kind of way they might do in individual therapy, whereas in the
community group there will seldom be the opportunity for sustained
attention to the individual's experiencing. The community group can give
sustained support to a trainee, which can be the more powerful because
of the number of people involved, but what the community group primarily
provides is the opportunity to hold on to one's own experiencing in the
face of interruptions, challenges and the competing needs of others. The
question of why, beyond a certain size of around seven to ten people,
the group experience is different, is an interesting question in its own
right (Mountford, 2001). There is one difference between 'standard'
person-centred view and the focusing-oriented view on the question of
personal development. The standard view is that trainees should above
all develop their ability to manifest the therapist conditions, since it
is the ability to offer the conditions which is the healing element in
therapy. From a focusing-oriented point of view the therapist conditions
remain important in providing a safe place in which the client can
engage with their experiencing, but the most important thing is simply
that the therapist be present as a human being. From a focusing-oriented
point of view the therapist does not have to be anything approaching a
'fully-functioning person'; they simply have to be present, and to be
able to set aside their own personal difficulties for the duration of
the session. The most important things are (a) to be there and (b) not
to obstruct the client's process. This difference in theoretical
viewpoint makes no difference to the work in the personal development
group, but I think that the focusingoriented position can make it easier
for trainees who become overanxious about whether they have achieved
sufficient 'levels' of the therapist conditions.

168

Person-Centred Therapy

Skills group

In the skills group trainees work on all the standard counselling
skills, such as listening, reflecting, building the therapeutic
alliance, issues surrounding beginnings and endings, and finding ways of
responding which are right for the individual trainee. The more
specifically focusing-oriented skills are worked with in a separate
group. Listening/focusing group

The listening/focusing group deepens the trainees' listening ability,
gives plenty of time to develop awareness of what happens when we are
listened to carefully, gives experience of the 'self-propelled process'
which can be initiated by exact reflection, gives experience of the
difference between responses which reflect content, or emotion, or
'point to' the edge of awareness. It is also a place where trainees can
begin to develop the crucial quality of self-acceptance, as they learn
to be with their own experiencing in a friendly way. In this part of the
course Focusing is also introduced as a procedure which trainees can
learn in order to develop their own ability to recognise and stay with a
felt sense. It is a place to learn experientially about what can
interfere with the process of experiencing, and it can provide some
experience of working with dreams, with 'inner critics', 'problematic
reactions', 'inner splits' and 'unfinished business'. Focusing
partnerships

The focusing partnerships provide a place on the course where trainees
have a regular weekly opportunity to be listened to with undivided
attention for a period of twenty minutes or so each way. It is entirely
up to the focuser how much they wish to reveal of the content of their
experience; the listener is there simply to encourage and assist with
the process. These partnerships are designed to show experientially how
deeply therapeutic listening and focusing can be. They also go some way
towards satisfying the British Association for Counselling and
Psychotherapy (BACP) requirement that trainees should have some
experience of being in the client position. It has always been the
person-centred view that no one should be required to engage in
counselling, and the BACP has respected this position by allowing, as an
option to individual therapy, that trainees must engage in personal
development work which provides an equivalent to such therapy. The
vagueness of this has led to some difficulties in deciding what

Training and Supervision

169

can count as an equivalent, but regular one-to-one listening/focusing
partnerships come as close as anything can to satisfying the
requirement. Theory sessions

These introduce the basic person-centred theory and the central focusing
concepts, and also provide introductions to other major theoretical
positions such as the psychodynamic and the cognitivebehavioural. In
addition, they introduce ways of thinking about specific kinds of
difficulties, such as anxiety, depression, bereavement, and the effects
of trauma and abuse. They also introduce issues such as spirituality,
gender and sexuality, race and culture, which impinge on the work of
therapists. Grappling with the intellectual issues involved in therapy
is to be encouraged, but this 'avenue', the avenue of interaction with
ideas, will be of more importance to some trainees than others. Those
from a more academic background may find themselves giving more
attention to other avenues of learning of which they have little
experience, while those with considerable experience of helping
relationships, but little theoretical knowledge, may find in the theory
sessions exciting new worlds to explore. As always, only the individual
trainee can sense -- often with the help of others -- what it is that
they most need at this point in their development. Supervision

I will discuss focusing-oriented supervision more generally later, but
on any counselling course supervision provides the opportunity for the
trainee to reflect on their practice with the help of an experienced
counsellor. It is important that the supervision session should provide
a safe enough place for the trainee to bring what is really troubling
them in their work. For this reason it is best for the individual
supervisor to have no other role on the training course, and especially
not to be involved in any assessment procedures. In addition to weekly
individual supervision, the supervision group provides opportunities for
trainees to role-play clients and to get a whole range of different
responses to their work. The role-playing of a client is also, of
course, a good method of getting a felt sense of what it may be like to
be that client, and following a role-play trainees may find themselves
interacting rather differently with the client. Role-plays can be
recorded and replayed, so that the trainee can go

170

Person-Centred Therapy

back and examine, for example, just what it was which made them feel
awkward when the 'client' said that. Focusing-oriented psychotherapy
training Again I will discuss training primarily in the British context.
Because of the developing interest in focusing and experiential therapy
there seems to be a place for courses which will enable qualified
therapists to experience an in-depth training in the theory and practice
of focusing-oriented therapy. The main interest in such a course (in
Britain) will undoubtedly come from person-centred therapists who wish
to develop their understanding of focusing-oriented therapy, which they
would see as part of the person-centred approach. However, it may also
be that qualified practitioners in other approaches will be interested
in seeing what focusing can add to the way in which they normally work.
Training of this kind is new in Britain, but it may be of interest to
give a brief outline of a course which we are introducing at the
University of East Anglia. The course is a one-year full-time diploma in
Focusing and Experiential Psychotherapy, which with the addition of a
research methods module and a dissertation can be taken as a master's
degree. The objectives of the diploma course are: • To provide
sufficient experience and theoretical understanding of the
focusing-oriented approach to enable therapists to incorporate this
approach into their clinical work. • To provide an appreciation of the
philosophical grounding of focusing-oriented therapy. • To explore the
ways in which focusing-oriented therapy is related to 'standard'
person-centred therapy. • To enable students to make use of Focusing in
their own personal and professional development. • To provide an
historical understanding of the development of the focusing-oriented
approach. • To develop an awareness of how the experiential approach can
inform other approaches to therapy. • To develop an awareness of how
Focusing can contribute to creative activity in general. • To introduce
students to issues involved at the interface between psychotherapy and
spirituality.

Training and Supervision

171

The sessions on general focusing theory and its philosophical grounding
will include: • the historical relationships between client-centred
therapy, experiential therapy and focusing; • the basic concepts of the
'felt sense' and the ways in which it is distinguished from emotions,
imagery and ordinary physical sensations; • process difficulties such as
intellectualising, externalising and 'overwhelm'; • therapist procedures
for engendering process steps -- the concepts of 'implying',
'carrying-forward', 'handle-words' and 'clearing a space'; • Gendlin's
'six steps' and Focusing as a taught procedure; • bringing focusing into
therapy sessions; • the philosophical background in existentialism,
phenomenology and pragmatism; • the theory of the relationship between
experiencing and concepts; • the theory of specific process blocks such
as conflicts and the suppression of experiencing; • theoretical
approaches to the 'inner critic'; • experientialising of other
approaches to therapy, such as Gestalt and cognitive-behavioural; • the
experiential theory of dreams; • the relationship between Focusing and
meditation; • experiential theories of personality change: Gendlin,
Greenberg, Rice and Elliott; • the self and 'parts' of the self.
'Disidentification'; • introduction to Gendlin's A Process Model; •
objections to focusing-oriented psychotherapy; • the research and
evidential basis for focusing-oriented psychotherapy. The experiential
part of the course will include: • experiential work in listening and
reflection; • work in Focusing partnerships; • work with finding a felt
sense; • looking at how process steps come; • learning to be aware of
the body-sense; • learning to 'be with' a felt sense; • practice in
using Gendlin's six focusing steps;

172

Person-Centred Therapy

• practice in role-play; • working with the 'inner critic'; • working
with conflicts and experiential suppression; • experientialised versions
of the empty-chair and two-chair techniques; • experientialised working
with cognitive-behavioural procedures; • working with dreams; •
experimenting with the differential effects of meditation instructions
compared with Focusing instructions. Courses similar to this would seem
to be appropriate in countries in which psychotherapy training is
undertaken at postgraduate level following completion of a psychology
degree. Training in teaching Focusing as a procedure The Focusing
Institute in New York has developed a structure for the training of
Focusing teachers. It is emphasised that such training is not a training
in psychotherapy. Rather it trains people to teach Focusing to anyone
who wishes to use the procedure for their own benefit. There is an
international network of 'Focusing co-ordinators' who are responsible
for setting up courses which train Focusing teachers. There are
progressive levels of training and a process of certification for the
different levels. In the same way, there are the beginnings of a network
of trainers in 'Thinking at the Edge' which applies Focusing principles
to creative thinking. Different countries may in addition have their own
training programmes. The British Focusing Teachers' Association, for
example, has courses and provides its own certification. Supervision

Focusing-oriented principles would encourage the counsellor to speak
from their felt sense of clients, to notice subtle feelings which they
may have in connection with a client, perhaps a sense of unease or
excitement, and then to gently approach this felt sense and enquire what
is 'in' it. The counsellor can also be encouraged to ask themself
questions such as 'What would I really like to say here?' or 'What stops
me?' and wait to see what comes. At the same time the focusing-oriented
supervisor will want to stay with their own felt sense of what the
counsellor is doing, and of what might be happening for the client. The
intricacy of the supervision situation far exceeds

Training and Supervision

173

what can be expressed in words, so that only responses which come from
the supervisor's whole felt sense are likely to be helpful. Lambers
(2000, p. 187) writes that person-centred supervision is a matter of
facilitating congruence. The role of the supervisor is not to judge the
counsellor's work from some outside perspective, but 'to facilitate the
therapist's ability to be open to her experience so that she can become
fully present and engaged in the relationship with the client'. Focusing
can be used in an explicit way in helping the therapist to be open to
their experience, as shown in the following extract from a supervision
session (Baljon, 2002, p. 320--1). The therapist already knows how to
focus. Jill, the therapist, begins by saying that her problem is that
the problems of her client seem so understandable to her. The supervisor
is intrigued by this remark, and asks what she means by
'understandable'. Jill says that the client is unfit for work and that
he is worried about making his mortgage repayments. The supervisor still
does not understand Jill's problem and asks what this means to her. Jill
says that she has a feeling that she should be able to solve these
problems for the client, although she realises that this is impossible.
The supervisor recognises here a difficulty with which Jill often
struggles, and says S3: Yes, that is a field of tension in this
profession. You empathise with how someone gets in a fix through
practical circumstances and you cannot do anything about it. But what do
you feel, when you think about it for a minute, when you realise what
the client is going through? J4: Of course, this is my doctor-attitude
again, my desire to help find a practical solution. S4: Yes, but think
about what you feel inside yourself for a minute when you consider the
financial situation of your client, now that he has to live on a
disability insurance. ( Jill starts to focus.) J5: Some sort of tension.
S5: Where do you experience this tension? ( Jill imagines how it would
be to be the client and focuses on what emotions this evokes in her.)
J6: Here on my breast, as if a stone is weighing me down. S6: As if you
bear a burden? J7: No, not like that, it doesn't weigh down on my back.
I think it is extra difficult for me because there are children
involved. (The next intervention sprang forth from my perception of
Jill's facial expression.) S7: You seem to feel something like sorrow
now as well.

174

Person-Centred Therapy

J8: Yes . . . now I remember, that is what the client needs, that he can
express his emotions about this, that these emotions are allowed to
exist. ............... J10: Now a sort of heavy feeling rises to my
head. S10: Can you breathe towards that feeling? J11: What do you mean?
S11: You know, let the feeling be there and breathe calmly. J12: It is
still as if it is not allowed, as if that is not my job, as a therapist,
being occupied with my own feelings that way . . . S12: How does it feel
to realise that these messages keep emerging inside of you, saying that
you should be rational? J13: I feel something like . . . not exactly
sad. S13: It moves you. J14: More a feeling as of a child that is not
allowed to do something, a bit of, a bit of . . . yes, sadness after
all.

The supervisor then worked for a bit with the therapist on how she could
deal with the inner critical voice which tells her that she should not,
as a therapist, be occupied with her own feelings. Much later, Jill
recalled that this supervision session had been a turning point in her
personal development. While imagining herself to be the client she had
had an intense sensation in her breast, which had given greater depth to
her experience. For the first time she had understood what a 'felt
sense' was . . . She had experienced how she could be in touch with
herself and with the client at the same time, without losing sight of
the distinction between her own feelings and those of the client. She no
longer saw that many mental images when focusing now, but made contact
with her physical experience instead. She emphasised that time had been
a very important factor for her in the supervision. She had been enabled
to discover what was meant by congruence in her own time. (ibid.,
p. 322)

8 Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

In this chapter I will outline some of the central themes in Gendlin's
account of psychotherapy. Gendlin's views are not easy to summarise, and
his major work A Process Model (1997a) has not yet been formally
published, although a draft of it has been available for some time from
the Focusing Institute in New York. Rather more accessible introductions
can be found in Gendlin (1962/1997, 1964b/1973, 1990, 1991b, 1996). It
could be some years before his work is thoroughly discussed and
understood, but in the meantime even a partial understanding of it may
contribute much to our understanding of what psychotherapy involves. In
what follows I have tried to sketch my own present understanding of
psychotherapy as it has developed through a study of Gendlin's writings.
I have tried to convey what I take to be Gendlin's central ideas, but
have to some limited extent presented them in my own way. Gendlin's view
is that in reading we 'cross' what we read with our own understandings
(I will discuss 'crossing' shortly) and that through this we are carried
forward. This book, and especially this chapter, comes from the crossing
of Gendlin's writings with my own thought and experience. In the reader
there will then be a further crossing which I hope will be fruitful. The
implicit (. . .) There is an implicit background of feeling to all we do
and say. We can turn our attention to what we are feeling, and refer to
aspects of it. There is then an interaction between the continuing
feeling-process and the attention we bring to it. The interaction
generates a specifiable feeling, a 'this'. We may recognise the feeling
as of a particular sort 175

176

Person-Centred Therapy

(jealous, excited, hurt, for example), or we may not. If not, we can
still refer to 'this feeling'. The feeling can be quite recognisable and
distinctive even if we have no ready-made category into which to fit it.
Gendlin calls that to which we can directly refer in this way, a 'direct
referent'. A direct referent may be a specified feeling or a felt sense
which is in the process of being specified. We can say that we find the
felt sense when we turn our attention to what we feel. However, before
we focussed our attention, there was not this specified feeling. It only
emerges as something specific, as a 'this', through the impact of our
attention. So we could also say that the felt sense is made in the
interaction between our feeling-process and our attending to that
process. It is impossible to draw a sharp line between 'finding' and
'making' here, but this is so wherever we are concerned with creativity.
The sculptor 'finds' the form in the rock as much as they 'make' it. The
psychotherapy client makes a new life for themself as much as finding
it. We can bring our attention to our implicit feeling-process and then
find (create) specific feelings. This is an important and distinctively
human activity, though a relatively uncommon one. Most of the time our
feeling-process is interacting not with our attention but with what we
are doing or saying. When we are engaged in practical activity our
feeling-process informs what we are doing. Each movement we make
registers with us and how it registers makes a difference to our next
move. There are degrees to which our feeling-process is engaged as we
act; when acting habitually there is less of immediate feeling and more
of the structure of habit coming from the past. But when we are doing
something important for the first time then our feeling-process is
vividly present as we act. Further, when we act, our feel for our
environment informs what we do. In a familiar environment the things we
see and hear connect smoothly and implicitly with our feeling-process.
But when we encounter something unexpected the smooth ongoing
interaction between feeling-process and environment is interrupted. We
stop and give our attention to the environmental event -- 'What on earth
is that?' When we read, the written words connect with our
feelingprocess. They draw out felt meanings. We do not normally give
explicit attention to the meaning of each word, but each word's meaning
functions implicitly as we read. When we come to a place where a word or
phrase does not connect with our feeling-process the reading

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

177

process (the interaction between symbols and feeling-process) comes to a
halt. Then we give more attention to the words which are blocking us,
and try to get a sense of what they could mean here. When we write, the
relation between words and symbols is reversed. We start to write or
type the words as they emerge from what we want to say, as they emerge
from that feeling-process. When we come to a place where our
feeling-process is not being expressed by the words which are available
to us, the writing process comes to a halt. Then we give more attention
to the feeling which is not getting expressed, and try to get a sense of
what would express it. A real difficulty in thinking about experiencing
is that in our experiencing there is an element, what I have been
calling a 'feelingprocess', which never exists by itself, independently
of its interaction with other things such as external events or symbols.
Gendlin often refers to this 'feeling-process' by the device (. . .),
'dot, dot, dot'. (. . .) points to that element in experience which is
not conceptual, but which interacts with symbols to form concepts.
Experiencing is always one aspect of a relationship between (. . .) and
something which relates to it. But the (. . .) is something real; we can
refer directly to it, although when we do that the (. . .) takes the
specific form of a direct referent, a 'this'. The (. . .) in itself
cannot be expressed in words; but 'it' can lead to words, and words can
have an impact on 'it'. With the (. . .) we are right at the limits of
what can intelligibly be said. For while in a way it is right to say
that the (. . .) in itself cannot be expressed in words, it is equally
true to say that it is exactly what is expressed in words. What else
could words articulate? The (. . .) is the implicit, what has not yet
been made explicit. The implicit cannot be said, because saying it makes
it explicit; but also, the implicit is said precisely in making
something explicit. The (. . .) is not a blank, a nothing. It functions
in specific ways in our experiencing. As mentioned above, it functions
in the formation of a direct referent. When we bring our attention to
the (. . .) and ask 'What's this?' something may form. That is the
formation of a felt sense. The formation of a felt sense requires our
attention, but it also requires the (. . .). Again, as mentioned, the (.
. .) functions in our activities generally, and can be seen to be
fulfilling specific functions in reading and writing (also, of course,
in listening and speaking). We can read only if the marks on the paper
connect with a (. . .), only if a felt meaning is generated for us. When
we write we start with a (. . .), and then seek words whose (. . .)
expresses our (. . .). When we find such words there is the sort of
release which we experience

178

Person-Centred Therapy

in therapy -- 'Ah, that says it!'. Of course it is often true that we
cannot find words whose (. . .) is our (. . .); we cannot find words to
say what we mean. Then we cast around for words which can be made to
mean what we want to say. This is the realm of metaphor and simile. We
have our (. . .) and we bring up to it words which have their own (. .
.). The lover says his girl's eyes are bright as diamonds. Now 'bright
as' has a meaning in connection with comparisons of lights (is this star
as bright as that one? is the sun shining as brightly today as it was
yesterday?). But the lover is not of course thinking in terms of
photometric comparisons of the reflectivity of his girl's eyes with the
reflectivity of diamonds. The existing (. . .) of 'bright as diamonds'
contains more than this, and other than this. Once the image has been
used we can see certain aspects of this 'more' and 'other': her eyes
sparkle, they express something of intense and intrinsic value, there is
something beautiful, and something that is a 'hard' independent reality.
The use of the image was not based on these similarities; rather
something in the (. . .) of 'bright diamonds' draws out something in the
(. . .) of the lover's experience of his girl, and the similarities are
created in the interaction (Gendlin, 1962/ 1997, pp. 113--17, 140--4).
Any two words with their respective (. . .)s can be, in Gendlin's
terminology, 'crossed', and then new aspects emerge (Gendlin, 1991b,
pp. 96--9; 1997a, pp. 51--7). Suppose we are thinking about clocks and
time, of 'living by the clock'. We select something apparently quite
unrelated, such as jellyfish. We bring the word 'jellyfish' up to our
felt sense -- our (. . .) -- of clocks. What can 'jellyfish' draw out
from our (. . .) of clocks? Well, jellyfish do not move around
spontaneously, and this draws out the lack of spontaneity of clock time.
Jellyfish stay attached to the rock, as the tide washes in and out, and
we see that there is a similar passivity of the clock world, a world of
routine, which goes round and round. The jellyfish's life is peaceful,
comfortable, not proactive, and that is what clock time is like. But
also, if we get too close to a jellyfish we may get paralysed by its
sting, and is not that what can happen to us if we live too much by the
clock? A student in a workshop I taught on Gendlin's Experiencing and
the Creation of Meaning was initially sceptical about the idea of
'crossing'. How could it possibly help, for example, to cross her
partner with a tin of sardines? But then she found herself thinking . .
. it is quite hard to open up the tin . . . what is inside is good and
nourishing . . . when you think you have got to the end there is always
that little bit more . . . .

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

179

Anything can be crossed with anything, but only some crossings are
fertile. What 'just comes' to us when we stay with something arises out
of the whole intricacy of our experiencing, which includes 'all that'
surrounding the thing we are staying with. If we select two words at
random from the dictionary, their senses can be crossed, but if we let
two words 'just come' to us then they will already have their
interconnections. It is not just chance that we choose 'clocks' and
'jellyfish', or 'my partner' and 'a tin of sardines'. And even if we
cross words taken at random from the dictionary, how they cross will
undoubtedly be a function of who does the crossing. We are here in the
realm of the creation of metaphor. Gendlin argues that metaphors are not
formed through the noticing of likenesses; rather, the likenesses are
created by crossing the (. . .) of one thing with the (. . .) of another
thing. The metaphor is formed through the interaction. This happens
frequently in psychotherapy. A client cannot find words to express what
she is experiencing. She stays with the felt sense of her experiencing
and the image comes to her of an empty box. She says with a sigh,
'That's it, my life is an empty box.' There is already some release in
this, but then she goes on to explore what is in the image. What is an
empty box? Well, empty boxes were once full, but no longer are, they are
things which are put aside, thrown away; they are far less important
than what they contained, they have no value in themselves. How then is
she an empty box? Now the image begins to unfold: she had a family but
her husband left her and her children have now grown up and moved away.
She provided a protective container for them which was her sole function
in life. She did it well, but now she has no role any more. She is a
discarded, empty box. She explores all the pain of this, and tries to
sense whether the empty box image is still alive for her. Perhaps not,
perhaps its function was simply to crystallise out what her felt
situation is. But anything can cross with anything, and when an image
comes it may have in it not only the problem but a hint of a way
forward. She stays with the metaphor of the box. She feels, there is
nothing wrong with a cardboard box that has fulfilled its function. Does
it just have to be thrown away? No, it can be recycled, or it can be
used for an indefinite range of other things. It can have many
functions. Its life can continue in quite new ways, maybe no longer as a
box at all. Something may emerge for her from this. Metaphor has a
widely acknowledged place in psychotherapy, but without the concept of
felt experiencing, of (. . .), metaphor is unintelligible. For metaphor
to be possible old words have to work in

180

Person-Centred Therapy

new ways. One has to let go (a bit) of the familiar ways in which the
words work and dip down into the (. . .) out of which they emerge. This
is what happens in focusing. In Gendlin's view, experiencing is always
an interaction between a (. . .) and words, actions or events which
function to draw something forth from the (. . .). In focusing, what
interacts with the (. . .) is first the attention which we bring to it.
Giving attention to a (. . .) constellates it as a 'this'. The (. . .)
is now a 'something'; there is already a change. Such a change may not
be negligible; often a client feels real relief at getting to the point
of sensing that 'there is something wrong here, I can really feel the
shape of it now, it's something that has been there a long time'. Once
there is the sense of a 'something' (i.e. a felt sense has formed),
words and images can be brought up to the 'something'. The client can
ask 'What is this?' and wait for what comes. When a word or image comes
they can then try to sense whether it 'fits' the felt sense. If it does,
then there is a further releasing step: 'So that's what it is, I'm
jealous. Well, if that's what it is I can see a bit more what I need to
do.' If no words come which carry the client on, then more waiting and
sensing is required, until something, often a metaphor, comes. Then from
the metaphor there can be further steps, as we saw above. The (. . .) is
a feeling-process rather than a state. Our feeling-process is ongoing,
it has a momentum. We might even say it has a direction, except that
'direction' here does not refer to something that can be specified as a
goal. The momentum of the feeling-process can be seen in the steps that
occur in therapy. The client feels something disturbing, then seeks for
a way of articulating it. A word or image comes, the disturbing feeling
shifts a bit, and then further words or images come. There is an ongoing
process here in which the need for something further is felt, then
something comes which at least partially satisfies the need, and then
there is a new need. At each point the feeling-process 'implies'
something further. The client (or the therapist, or the client's life
situation) interacts with this 'implying' and one of three things can
then happen. (1) The interaction may simply leave the implying
unchanged. For instance, the client senses the discomfort of their
situation, which they have just characterised as 'being irritated'. The
therapist says 'I think you are angry with me'. This does not connect
with the client's experiencing. The sense of 'being irritated' is still
there, unchanged. The therapist's response has not helped in carrying
the client forward. (2) The interaction may distract the client from
what they are experiencing. For instance,

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

181

the therapist says 'I wonder if this is the same sort of irritation as
you said your father used to feel for your mother?', and the client's
experiencing of his irritation is lost, as he turns his attention to the
therapist's question. (3) The interaction may provide just what is
needed for the client to move on. For instance, the therapist simply
reflects the client's irritation, and the client then says 'Well, it's
not really irritation, it's more like feeling trapped'. When this
happens the gnawing feeling of 'I'm irritated, but I don't know what
this is all about' vanishes. What the therapist did has resulted in that
implying no longer being there. There is now something new, the sense of
being trapped, but the irritation has gone; it has carried forward into
something else. This is quite different from the case where the
therapist's response gets rid of the implying by diverting the client to
something else. In that case the implying disappears because it has been
knocked on the head, as it were, whereas in the other case the implying
disappears because that which was implied (in this instance, the sense
of being trapped) has now occurred. In Gendlin's terminology the
therapist's reflection carried the client forward. In general, when
something is implied (in this sense) there can be events which remove
the implying, not by destroying it, but by carrying it forward. Implying
and carrying-forward 'Implying', as it is used here, is one of Gendlin's
key concepts (Gendlin, 1997a, pp. 9--11). In any human process there is
an implicit implying of what is to come next. What is implied is not
explicit, that is, there is no specifiable event which must occur if the
implying is to be 'satisfied'. Gendlin's 'implying' is not like logical
implication, where the premises of an argument logically determine its
conclusion. It is more like the earlier lines of a poem 'implying' what
will complete it. The concluding line is not logically or physically
determined by the lines which have already been written, but it is
implied in the sense that something is required to complete the poem,
and when that comes the sense of 'something needed' will vanish. It is
possible that the poem could be completed in more than one way, and it
is also possible that no final line can be found. Gendlin's concept of
implying does not entail either that there will be something that will
'carry forward', or that only one thing can do so. This concept of
implying is also distinctive in that once the implied event has
occurred, what led to it may have to be revised. The coming of the final
line of the poem may lead the poet to revise some of the earlier lines.
This

182

Person-Centred Therapy

means of course that it is impossible to get from the beginning to the
end by logical deduction; if there is logic here it is a peculiar logic
in which the conclusion of an argument alters the premises!
Interaffecting ('interaction first') We are in all this thinking of
systems which are not analysable into distinct parts which retain their
form independently of their place in the whole. Each element in the
whole is affected by all the other elements, but these in turn have been
affected by the first element, so that they affect the first element not
as they are independently, but as already affected by the first element.
Gendlin holds that human beings, and biological organisms generally, can
be thought of as systems of this kind, as interaffecting wholes, within
which everything is affected by everything else. Gendlin (1997a, p. 41)
tells this story to illustrate the notion of interaffecting: When I was
in the Navy, I learned to repair and tune the radio receivers of that
time. They had several parts called "IFcans" (Intermediate Frequency),
each of which had a screw on top. I had to turn the screw on the first
one to the point where the signal is loudest. Further turning diminishes
the signal again. Then I would turn the screw on the second to its
maximum. But this would make a difference to the first. I would turn the
screw on the first to what was now the loudest point. But this would
affect the second, so it had to be turned to its loudest again. Now this
altered the first again, but only a little. After going back and forth a
number of times, both are at their loudest. Now came the third, and then
each time going between the second and the first again, second and
first, second and first, between every turning of the third. And so with
the fourth, where one must retune third, second and first, second and
first between every two tunings of the fourth. Eventually all
differences all of them can make to each other, and to all the
differences that makes to all the differences, and so on, is taken
account of.

This 'Ifcans' story is only a machine analogy for the notion of
interaffecting. It differs from interaffecting in that (a) the
adjustments are made in sequence, whereas in interaffecting everything
is there in one time instant and (b) the adjustments are made from
outside the system in accordance with a human goal, whereas in
interaffecting the 'goal' is simply what the system as a whole implies.
Interaffecting is an interaction process in which the elements in the
process are what they are through being in interaction with the

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

183

other elements. This notion runs through all of Gendlin's thought. We
are who we are in and through our interactions with others.
Psychotherapy can be seen as an interaction between client and therapist
in which both participants are changed. It is also an interaction
between the client's experiencing and whatever is brought up to that
experiencing along the specific avenue of therapy which is being
pursued. Solitary reflection is an interaction between our experiencing
and the words and images we bring up to our experiencing. In that
interaction our experiencing changes, but so may the meanings which the
words have for us. Our bodies can be thought of as interaffecting
systems in which each organ functions in interaction with all the other
organs, and is fully itself only through that interaction. There are
many different kinds of interaction, and Gendlin's Process Model lays
out some of this complexity. Running through all of the Model is the
theme of 'interaffecting', but Gendlin then develops more specific
concepts for thinking about the kinds of interaction which characterise
plants, animals and human beings respectively. Organism and environment
In Gendlin's view it is important that human beings (and organisms
generally) can be seen not only as interaffecting wholes, but as
existing in similar interaffecting relationships with their
environments. 'Organism' and 'environment' are correlative terms: an
organism's environment is not usefully describable in purely physical
terms, but in terms of how it relates to the organism's needs. Just as
in specifying the parts of an organism it is necessary to think in terms
of function (the eye of a fly is physically quite different from the eye
of a mammal), so things in the environment which are physically various
count, for this organism, as 'food' or 'shelter'. Organism and
environment need to be thought of as a single interaffecting system
(Gendlin, 1997a, pp. 1--6, 38--46). Organisms, from this perspective,
are interaffecting systems which imply their own continuation. Their
continuing depends critically on their environment. If certain events
occur in the relationship between organism and environment then the
organism's life will be carried forward. If these events do not occur
then the organism will remain in a state of 'implying', and this will
usually result in particular sorts of behaviour. For example, if no prey
appears an animal will prowl around, or wait very quietly, or do other
things which will increase the likelihood of encountering prey. The
animal's life continues in

184

Person-Centred Therapy

this different way, during the period when the prey-catching behaviour
is blocked. Prey-catching is still implied however, and this implying is
manifested in the searching or waiting behaviour. When prey does appear
then this implying ceases. The appearance of prey carries the animal
forward. Levels of life In what follows it is important to realise that
Gendlin is not engaged in developing a scientific theory. Rather, he is
developing new kinds of concepts which will allow us to think about
organisms, behaviour, language and focusing in ways which begin with
process and interaction. In the standard way of thinking, one begins
with individual things (entities, atoms) and then develops principles of
change and of interconnection. Within that way of thinking the problem
is how to explain change and interdependence within a basic framework in
which the 'atoms' stay the same and are separate from each other. In
Gendlin's model the problem is the opposite: we need to be able to
account for stability (lack of change) and for individual entities,
within a framework in which everything is in flux, and everything
depends on everything else. Gendlin has developed a set of concepts for
thinking about organic life in which there are several levels of
implying and carrying-forward. There is the level of plant life, which
already involves intricate implyings arising from interaffecting
processes within the organism, and between the organism and its
environment. A seed implies the emergence of shoots and roots. This
implying can be blocked, for example by a stone which the shoot
encounters. Instead of continuing upwards the shoot now behaves in a new
way: it turns along the base of the stone until it can resume its upward
course. If the stone is removed, then the upward movement carries
forward without the need for a detour. On the level of animal life the
implyings, carryings-forward and blocks which characterise plant life
are all still there, but with animals there is in addition the whole new
dimension of perception and behaviour. Gendlin (1997a, Chapter 6) has an
intriguing account (which I am greatly oversimplifying here) of how this
new level of organisation involves and builds upon the previous level.
The new level brings the notion of an aspect of organic process which
registers the organism's other processes. The organism then interacts
not only with its environment but with that environment as registered
within

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

185

itself. The previous bodily processes still continue of course, but they
now embody a new kind of process, that of sentient behaviour. Behaviour,
for Gendlin, is seen as a new way of carrying-forward what was stopped.
As the animal prowls, eating is still stopped and still implied, but the
prowling behaviour carries the animal forward in a new way. Then just as
bodily process may be blocked and behaviour arise, so behaviour may be
blocked and symboling arise. Gendlin uses as an illustration of two
monkeys who cannot actually fight (perhaps because they are on opposite
sides of a chasm), and who then begin to gesture at each other. The
gesturing is a kind of behaviour, but it is a new development in
behaviour. The fighting behaviour, which is blocked, begins to occur
(the monkey raises an arm and snarls) but it is not carried through.
Instead the movements and sounds convey to the other monkey something of
the first monkey's state, and the second monkey gestures back. Here is
the beginning of communication, and also of symbolisation. Gesturing,
and symboling in general, can be seen as a new kind of carrying-forward
which arises when non-symbolic behaviour does not carry forward. From
gesturing to the full development of language involves several more
stages of development, the outlines of which Gendlin delineates in
Chapter 7 of A Process Model. In Gendlin's scheme, focusing and other
processes of creative change arise out of paused symboling in the same
kind of way as symboling arises out of paused behaviour and behaviour
arises out of paused body-process. Symboling is paused when we cannot
find the word (image, gesture and so on) which will carry us forward. As
in the other cases of stopped process, the first part of the usual
process occurs -- we try out first one word or image, then another. Thus
far we are on the symbolic level. But we are also beginning to do
something new here. We are sensing into 'all that which we can't yet
express', and awaiting what comes. There is still symboling going on,
but it is going on in a new way, just as in gesturing behaviour is still
going on, but going on in a new way. Let me now try to explain what I
think Gendlin is saying in a slightly different way. An animal's
prey-catching behaviour can be blocked by the nonappearance of prey, but
it can also be blocked by such things as misperception. Animals have far
more resources than plants, but along with their extra capacities go new
ways in which their lives can be blocked. What is new and different
about animals is that they interact with their environment via how they
register that environment. But

186

Person-Centred Therapy

along with all the advantages of perception come new kinds of problem.
If the animal's registry is not functioning properly then the animal
will respond to the environment not as it is but as how it is being
registered. For instance, if the animal's temperature registry is
defective it may register a warm environment as cold, and hence behave
inappropriately. Then the human level brings all that is there at the
animal level, but also the dimension of language and a social form of
life which allow us to act through knowledge of general principles
rather than only through our particular experience. For example, a human
being lost at sea may become desperately thirsty. Their body accurately
registers their need to drink, but they know that to drink salt water
will make things worse. Here the human being does not relate directly to
their organic awareness, which impels them to drink. Instead they relate
to their general knowledge of the situation, which tells them not to
drink. Human beings have, in addition to their needs (which plants have)
and their registering of their needs (which animals have), a further
awareness of what is true or false in general. This knowledge of general
principles is closely tied up both with linguistic ability, and the
ability to reflect on what one is registering. Both of these abilities
are aspects of the social nature of human beings; a human being does not
simply respond to what they register but to what kind of situation this
is. An animal sees the food, registers hunger and proceeds to eat. A
human being sees this as food (as of the general kind: 'food'), and the
situation as one in which it would be appropriate (or not) to pick it up
and eat it. Whether the human being will eat this food depends crucially
on the social situation and on whether this is generally seen as food.
(In some cultures, but not in others, dogs are seen as food.) Human
beings live in and respond to what is sometimes called a socially
constructed reality. Of course, societies do not entirely construct
their reality -- we cannot eat just anything -- but the social form of
human life transforms animal consciousness in a radical way. The human
form of consciousness brings with it huge advantages -- it prevents us
from drinking salt water, and in general it gives us the resources of
general knowledge that have been acquired by others and formulated in
terms of the language and traditions of our community. Most of what we
know comes not from our own individual experience but from what we have
been told, from what we have read, from what we have picked up from
people with more experience than ourselves. Human beings are educated,
and initiated, into the

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

187

ways of seeing the world which characterise the society they live in.
Our modern society has peculiar features, which I will come to shortly,
but in most human societies (and still in ours to a large extent), what
is learned is how we do things, how we see things. If someone does not
know what to do in a situation then they consult someone who does know.
There is a tradition of knowing and doing which provides the means for
individuals to find out what they, in their specific situation, need to
do. Now just as the development of animal awareness, which involves the
registering of the environment, can in spite of all its advantages, lead
to new kinds of problem, so too the development of human awareness and
tradition can lead to a new kind of problem. Just as an animal's
awareness may not always further its needs, so human cultural forms may
not always further either awareness or needs. With the human form of
life come general truths, such as the truth that drinking salt water is
harmful, but where there can be truth there can also be what is false or
misleading. In the animal world there is no issue about what is the true
thing to say or the right thing to do; that only comes with human
society and human agreement about how we see things. Only where there
are standards of judgement can there be any sense of what is 'correct',
and standards are essentially social in nature. Yet these standards do
not arise in a vacuum; they arise in relation to awareness of needs. In
general the standards are there, and are passed down as the tradition,
because they enable people to live together and to flourish. A tradition
which went fundamentally against human awareness of need would not be
propagated for long. Yet traditions can, to some extent, become
alienated from the needs of the people who live them. Traditions tend to
be self-perpetuating whether or not they still satisfy any need.
Traditions, social forms and ways of seeing the world do change. This
has always been so, but it is only in recent times that the possibility
of whole alternative traditions has become widely accepted. With this
acceptance has come the widespread postmodernist scepticism about the
very possibility of truth and knowledge. But I think that this concern
is unfounded. Truth and knowledge are notions that belong within
traditions. In the traditional Aristotelean view of the world objects
composed largely of the earth element seek their natural place at the
centre of the world, while things containing much of fire seek their
natural place in the heavens. Sparks from a bonfire rise into the sky.
If we ask, within this scheme of things, whether it is true that these
sparks, which we are observing tonight, are seeking their natural

188

Person-Centred Therapy

place in the heavens, then the answer is yes. But if we are thinking
within the scheme of modern science, we cannot ask that question. There
are no concepts of 'fire element' or 'natural place' in the scheme of
modern physics. We can ask whether these sparks are composed of
particles of carbon which are in the process of combining with oxygen,
and within the modern scheme the answer is yes. In Aristotle's scheme it
is not that the answer is no; it is rather that neither the question nor
the answer has a place. Questions of truth and knowledge arise within
traditions. It does not make sense to ask whether these traditions are
themselves true. A tradition is not the sort of thing which can be true
or false; it is there. As Wittgenstein put it, 'This game is played.'
But that is not to say that traditions cannot be challenged or cannot
change. The Aristotelean tradition in physical science is no longer one
which we can live within. It does not relate sufficiently to all that
has happened since Aristotle; it is no longer something through which we
can orient ourselves in our thinking about the physical world. The
explanation of why this is so can only be given through a detailed
laying out of the subsequent history of physical science. It is a long,
complex, human story with many aspects: intellectual, personal, social,
religious. It is not that from some impossible position outside of all
traditions we can look and judge that Aristotle was wrong; rather, as a
result of a myriad of factors, we can no longer live within the
Aristotelean tradition. Within a tradition there are standards for
assessing what is true and what is right; those standards indeed make
the tradition what it is. But traditions themselves can be queried, and
this can make it seem that, in spite of what I have said, there must be
some sense in which one tradition can be 'better' or more 'true' than
another. But 'better' and 'true' must have a new sense here; otherwise
they would presuppose a further tradition in terms of which we could
make such judgements. What we might say is that a 'better' tradition is
one which helps us more, which works for us, which allows us to move
forward, which enables us to live more fully. There can be changes in a
tradition, but whether the changes are for the 'better' can only be
assessed in terms of whether they 'make things better for us'. And
whether that is so is not a matter to be judged by the standards of any
tradition but in terms of whether we can live better. It is something to
be felt rather than thought. In the end what is right about a tradition
has to refer back to what is right in our felt awareness of our lives.
This is not to say that the

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

189

rightness of a tradition is simply determined by the felt needs of its
adherents, because to some extent their involvement in the tradition
changes their felt needs. The tradition and the felt needs are enmeshed
with each other; in Gendlin's term they interaffect each other.
Nevertheless, if the question is one of whether the tradition needs to
change, the place to seek the change is in the felt need. From the
practices and assumptions of the tradition we have to drop back into our
experiencing of our situation. We have to bring our attention to 'all
that' which always far exceeds what can be expressed explicitly in
cultural forms. It may help to bring up to our experiencing other
cultural forms, and see what happens in our experiencing when we look at
things through the lens of a quite different tradition. The aim here is
not to take on the forms of that other tradition, but to see what they
might elicit for us. Something new may come. Psychotherapy The
difficulties that arise in connection with postmodernism and cultural
relativism are the same sort of difficulties which face psychotherapy
clients, and I think that this is not just a coincidence. It is only in
our modern world that the tradition of psychotherapy has arisen. In
traditional cultures there is neither the need for nor the possibility
of psychotherapy. In such cultures, if someone encounters a personal
problem that cannot be sorted out within the family, they will consult
someone who plays the role of an elder within the culture, someone who
knows the traditions of the culture very deeply. The elder will then
advise, and the troubled person learns something about how such
situations are to be handled. They may then be able to pass on something
of this wisdom to others. This pattern of dealing with personal troubles
only begins to break down where traditions begin to be questioned. Once
we become aware that there are alternative traditions and that, for all
we know, our tradition may not be the best, the role of the 'elder'
becomes equally questionable. All that an elder can do is to advise from
their deep knowledge of a tradition, and that no longer satisfies us. If
that is how it is, then we are thrown back on ourselves. Yet the
difficulties in question are just those which we have not been able to
resolve on our own. That is precisely why there was the need to turn to
an 'elder' in the first place. Something new is needed here. In turning
to a (person-centred) psychotherapist we turn to someone who is not an
expert (an 'elder')

190

Person-Centred Therapy

in any tradition, except that tradition which encourages the person to
go beneath the surface of traditions and await what comes from the
intricacy of their own experiencing of their situation. Like anyone
else, the person-centred therapist does speak from within a tradition,
but it is a tradition which works on a different level, a peculiar sort
of tradition which could be seen as a way of dealing with traditions.
Clients approach therapists because they are some way troubled. Their
normal ways of coping with difficulties have failed. They have in some
sense 'got stuck', for example they are 'caught' in the tangle of some
dilemma, or in some state of anxiety or depression. This is the starting
point in therapy. Successful therapy involves the client being able to
move forward again in their life. It is not a matter of the problems
having been 'solved', but of the client being able to move freely again.
When we are 'stuck' we try various things. We may tell ourselves to snap
out of it, we may distract ourselves from the problem by reading a book,
we may take a holiday, listen to inspirational music, talk to a friend,
dig the garden and so on. Any of these procedures may help, or they may
not. Where something does help we are, in Gendlin's terminology,
'carried forward' by that procedure. The blocked state is released.
Prior to the carrying-forward we are in a state of tension. Something is
implied which is not yet there. It is like the case of hunger, where the
animal moves about restlessly, seeking for food. Here eating has not yet
happened; instead there is the implying of eating. That is hunger. The
implying continues until an event occurs -- sight of food -- which
carries the animal forward into eating. Then that implying ceases. When
we are stuck we feel the implying of something, but we may not know what
would carry us forward. Even in the hunger example it may not be clear
in advance what will carry the implying forward. We know we are hungry,
but neither chocolate, nor biscuits will do. The gnawing is still there,
until we go to the fridge and find the Stilton cheese. And something
completely different, such as an intravenous drip, can also carry hunger
forward. The carrying-forward which occurs in psychotherapy is a
particular kind of carrying-forward which can only occur in human
beings. As we have seen, there are other kinds which occur in the
organic and animal realms, though also in us insofar as we too belong to
these realms. Gendlin's model in general emphasises processes rather
than states. Even in the physical world there is continuous process. A
moving body not only has a specifiable position and direction

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

191

of motion, it also has momentum. A body's momentum is something it can
be said to have at a particular moment, but momentum is also about where
the body is going to be in the next moment. The body's present momentum
tells us something about what is to come next. As physical beings we
ourselves have momentum -- when the car brakes suddenly we are
physically carried forward just as much as anything else. What can stop
or block physical movement (such as a stone in the way) need not block a
plant (it can grow round the stone). What can stop or block a plant
(such as a large change in temperature) need not block an animal (it
registers the change and seeks shelter). What can stop or block an
animal (such as illness) need not stop a human being (they recognise the
symptoms and consult a doctor). Human problems are often sorted out by
reference to general principles, whether these are enshrined in 'common
sense' or in the specialist knowledge of experts, or in books or other
reference sources. The more a human being knows about the general
principles of things the greater is their ability to deal with problems
as they arise. Yet general principles never fully apply to individual
cases. Even in the 'hard' sciences there are always exceptional
circumstances. There is a general principle that salt dissolves in
water, but not if the water is frozen, or already saturated with salt,
or the salt grains have an insoluble coating, or . . . There is no
exhaustive specification for what the 'exceptional circumstances' are;
all we can say is that normally salt dissolves in water. The working
scientist has to develop a feel for 'normal circumstances', for what can
reasonably be taken for granted in setting up an experiment, and what
cannot. This 'tacit dimension' of science has been explored in depth in
the writings of the scientist and philosopher Michael Polanyi (1958,
1967). Science, and human life generally, requires general principles,
but these always operate against a tacit (what Gendlin calls an
'implicit') background. The creative scientist has an ability not only
to work with the principles (with the logical and mathematical
formulations) but also to dip into the tacit background out of which the
formulations arise. It has become increasingly recognised that science
is a creative activity rather than a purely logical one. The scientist
creates pictures or models and goes back and forth between these and the
experimental data. Then the model may need to be modified, or different
data may emerge from the application of the model. In science, and in
other creative activities, there is a zigzag between concepts and
experience. A creative writer (see Appendix A), as much as a scientist,
tries out

192

Person-Centred Therapy

various formulations; these then modify the felt sense of what he or she
is trying to express, and lead to a new formulation. Creative people
have always worked like this, but in traditional societies there is by
definition little need for creativity. The general principles of the
tradition are sufficient, and in both art and practical affairs there is
little need for innovation. The need for creativity arises only when the
tradition is called into question. Then we cannot simply proceed with
the established forms. It is not a matter of abandoning them, but of
reconnecting them with immediate experiencing, so that they become open
to modification. The relationship between traditional forms and creative
innovation lies at the heart of Gendlin's (1964b/1973, 1997a) account of
psychotherapy. Very briefly, Gendlin's view is that psychological
disturbance arises from our becoming 'structure-bound', that is, caught
in specific forms of thought and emotion which are not open to
modification by our immediate lived experiencing. Our experience has
become 'frozen' into specific forms, so that in certain areas of our
lives the creative interplay between form and feeling has ceased. The
re-establishment of the interplay is one crucial function of
psychotherapy. The therapist looks for the places where the interplay is
still possible, the places where the client pauses, feels a bit
uncertain, does not quite know how to go on. At those points, the blurry
places (the '. ..' places on the transcript), there are the
possibilities for creative change. It is possible to notice or seek such
places by oneself, but it is very much easier if we have someone with us
who can say 'Could you just stay with that a while?' or 'What is in
that?' or 'What is the crux of all that?' However, making such moves is
not the only thing, or even the most important thing, in re-establishing
the interplay. The most important thing is simply for someone to be
there with us. This is because our experiencing is different when we are
with another person. On our own we tend to go round in the same old
circles, or drift away into dreamy states. If we say the same things
that we say to ourselves to another person the effect is different. Even
if they say nothing in reply we know that they have heard, that there is
someone there who is receiving what we have said. And that reception by
another person encourages us to receive what we have said. Our relation
to the other person changes our relation to ourself. If the therapist
does more than simply listen then there is the potential for the
interaction to be better or worse. It will probably be worse if the
therapist comes in with criticism, advice, accounts of their own
experiences and so on. Responses like that tend to close us down.

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

193

Where a client is already engaging with their experiencing all that is
required from the therapist is the listening which enables the client to
stay on their own experiential track. Here it is simply the presence of
the therapist which facilitates the client's carrying-forward. Anything
more than listening or minimal reflection is likely to be distracting.
However, further intervention by the therapist is needed where the
client is not on an experiential track at all. In these circumstances
the art of the therapist lies in finding places where the client can
still interact with their experiencing, even though at present they are
not doing so. Then, once the interplay of form and feeling is
facilitated in these places the consequent changes in the client's
experiencing may allow the 'unfreezing' of those aspects of their
experience which are currently structure-bound. We can now consider
further what is involved in relating in a creative way with one's
experiencing. It can easily seem that focusing is a matter of turning
our attention inward and 'working with our feelings', but this is a
misleading way of putting it. What we turn our attention to in Focusing
is our situation. Certainly we look into ourselves, but this 'looking
into' is more like 'looking into what went wrong with last year's
business plan' than looking into a private room which no one else can
see into. In focusing we get a felt sense of 'all that' about our
situation, but the feel of 'all that' is not separate from the
situation. Our feelings and our situations come together; something is a
situation for us only if it has an impact on us, if it involves what we
want and feel. And our feelings are always tied up with situations. A
specific feeling, such as guilt, is tied up with a situation in which we
think we have done something wrong; a feeling of hope is embedded in a
situation in which we believe, but are not sure, that something good is
going to happen. Specific feelings or emotions such as these are not
just internal goings-on, like itches; they are how our bodies are
responding in specific kinds of situations. It can help us in thinking
about human emotions if we compare them with the emotions which animals
can have. Animal emotions are more limited than ours in two ways. First,
there are situations which only human beings can get into. Perhaps a dog
can hope that he will soon be taken for a walk, but he cannot hope that
his master will return next Tuesday. Nor can he be concerned about
having broken a promise. Animals cannot have feelings which are embedded
in situations which are distinctively human. Secondly, as we saw in
Chapter 3, animal feelings are feelings-in-behaviour (Gendlin, 1997a,
pp. 95, 218). The fighting monkey is angry, the tail-wagging dog is

194

Person-Centred Therapy

pleased, the cowering dog is frightened. Animal feelings are there in
the flow of the animal's behaviour. What an animal does not do is to sit
down and reflect on its feelings. It cannot say to itself 'I was really
angry about that', or 'I have that feeling of fear again'. This is not
just because of the lack of language. It is because such reflection
requires a social form of life in which others respond to our feelings
in a way which leads to our being able to respond to our feelings
ourselves. The mother conveys to the child (not necessarily in language)
that she experiences the child as upset, and the child then acquires a
sense of 'me upset' which he or she can retain even when mother is no
longer there. Human beings not only experience emotions-in-behaviour but
emotions as inner states. We can bring our attention to our emotions,
and in the emotion we find the structure of the situation to which the
emotion is the body's response. Now just as there is a way our body gets
when we feel specific emotions such as guilt or hope, so there is a way
our body gets in relation to the whole situation which we are in
(Gendlin, 1973a). As I said in Chapter 3, the body-sense of a whole
situation is usually less obvious than the body-sense of a specific
aspect, such as the fear associated with being attacked. In any culture
certain common situationaspects are recognised and the corresponding
emotions are given names (Purton, 2000a), such as fear (corresponding to
a kind of situation where there is danger), pride (corresponding to a
kind of situation where I have done something, and I feel good about it)
or regret (corresponding to a situation where I did something and I wish
I had not). These kinds of situations are familiar, and the emotions
associated with them are easily recognised. Other kinds of situation can
arise for which the corresponding emotions do not have names, and then
we have to find a circumlocution which will allow us to refer to the
emotion (for example, that feeling you get when you know that you are
being cheated but you cannot see how). But in addition to responding
with emotion to kinds of situation, we also respond to this particular
situation which we now are in. Our response to this situation may
involve feeling-in-behaviour in the situation, but we can also turn our
attention to the feel of the situation. This is not something which
people normally do, and there was no word in the language for 'the feel
of this whole situation' until Gendlin introduced the term 'felt sense'.
(Gendlin's other phrase, 'direct referent', more properly covers any
inner state to which we can directly refer in our experiencing, and so
covers both emotions and felt senses.) Thus the felt sense is how the
body is registering 'this

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

195

whole thing', while an emotion is how the body is registering a kind of
situation. From this we can begin to see how it is that through giving
our attention to a felt sense of a situation we can change. Through
giving our attention to a felt sense we bring it into focus and
articulate some aspect of it. The physical feel of a situation may be
describable initially as, for instance, 'jumpy', 'tight' or 'pulled-in'.
Words like this give us a grip on the felt sense -- there it is, all
pulled-in. This feel of 'pulled-in' is how our body is registering the
situation as a whole. But in that bodily reaction is an intricacy
corresponding to the intricacy of the situation. The bodily reaction is
the physical 'focaling' (Gendlin, 1997a, pp. 46--7) of one's engagement
with the situation; for instance, feelings of fear in connection with
what someone has said they will do, but also an irritation with oneself
for being afraid, a sense that one has not changed in this way in all
these years, a tiredness with having to deal with this again, memories
of what happened last time (and all those other times) it was like this,
doubts about whether it can be different . . . All of that, which
clearly could never be exhaustively articulated, is there in the felt
sense, in the 'pulled-in'. To give attention to the felt sense already
makes a difference to it. What was a vague amorphous feeling comes into
focus -- 'that's there', that whole pulled-in thing. There will no doubt
be other troubles in one's life, but one can now sense the emotional
unity of this one. It is distinct from the other difficulties which are
around; its unity cannot be spelled out in words, but it can be
distinctly felt. That in itself makes for a certain release. It is as if
a whole cloud of vague apprehension has condensed into a droplet of
precise feeling. One's body feels a little easier. This is the effect of
bringing up to one's experiencing something external to it, namely
attention and the specifying of the experiencing as a 'this'. Having got
the formed felt sense as a 'this' one can then seek to articulate it.
One is now bringing other things up to the felt sense, such as the
question 'What is all this?', 'What is the crux of this?' or 'What does
this need?' These verbal forms interact with the felt sense. They begin
to draw out aspects of it which were previously only implicit. From the
felt sense new verbal (or imaginal) forms arise. They are checked with
the felt sense, one notices whether they 'resonate', whether there is a
felt shift. Where a felt shift occurs this is registered and welcomed.
Now the felt sense is different, and this means that the feel of one's
situation is different. But feelings are not distinct from situations --
after the felt shift one's situation is different. It may or may not be
possible

196

Person-Centred Therapy

to express the change in words. Sometimes one says things like 'I was
scared and saw her as threatening, but now its more like I see her as
just going along her own track, and I can go along mine too.' At other
times it is just that things are different. Gendlin (1964b/1973, p. 455)
writes: A whole vast multiplicity of implicit aspects in the person's
functioning and dysfunctioning is always involved. For, when a direct
referent of experiencing "opens up", much more change has occurred than
the cognitive recollection of this or that . . . "How is everything
different?" "Well, it just seems OK now!" "Do you still feel that
such-and-such might happen and you couldn't deal with it?" "Yes, but now
I kind of feel, well, that's life. That's the way it is, you have to
accept things like that."

Like Rogers (1956), Gendlin holds that it is not insight which lies
behind therapeutic change. Insight often comes as part of the change,
but is an effect of the change rather than a cause. The cause of the
change is the bringing of something (attention, words, actions, personal
interactions) up to one's experiencing so that there is an interaction.
From the interaction new things emerge from the implicit depths of the
feelingprocess. Those new things were not already there 'in the
unconscious'; they are formed (given a form, made explicit) through the
interaction. The different avenues of therapy, which we looked at in
Chapter 5, involve bringing up different things to our experiencing. The
Focusing procedure in which we encourage a felt sense to form and then
bring to the felt sense questions such as 'What is this?', 'What does
this need?' is just one avenue. Psychodynamic therapists bring
interpretations up to the client's experiencing, behavioural therapists
encourage interaction between experiencing and behaviour, some
person-centred therapists bring the emotional responses of the
therapist. The important matter is not so much which of these procedures
is used, but whether they are used in such a way that they connect with
the client's experiencing and carry it forward. Any of the standard
therapeutic procedures can in this way be 'experientialised' or
conducted in a 'focusing-oriented' way. Rethinking some person-centred
concepts

In addition to giving us a new perspective on psychotherapy generally,
Gendlin's work can be seen as leading to a reformulation of some of
Rogers' concepts.

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

197

The actualising tendency

It seems clear that what corresponds, in Gendlin's thinking, to Rogers'
'actualising tendency' is the carrying-forward of the life of the
organism as a whole. The multifarious organic processes do not just go
on sideby-side; they interaffect each other and the behaviour of the
organism arises from the implicit 'totaling' and 'focaling' of all the
processes in interaction with all the others. In the same way human
behaviour arises from the totaling of everything that is within us, in
interaction with our current environment. The full complexity of what
moves us to action cannot be fully articulated, but nevertheless when
the time comes to act we are often able to do so. Our actions cannot be
arrived at by logical calculations; they arise from what we feel
implicitly, from how our situations are registered in our bodies. Logic,
calculation and other explicit forms of experience may form part of what
moves us to act, but there is always far more that is implicit. This
applies even to a simple action such as crossing a crowded room to talk
to someone. There lies behind the action all kind of considerations of
why we are going to talk to this person, why now, how we are to navigate
through the press of the other people, how we are going to greet this
person, how friendly our smile will be and so on, without limit. All of
this is implicit in the action which we take. We may be able, if we give
attention to what is going on in us, to make explicit some of the
factors involved, but many more will remain implicit. Yet the fact that
we cannot work it out does not prevent us from acting. Even though 'we'
(as intellectual calculator) cannot work it out, our 'body' knows what
to do. Gendlin often refers to 'the body' as that to which we give our
attention in focusing. 'The body' here is not the body as conceptualised
by anatomy and physiology, but the living body as felt from inside, the
body in which we are aware of a felt sense, and from which change steps
come. What corresponds to Rogers' 'actualising tendency' is what Gendlin
(1996, Chapter 20) calls the 'life-forward' direction: the 'direction'
in which we are carried forward by our current state of implying. This
is a 'direction' not in the sense of an explicit goal (though it may
include explicit goals), but a direction sensed with the whole of our
being. In therapy the explicit direction in which the client is going
may change from session to session, or even from moment to moment (they
are going to leave their job . . . well, not leave immediately . . . not
actually leave, but make some changes . . . or rather make some changes
in how they relate to their job . . . but the

198

Person-Centred Therapy

job paralyses them, so actually they do have to leave . . .). We know
that a process is going on here, which has its own kind of 'direction'.
Gendlin uses in this connection the analogy of a winding road: sometimes
we are going north, sometimes south. In a superficial sense we keep
changing our direction, but in a deeper sense we are going in the same
direction all the time. It is this deep, implicit direction which in
Gendlin's thought corresponds to the actualising tendency in Rogers'
theory. Unconditional positive regard

Rogers held that the client's perception of the therapist's acceptance,
or UPR, was a crucial factor in dissolving conditions of worth, which
are themselves the source of psychological disturbance. One problem with
this is that the more a client is enmeshed in conditions of worth the
less able they will be to appreciate the therapist's acceptance of them.
It follows that the more disturbed a client is the less effective
person-centred therapy should be, but that is not obviously the case.
Gendlin's view is that it is not the client's perception of the
therapist's acceptance that is crucial, but whether the therapist can
help the client to relate to their own experiencing in the way I have
previously discussed. Gendlin (1964b/1973, pp. 468--9) acknowledges that
rejecting attitudes on the part of the therapist are likely to be
untherapeutic, but he thinks that this is because when we feel that our
experiences are not being accepted we find it difficult to stay with the
implicit meanings of those experiences. The non-accepting therapist's
'pushing away' of our feelings tends to distance us from them, while an
accepting attitude on the part of the therapist encourages us to stay
with and articulate the feelings. Gendlin holds that even if the client
is unable to appreciate the therapist's acceptance, therapeutic progress
can still be made. For the therapist can still respond to the client's
experiencing in a way that may encourage the client to do the same.
Acceptance, in Gendlin's view is therapeutically facilitative, and
rejection is therapeutically destructive, but it is not that the degree
of therapeutic change depends in any simple way on the level of
therapist acceptance. So long as the client feels safe enough to engage
with their experiencing, and so long as the therapist encourages such
engagement, therapeutic movement can take place. I do not think that
Gendlin's alternative view of the therapeutic effect of acceptance
should be seen as denying the possibility of the dynamic which Rogers
postulated. Where psychological disturbance

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

199

does originate from the introjection of conditions of worth, it seems
plausible to suppose that the consistent acceptance of the therapist may
well play a role in undermining those conditions. This dynamic is not
very much different from that involved in desenitisation therapy -- the
client initially expects that the therapist will condemn them for having
their feelings, but as time goes on and no condemnation takes place, the
client gradually feels it is possible to acknowledge and reveal the
feelings. Even so, of course, the client may suspect that the therapist
is not being genuine, or that the therapist can accept the client's
feelings 'only because you are a counsellor -- you are trained to do
this'. The 'desensitisation dynamic' is one example of a therapeutic
process which does not involve anything like focusing. It is important
to see that Gendlin does not deny that such non-focusing therapeutic
processes exist. Focusing is a centrally important element in therapy,
but it is not the only element. Focusing works with what is implicit in
experience but not yet articulated, but some therapeutic processes take
place in the realm of what is explicit, as I discussed in Chapter 6.
Since our positive regard for things or people is usually conditional on
what those things or people are like UPR has often been seen as a
paradoxical notion. It can seem that no one could genuinely have
positive regard for a client irrespective of what the client is like,
yet genuineness of course is one of the crucial therapist conditions.
From Gendlin's perspective, there are several things which can be said
about this. First, there is the point that the client is not to be
identified with their feelings or attitudes. In focusing we distinguish
the feelings from the person who is struggling with the feelings.
Gendlin (1996, p. 287) writes 'There is often so much unlovely stuff in
a client, which cannot genuinely be regarded positively. But I see no
contradiction, because, as I formulate it, unconditional positive regard
is for the embattled person in there, not for the stuff.' However, it
seems clear that a person cannot entirely be separated from their
feelings, attitudes and personal qualities in general. It is true that
the person struggles with their feelings, but their feelings are their
feelings, feelings which have in part arisen from the life which they
have led, and choices which they have made in the past. Struggling with
one's feelings is different from struggling with something external to
oneself. I am not clear how this relationship between the person and
their feelings should be explicated, and I am not convinced that Gendlin
has given a satisfactory account of the matter. On the other hand, I
think that in his theory we can find hints of the way forward.

200

Person-Centred Therapy

For Gendlin, all organic events 'imply' other events. For instance
hunger 'implies' eating, eating 'implies' digestion and so on. Hunger
goes on implying eating until the animal encounters food, and then the
implying of eating stops. In Gendlin's terminology the appearance of
food 'carries forward' the implying which is hunger. In the
psychological realm, anger implies attack, fear implies withdrawal and
so on. Even the most difficult, painful and entangling feelings imply
events that would carry them forward. Each difficult thing carries
within itself the implication of what it requires in order for it to no
longer imply what it does. The things that are 'wrong' or 'bad' in our
lives imply what is needed for our lives to be better. As Mary Hendricks
(2001, p. 135) puts it in an interesting study of UPR from a
focusingoriented perspective: 'What is twisted, stuck, painful has
implicit movement. There is even a sense in which the twisted gives rise
to untwisting. Untwisting inheres in twistedness.' It is for this reason
that in therapy we need to accept unconditionally what is there; what is
there, if we can stay with it, can show us what it needs in order to
move forward. But this is difficult to do on one's own. It requires
turning towards that which is painful, and experiencing its meaning. The
therapist can help the client by adopting towards the client just that
unconditional acceptance which the client needs to adopt towards their
own experiencing. And the therapist can do this genuinely because he or
she sees whatever is there in the client as an element in the client's
moving forward. What the client feels and expresses may, taken in
itself, be self-defeating or ugly or unethical, but the therapist knows
that it is but an aspect of the process which is unfolding. Gendlin
(1997a, Chapter 4) has a way of thinking about time which is relevant
here. Sometimes, when a suicidal client has recovered, they look back
and say that they never really would have done it, they love life too
much. From where they are now, this is a true account of how it was when
they were feeling suicidal. But they may also remember how they felt at
the time, which is quite different. There is a difference between how
things were (we now see) and how we experienced them at the time. There
is a sense in which, as time goes on, the past changes. In looking at a
client with unconditional positive regard we are looking at them as if
from that future point at which it will be clear that the 'bad' things
contribute to the greater good. The therapist does not have to know how
it is possible for the ugly things to be 'redeemed'; it is enough to
have the attitude that everything has its place in the ongoing process
of the client's life. There are clearly implications for ethics and
spirituality here, some of

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

201

which I have discussed elsewhere (Purton, 1998). I say a little more
about Gendlin's view of time in Appendix A. I have been suggesting how
the 'standard' person-centred view of UPR can be reformulated in terms
of Gendlin's approach. We could also consider how, conversely, Gendlin's
view could be reformulated in terms of the standard account. I think
that the reformulation would go something like this: From the
perspective of the standard account it is the therapist conditions which
are central. However, these conditions can be embodied either
superficially or in what Mearns (1997) calls 'relational depth'. A
superficial embodiment of UPR is one in which the counsellor accepts the
client in the sense of being warm, supportive, accepting, sympathetic
and non-judging. This kind of UPR embodiment is very appropriate in many
kinds of helping relationships, such as welfare work or citizens advice.
It also provides a good foundation for counselling work. However, UPR in
its full embodiment involves 'being able to meet the client at
sufficient depth to work at the existential level of the client's
experiencing. . . .When I am working with my client at the existential
level of his experiencing it means that he is giving me access to his
innermost feelings and thoughts about his Self and his very existence'
(Mearns, 1997, p. 16). The 'acceptance' here is not simply of the
client, but of the client's existential experiencing. Trainee
counsellors often provide support for, and acceptance of, their clients
through giving helpful suggestions, or reassurance which distracts the
client from what they are experiencing. They manifest 'acceptance' in
the sense of being kindly disposed towards the client and trying to ease
the client's pain. This is not accepting the client at relational depth;
it leaves out the full experiential aspect of UPR. From this perspective
Gendlin's view does not add anything to the standard account of UPR but
rather explicates and emphasises the existential, experiential and
relational-depth aspect of the notion. Empathy

Rogers' (1959, pp. 210--11) classical definition of 'empathy' was:
\[B\]eing empathic, is to perceive the internal frame of reference of
another with accuracy and with the emotional components and meanings
which pertain thereto as if one were the person, but without losing the
'as if' condition. Thus it means to sense the hurt or the pleasure of
another as he senses it and to perceive the causes thereof as he
perceives them, but

202

Person-Centred Therapy

without ever losing the recognition that it is as if I were hurt or
pleased or so forth.

According to Rogers the reason that empathy is crucial is that the
client needs to feel understood if the conditions of worth are to be
dissolved. The therapist's unconditional positive regard would clearly
be ineffective if the client felt that the therapist were not seeing
them as they saw themself. The client would feel 'Of course you can
accept me if you see me like that, but I'm not like that, I'm like this,
and no-one could accept a person like this.' For Rogers, then, what is
crucial is that the therapist should understand the client and that the
client should experience this understanding (along with the therapist's
acceptance). One important way of checking that the therapist has
understood is through reflecting back to the client what the therapist
thinks the client meant. Reflection can thus be understood as a
procedure for checking on the accuracy of the therapist's empathy, but
it needs to be distinguished from empathy itself. There are other ways
in which the therapist may show that they have understood the client,
some of which may be quite idiosyncratic to the situation (Bozarth,
1984). For Gendlin, what is crucial is that the therapist should
facilitate the client's carrying-forward of their experiencing. An
important aspect of doing this is through the therapist reflecting back
to the client the therapist's articulation of the client's experiencing.
The client can then check whether what the therapist has said does
articulate their experiencing. Often it does not, but this lack of
understanding by the therapist is not necessarily a bad thing. Though
being misunderstood we can come to appreciate what we really do feel. (I
think here of Jung who at one stage of his life used to tell his dreams
to his gardener. The gardener always made utterly inappropriate
interpretations which allowed Jung to arrive at helpful interpretations
through thinking 'Well, it's certainly not that!'.) On the other hand,
as in the case of unconditional positive regard, empathy usually helps
the client to go further into their own experiencing. Lack of empathy
may make the client feel that their experiencing is not understandable
and hence not worth staying with. More important, if the client is at
present unable to articulate their experience, articulation by the
therapist becomes crucial. In Gendlin's (1964b/ 1973, p. 469) words 'To
be myself I need your responses, to the extent to which my own responses
fail to carry my feelings forward. At first, in these respects, I am
"really myself " only when I am with you.'

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

203

But to be able to articulate the client's experiencing the therapist
must be empathically in tune with the client. Empathy, in the sense of
being in tune with the client's experiencing, so that client and
therapist can together refer to 'this feeling' or 'what you are sensing
here', is often central to the therapeutic process. But only often --
clients sometimes find it impossible to believe that the therapist could
understand them, but the change process takes place in spite of this.
(Gendlin (1990, p. 213) remarks that he himself was such a client.) In
such cases therapy can still be effective because what it depends on is
not primarily whether the client feels understood, but on the process of
articulation of what is implicit. Whether the client feels understood or
not, the therapist's responses can serve the function of drawing the
client's attention to the 'edge' of their experiencing, and of
encouraging the client to carry that experiencing forward. As with UPR
we might reformulate Gendlin's view in terms of the 'standard' view of
empathy. Again the central point would be that there are forms of
empathy which are relatively superficial (such as being aware that the
client is angry, or sad, or jealous, . . . ), but also the kind of
empathy where the therapist is engaging with the client at an
experiential level where at first neither may be able to articulate the
client's experiencing, yet the therapist accurately senses or tunes in
to that experiencing. Gendlin's perspective could thus be characterised
as one which emphasises the experiential and relational depths of
empathy. Congruence

As we saw in Chapter 2, there are serious difficulties in Rogers' notion
of congruence. Rogers seems to have thought that these difficulties
could be resolved by the development of new kinds of measurement, but I
suggested that the difficulty is a conceptual one. The phenomenon of
incongruence is something that we can recognise when we come across it;
we do not need the development of new tools of measurement to establish
whether a person is incongruent or not. From Gendlin's perspective
incongruence is a matter of a person not adequately symbolising their
experiencing, where 'experiencing' (unlike Rogers' 'experience') refers
to what is going on in that person's awareness. To pick up on Rogers'
example in Chapter 2, someone says that he feels admiration for his
father, then on further reflection and discussion says that nevertheless
he does find his father irritating sometimes . . . in fact quite a lot
of the time . . . there are even

204

Person-Centred Therapy

aspects of his father's personality that he does not like . . . and even
hates. This process of differentiation and symbolisation of one's
experiencing is precisely what goes on in therapy, and after several
months of therapy, perhaps, the man may one day say, with vehemence,
that he hates his father. He may then add that he has always hated him.
Here (where Rogers would say that the man has indeed always hated his
father, though up to now this experience has been denied to awareness)
Gendlin (1959, 1964b/1973, 1999) has a novel perspective, which I
referred to briefly in Chapter 3. His view is that at the earlier time
the man was in a state of implicit hatred. That is, he was in a state
which would naturally have emerged as hatred had the hatred not been
blocked. What happens in therapy is that the block is released and the
hatred is expressed in words and/or behaviour. Gendlin holds that the
hatred was not just there, waiting. What was there was a whole intricate
situation with the father, one aspect of which was being expressed as
admiration, while another aspect was blocked aggression, expressed
perhaps in bad moods and depression. There was something wrong, but
there was no hatred, only that which would lead to aggression given the
circumstances which would release it. Gendlin compares such situations
with the experience of hunger: hunger is a state which naturally leads
to eating. Eating, we could say, is the expression of hunger, but we
cannot say -- except quaintly and metaphorically -- that the eating was
there, waiting to appear. At the earlier time the person was not eating,
but they were in a state which, in Gendlin's terminology, 'implies'
eating. Similarly, we can say that our man's anger is an expression of
his relation to his father, but we should not say -- except quaintly and
metaphorically -- that the anger was there, waiting to appear. At the
earlier time the man was not angry, but he was in a state which
'implied' anger. For Gendlin, this earlier state, like all states, is
indefinitely intricate. It is the resultant of a myriad of events and
influences: the man's early childhood experiences, what had happened to
him at school, his experience of how his parents related to each other,
the effect of an illness when he was a teenager and how his father had
reacted to that, and so on. His present state carries the implications
of all this, implications which cannot be neatly parcelled out, but
which form an intricate whole to which, in therapy, for example, he can
give his attention. As he focuses on 'all that about me and my father',
words and images may arise which give expression to 'all that'. It is
'heavy', 'paralysing', but in that 'paralysed' thing there is . . .
something . . . irritation . . . yes, but an energy in it . . . anger,
yes hatred, but also

Towards a Theory of Psychotherapy

205

pain and . . . pity? To say he is 'now aware of the anger he had not
felt before' is a very crude and misleading description of the
situation. The reality is that an indefinitely intricate situation has
been carried forward in a particular way which expresses some new
aspects of what had up to now been only implicit. The saying 'I am
angry' is not a matching of symbols to experience but an expression of
his experiencing (which might instead have been expressed by striking
his father). In Gendlin's view therapy does not succeed through people
coming 'to know what they really feel', but through the changes in them
which come about through expressing what was implicit, but blocked.
Gendlin's notion of 'implying', that is, of implicit states later being
articulated in explicit statements and behaviour, enables him to think
about incongruence in a new way. Incongruence is no longer a matter of a
mismatch between symbols (such as saying 'I'm not angry') and a state of
mind (being angry), but an incomplete expression of one's experiencing.
From Gendlin's perspective we are congruent (authentic) when what we say
flows from the totality of our experiencing, when it formulates and
expresses that experiencing. We are incongruent (inauthentic) when what
we say comes from some other source, for example, from what we think
should be said in such situations, from what we would theoretically
expect, from habit, from what we have felt about similar situations in
the past, from just one conceptualised bit of our experiencing or from
what we would like to be true. Inauthentic expression is expression
which does not come freshly from our current experiencing, but from some
kind of conceptual structure which bypasses that experiencing. In
Gendlin's terminology we are incongruent when we are structure-bound. It
may be worth adding that the difference between Rogers' and Gendlin's
accounts of congruence is closely related to different philosophical
perspectives on how language relates to the world. The traditional
picture has been that language represents the world. The world is just
there, with its complex structures. Words then symbolise different
elements in the structures, and the structures of sentences mirror the
structures in the world. This kind of view, often referred to as the
'picture' theory of language can be found in philosophy from Augustine
to the early Wittgenstein. However, in the twentieth century, the
difficulties in such a view of language became increasingly evident. In
the later Wittgenstein, in postmodernism and in Gendlin's thinking,
language is seen as creating meanings rather than as acquiring its
meanings through 'corresponding to', 'reflecting' or 'being congruent

206

Person-Centred Therapy

with' a non-linguistic reality. In this more recent philosophy
symbolisation is no longer seen as involving congruence between
'symbols' and 'world', and this suggests that Rogers' notion of
congruence does need to be reformulated. The geometrical metaphor of
congruence (a matching of one thing to another) will itself need to be
dropped, but this does not mean that authenticity will be any less
significant a notion in psychotherapy. It is only the philosophical
picture of authenticity as a 'matching' which needs to be set aside. In
Gendlin's account the essential structure of Rogers' thinking is
retained. It remains true that the broad aim of therapy is to enable
clients 'to become themselves', or to live authentically in whatever way
is right for them. It also remains true that it is important for the
therapist to respond to the client in an authentic way, that is, from
the whole felt sense of their experiencing, rather than from the
standpoint of a specific theoretical framework, or in any other way that
imposes some specific form on the client which is not the client's form.
The therapist needs to respond from their felt experiencing if the
client is to be helped to do the same.

Conclusion

What I have tried to do in this book is to look at person-centred
therapy from Gendlin's focusing-oriented perspective. This perspective
itself originates in a way of thinking which sees concepts and theories
as possible ways of relating to and carrying-forward our experiencing.
It holds that there is something beyond the concepts, something which
nevertheless responds, in different ways, to different conceptual
formulations. Gendlin's perspective joins naturally with that of Rogers,
in which the emphasis is not on the therapist's concepts but on the
client and on the client's experiential frame of reference. Gendlin's
perspective allows space for there to be many different conceptual
formulations of the nature of human personality, of psychological
disturbance and of psychotherapy. It also allows for there to be many
different therapeutic procedures. Amongst such procedures we find
Rogers' procedure of reflection, Gendlin's Focusing procedure, the
person-centred 'use of the self' procedure and also many other
procedures which are characteristic of other schools of therapy. Any of
these procedures may be helpful for a client, but it is crucial to
Rogers' and Gendlin's thinking that there is also something which is not
a matter of 'procedures' at all. This 'something' is the experiencing
process of the client which is facilitated by the presence of the
therapist. The mere presence of another person can be facilitative, so
long as they are present in the receptive way which Rogers articulated.
Then within that facilitative presence a variety of procedures can be
used. Focusing-oriented therapy as a 'school' of therapy involves the
general background conditions of genuineness, respect and empathy,
together with the reflective and focusing procedures characteristic of
Rogers' and Gendlin's ways of working. However, the way of thinking
behind focusing-oriented therapy points to a reformulation of how we
might think about 'schools of therapy'. Gendlin's view, which is quite
strongly confirmed by empirical research, is that most of the specific
concepts and procedures which are characteristic of the different
schools make little overall difference when it comes to therapeutic
effectiveness. What does make a significant overall difference is the
207

208

Person-Centred Therapy

quality of the relationship between client and therapist, and the
ability of the client to engage with their own experiencing. Rogers' and
Gendlin's ways of working can be seen as ways of facilitating these two
aspects of the therapeutic encounter, but that is not to say that other
more specific procedures may not be very helpful for many clients. What
is important, though, is that such procedures need to be employed in a
focusing-oriented way, that is, in a way which continually checks back
with the client what the impact of the procedure is on the client's
experiencing. The important question is whether this procedure here,
with this client, helps the client to move forward. From a
focusing-oriented perspective, the procedures need to be employed within
the overall felt sense of the therapy situation. They should not
dominate a session, but be incorporated into it in a way which furthers
the client's experiential process. Yet while Gendlin's approach enables
us to see that there can be many effective 'schools' of therapy, it also
makes it clear that the philosophical principles behind person-centred
practice are fundamentally different from the ways of thinking which
characterise most schools of therapy. Most schools of therapy ground
their practice in particular theories of personality or of human
development (and such theories are there to a limited extent in the
writings of Rogers and Gendlin themselves). However, Gendlin's way of
thinking takes seriously the person-centred view that it is the client's
way of conceptualising (interacting with) their experiencing which
matters. Instead of another scientific theory of how people are, Gendlin
provides a philosophical analysis of the relationship of experiencing to
concepts in general. Gendlin has little by way of a theoretical
framework of personality or of human development into which the client's
issues are to be fitted. He has a philosophical view of human beings as
creatures in which there is a continuing interaction between
experiencing and symbolic forms, but that is different from having a
scientific theory of personality. Yet his approach is not
anti-theoretical; theoretical ideas can be helpful to the client, but
which theories will be helpful is a matter of how the client interacts
with the theory. It is not decided in advance by the therapist which
theoretical ideas will help the client. The more theoretical frameworks
with which the therapist is familiar the better, since then there is a
greater chance of the therapist responding in a way which will be
helpful to this client. Similarly, the more therapeutic procedures with
which the therapist is familiar the better, since then the therapist may
be able to draw on something which will be helpful to this client.
Gendlin's approach is radically person-centred; it

Conclusion

209

is centred not on any scientific theory but on the 'person in there' who
is to be helped in construing their lived experiencing in ways which
carry them forward. Gendlin's approach shows how the person-centred
approach relates to other approaches. It is not on the same level as
them. What is central to the person-centred approach -- its
person-centredness -- needs to be there in any form of therapy if that
therapy is to be effective. Classical person-centred therapy, that is,
the form of therapy which pursues primarily the avenue of 'reflection of
feeling', can reasonably be seen as one school of therapy amongst
others, but this 'school' does not constitute person-centred therapy.
Nor does the 'school' which emphasises 'the use of the self', in the
sense of working with the specifics of client--therapist interaction.
Person-centred therapy cannot be identified with any of the avenues of
therapy; it is, rather, a matter of how one proceeds along an avenue.
Finally, Gendlin's position can help us to appreciate that any
formulation of what is valuable in therapy, including the
focusing-oriented formulation, can be used in ways which are unhelpful
to the client. In a conference presentation Gendlin (1990, pp. 205, 206)
said: What matters is to be a human being with another human being, to
recognise the other person as another being in there. Even if it is a
cat or bird, if you are trying to help a wounded bird, the first thing
you have to know is that there is somebody in there, and that you have
to wait for that "person", that being in there, to be in contact with
you. . . . Do not let focusing, or reflecting, or anything else get in
between. Do not use it as an in-between. Do not say: "I can stay here
because I have my reflecting-method, I have my ping-pong-paddle, so you
cannot get me. You say something? You get it back." There is a sense
that we are armed, you see. We have methods, we know focusing; we have
credentials; we have doctors. We have all this stuff and it is so easy
for us to sit there with stuff in between. Do not let it be in between;
put it out of the way.

This is, I believe, very close to the spirit of Carl Rogers' thinking.
In an appreciative obituary of Rogers, Gendlin (1988, p. 128) records
that on a video-recorded panel a few months before Rogers' death, 'there
was an argument between those who uphold the pure client-centered method
and those who integrate it with other methods. I said we need both
groups. But Carl said, "I didn't want to find a client-centered way. I
wanted to find a way to help people".'

Appendix A The Wider Context

Psychotherapy does not exist in a vacuum. It is an activity which is
inextricably connected with the rest of human life. Some relevant
connections are:

• Principles and procedures in psychotherapy clearly have ethical and
social implications.

• There is a creative element in psychotherapy which must in some way
connect with creativity in the arts.

• Similarly, there must be connections with creative thinking in
general. • Views of psychotherapy are inevitably embedded in general
philosophical conceptions of the nature of the world and our place in
it.

• Human beings are embodied beings, so that ultimately there have to be
connections between what goes on in psychotherapy, and the biological
and physical underpinnings of our lives. • Many of us feel that human
beings have a spiritual dimension, and that too must stand in
significant relationship with what goes on in psychotherapy. In
assessing any theory of psychotherapy it is important to take into
consideration this wider context. Assessment of any form of
psychotherapy should not be limited to empirical studies of process and
outcome, as if therapy could be separated from everything else in our
lives. The general principles which lie behind a psychotherapy will have
implications elsewhere, and these implications need to be assessed as
part of the assessment of the general principles. In this part of the
book I will discuss briefly several areas in which Gendlin's principles
can be seen to be illuminating or fruitful. In so far as this is so in
these other areas, we have reason to take the general principles
seriously. Then we can, with extra confidence, employ them in the field
of psychotherapy. To write at all adequately about these areas would
require a whole chapter for each of them -- or in some cases a whole
book -- but I hope at least to give some glimpses of the context and
implications of Gendlin's thinking. What follows will be a set of swift,
kaleidoscopic impressions, rather than a systematic survey.

210

Appendix A

211

Ethics and values In wrestling with a moral problem we often seem to be
pulled in two ways. There is often the immediate feeling of wanting to
do something, but opposed to that is the pull of a moral principle, such
as that of not hurting people or not taking what does not belong to us.
Some philosophers, such as Kant, hold that morality is entirely a matter
of acting from principle, from a sense of duty; if one also wants to do
what duty prescribes, that creates the risk of doing the right thing for
the wrong reasons. Others, such as Aristotle, hold that we only act
morally when our character has developed to the point that we naturally
want to do what is in accordance with moral principles. Both these views
contrast with the view that people should simply do whatever they want
to do, and ignore 'moral principles' which are seen as constrictions
laid upon the individual by the society. Gendlin (1986b, 1996, Chapter
21) gives us a novel way of looking at these issues. For Gendlin a human
being is not an organism on which society imposes its values; a human
being is an interaction between organic feeling, and the general
concepts and principles of society. Much of what we feel about what is
right and wrong, we have picked up from parents and others. Later we may
come to sense that some of these absorbed principles do not fit our
developing experience, and we modify or reject them. But the others we
keep; the fact that we learned them from others is no reason for saying
that they are not our principles, any more than it is for saying that
what we have learned from others about history or science is not our
knowledge. Whether a way of thinking or feeling is ours is not a matter
of where it came from, but of whether it connects now with our own
experiencing. From our society we absorb some principles which naturally
fit with our experiencing, others which are initially uncomfortable but
with which we later come to appreciate and identify with, and still
others which we cannot feel comfortable with and which we need to
reject. We will only take the third kind of case as the norm if we
mistakenly think of human beings as initially isolated organisms which
later have to be 'socialised'. Rogers always held that as people become
more themselves they become more sensitive to the needs of others, more
'moral', but his theoretical framework (which sets 'organismic
experience' against 'conditions of worth' imposed by society) makes it
difficult to understand why this is so. For Gendlin there is still a
real distinction between moral principles which are our own, and
principles which we live by in an inauthentic way, out of fear, or
habit, or anything other than our immediate experiencing. But the
distinction does not rest on where the principles come from; it rests on
whether the principles in question are really alive for us in our
immediate experiencing, or whether we are telling ourselves that we
'ought' to feel that way when really we do not. Gendlin's thinking
allows for the case where we genuinely feel that we ought to feel
different from the way we do feel (e.g. we genuinely want to feel

212

Appendix A

accepting of certain kinds of people that we cannot yet feel accepting
of ) . It is not a matter of whatever we feel being right for us. In
this connection I think that Harry Frankfurt's (1971) distinction
between first- and secondorder desires is helpful. It is characteristic
of human beings that we not only have our desires and feelings but also
have desires and feelings about our desires and feelings. It can seem
that in Focusing, and in the person-centred approach generally, we are
encouraging people just to follow their feelings, irrespective of the
impact of this on others. But that is a misunderstanding. Rather, we are
encouraging people to notice their feelings, to stay with them, to sense
what needs to be acted on and what does not, taking into account the
whole of their experiencing including their moral principles. It may
seem that there is still a question of why we need moral principles at
all. Why can we not simply rely on our immediate felt experiencing in
making a moral choice? In terms of Gendlin's theory the answer is that
experiencing is always an interaction between the immediate
feeling-process and something general. An animal simply reacts to events
in its environment out of its feeling-process, but a human being
responds to a situation which is constituted as much by what is general
and social as by the individual's feeling-process. For example, an
animal simply reacts to threat with counter-threat or flight. A human
being may be inclined to do the same, but can also respond in terms of a
general awareness that 'tit-for-tat' responses can be harmful, or that
giving in to bullying is not a good thing. In the human response there
are general principles involved. These are not imposed on human beings,
but partly constitute what human responses are. There is then the vexed
question of which moral principles we should subscribe to, given the
variety of such principles found in different societies or within
subgroups of a single society. This is a question which has become
especially acute as we have become more aware of the variety of moral
positions which can be adopted. Here Gendlin's answer is that the moral
principles which are right for us are those which arise from our
engaging fully with the whole of our experiencing. Consider the example
of a student who is trying to decide whether he ought to abandon his
university career. Suppose he says after a short discussion that his
parents really want him to stay and that he does not want to let them
down, that settles the matter. His friends then criticise him for doing
the wrong thing, on the grounds that young people should not do what
their parents tell them to do. Or suppose he says that it's just silly
doing something you do not want to do, so he's going to leave. His
parents then criticise him for doing the wrong thing, on the grounds
that people should make the most of the educational opportunities which
they have. Here there are conflicting moral reactions. It can seem that
the important issue is whether the friends or the parents are right, but
who is to say who is right? Now a counsellor working with the student is
unlikely to adopt the position of either the friends or the parents. The
counsellor helps the student to

Appendix A

213

reflect on what is right for the student to do, but this process of
moral reflection does not begin with general principles. It begins with
the student going into his experiencing, exploring new aspects of it,
such as the general difficulty he has in making decisions, the
associated self-doubt, his contempt for himself for being so indecisive
and so on. Out of this process of exploration something will emerge. It
may be that he decides to leave the university or it may be that he
decides to stay, but either way it now seems appropriate to say that he
has made the right decision. That the decision is a good one is not a
matter of its content but of the process by which it is reached. The
process is one of going into one's experiencing and making new
distinctions in terms of one's feelings. But this is not to say that
moral principles are not involved. On the contrary, it may be that the
moral principles with which the student is confronted by his friends and
parents are exactly what stir up his feelings. In his counselling
sessions he may well be reflecting on the principle that one should not
waste one's opportunities. How does that feel? Does it make him feel
trapped, or does it bring a sense of challenge? Then again the student
may be confronted with the principle that young people should not be
doing what their parents tell them to do. Does this bring a sense of
excitement and novelty, or does it touch on a deep sadness that his
parents have never understood him? When we bring moral principles up to
our experiencing there is an interaction. Our experiencing changes, and
so do our principles. Having had that experience I can no longer hold on
to this moral principle, at least not in its original form. But also
having looked at my life through the lens of this moral framework I no
longer experience the situation in the same way. Looking at moral
principles in this process-oriented way frees us from the dilemma of
having to choose between moral principles as statements either of
absolute truths or of mere personal preferences. Moral principles do not
tell us what to do, nor do they express what we want; rather, they
provide an avenue along which we can explore what to do. They can be a
means of carrying us forward in our quest for what is good. It is
axiomatic that in a person-centred therapeutic context the therapist
should not try to impose their values on the client, but at the same
time the therapist needs to be authentic with the client, and not
pretend to be valueneutral. This has sometimes seemed a dilemma in the
person-centred approach. But from Gendlin's perspective there is no
difficulty in principle. The therapist can try out making value
statements such as 'every child should be cared for' -- such statements
can have an experiential impact. A client may implicitly hold to this
value without connecting it with certain aspects of their own childhood.
When the therapist puts forward this value statement explicitly, the
client may resonate with it, and begin to connect it to the fact that
they were not themselves cared for. Gendlin will sometimes try out value
statements on the client which are experientially alive for him, and
which he thinks might be experientially

214

Appendix A

alive for the client: for example (1996, p. 265) 'People have a right to
at least some times for themselves', (p. 266) 'Every child should be
cared about', (p. 267) 'You shouldn't have had to try to give her what
she needed.' Sometimes this helps the client carry forward, sometimes
(p. 267) not. Where it does not help the client to carry forward Gendlin
drops the value statement and goes back to what the client is feeling. I
think that Gendlin is saying that moral principles are pointless unless
they move us in some way. In contexts where they do not move us it is
best to drop them and go back to the feelings. But that is not to say
moral principles are of no use -- on the contrary they often do move us,
but no one can know whether a particular person in a particular context
will be so moved. If stating a moral principle evokes an experiential
response in someone, then they are helped to that extent. Moral
principles get a bad name through people trying to persuade other people
to follow them without the experiential response being there. So we need
to be value-neutral in the sense of having no fixed views about which
moral principles will help which people and when.

Social and political implications Gendlin has always been concerned with
the social and political aspects of his work. He has from the beginning
encouraged the development of groups, known as 'Changes' groups, in
which listening and focusing can be learned and practised. Like Rogers,
he has been sceptical about the professionalisation of the therapy world
and has written about 'The politics of giving therapy away' (Gendlin,
1984c). In addition to these practical measures Gendlin has written on
the theoretical implications of his views for how we can understand the
relationship between the individual and the society. He criticises the
influential tradition, coming partly from thinkers such as Adorno and
Foucault, according to which everything human is a 'social
construction', so that there is then nothing in the individual human
being which can resist the imposition of social controls. According to
this view it is an illusion to suppose that by turning to one's own
experiencing one can find anything which will provide an authentic basis
for challenging the norms of one's society; for one's experiencing has
been formed by just those norms. Gendlin traces the origins of this view
to the beginnings of modern science, when for the first time a
mathematical grid was imposed on our experiencing. Kant's philosophy
then developed the view that all our experiencing must conform with the
principles of pure reason which exist a priori. Finally, the principles
which determine the nature of our experiencing were identified with the
structures of society which are imposed by the exercise of power. Then
there is no longer anything significant in the human being which is
independent of society. Even what we might think of as the basic needs
of

Appendix A

215

our body are so imbued by societal structures that it no longer makes
any sense to speak of a human nature in itself. Gendlin (1987, p. 256)
quotes Foucault's aim 'to expose a body totally imprisoned by history
and the process of history's destruction of the body'. Gendlin relates
this development to Freud's insistence that the ego is formed by
society; there is another part of the person, the id, but the id is
unstructured impulse which has no form of its own. It could also be
related to the theme of behaviourist psychology that all significant
human behaviour is learned. Gendlin accepts that there is no human
experiencing which is independent of the structures of society. But for
him the relationship between the structures and experiencing is not a
one-way imposition of the former on the latter. Rather, it is an
'interaffecting' relationship, in which, it is true, experiencing is
always already affected by society, but it is also true that society is
always an expression of human experiencing. The answer to the question
of what is in the human being apart from the structures of society is
the intricate organisation and functioning of the human body. This is
admittedly deeply affected by the societal structures, but the
structures are also deeply affected by it. Through the work of the
ethologists in the last sixty years it has become abundantly clear that
not all animal behaviour is learned. Amongst the lower forms of animal
life most behaviour is innately determined, but even in mammals and
primates there is a blend of social learning with a very significant
innate element. In animal societies, social learning elaborates on
inherited behavioural structures, and there is no reason to think that
it is different for human beings. Not only is there, undoubtedly, such a
thing as the imposition of social forms on the individual human being,
but there is also something that the forms are imposed on. Gendlin
applauds Foucault's demonstration that medicine and psychiatry, for
example, can be forms of social control, but he insists that they need
not function in this way. Instead of imposing on and controlling our
experiencing, these social forms can carry it forward. In the same way
instruction does not have to be indoctrination; it can be genuine
education. The difference between the two is that indoctrination imposes
its content, whereas education is sensitive to the experiencing of the
learner, and presents the content in a way which carries the learner's
experiencing forward. Gendlin believes that modern society has reached
an important point at which a growing number of people have become aware
of the structures within which they live, and wish to find their own
ways of living within, or creatively modifying, those structures.
Although in many quarters the movement towards standardisation, quality
control, explicit mission statements, performance criteria and so forth
continues unabated, there is an increasing number of people who resist
this tendency. Some of them would like to destroy the structures
entirely, but many see that the way forward is rather

216

Appendix A

to work at ways of making the structures fit better with human
experiencing, to adapt the machine-world to human needs, rather than
human needs to the machine-world.

Artistic creativity Writing Focusing can be used very effectively in the
teaching of writing. Sondra Perl, a professor of English at the City
University of New York, and former director of the New York City Writing
Project, has been teaching creative writing to students at all
educational levels for the last twenty years, using a suitably adapted
form of Gendlin's Focusing instructions. Perl (1994, p. 79) has created
a set of Guidelines for Composing: They are tools that invite writers to
work directly with the felt sense, to use it to discover what they want
to write and to rely on it as a guide, both in choosing words and
knowing whether those words capture their intended meanings. More often
than not, they lead to writing that is powerfully connected to the
writer and powerful in its own right. . . . The Guidelines for Composing
are, essentially, a series of questions intended to call up and draw out
writers' felt sense. They invite writers to stop, relax, pause, and
listen quietly so they hear not only their usual thoughts but the
silences between them

Perl emphasises the importance of the instructor's stance, which needs
to be one which embodies respect, trust, caring and patience. In the
writing group, facing a blank page can be a frightening experience, and
part of the instructor's role is 'to ease the panic that often
accompanies composition, the anxiety or fear of not-knowing that hits us
just before we begin to create something. This is perhaps the most
valuable aspect of the process: that another person is there to
accompany us along a path that initially appears daunting' (p. 80).
Having established an atmosphere of safety in the group, Perl then gets
the students to relax, and to jot down an inventory of what is on their
minds, what they are thinking about these days. She then asks them to
look over the list and see if any item is asking for attention, if any
item 'jumps off the page at you'. The students are then asked to take
that item and write it at the top of a new page. They then note down
whatever comes to them in connection with that item. They are asked not
to go into any particular association too deeply. Perl (pp. 84--5) then
asks them to set aside all the bits and pieces and picture yourself
holding the topic or issue in your palm. Stay there and just picture the
whole topic right there, stretched out in front of you. I want you to
look at the whole of it, not the

Appendix A

217

bits and pieces that are so familiar to you, and ask yourself the
following questions: What makes this topic or issue so compelling or
important? What is at the heart of this issue for me? . . . Now wait
until you get a word, or phrase, or an image that captures your sense of
the whole topic. Once you get it, write it down and begin exploring it.
. . . As you write, let your felt sense deepen. See if it says you are
on the right track. Notice what else it may be telling you. Can you
experience the shift in your body that says "Yes, this feels right. This
begins to say it"?

The students are then encouraged to write for fifteen minutes or so, and
then Perl asks some closing questions: Ask yourself: Where's this all
leading? What's the point I'm trying to make? And write again whatever
comes to you . . . . Once you feel you are near or at the end, ask
yourself: Does this feel complete? If so, write down your answer. If
not, ask, again: What's missing? And, again, look to your felt sense of
the topic for some guidance. . . . Once you have a felt sense of where
this is leading, ask yourself: What form might this be written in? Is
this a poem? A play? A narrative? Is it a dialogue or a story or an
essay? . . . Can someone else tell this story? Make some notes to
yourself about what forms you might use or from whose point of view you
might work as you compose your piece.

Perl comments (p. 87): When the Guidelines are effective, what works is
not so much a technique as a philosophy . . . .One key idea is that our
individual ways of being are also, intrinsically, ways of being with
others. Genuine voices can be forged, against all the odds, in the most
adverse circumstances. But individual authenticity flourishes where such
authenticity is also valued by the group. When using the Guidelines, we
do not tell students they have something valuable to say. We show them.
We say, in effect, that there is more to each person present than he or
she is usually aware of . . . And what we work with when articulating
meaning creatively is a sensate knowing that we can refer to and draw
upon, even though it may never be fully said. To uncover this sense and
to let what we thereby contact speak through us is no mere deciphering
or decoding. It deserves to be called a higher literacy, for we 'read'
the hitherto unwritten, and 'hear' what is not yet spoken.

Painting Gendlin (1992, p. 199) writes: The artist adds a line and then
stands back . . . and feels very exactly whether the line is what it
needs or whether that new line was wrong and must be taken out again.
The artist might stand before such a design for a long

218

Appendix A

time -- even years, sensing but not finding the needed line. The design
needs something, but what? It's not just unbalanced, as if adding most
anything to the left side would do. No, it needs -- uhm, ah, hmm, . . .
That blank seems to know what the design needs. Certainly it knows to
reject the line the artist just tried. And also to reject many more
lines that come and are never even drawn. That . . . knows what and
where a right new line goes, and yet that line has never existed before
-- in the history of the world.

The artist and psychotherapist Mical Goldfarb, having heard Gendlin
speak about creativity, began to explore her own experience of creating
works of art, and that of some fellow artists. She writes (Goldfarb,
1992, p. 180): Much has been written about the process of art, about its
creation and its creators. However, even the notes and journals of
artists give few glimpses into the creative process as it is lived and
felt: into the actual, particular, sensed experience of bringing a work
of art into being.

Goldfarb interviewed several painters in the Seattle area, with a view
to seeing whether they worked with a felt sense in their painting. None
of the artists interviewed specifically identified, located or dialogued
with \[an\] inner feeling in a direct manner. In fact . . . none of them
had really thought about the relationship between their inner felt sense
of wanting to create a painting and the creative process itself until my
questions pointed to it. What emerged were descriptions of an attunement
to an inner sense of something wanting to be created, and of an
attention to this sense as an essential feature of the process of
creating a work of art.

One of the painters, Kevin Harvey, told the story of his painting of
'the universe over the telephone wires and the trees'. He had been
looking out from a friend's front porch one evening, looking up and just
seeing these weird angles of trees and these weird telephone wires . . .
I liked that image for some reason, and . . . going back to his house,
looking at it again in the daylight, not so much to get an exact replica
of it, but just to capture the feeling which I first had when I saw it .
. . and also knowing that whatever it was that I saw there was important
and it was important to get that feeling across to somebody else . . .
to know that \[the painting\] had the same feeling that I originally saw
when I looked out . . . I moved those telephone wires around a lot, just
to make them have some sense of purpose. They had to have direction and
purpose, otherwise they just seemed like a bunch of lines crossing a
page . . . otherwise they wouldn't have been convincing. They would have
been read as telephone wires, but they wouldn't have read the same way .
. . not fitting the internal image.

Appendix A

219

Here we see the artist having the initial experience which feels
important and which he wants to get across to others. He goes back to
the friend's house to recapture the experience. Then he paints, and has
to try out various things and move the wires around, so that they convey
the experience he is trying to convey, so that they 'fit the internal
image'. He comments: You start with knowing what it's supposed to be and
then you go through all these stages where it isn't what it's supposed
to be, and then it ends up being what it's supposed to be, even if it's
not what it was when you started.

Another of the painters interviewed by Goldfarb, Pat DeCaro, remarked:
sometimes it's not even an image, but it's a feeling of it, . . .
Sometimes there is an image of it, but a lot of times you may not even
know what it would look like. But \[you have\] a sense of just what it
is going to be . . . \[and\] you do find it, and it is part by part . .
. you're working over here, and suddenly it tells you what to do over
here, and then that tells you what to do in another part . . . I
wouldn't say the work's speaking to you, I think your self is speaking
to you as you're working . . . but its not articulated in words.

Not infrequently artists experience a block to their creativity.
Goldfarb quotes Paul Klee: 'I have very definite feelings, but have not
yet transformed them into art. So now I have to struggle again, and
chiefly against the inhibitions that prevent me from exploiting my
original talent. . . . As if I were pregnant with things needing form,
and dead sure of a miscarriage.' Goldfarb describes her own experience
of working on a large painting of a group of rocks off the coast of
Washington which had great significance for her. She felt deeply the
exact experience she wanted to express, as well as the image of the
rocks which would be its vehicle. But she could not move forward with
the painting; there was an inner sense of being blocked. Then she began
to approach the block as a feeling, made room for it, and asked it to
help her find a solution. Weeks later, she felt a rush of excitement in
my middle. The image of the rocks of Stonehenge loomed suddenly in my
mind's eye. The awe and reverence I had felt when I visited the great
circle of stones years ago was with me in that moment. I knew that this
was the felt sense of my painting, struggling to find its way onto the
canvas and I saw that my adherence to a literal realism was exactly what
was standing in the way of my ability to express my felt experience.
Returning to the studio, I worked for hours on the painting, grouping
the great stones off the coast as the monoliths stand on Salisbury
Plain. Clearly, this was what was needed! By making room for the blocked
feeling and accepting it as a natural part of the process of creating
the painting, I allowed the unknown to be made known.

220

Appendix A

Creative thinking Gendlin has developed a systematic way of applying his
philosophy to creative thinking and theory construction in general. This
procedure, known as 'Thinking at the Edge' (TAE), in effect applies the
Focusing procedure to intellectual rather than personal problems. As
with Focusing, Gendlin has laid out a series of steps which are intended
as guidelines rather than as a rigid prescription which must be followed
exactly. A full account of TAE can be found in a special issue of The
Folio, the Journal of the Focusing Institute (2000--2003). It contains
Gendlin's own account of the procedure, three detailed examples of its
use (in the philosophy of science, text translation and psychotherapy
theory), and applications in industry and ecology. A version of the
paper on unconditional positive regard in psychotherapy change has
already appeared in Hendricks (2001). I can only give a first taste of
the procedure here. TAE begins with the situation in which we have a
sense that we know something important (in a field which we are familiar
with), but cannot yet articulate or communicate what we know. We may
say, 'There is something odd here -- it feels I'm on to something.' As
in Focusing we first sit with the felt sense of this as yet unclear
place. Then we notice that because there is something new here, it has
something of a paradoxical or contradictory aspect to it. From the felt
sense emerges something like 'It is this, yet it is not', for example
'Separating from a situation lets one have the situation.' We then
notice which words seem to be crucial to what we want to say, and write
these words down, together with their standard meanings. When these
words are used with their standard meanings they do not really say what
we want them to say. But words can always be used in new ways. When we
made the contradictory sentence we did not mean the words in quite their
normal senses. What then did we mean by them? We move between the words
and the felt sense. We can then notice that other words can work just as
well. Using these other words we can write down several sentences which
catch the crux of what we mean. The different sentences pull out
different aspects of the felt sense, different strands in what we mean.
Next we collect examples or facets of this which we mean: anything which
resonates with the felt sense of it, anything which carries it forward.
We write down a sentence for each facet which would not be intelligible
to anyone who was unfamiliar with what we mean. It is a sentence which
only makes sense when understood the way we mean it (it may contain
metaphors or poetic forms of expression or juxtapositions of elements
that would not normally go together). Then we can cross the structure of
two facets -- we ask how each looks when seen in the light of the other.

Appendix A

221

Finally, from all this, what can emerge is a way of expressing what we
mean which can be put in the public language. Further steps are then
provided, which enable what has emerged to be built into a formal,
logical theory. 'Thinking at the Edge' has developed out of a course on
Theory Construction which Gendlin taught at the University of Chicago
for many years. There is a close, dual, relationship between TAE and his
theoretical work: not only were his theoretical concepts developed
through the kind of process which TAE formalises, but also the theory,
as formulated especially in A Process Model, constitutes an explanation
of how it is that TAE (and Focusing) works.

Biology In the late nineteenth century there was a battle between those
biologists (the 'mechanists') who held that living things can be thought
of as essentially physical systems, and those (the 'vitalists') who
thought that in addition to the mechanisms of organic life there is also
a 'vital force' in virtue of which an organism is a living thing. This
battle was for all practical purposes won by the mechanists, and the
notion of a 'vital force' which would distinguish living things from
non-living things has no place in modern biology. And yet, we may feel,
there is a difference: there is something different about living things,
which is not just a matter of the complexity of their physical
structures. The basic issue here goes back to Descartes' dichotomy
between human beings which have minds and other things which are just
physical systems. This dichotomy leaves no room for conceiving of plants
or animals as beings which are neither human nor merely physical.
Aristotle, on the other hand, thought in terms of a four-way division
of: material things, living things, animals and people, in which each
category includes but goes beyond the preceding one. Gendlin's system is
like Aristotle's in this respect (Gendlin is, amongst other things, an
Aristotelean scholar). In A Process Model, he develops an intricate
account of how we can think about the difference between organisms,
animals and human beings, an account which neither reduces organisms and
animals to mere physical systems, nor introduces speculative entities
such as the vital force. For Gendlin, the modern account of living
things as mechanistic systems confuses a mechanistic way of looking at
things (which has its place and value) with a view of what living things
are. For Gendlin the actual living organism is an interaffecting whole
which can for certain purposes and in certain respects be regarded as a
set of mechanisms. But there is always more to a living thing than can
be specified in terms of specific mechanisms. These 'mechanisms' are
specific aspects of the organism which are 'pulled out'

222

Appendix A

(discovered, created), as we bring our mechanistic conceptual scheme up
to the living thing itself. Although Gendlin does not discuss the
concept, I think that his account helps us to make sense of the notion
of 'function' in biology. The notion of function is not easy to
elucidate. In the case of a machine we can say that the function of each
of its parts is to contribute to the overall 'purpose' of the machine,
which of course is determined by the purposes of human beings. But
living things are not created by human beings for human purposes; they
in some sense have their own purposes. But in modern biology there is no
place for purposes; there are just mechanisms. It might seem that
biology will have to get along without the notion of function (Manser,
1973), but that is clearly impossible. Biological thinking is permeated
by the notion of function (Purton, 1978a,b, 2004). For example, function
largely determines what counts as an organ of a particular kind. The eye
of a fly is a very different sort of physical structure from the eye of
a cat. They both count as eyes because of their function, because of the
role they play in the life of the animal. Now various attempts have been
made to re-interpret 'function' in terms of what contributes to the
survival of the organism, or to the survival of the species, or to the
maximisation of reproduction of the genes involved, but none of these
ways of thinking about function has proved really satisfactory. (For
instance, if we think of function in terms of what contributes to the
survival of the individual we will have difficulties with such things as
the kangaroo's pouch; if we think in terms of what contributes to the
survival of the species, or propagation of the genes, what are we to say
of the characteristics of animals such as mules, which do not
reproduce?) What we want to say, I think, is that the function of an
organ or of a behaviour pattern is what it contributes to the life of
the organism, but there is no way of saying that in mechanistic biology.
I think that Gendlin's concepts may be of help here. For Gendlin an
organism cannot be adequately conceptualised as a mechanistic system. It
needs, rather, to be thought of as an interaffecting whole. The life of
the organism is the 'totaling' and 'focaling' (Gendlin, 1997a,
pp. 46--7) of all its interaffecting processes, and the function of any
process is a matter of what that process contributes to the organism's
life as a whole. It is the 'interaffecting whole' that cannot properly
be formulated in mechanistic biology, but function is a matter of what
contributes to that whole.

Animal behaviour studies An area in which I worked a bit, many years ago
(Purton, 1978b), is ethology, the biological study of animal behaviour.
In Gendlin's writings (e.g. 1991b, pp. 110, 132--5; 1993, pp. 4--5;
1997a, pp. 116, 139) there are a number of references to ethology, and
in a way ethology could be said to be quite central to his project of
developing a way of thinking about the body which

Appendix A

223

allows for the possibility of focusing. It is the ethologists who have
shown that there is much in animal behaviour which cannot be accounted
for in terms of learning. The findings of ethology make it very
implausible to assume that human behaviour and experience are determined
entirely by social and cultural factors. They make it much more
plausible that the social context interacts with, and gives a cultural
specificity to, that which is not culturally determined. It seems clear
that in human beings what is 'cultural' and what is 'natural' cannot in
fact be separated, but we can appreciate that there are two factors
involved, not just one, through considering what happens in focusing and
in creative activity generally. In these activities what is physically
felt is changed through interaction with cultural forms, but also new
forms are created out of what is felt. The experiencing of a creative
artist arises in part from historical and cultural factors, but what is
created may transform those very factors. Ethology can help us to
appreciate this fact that there is more to experience and behaviour than
that comes from learning or society. Reflection on ethology can help us
to understand Gendlin's position better, but it may also be that
Gendlin's ideas will be of use to ethologists. Ethology is a branch of
biology, not of psychology; animals, for the ethologist, are organic
physical systems to be understood in terms of physiological mechanisms,
biological function and evolutionary origin. Yet in reality, of course,
we see and relate to animals in ways other than in this detached
'scientific' way. My cat clearly shows affection for me; we are fond of
each other. How does that connect with movement patterns or physiology?
Ethologists look at animals, but animals can look back at us. The fact
that there is no place for this fact in our 'scientific' way of thinking
about animals was something that struck me very much when I was working
in the philosophy of ethology, and I was delighted to find this passage
in Gendlin's work (1995, p. 146): Since Descartes, the scientists have
had to avoid noticing the absurdity of the assumption that animals are
just patterned machines, that there is no one looking back at them, just
bits of color. We seem unable to think about what obviously looks at us.

Gendlin has written more on this in an unpublished paper titled 'On
animals': I know that there is somebody in every dog, cat and cow. They
see you seeing them, and touching them can keep them from being lost in
the night and fog . . . our society treats animals -- as mere raw
material. To become accustomed to it, one must be able to ignore the one
in there who looks out at us. As long as that one has to be ignored in
them, people hardly relate to that one in each other.

Until fairly recently, such matters would simply have been ignored by
ethologists. However, there is now a relatively small, but still
significant,

224

Appendix A

school of 'cognitive ethology', originating from the work of Donald
Griffin, which is prepared to think of animals in terms of concepts such
as 'wanting', 'hoping' and 'intention' which mainstream ethologists
still tend to regard as 'anthropomorphic'. Yet this cognitive ethology
has its difficulties. While from a common-sense point of view the
cognitivists are surely right in speaking of 'intention' and 'hope' in
the context of chimpanzee behaviour, it may seem not quite so right to
apply these concepts to ants or amoebae. People's intuitions differ
here, but for most of us there comes a point in the scale of life where
we do not seriously think of an organism as hoping, intending or even
wanting. At some point -- perhaps we have to come down to the level of
jellyfish or even cabbages -- the kinds of concepts we employ in
thinking about people no longer have an application. Now I suspect that
one of the difficulties in current cognitive ethology is that the
concepts currently available cannot capture much of the intricacy of
animal behaviour. Griffin (1981, p. 115) writes of a chimpanzee: I
submit that it may actually clarify our thinking to entertain such
thoughts as 'Washoe hopes to go out for a romp, and intends to influence
her human companions to that end,' or 'This bee likes one cavity better
than the other, and wants her swarm to occupy the preferred one.'

Traditional ethologists would object to this. They would see terms such
as 'hope', 'intention', 'liking' and 'wanting' as referring to
unobservable inner states of the animal which have no use in ethological
theory. Such a view has long been abandoned by most philosophers, and
Griffin is surely right that to entertain such thoughts can lead to
better ethological descriptions and explanations. However, the unease
which the traditional ethologists feel is not entirely misplaced. Terms
like 'hope' and 'fear' have intricate patterns of connections rooted in
our human form of life. They may not be applicable without modification
to the context of animals. (This is the familiar concern over the
'anthropomorphization' of animals.) Wittgenstein (1963) remarked: One
can imagine an animal angry, frightened, unhappy, startled. But hopeful?
And why not? We say a dog is afraid his master will beat him, but not,
he is afraid his master will beat him tomorrow. (I, 650)

I think many people would feel that there are contexts where we could
speak of a dog as hoping, but what about bees or ants? It can seem that
we have to make a decision about whether the animal in question 'has a
mind or not'. If it has, we can apply all our 'mentalistic' concepts
such as hope, intention and so on; if it does not have then we must
describe it in purely mechanistic or functional terms. But creatures
such as ants or bees do not fit this dichotomy. 'Hope' and 'intention'
seem out of place in describing their

Appendix A

225

behaviour (the details of why this is so -- if it is -- need close
examination), but that does not mean that the only alternative is to
explain their behaviour in terms of physical mechanisms. Griffin's
reference to the bee liking one cavity better than another does not
strike me as out of place (though I would hesitate over bees hoping).
But 'liking' here probably does not have quite the same web of
connections which it would have if we were speaking of a human being
liking one site for a house better than another. It is a different,
though related concept. I suspect that we get to it by the procedure
Gendlin (1991b, pp. 96--9; 1997a, pp. 51--4) calls 'crossing'; that is,
we bring our notion of human liking up to what we observe of bee
behaviour and let the human-liking concept draw out certain aspects of
bee behaviour that would not otherwise be prominent. Certainly there are
implications in saying that a bee likes something. We are not
attributing to the bee some unobservable inner state (which traditional
ethologists would rightly dismiss as irrelevant to their work). When we
say that the bee likes this cavity we are saying that the bee is
registering the cavity, and there is some 'press' or tendency for the
bee to do what is needed to get the swarm to settle there. The bee's
state is one which, in Gendlin's sense, implies behaving in ways which
will lead to that cavity being selected. Gendlin's concepts (which I
have barely touched on here) provide ways of thinking about living
things and animals which are neither anthropomorphic nor mechanistic.
They are the kind of concepts which ethology needs if it is to do
justice to the study of animal behaviour. (Some of the material in this
section is taken from an article on 'Ethology and Gendlin's Process
Model' (Purton, 2004) in which I discuss the issues more fully.)

Medicine Focusing has been used in a number of medical and health-care
settings. For example Katonah (1991) studied the impact of Focusing on
depression, hardiness, body cathexis, body attitudes and physical
activity level in twelve cancer patients, the results showing a
significant decrease in depression and a significant improvement in body
attitudes. A number of other studies on the effects of Focusing on
cancer patients appeared in the 1999 issue of The Folio: A Journal for
Focusing and Experiential Therapy. There is some evidence that Focusing
may have a positive impact on immune functioning. There is background
evidence for this possibility in a study (Kiecolt-Glaser etal., 1985)
suggesting that some enhancement of cellular immunity is accomplished
through a regular practice of relaxation, and a study by Pennebaker et
al. (1988) suggesting that self-disclosure of traumatic events can
enhance the immune capacity. A further study by Lutgendorf et
al. (1994), using the Experiencing Scale, suggested that disclosure in
itself did not increase immunity, but that after Focusing questions were
used to increase the patient's experiential involvement there was an
increase in

226

Appendix A

immune function. Katonah (1999, p. vii) concludes that it may be 'the
manner in which one engages in the expression of the trauma that makes
the difference in immune functioning rather than just talking or
writing. . . . Utilizing focusing to increase experiential involvement
may be a key variable in this area of psychoneuroimmunology.' The 1999
issue of The Folio, referred to above, was devoted to the theme of
Focusing and medicine. In addition to the material on cancer and immune
reaction just mentioned, it contains a number of other papers on these
themes. There are also interesting articles on using Focusing in working
with conditions such as AIDS, chronic pain, memory impairment, stress
and mild concussion.

Education In 1997 another special edition of The Folio was devoted to
the theme of Focusing with children. It contains papers on topics such
the use of Focusing in Schools, Focusing using art with adolescents, and
Focusing and play therapy with a 6-year-old child. There have been three
international conferences on Focusing with children, held in Hungary in
1998 and 2000, and in Canada in 2002. This is a flourishing area of the
Focusing world, more details of which can be found on the Focusing
Institute website.

Time and space To see the changes which occur in psychotherapy, for
example, as 'explications' or 'carryings-forward' of earlier states
brings with it a novel view of time. We look back on something that
happened when we were in Paris, and acknowledge that we were jealous,
although we were 'not aware of it at the time'. We can remember how we
felt at the time, and we really did not feel jealous. In the time series
which we remember there was no jealousy, at that time in Paris. But now,
through reflection, and talking things over, we have come to reconstrue
the Paris events. Our experiencing of the Paris events has been carried
forward by our reflecting and our talking and now there is a reconstrued
past in which we were jealous. The usual way of thinking makes out that
this jealousy was there at the time, and forces us into speaking of
'unconscious feelings'. Yet there is no way of confirming the presence
of an 'unconscious feeling'; it is by definition unknowable to the
person who has it. Of course other people might say at the time 'He is
obviously jealous', but in saying that they are only saying that various
consequences are likely to ensue; they are not claiming some x-ray
insight into how we feel at the time. (And if they did, they would be
wrong, for there were no jealous feelings at the time.) 'Unconscious
feelings' are a conceptual impossibility, but there are real phenomena
to which this phrase points, the phenomena of explication and

Appendix A

227

carrying-forward, and the 'doubled' nature of time in which what
happened in the remembered past is distinct from what happened in the
explicated past. The explicated past (what we might now say 'really'
happened) emerges from explication, from interaction with other people
or our own process of self-examination. There is a sense in which the
interaction creates (as much as reveals) what really happened. The
remembered past, on the other hand, is the images we have of a sequence
of events laid out as if along a line which stretches into the past. It
is the past as we imagine it in the present. It is what we can be
trapped in if we do not allow our feelings and images to interact with
something or someone who can carry us forward. For Gendlin (1991b,
1997a), the kind of time which stretches out in a line is a late and
characteristically human development. Animals do not live in this sort
of time, because they do not have the resources to symbolise their
experience in this way. Linear time requires the ability to reflect and
hence to experience the repetition of patterns, so that there can be the
experience of 'this is like that which I experienced before'. Something
similar applies in the case of space. The ability to reflect and
experience things as kinds of things, to experience patterns, is an
essentially human ability. Animals have a sense of space, but it is the
immediate lived space of their behaviour in context. Human beings can
see things as of a certain kind, they can see aspects of things. They
can imagine things as if seen from the point of view of someone else.
The three-dimensional framework of space allows for the seeing of
aspects, and Gendlin (1997a, Chapter 7) argues that conversely the
development of symbolic behaviour, initially in the form of gestures, is
what lies at the heart of our ability to envision the world as stretched
out in space and time. Human space and time are thus not independent
realities, but are generated from the human mode of interaction.

Physics There has for a long time been a tension in physics between the
conceptual frameworks of relativity theory on the one hand and quantum
mechanics on the other. One aspect of this is that although relativity
abandons Newton's notion of absolute space and time and makes the
space--time co-ordinate frames relative to the observer, it nevertheless
employs overall space--time co-ordinate frames within which events are
specifiable. Quantum mechanics, on the other hand, thinks in terms of an
interactional framework in which events cannot be specified at all
except through the interaction by which they are detected and measured.
The attempt to combine relativity with quantum mechanics leads to
well-known anomalies which have to be dealt with in ad hoc and
theoretically unsatisfactory ways. Gendlin collaborated with the
theoretical physicist Jay Lemke in looking at these difficulties
(Gendlin and Lemke, 1983). In Gendlin's scheme of

228

Appendix A

things interaction always comes first, which suggests that the general
scheme of quantum mechanics should be seen as the fundamental one in
physics, and that where relativity and quantum mechanics together
generate anomalies, the reason is likely to be that relativity theory
has not freed itself from the traces of 'absolute space and time' which
still inhere in it. From Gendlin's perspective, space and time, as
overarching frameworks within which events take place, are constructions
which are derivatives from actual interactions. Particles, too, as
specified in terms of energy intensities at particular space--time
locations are a secondary construction out of interactions. A particle
can only exist as an aspect of an interaction; there cannot be an
isolated particle. For Gendlin, the physical world, as much as the human
world, is an interactive order in which space, time, and individual
particles and organisms exist only as manifestations of interaction. So
far as I know, Gendlin's work has not had any direct impact in
theoretical physics, but Professor Mark Bickhard (2003) of Lehigh
University writes in this connection: The 1983 paper seems roughly
prescient about some developments in string theory, such as there being
a proper space--time for each world tube, instead of a background
space-time in which interactions take place, but this seems to have
emerged from the mathematics rather than from that paper.

Philosophy As we saw in Chapter 3, Gendlin originally trained as a
philosopher, and about half of his published work is in that field. The
main influence in his philosophical work comes from the tradition of
phenomenology and existentialism, and reading works such as
Merleau-Ponty's Phenomenology of Perception can be very helpful in
understanding Gendlin's thinking. (In Spain Carlos Allemeny insists that
his focusing-oriented psychotherapy trainees should study some of this
philosophical background.) Gendlin (1989, p. 404) sketches the
beginnings of his philosophy in the following way. He writes: As an
undergraduate I developed a method to communicate with religious people
and atheists, Marxists and McCarthyites, Behaviorists and Freudians. My
method was to accept anyone's entire system -- for the moment -- so as
to use their terms to couch whatever point I wanted to make. I would
explain that I didn't agree with all that, I was only postponing all
other arguments, so that I could make one point. I found I could
formulate any one point in any system. I knew that "the" point was not
the same in different terms, since "it" had the different implications I
postponed. The difference was clear. But what was the sameness? In what
respects was "it" still "that" point, moving across the formulations?

Appendix A

229

On coming to the University of Chicago, Gendlin recognised one part of
his puzzle in the work of Richard McKeon, who argued that there are a
number of alternative philosophical frameworks through which the world
can be viewed, each self-consistent, but incompatible with the others.
Another part of his puzzle he found in the work of the phenomenologists
who knew that there was more to a 'point' than its formulation. Thirdly
in the writings of Dilthey he found the element of creativity that is
present in all understanding: in reformulating a point we create
something new; 'it re-makes itself out of us' (ibid., p. 406). Other
influences on Gendlin's thinking were the American pragmatists, and
indirectly, Heidegger, with whose ideas he became familiar through other
people who had read him. Gendlin did not read Heidegger himself until
1963 because he had heard about Heidegger's one-time Nazi connections.
However, having seen an 'unusable' translation of Heidegger's Die Frage
nach dem Ding he set about making his own translation and wrote an
analysis of it. I sent the book to Heidegger. I wrote him "In the
Analysis I explained every point I did not understand at first". He
answered: "You have written an illuminating afterword with great
penetration. It will make my work more accessible in your country". He
was always kind in these things. And/or he saw that I grasped and showed
his more-than-conceptual thinking (ibid., p. 408)

Gendlin's Analysis was published along with the English translation,
which is titled What is a Thing? (Heidegger, 1967). Although Gendlin
formulated his position before the contemporary debates on postmodernism
developed, he sees his philosophy as offering a way through the current
difficulties. Like McKeon, postmodernism sees that there are many ways
of conceptualising the world, but is unable to formulate the point that
there is something that is conceptualised, or the point that some
conceptualisations are better than others. To use one of Gendlin's
examples, it is absurd to fly to a philosophy conference by aeroplane
while arguing that the laws of aerodynamics are a mere 'social
construction'. Gendlin's solution to this problem is not easy to explain
briefly, but in essence he holds that the world is an implicit and
interactional order which responds differently but precisely to the
conceptual schemes we bring to it. Some schemes carry us forward, while
others do not. The world is not what any of the schemes say, but it
responds differentially to those schemes. The schemes draw forth
different responses, just as in the special case of psychotherapy where
a particular formulation of an issue can resonate with us and carry us
on, whereas another formulation leaves us unmoved. Gendlin's work has
attracted some interest amongst philosophers of language who are
concerned with these problems. A book edited by David Levin (1997)
contains the comments of fourteen philosophers on different

230

Appendix A

aspects of Gendlin's thought together with his responses and his own
summary of his position. One final aspect of Gendlin's philosophy should
be mentioned. Like his teacher McKeon he is a significant Aristotelean
scholar, and has for thirty years or so been working on a commentary to
Aristotle's De Anima, a work which could rather anachronistically be
described as 'Aristotle's psychology'. As I mentioned above, Aristotle,
unlike Descartes, allows for categories of beings other than people and
material objects, and in particular for living things as a distinctive
kind of entity. Behind the more recent work of the phenomenologists and
pragmatists I think that Gendlin's work can be seen as quite deeply
rooted in Aristotle. The philosophical aspects of Gendlin's work may
seem rather daunting to the non-philosophical reader. However, I have
along with Rob Foxcroft, Kye Nelson and Barbara McGavin, taught aspects
of his philosophy to people interested in Focusing at a summer school in
Scotland. Gendlin initially believed that this project could not
succeed, but to my surprise almost as much as his, it has proved a
success. For the last three years people have come to the Isle of
Cumbrae and we have looked at the philosophical ideas which are most
relevant to Gendlin's work, and examined in detail his first book
Experiencing and the Creation of Meaning, and then the even more
forbidding Process Model. Gendlin (2002) has commented 'I am becoming
interested in this fascinating fact that there are people without
philosophical training who can hear, feel, think this work . . .'

Spirituality In Focusing we open ourselves to what may come. We are
active in bringing our attention to a murky felt sense, and in asking
questions such as 'What is this?' or 'What does this need?', but then we
wait . . . and often there is a response. A word or an image 'comes',
and there is a sense of release. This opening of oneself to something
else, to something unknown, clearly has something in common with
spiritual practices such as prayer and meditation. There is also a
parallel, Gendlin (1984d) suggests, with the notion of obedience to that
which lies beyond ourselves. He suggests that there are many forms of
obedience which are not to be commended: obedience to other people, to
the dictates of one's superego (which Freud identified with God), to
one's own wishes and plans, or to one's own fears. Nor should we
immediately follow whatever comes from our opening to the (. . .), the
felt sense. It is rather an obedience to what comes from the dialogue
with the (. . .) over a series of steps. The (. . .) or 'edge of
awareness' is to be valued (p. 196)

Appendix A

231

because it is a porous borderzone through which new steps come that we
could not have made. . . . That edge or border which we do sense has to
be distinguished from the other side which is vastly more, and which we
do not sense as such. What comes in one moment in such a sense is not
the other side! It is only a little bit from the other side, and already
mixed with how we are and have been. So we cannot simply obey one such
step, sense or edge, either. After a while more steps come, and may
change what seems right.

Gendlin's reference to 'the other side which is vastly more' is
reminiscent of William James' remark at the close of The Varieties of
Religious Experience (1902/1985, pp. 457--8): Let me then propose, as a
hypothesis, that whatever it may be on its further side, the 'more' with
which in religious experience we feel ourselves connected is on its
hither side the subconscious continuation of our conscious life.

In his book Religious Experiencing: William James and Eugene Gendlin
(Shea, 1987), the Augustinian priest John Shea has drawn attention to
other elements in James's account of religious experiencing which are
echoed in Gendlin's views, especially the emphasis on feeling and the
transformation of feeling. Two other Catholic priests, Peter Campbell
and Edwin McMahon, have founded an Institute for Bio-Spiritual Research,
which is devoted to the exploration of spirituality through Focusing.
Details of their approach can be found in their book Bio-spirituality:
Focusing as a Way to Grow (1985/1997). In a rather similar way, although
not from a specifically Christian perspective, Elfie Hinterkopf (1998)
writes about her way of using Focusing in a spiritual context with
counselling clients. Her book is titled Integrating Spirituality in
Counselling: A Manual for Using the Experiential Focusing Method. A
number of Buddhist thinkers have been drawn to Gendlin's work. Roger
Levin (2003) in 'Focusing and Spirituality' (Focusing Institute Website
2003) writes: The American meditation master Robert Aitkins Roshi once
suggested in an introduction to Zen Buddhism that students beginning
serious study of Dharma could find no better preparation than to learn
Focusing. Buddhist Dharma holds that our perception of self and the
world, in fact our entire sense of reality, is constructed of
less-than-conscious habits of fixated attention which become rigidified
into conditioned patterns of defensive judgments designed to control
experiencing in order to maximize pleasure or avoid pain. However, it is
these very attachments or conditioned habits of

232

Appendix A

experiencing which are, paradoxically, the root cause of human suffering
in the Buddhist view.

In a book on Buddhist psychology John Welwood (2000, p. xiii) writes
that 'Gendlin opened up the whole world of inner experiencing for me. He
was the first person I ever met who spoke directly about the actual
process of felt experience -- how it works, how it unfolds and leads to
sudden, unexpected breakthroughs.' There are clearly connections between
what goes on in Focusing and what goes on in meditation (King, 1979;
Amodeo, 1981a,b; Moore, 2001), but Gendlin (1996, pp. 65--6) notes that
some forms of meditation involve a more thorough letting-go of everyday
awareness. In Focusing we need to retain awareness of the bodily felt
sense, whereas in at least some forms of meditation there is the
movement into a state of consciousness in which body-awareness plays no
role. Taoism is another form of spirituality which clearly resonates
with Focusing. In their book Grace Unfolding: Psychotherapy in the
Spirit of the Tao-te Ching (1991, pp. 2, 60) Greg Johanson and Ron Kurtz
write: From the outset the Tao-te Ching points to both the inevitability
and the inadequacy of words. . . . Words can name and create meaning,
bringing experience to expression and understanding. However they can
never capture precisely what is. We can get lost in words. They can
separate us from experience . . . In his classes on the Focusing Method,
Gendlin teaches ways in which people can concentrate on the alive, felt
sense of an issue as opposed to wandering off into disembodied theories
about the issue. Although experiential, bodily knowledge can be
frightening because it is so radically raw and uncontained by our
theories. Lao Tsu cautions against exchanging it for the conventional
wisdom of abstractions which place a veneer over truth.

Kurtz (1990) has developed a form of therapy -- Hakomi Therapy -- which
draws on Taoism and body-oriented forms of psychotherapy, and which is
very consonant with focusing-oriented principles. As well as connecting
with various forms of spirituality, focusing may have implications for
religious practice. Gendlin suggests that religious ceremonies can often
lose their effectiveness because they become detached from the
participants' immediate experiencing. He suggests a project (Gendlin,
2000) in which, after a religious service, participants might take time
simply to say something about how the words of the liturgy connected
with their own experiencing. This way of responding could be initially
modelled by the person leading the service, for example by saying
something such as 'He heals the sick and frees the bond' -- where am I
currently 'bound'? -- Here is a promise that I could be free -- ah -- .
. . there is my longing to be

Appendix A

233

free -- what would it be like to be free? Can I 'taste' it? It would be
right to be free -- it says here that the Universe (or whatever All That
should be called . . . ) could free me -- without any particular shape
or answer I am relating to this promise of no longer being so bound --
in that way I know myself to be bound, that I felt at the start.

Participants could also form Focusing partnerships which could meet
after the service, or at some time before the next service, so that
there could be further opportunities to express the experiences elicited
by the service. This procedure would bring religious experiencing into
the community: Many people are lonely, not because they don't know
community groups to which they could go, but because what happens there
will feel superficial, and will not inwardly reach and touch them. Then
attending is only an effort, an added expenditure of energy rather than
the strengthening and support that community used to provide. . . . The
present project proposes first connecting the communal meanings to the
inner experiencing process, so that they can cross, enrich and be
enriched by the unique and intricately detailed meanings that arise from
experiencing. Secondly, the project builds into the structure of
community a time and pattern of inviting, reaching for, and hearing from
the unique individuals.

There is one further aspect of spirituality which Gendlin does not
discuss explicitly, but to which his work seems clearly relevant. In his
classic work The Idea of the Holy, the German theologian Rudolf Otto
(1923/1958) suggests that the field of the holy has two dimensions.
There is an ethical dimension (a holy person is a good person) and there
is what he calls the 'numinous' dimension (a holy person is seen as
being in touch with, or informed by, numinous power). Something of these
two dimensions can also be seen in the use of the English word
'spiritual'. If we emphasise one dimension we come to the saintly person
who lives by high ideals; if we emphasise the other we come to the
shaman, the person who is in touch with the spirits. For Otto, both
dimensions are essential to the holy. The holy without the numinous is
the sphere of morality; the holy without the ethical is the realm of the
uncanny. Given the scientific world view which is dominant today the
numinous has for many people shrunk to vanishing point. Of course the
phenomena of the numinous, such as telepathy, clairvoyance, precognition
and 'far memory' are still reported, but they are dismissed as
fraudulent, or due to mere imagination or psychopathology. These
phenomena form a category, investigated by the rather dubious discipline
of 'parapsychology', only because they do not fit into the framework of
scientific thought. That is, they break the space--time--causality model
which is (in spite of the

234

Appendix A

development of quantum mechanics) seen not just as a model, but as the
reality of things. However, in a philosophical framework such as that of
Gendlin, all this looks different. For Gendlin the space and time with
which physics deals is a lately developed human construction. This space
and time is generated by human interaction, in perhaps the same sort of
way that quantum interactions generate a space and time rather than
occurring within an already established space--time framework. In
Gendlin's philosophy space and time are not the substantial forms which
we have inherited from Newtonian physics. It is not that space--time
framework which is primary, but the framework of personal life and
interaction. This kind of position is not new; it is there in
phenomenology and, in different ways, in the work of philosophers such
as Heidegger and Wittgenstein. What is given, where we start from, is
the human form of life. Science develops within that form of life. The
scientific world is a human creation, though not an arbitrary one. In a
way this is obvious, but because science is taught today as the
discovery of a reality independent of human beings, we can lose sight of
it. Gendlin (1991b, pp. 42--3) shows how the change from taking the
scientific picture as a model which is useful for certain purposes, to
taking it as a representation of reality took place gradually between
the time of Galileo and that of Kant. Early in this period Descartes was
clear that science needs to develop through imposing its conceptual grid
on nature, and \[f \]or a century or more, people kept their eyes on
both the elegant logicalmathematical order, and the messy natural order.
They thought of science not as people think of it today, as telling us
the facts of nature. Rather, they thought of science as a hypothetical
scheme of mathematical constructions that we invent and impose. For
example, look at how Rousseau begins the Second Essay on Inequality: For
a few pages he summarises naturalistic observations and history. Then he
says: "Let us set the facts aside . . . as our physicists do every day .
. . and let us proceed hypothetically." . . . .Today, people must read
Rousseau's paragraph several times before they can believe that they
have read it correctly. "How can he say that scientists set the facts
aside?" they ask . . . . People have forgotten that science "sets the
facts aside". Now they think there are no facts other than scientific
ones. But, the paragraph also puzzles sophisticated philosophers. Like
Descartes and Rousseau, they think of science as a construction we
impose, but now they also think that nothing else is possible. Isn't
anything else just a construction too? What is that, which Rousseau asks
us to set aside? That natural order has been lost! Before, it was always
there. In Rousseau's time it was still obvious that "the facts" are far
richer and more confusing than science's clean hypothetical grids.

Appendix A

235

With Rousseau the natural order has its last moment.

It is to the restoration of our sense of the natural order -- the order
of interactional experiencing -- that Gendlin's work points. Then, I
think, many phenomena, especially in the realm of the human and
spiritual, and including the phenomena of focusing, will find their
natural place.

Appendix B Resources

The Focusing Institute 34 East Lane, Spring Valley, NY 10977, New York
www.focusing.org Tel./fax 914 362 5222. email: info@focusing.org

Focusing Resources 2625 Alcatraz Ave, PMB #202, Berkeley, CA 94705 USA
www.focusingresources.com Tel. 510 666 9948. email: awcornell @aol.com

Some English-language websites www.focusing.org (Focusing Institute,
USA) www.focusingresources.com (Ann Weiser Cornell, USA)
www.focusing.co.uk (Peter Afford, UK) www.focusing.org.uk (Rob Foxcroft,
UK) www.innerrelationship.com (Barbara McGavin, UK)

Journals The Focusing Folio, published by the Focusing Institute. The
Focusing Connection, published by Focusing Resources. Back copies are
available.

Research Network for Research on Experiential Psychotherapies
www.experiential-researchers.org

236

References

Amodeo, J. (1981a) The complementary effects of meditation and focusing.
The Folio: A Journal for Focusing and Experiential Therapy, 2(3), 9--16.
Amodeo, J. (1981b) Focusing applied to a case of disorientation in
meditation. Journal of Transpersonal Psychology, 13(2), 149--54.
Armstrong, M. (1998) Treating trauma with focusing and EMDR. The Folio:
A Journal for Focusing and Experiential Therapy, 17(1), 23--30. Baker,
N. (2004) Experiential person-centred therapy. In P. Sanders (ed.) The
Tribes of the Person-Centered Nation. Ross-on-Wye, PCCS Books,
pp. 67--94. Baldwin, M. (1987) Interview with Carl Rogers on the use of
the self in therapy. In M. Baldwin and V. Satir (eds) The Use of the
Self in Therapy. New York: Haworth Press, pp. 45--52. Baljon, M.C.L.
(2002) Focusing in client-centred psychotherapy supervision: teaching
congruence. In Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the
21st Century: Advances in Theory, Research and Practice. Ross-on-Wye:
PCCS Books, pp. 315--24. Barrett-Lennard, G.T. (1998) Carl Rogers'
Helping System: Journey and Substance. London: Sage Publications.
Battye, R. (2003) Beads on a string. In S. Keys (ed.) Idiosyncratic
Person-Centred Counselling. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 151--71.
Bergin, A.E. and Garfield, S.L. (1996) Handbook of Psychotherapy and
Behavior Change. Fourth edition. Chichester: John Wiley. Bickhard, M.
(2003) Personal communication. Bozarth, J. (1984) Beyond reflection:
emergent modes of empathy. In R. Levant and J.M. Shlien (eds)
Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered Approach. New York:
Praeger, pp. 59--75. Bozarth, J.D. (1996) Reflections and reactions to
Carl R. Rogers with Mr. Vac: implications for future therapeutic
interactions with severely disturbed clients. In R. Hutterer, G.
Pawlowsky and P. Schmid (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Therapy:
A Paradigm in Motion. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 495--8.
Bozarth, J. (1998) Person-Centred Therapy: A Revolutionary Paradigm.
Ross-onWye: PCCS Books. Brodley, B.T. (1988) Does early-in-therapy
experiencing level predict outcome? A review of research. Discussion
paper prepared for the Second Annual Meeting of the Association for the
Development of the Person-Centered Approach, New York, May 1988.

237

238

References

Brodley, B.T. (1990) Client-centered and experiential: two different
therapies. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts and R. Van Balen (eds)
Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties. Leuven:
Leuven University Press, pp. 87--107. Brodley, B.T. (1991) The role of
focusing in client-centred therapy. Paper presented at the 1991 Annual
Meeting of the ADPCA in Coffeyville, Kansas, May 23--27. Brodley, B.T.
(1999) About the non-directive attitude. Person-Centred Practice, 7(2),
79--82. Bucher, C. (2000) Why it was crucial for me to quit Focusing,
and what came next. The Focusing Connection, 17(3), 3. Campbell, P.A.
and McMahon, E.M. (1985/1997) Bio-Spirituality: Focusing as a Way to
Grow. Chicago: Loyola Press. Clark, C.A. (1990) A comprehensive process
analysis of focusing events in experiential therapy. Doctoral
dissertation, University of Toledo. Coffeng, T. (1996) The delicate
approach to early trauma. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky and P. Schmid
(eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Therapy: A Paradigm in Motion.
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 499--511. Cornell, A.W. (1990) The
Focusing Guide's Manual. Berkeley: Focusing Resources. Cornell, A.W.
(1993) Teaching focusing with five steps and four skills. In D. Brazier
(ed.) Beyond Carl Rogers. London: Constable, pp. 167--80. Cornell, A.W.
(1995) Relationship = Distance + Connection: A comparison of inner
relationship techniques to finding distance techniques in Focusing.
Paper presented at the First Conference on Focusing Therapy,
LindauBodensee, August 1995. Available at www.focusingresources.com.
Cornell, A.W. (1996) The Power of Focusing. Oakland: New Harbinger.
Cornell, A.W. (2001) The power of listening. Paper presented at 13th
International Focusing Conference, Shannon, Ireland, May 2001. Available
at www.focusingresources.com. Cornell, A.W. (2003) Personal
communication. Cornell, A.W. and McGavin, B. (2002) The Focusing
Student's and Companion's Manual. Berkeley: Calluna Press. Corsini, R.
(1973) Current Psychotherapies. Itasca, Illinois: Peacock Publishers. De
Silva, P. (1984) Buddhism and behaviour modification. Behaviour Research
and Therapy, 22(6), 661--78. Draper, I. (2002) Swimming with the
dolphins. Person-Centred Practice, 10(1), 45--48. Durak, G.M.,
Bernstein, R. and Gendlin, E.T. (1997) Effects of focusing training on
therapy process and outcome. The Folio: A Journal for Focusing and
Experiential Therapy, 15(2), 7--14. Ellingham, I. (2001) Carl Rogers'
'congruence' as an organismic, not a Freudian, concept. In G. Wyatt
(ed.) Congruence. Volume One of Rogers' Therapeutic Conditions:
Evolution, Theory and Practice. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 96--115.

References

239

Elliott, R. (1989) Comprehensive process analysis: understanding the
change process in significant therapy events. In M. Packer and R.B.
Addison (eds) Entering the Circle: Hermeneutic Investigation in
Psychology. Albany, New York: SUNY Press, pp. 165--84. Elliott, R. et
al. (1996) A process-experiential approach to post-traumatic stress
disorder. In R. Hutterer, G. Pawlowsky and P. Schmid (eds)
ClientCentered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in Motion.
Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 235--54. Elliott, R., Davis, K. and
Slatick, E. (1998) Process-experiential therapy for posttraumatic stress
difficulties. In L. Greenberg, J. Watson and G. Lietaer (eds) Handbook
of Experiential Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press, pp. 249--71.
Flanagan, K. (1998) Everyday Genius: Focusing on Your Emotional
Intelligence. Dublin: Marino Books. Frankfurt, H. (1971) Freedom of the
will and the concept of a person. Journal of Philosophy, 68(1), 5--20.
Freud, S. (1936) The Problem of Anxiety. New York: Norton. Geggus, P.
(2002) Zero Balancing: Person-centred bodywork -- or bodycentred
personwork. Person-Centred Practice, 10(2), 88--95. Gendlin, E.T. (1959)
The concept of congruence reformulated in terms of experiencing.
University of Chicago Counselling Center Discussion Paper, 5(12).
Gendlin, E.T. (1962/1997) Experiencing and the Creation of Meaning.
Second edition. Evanston, Illinois: Northwestern University Press
(1997). Gendlin, E.T. (1963/1968) Subverbal communication and therapist
expressivity: trends in client-centered therapy with schizophrenics.
Journal of Existential Psychiatry, 4(14) (1963). Revised version in C.R.
Rogers and B. Stevens (eds) Person to Person: The Problem of Being
Human. Lafayette, CA: Real People Press, pp. 119--28 (1968). Gendlin,
E.T. (1964a) Schizophrenia: problems and methods of psychotherapy.
Review of Existential Psychology and Psychiatry, 4, 168--79. Gendlin,
E.T. (1964b/1973) A theory of personality change. In A.R. Mahrer and L.
Pearson (eds) Creative Developments in Psychotherapy. New York: Jason
Aronson (1973). Originally published in P. Worchel and D. Byrne (eds)
Personality Change. New York: Wiley (1964), pp. 439--89. Gendlin, E.T.
(1968) The experiential response. In E.F. Hammer (ed.) Use of
Interpretation in Treatment: Technique and Art. New York: Grune &
Stratton, pp. 208--27. Gendlin, E.T. (1969) Focusing. Psychotherapy:
Theory, Research and Practice, 6(1), 4--15. Gendlin, E.T. (1970) A
small, still voice. Psychology Today, June, pp. 57--9. Gendlin, E.T.
(1973a) A phenomenology of emotions: anger. In Explorations in
Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy. The Hague: Martinus Nijoff,
pp. 367--98.

240

References

Gendlin, E.T. (1973b) Experiential psychotherapy. In R. Corsini (ed.)
Current Psychotherapies. Itasca, Illinois: F.E. Peacock, pp. 317--52.
Gendlin, E.T. (1978/2003) Focusing. Revised and updated 25th anniversary
edition (2003). London: Rider. Gendlin, E.T. (1980) Client-centered
therapy as a frame of reference for training: the use of focusing during
therapy. In W. De Moor and H.R. Wijngaarden (eds) Psychotherapy:
Research and Training. Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp. 279--97. Gendlin, E.T.
(1983) On client-centered and experiential psychotherapy: An interview
with Gene Gendlin. In W.-R. Minsel and W. Herff (eds) Research on
Psychotherapeutic Approaches. Frankfurt: Verlag Peter Lang, pp. 77--104.
Gendlin, E.T. (1984a) Imagery, body and space in focusing. In A.A.
Sheikh (ed.) Imagination and Healing. New York: Baywood Publishing,
pp. 259--86. Gendlin, E.T. (1984b) The client's client. In R. Levant and
J.M. Shlien (eds) Client-Centered Therapy and the Person-Centered
Approach. New York: Praeger, pp. 76--107. Gendlin, E.T. (1984c) The
politics of giving therapy away: listening and focusing. In D. Larson
(ed.) Teaching Psychological Skills: Models for Giving Therapy Away.
Monterey: Brooks/Cole, pp. 287--305. Gendlin, E.T. (1984d) The obedience
pattern. Studies in Formative Spirituality, 5(2), 189--202. Gendlin,
E.T. (1986a) Let Your Body Interpret Your Dreams. Wilmette: Chiron.
Gendlin, E.T. (1986b) Process ethics and the political question. In
A.-T. Tymieniecka (ed.) Analecta Husserliana, Vol. 20, Boston: Reidel,
pp. 265--75. Gendlin, E.T. (1986c) What comes after traditional
psychotherapy research? American Psychologist, 41(2), 131--6. Gendlin,
E.T. (1987) A philosophical critique of the concept of narcissism. In D.
Levin (ed.) Pathologies of the Modern Self. New York: New York
University Press, pp. 251--304. Gendlin, E.T. (1988) Carl Rogers
(1902--1987). American Psychologist, 43(2), 127--8. Gendlin, E.T. (1989)
Phenomenology as non-logical steps. In E.F. Kaelin and C.O. Schrag (eds)
American Phenomenology: Origins and Developments. Dordrecht: Kluwer,
pp. 404--10. Gendlin, E.T. (1990) The small steps of the therapy
process: how they come and how to help them come. In G. Lietaer, J.
Rombauts and R. Van Balen (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy in the Nineties. Leuven: Leuven University Press,
pp. 205--24. Gendlin, E.T. (1991a) On emotion in therapy. In J.D. Safran
and L.S. Greenberg (eds) Emotion, Psychotherapy and Change. New York:
Guilford, pp. 255--79.

References

241

Gendlin, E.T. (1991b) Thinking beyond patterns. In B. den Ouden and M.
Moen (eds) The Presence of Feeling in Thought. New York: Peter Lang,
pp. 21--151. Gendlin, E.T. (1992) The wider role of bodily sense in
thought and language. In M. Sheets-Johnstone (ed.) Giving the Body Its
Due. New York: SUNY Press, pp. 192--207. Gendlin, E.T. (1993) Human
nature and concepts. In J. Braun (ed.) Psychological Aspects of
Modernity. Westport: Praeger, pp. 3--16. Gendlin, E.T. (1995) Ultimacy
in Aristotle: in essence activity. In N. Georgopoulos and M. Heim (eds)
Being Human in the Ultimate: Studies in the Thought of John M. Anderson.
Amsterdam, GA: Rodopi, pp. 135--66. Gendlin, E.T. (1996)
Focusing-Oriented Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. Gendlin, E.T.
(1997a) A Process Model. New York: Focusing Institute. Gendlin, E.T.
(1997b) Reply to Hatab. In M.J. Levin (ed.) Language Beyond
Postmodernism: Saying and Thinking in Gendlin's Philosophy. Evanston:
Northwestern University Press, pp. 246--51. Gendlin, E.T. (1999)
Authenticity after postmodernism. Changes: An International Journal of
Psychology and Psychotherapy, 17(3), 203--12. Gendlin, E.T. (2000)
Focusing as part of spiritual renewal. Focusing Institute website:
www.focusing.org. Gendlin, E.T. (2002) Personal communication. Gendlin,
E.T. and Berlin, J.I. (1961) Galvanic skin response correlates of
different modes of experiencing. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 17(1),
73--7. Gendlin, E.T. and Lemke, J. (1983) A critique of relativity and
localization. Mathematical Modelling, 4, 61--72. Gendlin, E.T. and
Shlien, J.M. (1961) Immediacy in time attitudes before and after
time-limited psychotherapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 17(1),
69--72. Gendlin, E.T. and Tomlinson, T.M. (1967) The process conception
and its measurement. In C.R. Rogers (ed.) The Therapeutic Relationship
and its Impact: A Study of Psychotherapy with Schizophrenics. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 109--31. Gendlin, E.T. and Zimring,
F. (1955) The qualities or dimensions of experiencing and their change.
University of Chicago Counselling Center Discussion Papers, 1(3).
Reprinted in Person-Centered Journal, 1(2), 55--67 (1994). Gendlin,
E.T., Jenney, R.H. and Shlien, J.M. (1960) Counsellor ratings of process
and outcome in client-centred therapy. Journal of Clinical Psychology,
16, 210--13. Gendlin, E.T., Moursund, J.P. and Rogers, C.R. (1967)
Putting the design into effect. In The Therapeutic Relationship and its
Impact: A Study of Psychotherapy with Schizophrenics. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 39--62.

242

References

Gendlin, E.T. et al. (1968) Focusing ability in psychotherapy,
personality and creativity. In M.M. Shlien (ed.) Research in
Psychotherapy (Vol. 3, pp. 217--41). Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. Ghosh, A. (2001) The Glass Palace. New York:
HarperCollins. Goldfarb, M. (1992) Making the unknown known: art as the
speech of the body. In M. Sheets-Johnstone (ed.) Giving the Body Its
Due. New York: SUNY Press, pp. 180--90. Goldman, R. (1997) Change in
thematic depth of experiencing and outcome in experiential
psychotherapy. Doctoral dissertation, York University, Ontario. Goldman,
R. (2002) The empty-chair dialogue for unfinished business. In J.C.
Watson, R.N. Goldman and M. Warner (eds) Client-Centered and
Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books,
pp. 427--47. Greenberg, L.S. (1979) Resolving splits: The two-chair
technique. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and Practice, 16, 310--18.
Greenberg, L.S. (2002) Emotion-Focused Therapy: Coaching Clients to Work
Through Their Feelings. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. Greenberg, L.S. and Safran, J.D. (1987) Emotion in
Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. Greenberg, L.S. and Van Balen,
R. (1998) The theory of experience-centered therapies. In L. Greenberg,
J. Watson and G. Lietaer (eds) Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy.
New York: Guilford Press, pp. 28--57. Greenberg, L.S., Rice, L.N. and
Elliott, R. (1993) Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment
Process. New York: Guilford Press. Griffin, D. (1981) The Question of
Animal Awareness. Revised edition. Los Altos: William Kaufmann. Hatab,
L.J. (1997) Language and human nature. In M.J. Levin (ed.) Language
Beyond Postmodernism: Saying and Thinking in Gendlin's Philosophy.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press, pp. 234--46. Haugh, S. (2001)
The difficulties in the conceptualisation of congruence: a way forward
with complexity theory? In G. Wyatt (ed.) Congruence. Volume One of
Rogers' Therapeutic Conditions: Evolution, Theory and Practice.
Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 116--30. Hayashi, S. et al. (1998)
Client-centred therapy in Japan: Fujio Tomoda and Taoism. Journal of
Humanistic Psychology, 38(2), 103--24. Heidegger, M. (1967) What is a
Thing? Chicago: Henry Regnery. Hendricks, M. (2001) An experiential
version of unconditional positive regard. In J.D. Bozarth and P. Wilkins
(eds) Unconditional Positive Regard. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books,
pp. 126--44. Hendricks, M. (2002) Focusing-oriented/experiential
psychotherapy. In D.J. Cain and J. Seeman (eds) Humanistic
Psychotherapies: Handbook of Research and Practice. Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association, pp. 221--51.

References

243

Hendricks, M. (2003) Dialogue between Mary Hendricks Gendlin and Marge
Witty. Person-Centred Practice, 11(2), 61--9. Hendricks, M. and
Cartwright, R. (1978) Experiencing level in dreams. Psychotherapy:
Theory, Research and Practice, 15(3), 292--8. Hinterkopf, E. (1998)
Integrating Spirituality in Counselling: A Manual for Using the
Experiential Focusing Method. Alexandria, VA: American Counselling
Association. Holdstock, T.L. (1996) Discrepancy between the
person-centered theories of self and of therapy. In R. Hutterer et
al. (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm in
Motion. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 395--403. Iberg, J.R. (2001)
Focusing. In R. Corsini (ed.) Handbook of Innovative Therapy. Second
edition. Chichester: John Wiley, pp. 263--78. Iberg, J.R. (2002)
Psychometric development of measures of in-session focusing activity:
The Focusing-Oriented Session Report and the Therapist Ratings of Client
Focusing Activity. In J.C. Watson, R.N. Goldman and M. Warner (eds)
Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century.
Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 221--46. James, W. (1902/1985) The
Varieties of Religious Experience. London: Penguin. Johanson, G. and
Kurtz, R. (1991) Grace Unfolding: Psychotherapy in the Spirit of the
Tao-te Ching. New York: Bell Tower. Jung, C.G. (1983) Memories, Dreams,
Reflections. London: Fontana. Katonah, D.G. (1991) Focusing and cancer:
a psychological tool as an adjunct treatment for adaptive recovery.
Doctoral dissertation, Illinois School of Professional Psychology,
Chicago. Katonah, D.G. (1999) Introduction to focusing and medicine. The
Folio: A Journal for Focusing and Experiential Therapy, 18(1),
pp. vi--viii. Kiecolt-Glaser, J.D. et al. (1985) Psychosocial
enhancement of immunocompetence in a geriatric population. Health
Psychology, 4, 25--41. King, J.W. (1979) Meditation and the enhancement
of focusing ability. Doctoral dissertation, Northwestern University.
King, M. et al. (2000) Randomised controlled trial of non-directive
counselling, cognitive-behaviour therapy and usual general practitioner
care in the management of depression as well as mixed anxiety and
depression in primary care. Health Technology Assessment, 4(19).
Kirschenbaum, H. (1979) On Becoming Carl Rogers. New York: Delacorte.
Kirtner, W.L. and Cartwright, D.S. (1958a) Success and failure in
clientcentered therapy as a function of client personality variables.
Journal of Consulting Psychology, 22, 259--64. Kirtner, W.L. and
Cartwright, D.S. (1958b) Success and failure in clientcentered therapy
as a function of initial in-therapy behavior. Journal of Consulting
Psychology, 22, 329--33.

244

References

Klein, M.H., Mathieu, P.L., Gendlin, E.T. and Kiesler, D.J. (1969) The
Experiencing Scale: A Research and Training Manual. Madison: Wisconsin
Psychiatric Institute. Klein, M.H., Mathieu-Coughlan, P. and Kiesler,
D.J. (1986) The experiencing scales. In L.S. Greenberg and W.M. Pinsof
(eds) The Psychotherapeutic Process: A Research Handbook. New York:
Guilford, pp. 21--71. Kurtz, R. (1990) Body-Centered Psychotherapy: The
Hakomi Method. Mendocino, CA: LifeRhythm. Lambers, E. (2000) Supervision
in person-centred therapy: facilitating congruence. In D. Mearns and B.
Thorne (eds) Person-Centred Therapy Today. London: Sage, pp. 196--211.
Lambert, M.J. and Bergin, A.E. (1994) The effectiveness of
psychotherapy. In A.E. Bergin and S.L. Garfield (eds) Handbook of
Psychotherapy and Behavior Change. Fourth edition. Chichester: John
Wiley, pp. 143--89. Leijssen, M. (1993) Creating a workable distance to
overwhelming images: comments on a session transcript. In D. Brazier
(ed.) Beyond Carl Rogers. London: Constable, pp. 129--47. Leijssen, M.
(1996) Characteristics of a healing inner relationship. In R. Hutterer
et al. (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy: A Paradigm
in Motion. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang, pp. 427--38. Leijssen, M.
(1997) Focusing processes in client-centered experiential psychotherapy:
an overview of my research findings. The Folio: A Journal for Focusing
and Experiential Therapy, 15(2), 1--6. Levin, D.M. (ed.) (1997) Language
Beyond Postmodernism: Saying and Thinking in Gendlin's Philosophy.
Evanston: Northwestern University Press. Levin, R. (2003) Focusing and
spirituality. Focusing Institute Website: www.focusing.org. Levine, P.
(1991) Revisioning anxiety and trauma: the body as healer. In M.
Sheets-Johnstone (ed.) Giving the Body Its Due. New York: SUNY Press.
Levine, P. (1997) Waking the Tiger: Healing Trauma. Berkeley, CA: North
Atlantic. Lietaer, G. (1998) From non-directive to experiential: a
paradigm unfolding. In B. Thorne and E. Lambers (eds) Person-Centred
Therapy: A European Perspective. London: Sage, pp. 62--73. Lutgendorf,
S. et al. (1994) Changes in cognitive coping strategies predict
EBV-antibody titre change following a stressor disclosure induction.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 38(1), 63--77. Mahrer, A.R. (1996)
The Complete Guide to Experiential Psychotherapy. Chichester: John
Wiley. Manser, A.R. (1973) Function and explanation. Aristotelean
Society Supplementary Volume, 48. Mathieu-Coughlan, P. and Klein, M.H.
(1984) Experiential Psychotherapy: key events in client--therapist
interaction. In L.N. Rice and L.S. Greenberg (eds) Patterns of Change.
New York: Guilford.

References

245

McEvenue, K. (2003) Wholebody Focusing. Video tape, available from The
Focusing Institute, New York. McGavin, B. (2000) The power of presence.
The Focusing Connection, 17(4), July. McGuire, K.N. (1991) Affect in
focusing and experiential psychotherapy. In J.D. Safran and L.S.
Greenberg (eds) Emotion, Psychotherapy and Change. New York: Guilford,
p. 251. McMullin, R.E. (1972) Effects of counsellor focusing on client
selfexperiencing under low attitudinal conditions. Journal of
Counselling Psychology, 19, 282--5. Mearns, D. (1997) Person-Centred
Counselling Training. London: Sage. Mearns, D. (2003) Person-Centred
Counselling Training. 2nd edition. London: Sage. Mearns, D. and Thorne,
B. (1988) Person-Centred Counselling in Action (second edition 1999).
London: Sage. Mearns, D. and Thorne, B. (2000) Person-Centred Therapy
Today. London: Sage. Merry, T. (ed.) (1999) Learning and Being in
Person-Centred Counselling. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books. Merry, T. (ed.)
(2000) Person-Centred Practice: The BAPCA Reader. Ross-onWye: PCCS
Books. Moore, J. (2001) Acceptance of the truth of the present moment as
a trustworthy foundation for unconditional positive regard. In J.D.
Bozarth and P. Wilkins (eds) Unconditional Positive Regard. Ross-on-Wye:
PCCS Books, pp. 198--209. Moore, J. (2002) Listening within: counselling
women in awareness of the body. In F. Poland and G. Boswell (eds)
Women's Minds, Women's Bodies: An Interdisciplinary Approach to Women's
Health. Basingstoke: Palgrave. Mountford, C.P. (2001) Jonah and the dark
side. Person-Centred Practice, 9(2), 85--91. Orlinsky, Graw and Parks
(1994) Process and outcome in psychotherapy -- noch einmal. In A.E.
Bergin and S.L. Garfield (eds) Handbook of Psychotherapy and Behavior
Change. Fourth edition. Chichester: John Wiley, pp. 270--376. Otto, R.
(1923/1958) The Idea of the Holy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pennebaker, J.W. et al. (1988) Disclosure of traumas and immune
function: health implications for psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting
and Clinical Psychology, 56, 239--45. Perl, S. (1994) A writer's way of
knowing: guidelines for composing. In A.G. Brand and R.L. Graves (eds)
Presence of Mind: Writing and the Domain Beyond the Cognitive.
Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook, pp. 77--87. Perls, F. (1969) Gestalt
Therapy Verbatim. Lafayett, CA: Real People Publishing. Polanyi, M.
(1958) Personal Knowledge. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

246

References

Polanyi, M. (1967) The Tacit Dimension. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Prouty, G.F. (1976) Pre-therapy, a method of treating pre-expressive
psychotic and retarded patients. Psychotherapy: Theory, Research and
Practice, 13, 290--4. Prouty, G.F. (1990) Pre-therapy: a theoretical
evolution in the personcentered/experiential psychotherapy of
schizophrenia and retardation. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts and R. Van
Balen (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the
Nineties. Leuven: Leuven University Press, pp. 645--58. Prouty, G.F.
(1998) Pre-therapy and pre-symbolic experiencing. In L. Greenberg, J.
Watson and G. Lietaer (eds) Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy. New
York: Guilford Press, pp. 388--409. Purton, C. (1978a) Biological
function. Philosophical Quarterly, 29, 10--24. Purton, C. (1978b)
Ethological categories of behaviour and some consequences of their
conflation. Animal Behaviour, 26, 653--70. Purton, C. (1989) The
person-centred Jungian. Person-Centered Review, 4(4), 403--19. Purton,
C. (1998) Unconditional positive regard and its spiritual implications.
In Person-Centred Therapy: A European Perspective. London: Sage,
pp. 23--37. Purton, C. (2000a) Empathising with shame and guilt. In J.
Marquez-Teixeira and S. Antunes (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential
Psychotherapy. Linda a Velha: Vale & Vale, pp. 33--54. Purton, C.
(2000b) Introjection and the aliens within. Person-Centred Practice,
8(1), 15--20. Purton, C. (2002) Focusing on focusing. In Client-Centered
and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st Century: Advances in Theory,
Research and Practice. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS Books, pp. 89--98. Purton, C.
(2004) Ethology and Gendlin's Process Model. The Folio: A Journal for
Focusing and Experiential Therapy, 19(1), 114--23. Rennie, D.L. (1998)
Person-Centred Counselling: An Experiential Approach. London: Sage.
Rice, L.N. (1974) The evocative function of the therapist. In D.A.
Wexler and L.N. Rice (eds) Innovations in Client-Centered Therapy. New
York: Wiley, pp. 289--311. Rogers, C.R. (1942) Counselling and
Psychotherapy: Newer Concepts in Practice. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Rogers, C.R. (1951) Client-Centered Therapy. London: Constable. Rogers,
C.R. (1954) The case of Mrs Oak: a research analysis. In C.R. Rogers and
R.F. Dymond (eds) Psychotherapy and Personality Change. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, pp. 259--348. Rogers, C.R. (1956) The
essence of psychotherapy: moments of movement. Paper given at the first
meeting of the American Academy of Psychotherapists, New York, October
20. Rogers, C.R. (1957) The necessary and sufficient conditions of
therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21,
95--103.

References

247

Rogers, C.R. (1958) A process conception of psychotherapy. American
Psychologist, 18, 142--59. Rogers, C.R. (1959) A theory of therapy,
personality and interpersonal relationships, as developed in the
client-centered framework. In S. Koch (ed.) Psychology: A Study of a
Science, 3. Formulations of the Person and the Social Context. New York:
McGraw-Hill, pp. 184--256. Rogers, C.R. (1961) On Becoming a Person.
London, Constable. Rogers, C.R. (1963) The actualizing tendency in
relation to 'motives' and to consciousness. In M.R. Jones (ed.) Nebraska
Symposium on Motivation. Current Theory and Research in Motivation,
Volume X1. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, pp. 1--24. Rogers,
C.R. (1967) The findings in brief. In The Therapeutic Relationship and
its Impact: A study of Psychotherapy With Schizophrenics. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, pp. 73--93. Rogers, C.R. (1980) A Way of
Being. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Rogers, C.R. (1986a) Reflection of
feelings. Person-Centered Review, 1(4), 375--7. Rogers, C.R. (1986b)
Client-centered therapy. In I.L. Kutash and A. Wolf (eds)
Psychotherapist's Casebook. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, pp. 197--208.
Rogers, C.R. and Russell, D. (2002) Carl Rogers: The Quiet
Revolutionary. An Oral History. Roseville, California: Penmarin Books.
Rogers, C.R. and Wallen, J. (eds) (1946) Counselling with Returned
Servicemen. New York: McGraw-Hill. Ross, C.A. (1999) Subpersonalities
and multiple personalities: a dissociative continuum? In J. Rowan and M.
Cooper (eds) The Plural Self. London: Sage Publications, pp. 183--97.
Rothschild, B. (2000) The Body Remembers: The Psychophysiology of Trauma
and Trauma Treatment. New York: W.W. Norton. Sachse, R. (1990a) Concrete
interventions are crucial: The influence of the therapist's processing
proposals on the client's intrapersonal exploration in client-centered
therapy. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts and R. Van Balen (eds)
Client-Centred and Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties. Leuven:
Leuven University Press, pp. 295--308. Sachse, R. (1990b) The influence
of therapist processing proposals on the explication process of the
client. Person-Centered Review, 5(3), 321--44. Sanders, P. (ed.) (2004)
The Tribes of the Person-Centred Nation. Ross-onWye: PCCS Books. Schmid,
P. (2000) Prospects on further developments in the person-centred
approach. In J. Marques-Teixeira and S. Antunes (eds) Client-Centered
and Experiential Psychotherapy. Linda a Velha: Vale & Vale, pp. 11--31.
Schore, A.N. (1994) Affect Regulation and the Origin of the Self.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. Schore, A.N. (2003) Affect
Regulation and the Repair of the Self. New York: W.W. Norton.

248

References

Seeman, J. (1988) Self-actualisation: a reformulation. Person-Centered
Review, 3, 304--15. Shapiro, F. (1995) EMDR. New York: Guilford Press.
Shea, J.J. (1987) Religious Experiencing: William James and Eugene
Gendlin. New York: University Press of America. Slack, S. (1985)
Reflections on a workshop with Carl Rogers. Journal of Humanistic
Psychology, 25(1), 35--42. Smith, M.L. and Glass, G.V. (1977)
Meta-analysis of psychotherapy outcome studies. American Psychologist,
32, 752--60. Standal, S. (1954) The need for positive regard. A
contribution to clientcentered theory. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Chicago. Stiles, W.B., Shapiro, D.A. and
Elliott, R.K. (1986) Are all psychotherapies equivalent? American
Psychologist, 31, 165--80. Stinckens, N., Lietaer, G. and Leijssen, M.
(2002) Working with the inner critic: fighting the enemy or keeping it
company. Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the 21st
Century: Advances in Theory, Research and Practice. Ross-on-Wye: PCCS
Books, pp. 415--26. Tausch, R. (1990) The supplementation of
client-centered communication therapy with other validated therapeutic
methods: a client-centered necessity. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts and R.
Van Balen (eds) Client-Centered and Experiential Psychotherapy in the
Nineties. Leuven: Leuven University Press, pp. 448--55. Thorne, B.
(1992) Carl Rogers. London: Sage. Thorne, B. (2002) The Mystical Power
of Person-Centred Therapy. London: Whurr Publishers. Warner, M.S. (1998)
A client-centred approach to therapeutic work with dissociated and
fragile process. In L. Greenberg, J. Watson and G. Lietaer (eds)
Handbook of Experiential Psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press,
pp. 368--87. Warner, M.S. (2000a) Person-centered psychotherapy: one
nation, many tribes. Person-Centered Journal, 7(1), 28--39. Warner, M.S.
(2000b) Person-centred therapy at the difficult edge: a developmentally
based model of fragile and dissociated process. In D. Mearns and B.
Thorne (eds) Person-Centred Therapy Today. London: Sage Publications,
pp. 144--71. Watson (1984) The empirical status of Rogers's hypothesis
of the necessary and sufficient conditions for effective psychotherapy.
In R.F. Levant and J.M. Shlien (eds) Client-Centered Therapy and the
Person-Centered Approach. Westport: Praeger, pp. 17--40. Weitzman, B.
(1967) Behavior therapy and psychotherapy. Psychological Review, 74(4),
300--17. Welwood, J. (2000) Toward a Psychology of Awakening. Boston:
Shambhala. Wijngaarden, H.R. (1990) Carl Rogers, Carl Jung and
client-centered therapy. In G. Lietaer, J. Rombauts and R. Van Balen
(eds) Client-Centered and

References

249

Experiential Psychotherapy in the Nineties. Leuven: Leuven University
Press, pp. 469--79. Wilkins, P. (2003) Person-Centred Therapy in Focus.
London: Sage. Wittgenstein, L. (1963) Philosophical Investigations.
Oxford: Basil Blackwell. Wittgenstein, L. (1966) Lectures and
Conversations on Aesthetics, Psychology and Religious Belief. Oxford:
Blackwell. Worsley, R. (2002) Process Work in Person-Centred Therapy.
Basingstoke: Palgrave. Worsley, R. (2004) Integrating with integrity. In
P. Sanders (ed.) The Tribes of the Person-Centred Nation. Ross-on-Wye:
PCCS Books, pp. 125--47. Zimring, F. (1990) A characteristic of Rogers's
response to clients. PersonCentered Review, 5, 433--48.

Index (. . .) device, 154--5, 175--81 see also implicit, the acceptance,
see unconditional positive regard action and felt sense, 95, 137--8
focusing and, 95 working with, 136--8 actualising tendency, 14--15 and
carrying-forward, 197 and conditions of worth, 36--8 revision of
concept, 33, 35--6, 197--8 and social restraint, 34--8 and therapeutic
conditions, 26--7, 69 Adorno, T., 214 agricultural metaphor, 7, 31--4
Aitkins, R., 231 Alexander Technique, 142 Allemeny, C., 228 Amodeo, J.,
232 animal behaviour studies, see ethology animal(s) consciousness of,
223--5 emotion in, 75--6, 193--4 life, 184--5 Aristotelean world view,
187--8 Aristotle, 187, 188, 211, 221, 230 Armstrong, M., 142 artistic
creativity, 216--19 'asking' (focusing step), 87 stages within, 92
attention, and felt sense, 56, 70, 74, 81, 176, 180, 195 Augustine, St,
205 authenticity, 36, 84, 205 and carrying-forward, 84 and felt sense,
36--8 see also congruence; genuineness 'avenues' of therapy, 96, 108,
128--42, 156, 196 and therapy training, 165

Baker, N., 24 Baljon, M.C.L., 173 Barrett-Lennard, G.T., 3, 12, 13, 65
Battye, R., 21 behaviourist psychology, 215 'being oneself', and social
restraint, 34--8 Bergin, A.E., 2, 53, 156 Berkeley, Bishop, 50 Berlin,
J.I., 56 Bickhard, M., 228 biological concepts, 34, 221--2 blocked
process, 71--3, 185--6, 191, 204--5 body 'felt from inside', 83 lived,
197 registering changes in, 141 sensations and felt sense, 74--5, 93--4
sense, 86, 105--6, 194 working with, 141--2 Bozarth, J., 26, 27, 39, 43,
57, 146 British Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy (BACP),
168 British Focusing Teachers' Association, 172 Brodley, B.T., 25, 42,
145, 146, 152, 157 Bucher, C., 95 Buddhism, 29, 231--2 Campbell, P., 89,
231 carrying-forward, 54, 71--3, 102--3, 181--2 and actualising
tendency, 197 and authenticity, 84 'direction of fresh air', 103 and
listening, 193 in psychotherapy, 190--1 and structure-bound process,
79--80 Cartwright, D.S., 55 Cartwright, R., 132 catatonia, 126--8

250

Index catharsis, 123, 132 chair work, see empty-chair procedure;
two-chair procedure change-step, 5--6 see also felt shift; moments of
movement change, and insight, 77, 102, 134--5, 154, 196 'Changes'
groups, 214 children, focusing with, 225--6 Clark, C., 150, 161, 162
clearing a space, 29, 30, 87--8 in focusing-oriented therapy, 105, 134
'inventory', 105, 147 and stress reduction, 88 see also 'putting down'
(focusing step) client-centred response, 48--52 client-centred therapy,
3--4, 11--12 client--therapist relationship, 138--40 depth of, 149--52,
201, 203 difficulties in, 115--16 client vulnerability, 110--12
'client's client', 29, 44, 98, 153--4 client's frame of reference, 97
Coffeng, T., 124 cognitive ethology, 224 cognitive therapy, 135
community group, 166 Comprehensive Process Analysis (CPA), 161 concepts,
and experiencing, 5, 54, 69, 74, 83, 113, 177--8, 191 conditions of
worth, 4, 199 and actualising tendency, 36--8 and empathy, 202 and
psychological disturbance, 39--41 and self concept, 14 in training, 165
Conditions of Worth Theory, 15, 16, 18 difficulties with, 39--41 and
directivity, 146 configurations/parts of self, 91, 120, 121 congruence,
14 geometrical metaphor of, 46, 206 nature of, 45--8 revision of
concept, 47--8, 203--6 and Wisconsin Project, 66--7

251 see also authenticity; genuineness; incongruence, and structurebound
process conscience vs inner critic, 117 core conditions, 4, 7, 13,
115--16 see also acceptance; congruence; empathy; therapist conditions
Cornell, A.W., 89--91, 94, 95, 114, 119, 121, 135 counsellor, see
therapist creativity, 176, 185, 191--2, 229 artistic, 216--19 thinking,
220--1 critic, inner, see inner critic 'crossing', 178--9 cultural
differences, 110, 186 cultural relativism, 189 curtailed experiencing,
122--4 De Silva, P., 136 DeCaro, P., 219 denial, 15 Descartes, R., 221,
230, 234 desensitisation procedures, 162, 199 desires, first- and
second-order, 212 diagnosis, 18, 24, 143--5 vs sensitisation, 109--10,
144 see also expert knowledge Dilthey, W., 152, 229 direct referent,
59--60, 74, 176, 194 referent movement, 77 see also felt sense
'direction of fresh air', 103, 141 directivity, 3, 8--9, 42--5, 145--9
and coercion, 43 and Conditions of Worth Theory, 146 and influence, 42
in process-experiential therapy, 23 purist view, 26--7 towards
experiencing, 43--5 see also process direction dissociated process, 90,
121 see also 'too distant' process dissociation, 124 distortion, 15
divided experiencing, 119--21 Draper, I., 166 dreams, 122, 132 Durak,
G.M., 158

252 'edge of awareness', 20, 138, 203, 230--1 see also felt sense
education focusing in, 225--6 and indoctrination, 215 Ellingham, I., 47
Elliott, R., 22, 23, 161 EMDR (Eye Movement Desensitization and
Reprocessing), 142 emotion-in-action, 75 emotion(s) in animals, 193--4
and experiencing, 114 and felt sense, 74--6, 93--4, 113, 133
misconstrual of, 124--5 moderation of, 112 overwhelm, 6, 8, 133--4 in
process-experiential therapy, 24 schemes, 24 and situations, 193, 194
working with, 132--4 see also feeling(s); 'too close' process empathy
and conditions of worth, 202 and reflection, 100, 109, 202 revision of
concept, 201--3 empty-chair procedure, 23, 123 encounter, 83 see also
'interaction first' encounter groups, 17 ethics, 84, 200, 211--14
process view of, 212--13 ethology, 215, 222--5 cognitive, 224 evocative
reflection, 22--3, 124 evolution, 33 'exiled' process, 90 see also 'too
distant' process existence, preconceptual, 82--3 existential philosophy,
44 experience Rogers' concept of, 46--8 unconscious, 15, 46--7, 70, 196,
226--7 experiencing and concepts, 5, 54, 74, 83, 114, 177--8, 191
curtailed, 122--4 depth of, 159--60

Index difficulties in relating to, 109--28 directed quality of, 84
directivity towards, 43--5 divided, 119--21 and emotion, 114 helping
client relate to, 96--109 intricacy of, 37, 69, 72, 101--2, 133
misconstrued, 124--5 and moral principles, 213--14 paranormal, 151--2
'pointing' to, 100--2, 107--8 preconceptual, 82--3 reflexivity of, 30
religious, see spirituality and society, 214--16 suppressed, 121--2 and
theories, 4 see also concepts, and experiencing experiencing level in
early sessions, 63--4, 157--8 and therapeutic change, 63--9, 157--62 and
therapist conditions, 62--4, 68--9 Experiencing Scale, 56, 61
schizophrenics, 62--3 experiential psychotherapy, 2, 22 see also
process-experiential therapy expert knowledge, 51--2 see also diagnosis
externalising, 6, 8, 67--8, 90, 113--14 see also 'too distant' process
feeling-process, 175--8 momentum of, 180 feeling(s) ambiguity of term,
37 and experiencing, 114 and felt sense, 37, 38, 74 following, and
social restraint, 35 misconstrual of, 124--5 reflection of, 27, 49--51,
100, 209 and situations, 150, 193, 194 unconscious, 15, 46--7, 70, 196,
226--7 see also emotion(s) felt sense, 69--70, 73, 87 and action, 95,
137--8 and attention, 56, 70, 74, 81, 176, 180, 195 and authenticity,
36--8 'components' of, 94

Index development of concept of, 74, 194--5 and emotion, 74--6, 93--4,
113, 133 and feelings, 37, 38, 74 finding, 176 formation of, 115
'forward direction' in, 103 full, 93--4 in group work, 140--1 and
imagery, 93--4, 132 intricacy in, 115 and life situation, 93--4 in
poetry, 69 in reading, 176--7 and self, 153--4 and sensations, 74--5,
93--4 in teaching Focusing, 92 and thinking, 135--6 unfolding, 76--7 in
writing, 177--8 see also direct referent; edge of awareness felt shift,
5--6, 103, 195--6 see also change-step; moments of movement Fiedler,
F.E., 13 'finding the right distance', see 'putting down' (focusing
step) Flanagan, K., 89 'focaling', 195, 197, 222 focusing and action, 95
as self-help procedure, 86 as taught procedure, 8, 20, 80--1, 84--95,
172 attitude of friendliness, 105 global application, 77 interactive, 94
measurement scales, 161--2 origins of, 54--81 phases of, 73--80 in
process-experiential therapy, 23, 24, 25 referent movement, 77 solitary,
116 and subjectivity, 95 teacher training, 172 unfolding in, 76--7
Wholebody, 95 see also Experiencing Scale

253 focusing co-ordinators, 172 focusing instructions, 84--91 classical,
86--8 original, 84--5 variants, 89--91 focusing-oriented psychotherapy,
96--142 empirical evidence, 158--62 focusing partnerships, 168--9
Foucault, M., 214, 215 Foxcroft, R., 230 fragile process, 110--12
Frankfurt, H., 212 Freud, S., 46, 47, 55, 56, 215, 230 Freudian theory,
15, 16, 46--7, 70--3 see also psychoanalytic concepts fully-functioning
person, 167 function, biological, 185, 222 Galileo, 234 galvanic
skin-resistance studies, 56 Garfield, S.L., 2 Geggus, P., 142 Gendlin,
E.T. appreciation of Rogers, 209 basic concepts, 82--4 directs Wisconsin
project, 62 early work with Rogers, 54--61 and Freud, 70 and Heidegger,
229 impact of Wisconsin project results, 65--6 influences on his
thought, 54, 229, 230 philosophical background, 5, 54, 74, 228--30
social/political work, 214 general principles, 186, 191 genuineness, 12,
19--20 see also authenticity; congruence Gestalt therapy, 23, 120, 122,
123 experientially oriented, 162 gesturing, in Gendlin's theory, 185
Ghosh, A., 6 Glass, G.V., 53, 156 Goldfarb, M., 218, 219 Goldman, R.,
124 Greenberg, L., 22, 23, 24, 33, 121, 122, 124 Griffin, D., 224, 225

254 group supervision, 169--70 group work, 17, 20, 64--5, 140--1
'Changes' groups, 214 group size, 167 listening/focusing groups, 168 in
therapy training, 166--8 Hakomi therapy, 142, 232 'handle' (focusing
step), 87 Harvey, K., 218 Hatab, L.J., 154 Haugh, S., 48 Hayashi, S.,
28, 29 Heidegger, M., 229, 234 Hendricks, M., 106, 132, 158, 159, 160,
200, 220 'Herbert Bryan', case of, 28--9 Hinterkopf, E., 231 Holdstock,
T.L., 35 holy, dimensions of, 233--4 human potential movement, 35 'I'
and 'it', 91--2, 113, 199--201 Iberg, J., 106, 161, 162 identification,
90 see also 'too close' process image space, 92 imagery and felt sense,
93--4, 132 working with, 131--2 immune functioning, 225--6 implicit, the
and creativity, 192 (. . .) device, 154--5, 175--81 function in
experiencing, 177--8 and the unconscious, 48, 70--3, 204--5 implying,
71--3, 180--2, 190, 200 and psychotherapy, 204--5 incongruence, and
structure-bound process, 205 indoctrination, and education, 215 inner
critic, 116--19 creation of, 119 energy of, 117--18 and introjection,
118--19 superego as, 117 vs conscience, 117 working with, 117--19

Index insight, and change, 77, 102, 134--5, 154, 196 Institute for
Bio-Spiritual Research, 231 integrationists, 20--2 variant theory, 20--1
intellectualising, 6, 8, 67--8, 90, 113--14 see also 'too distant'
process interaction, 7--8 client and therapist, see client--therapist
relationship experiencing and society, 214--16 feeling process and
attention, 175--6 feeling process and words, 175--7, 180 organism and
environment, 34 tradition and felt needs, 189 'interaction first',
182--3 interactional order, restoration of, 235 Interactive Focusing, 94
interactive order, in physics, 227--8 interaffecting, 182--3
interpretation, 134--5, 148 intricacy experiential, 37, 69, 72, 101--2,
133 in felt sense, 115 introjection, 4, 14, 15, 199 and inner critic,
118--19 'inventory' (focusing step), 105 James, W., 231 Jenney, R., 55
Johanson, G., 232 Jung, C.G., 21, 152, 202 Kant, I., 211, 234 Katonah,
D.G., 225, 226 Kiecolt-Glaser, J.D., 225 Kiesler, D.J., 157 King, J.W.,
232 King, M., 53, 156 Kirschenbaum, H., 46, 62 Kirtner, W., 55, 58 Klee,
P., 219 Klein, J., 94 Klein, M.H., 157 knowledge, 187--8 Kurtz, R., 142,
232 Lambers, E., 18, 173 Lambert, M.J., 53, 156

Index language in Gendlin's theory, 185 learning, 32 picture theory of,
205--6 Leijssen, M., 49--50, 93--4, 115, 150, 154, 158 Lemke, J., 227
Levin, D., 229 Levin, R., 231 Levine, P., 124, 162 Lietaer, G., 43 life
concept of, 32--4, 222 levels of, 184--9 'life-forward' direction,
197--8 listening, and carrying-forward, 193 locus of evaluation
external, 14 internal, 18 Lutgendorf, S., 225 McEvenue, K., 95, 142
McGavin, B., 89--91, 95, 119, 121, 230 McGuire, K.N., 134 McGuire, M.,
94 McKeon, R., 54, 229, 230 McMahon, E., 89, 231 McMullin, R.E., 161
Mahrer, A., 25 'making a list' (focusing step), 105, 147 Manser, A.R.,
222 markers of process difficulties, 23, 29 Mathieu-Coughlan, P., 157
Mearns, D., 4, 17, 18, 19, 20, 35, 36, 42, 121, 148, 149, 164, 166, 201
medicine, focusing in, 225--6 meditation, 29, 232 memory, 226--7
'merged' process, 90 see also 'too close' process Merleau-Ponty, M., 228
Merry, T., 18 metaphor, 178 agricultural, 7, 31--4 creation of, 179--80
mirroring in childhood, 50--1 in focusing-oriented therapy, 98 and
psychological disturbance, 40

255 Rogers' view, 49 see also reflection misconstrued experiencing,
124--5 moments of movement, 5--6, 57--8, 59, 141 see also felt shift;
change-step momentum, 180, 191 Moore, H., 50, 50 Moore, J., 37, 232
moral principles, 211--13 and experiencing, 213--14 morality, see ethics
Mountford, C., 167 multiple personality disorder, 121 mysticism, 150,
151--2 see also spirituality Nelson, K., 230 non-directive reflective
psychotherapy, 3, 12, 16, 42, 48--52 non-directive 'rules', 67 'nothing
between', 97, 209 numinous, 233--4 obedience, 230--1 organic life,
221--2 as metaphor, 31--4 see also agricultural metaphor organism
development of, 15 and environment, 183--4 Orlinsky, D., 8, 159 Otto,
R., 233 overwhelm, emotional, see emotion(s), overwhelm, emotional
painting, focusing in, 217--19 paranormal experiencing, 151--2
parts/configurations of self, 91, 120, 121 Pennebaker, J.W., 225 Perl,
S., 216, 217 Perls, F., 120 person-centred therapy and procedures,
129--30 relation to other approaches, 21--2, 96, 130, 156, 196, 209
standard view, see 'standard' person-centred therapy 'person in there',
98, 111, 112, 209

256 personal development groups, 166--7 personal interaction, working
with, 138--40 phenomenology, 229 philosophy, 228--30 existential, 44
physics, interactive order in, 227--8 plant life, 184 as analogy for
human life, 31--4 poetry, 69, 181--2 'pointing' to experiencing, 100--2,
107--8 Polanyi, M., 191 politics, 214 post-traumatic stress
difficulties, 124, 162 postmodernism, 189, 205, 229 'pre-therapy', 128
preconceptual experiencing, 82--3 see also concepts, and experiencing
presence, 90, 91 of therapist, 19 problematic reaction points, 22--3,
124 process blocked, see blocked process dissociated, 121 fragile,
110--12 'too close', 90, 112--15 'too distant', 90, 112--15 process
difficulties, 24 markers, 29 process direction, 29, 30
process-experiential therapy, 22--5 and directivity, 147 focusing in,
23, 161 and focusing-oriented therapy, 109 therapist conditions in,
23--4 process identification, 29, 30 Process Scale, 56, 61 process
skipping, 144--5 process stages, 59--61 process/content distinction, 24,
147--8 Prouty, G., 126, 128 psychoanalytic concepts and client-centred
concepts, 130 see also Freudian theory psychodynamic therapy, 138--9
psychological contact and 'pre-therapy', 128

Index psychological disturbance conceptualisation of, 125--6 and
conditions of worth, 39--41 Gendlin's view of, 7--8 and structure-bound
process, 56, 192--3 psychopathology, 18 psychotherapy Gendlin's view of,
70--81, 175--206 and politics, 213 psychotherapy theories, 130
assessment of, 155, 162, 210 'purists', 19, 20, 25--7, 38--9 purpose, in
organic world, 33 Purton, C., 88, 92, 118, 124, 129, 194, 201, 222, 225
'putting down' (focusing step), 87 alternatives to, 92 in
focusing-oriented therapy, 105, 134 imagery of, 88 'putting nothing
between', 97--8, 209 quantum mechanics, 227--8 Quinn, R.D., 13 reading,
felt sense in, 176--7 'receiving' (focusing step), 87 receptive
attitude, 59, 96--7 referent movement, 77 reflection, 3 body, 126
discrimination in, 99 and empathy, 100, 109, 202 evocative, 22--3, 124
of feeling, 27, 49--51, 100, 209 in focusing-oriented therapy, 98
functions of, 48--52 situational, 126 word-for-word, 126 see also
mirroring reflexivity, 30 relational depth, 149--51, 201, 203 relativity
theory, 227--8 release, 103 see also moments of movement; felt shift
religious practice, 232--3 Rennie, D., 25, 29--30 repression, 15, 46--7
'resonating' (focusing step), 87

Index Rice, L.N., 22, 23, 29, 124 Rogers, C.R. appreciation of Gendlin,
58, 59, 62 early work, 2, 3, 11--16, 100 empathic reflections, 109 and
Freud, 15--16, 46--7, 55 and group work, 17, 20 impact of Wisconsin
project results, 64--5, 66 later work, 7, 19--20, 27 move to California,
64--5 and 'schools' of therapy, 52--3, 129 terminology, 3, 4 theory of
self, 12 view of theories, 1 role-play, 137 Ross, C.A., 121 Rothschild,
B., 124, 162 Rousseau, J.-J., 234, 235 Sachse, R., 159, 160, 162 Safran,
J.D., 24 Sanders, P., 17 Sartre, J.-P., 44 schizophrenia, 7, 16, 61--4,
65--7, 126--8 see also Wisconsin Project 'schools' of therapy, 2, 21,
129--30, 207--8 equal effectiveness of, 52--3 Schore, A.N., 51, 112
science, as human creation, 234 Seeman, J., 33 self configurations/parts
of, 91, 120, 121 and experience, 91--2, 113, 113, 199--201 and felt
sense, 153--4 Rogers' theory of, 12 use of, 20, 139, 209 self-concept,
12 and conditions of worth, 14 self-defeating modes of expression,
103--4 self-propelled feeling-process, 78 sensations, and felt sense,
74--5, 93--4 sensitisation, vs diagnosis, 109--10, 144 Shapiro, F., 142
Shea, J., 231 Shlien, J., 55, 56

257 simile, 178 situations and emotions, 193, 194 and experiences, 83
and feelings, 150, 193, 194 and felt sense, 93--4 skills training, 168
skin-resistance studies, 56 Slack, S., 49 Smith, M.L., 53, 156 social
construction of reality, 54, 186--7, 213, 229 social restraint, and
'being oneself', 34--8 society and experiencing, 214--16 modern, 215--16
'something', 91, 107, 113 space between 'I' and 'it', 91--2 Gendlin's
view of, 226--7, 234 image, 92 spirituality, 151--2, 200, 230--5
Standal, S., 12 'standard' person-centred therapy, 17--20 training, 164
standards, 187, 188 Stiles, W.B., 53, 156 Stinckens, N., 119 stress
reduction, 88 structure-bound process, 56, 59, 61, 72--3, 79 extreme,
125--8 and incongruence, 205 and psychological disturbance, 192--3 in
training, 165 subjectivity, 95 superego, and inner critic, 117
supervision group, 169--70 individual, 172--4 suppressed experiencing,
121--2 symboling, in Gendlin's theory, 185 'tacit dimension' (Polanyi),
191 Taoism, 232 Tausch, R., 21

258 techniques, 21 Tennyson, A., 33 theory(ies) construction of, 221
correspondence with reality, 129 empirical testing, 155--62 evidence
for, 159 and experiencing, 4 in psychotherapy, 208 in training courses,
169 therapeutic change client variables, 4, 55, 64 empirical studies,
156--62 focusing not necessary for, 152--5 and therapeutic conditions,
63--4 therapist variables in, see therapist conditions therapeutic
conditions, 13--15, 18 and actualising tendency, 26--7, 69
necessary/sufficient debate, 38--9 necessity of, 27, 38--9 in
process-experiential therapy, 22 Rogers' view of, 13--15 sufficiency of,
19, 27, 29, 38--9 and therapeutic progress, 39, 63--4 see also
individual conditions Therapeutic Conditions Hypothesis, 15, 48, 52--3
tests of, 155 therapeutic progress, see therapeutic change therapeutic
relationship, depth of, 149--52, 201, 203 therapist as well-functioning,
51--2 power of, 44--5 presence of, 78--80 therapist conditions, 13
balance between, 16 and experiencing level, 62--4, 68--9 and
'pre-therapy', 128 in process-experiential psychotherapy, 23--4 purist
view, 27 Rogers' view, 27 Tomoda's view, 29 see also core conditions
therapy, see psychotherapy

Index thinking creative, 220--1 and felt sense, 135--6 working with,
134--6 Thinking at the Edge (TAE), 172, 220--1 Thorne, B., 4, 18, 19,
20, 31, 35, 36, 42, 121, 149, 150, 164 time, Gendlin's view of, 134,
200--1, 226--7, 234 Tomlinson, T.M., 157 Tomoda, F., 27--9, 27--9 'too
close' process, 90, 112--15 see also emotions, overwhelm, emotional;
identification 'too distant' process, 90, 112--15 see also
externalising; intellectualising 'totaling', 197, 222 tradition(s),
187--9, 190 alternative, 187, 189 and creativity, 192 and felt needs,
189 training, 163--72 transference, 138--9 trauma, 123, 124, 162 and
Conditions of Worth Theory, 40 Treasure Maps to the Soul, 95 truth(s),
186, 188 general, 187 two-chair procedure, 23, 120 unconditional
positive regard, 12, 13 paradoxical nature of, 199 revision of concept,
198--201 superficial, 201 unconscious feelings, 15, 46--7, 70, 196,
226--7 unconscious, the, 15--16, 46--7, 70--3, 196 and the implicit, 48,
70--3, 204--5 unfinished business, 23, 123 value(s), 84 see also
morality Van Balen, R., 33 vulnerability, client, 110--12 Wallen, J., 11
Warner, M., 17, 21, 111, 112, 121 Watson, N., 39, 155

Index Weitzman, B., 162 Welwood, J., 232 Wholebody Focusing, 95, 142
Wijngaarden, H.R., 20 Wilkins, P., 42 Wisconsin Project, 7, 56, 61--8,
156--7 clinical implications, 65--8 theoretical implications, 68--70

259 Wittgenstein, L., 32, 188, 205, 205, 224, 234 Worsley, R., 20, 21,
24 writing felt sense in, 177--8 focusing in, 216--17 Zen Buddhism, 29
Zero Balancing, 142 Zimring, F., 56, 58, 59


