"Substantially updated to include a wealth of new information, Garry
draws on his vast experience and wisdom to expand on the healing power
of the child-centered play therapy relationship. Fresh ideas and
insights poignantly illustrated through personal stories and case
examples both enlighten and touch the reader's heart. A must-read for
all play therapists to expand their depth of practice, and for anyone
committed to a deeper understanding of children and what they need in
order to heal and reach their full potential." Sue C. Bratton, PhD,
LPC-S, RPT-S, Professor Emerita and Director Emerita, Center for Play
Terapy, University of North Texas. "A subsequent edition that is a
masterpiece! Previous editions of Play Terapy have been such classics
that it is difcult to imagine an improvement would be possible. However,
this 4th edition accomplishes it. Tere are so many impressive additions.
Tis book is both familiar and new---something only Dr. Landreth could
do. Tis is a foundational book in my classes and should be required for
anyone looking to understand and practice play therapy." Daniel S.
Sweeney, PhD, LMFT, LPC, RPT-S, Professor, Clinical Director, and
Director of the NW Center for Play Terapy Studies, George Fox
University. "Dr. Landreth has done it again! He has gifed the child
therapy community with an insightful, meaningful, and practical
framework for Child-Centered Play Terapy. Building on his last three
editions, Dr. Landreth ofers new perspectives and refections on
processes within play therapy. Tis new edition brings the dynamics of
play therapy alive through multiple cases and session transcripts that
illustrate Dr. Landreth's teaching points. Every page led me to refect
upon the signifcance of play therapy in children's lives." Dee C. Ray,
PhD, LPC-S, RPT-S, NCC, Regents Professor, Co-Director of the Center for
Play Terapy at the University of North Texas.

FO U R TH ED IT IO N

Tis is the latest edition of Garry Landreth's comprehensive text on
creating therapeutic relationships with children through play. Tis book
details Child-Centered Play Terapy (CCPT), an evidence-based model,
which stresses the importance of understanding the child's world.
Professors who have taught a course based on the previous editions will
be pleased to fnd the core message intact but updated with a
comprehensive review of rigorous contemporary research demonstrating the
strong evidence base for CCPT across cultural groups and presenting
issues. Expanded to cover additional topics of interest, this new
edition includes a model of the change process in CCPT and 13 new Rules
of Tumb that help clarify the CCPT relationship, and discusses deeper
issues in CCPT, such as recognizing emotional blocks in play therapy,
being culturally responsive, discovering meaning when there seems to be
no meaning, and more. Tis new edition ofers essential help to play
therapists who respond to sensitive issues at every stage of the
therapeutic process. Garry L. Landreth, EdD, LPC, RPT-S, is Regents
Professor Emeritus, Department of Counseling and Higher Education and
Founder and Director Emeritus, Center for Play Terapy, University of
North Texas.

F O U R T H E D IT IO N

New York London

Designed cover image by Amber-Lea Martinez Fourth edition published 2024
by Routledge 605 Tird Avenue, New York, NY 10158 and by Routledge 4 Park
Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN Routledge is an imprint of
the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business © 2024 Garry L. Landreth
Te right of Garry L. Landreth to be identifed as author of this work has
been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988. All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised in any form or by any
electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafer invented,
including photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or
registered trademarks and are used only for identifcation and
explanation without intent to infringe. First edition published by
Routledge 1991 Second edition published by Routledge 2002 Tird edition
published by Routledge 2012 Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Landreth, Garry L., author. Title:
Play therapy : the art of the relationship / by Garry L. Landreth.
Description: Fourth edition. \| Abingdon, Oxon ; New York, NY :
Routledge, 2023. \| Includes bibliographical references and index. \|
Identifers: LCCN 2022059396 (print) \| LCCN 2022059397 (ebook) \| ISBN
9781032186979 (hardback) \| ISBN 9781032186955 (paperback) \| ISBN
9781003255796 (ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Play therapy. Classifcation: LCC
RJ505.P6 L26 2023 (print) \| LCC RJ505.P6 (ebook) \| DDC
618.92/891653--dc23/eng/20230210 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2022059396 LC ebook record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2022059397 ISBN: 978-1-032-18697-9 (hbk) ISBN:
978-1-032-18695-5 (pbk) ISBN: 978-1-003-25579-6 (ebk) DOI:
10.4324/9781003255796 Typeset in Minion by Deanta Global Publishing
Services, Chennai, India

Te most important task God can give is the opportunity to be a parent.
Tis book is dedicated to my wife Monica for sharing the process with me
and to Kimberly, Karla, and Craig for the satisfaction gained from being
a father. Being a parent and the opportunity to be a grandparent to
Kara, Kristen, Travis, Julia, Ali, and Jolie are much more important
than writing a book.

Contents

Preface . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .xv Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xxi 1

About Me, Garry Landreth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .1

2

The Meaning of Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .7 Children Communicate Trough Play. . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .9 Symbolic Play. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16 Graphic Design of the Process of Change
in Play Terapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .19 Stages in the Play Terapy Process . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . .20 Play of Adjusted and Maladjusted Children . .
. . . . . . . . . .23

3

History and Development of Play Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.27 Psychoanalytic Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .28 Release Play Terapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .31 Relationship Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .33 Nondirective/Child-Centered Play Terapy .
. . . . . . . . . . .34 Play Terapy in Elementary Schools . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .35 Association for Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36 Center for Play Terapy . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .36 University Training. . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .37 Filial Terapy. .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.37

ix

x

Contents

4

A View of Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .45 Tenets for Relating to Children. . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .46 Children Are Resilient . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .47 Some Children Are Like Popcorn, and
Some Are Like Molasses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .50

5

Child-Centered Play Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .53 Personality Teory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .54 A Child-Centered View of Personality and
Behavior . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .59 Key Concepts of Child-Centered Play Terapy . . . . . . . .
.61 Terapeutic Conditions for Growth. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.66 Te Terapeutic Relationship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .75 Objectives in Child-Centered Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . .
.91 What Children Learn in Play Terapy. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.93

6

Being Culturally Responsive . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .99 Child-Centered Play Terapy and Cultural Responsiveness . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .100 A
Being With Cultural Philosophy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104
Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT) and Cultural Responsiveness . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104 Child-Centered Play
Terapy Research with Culturally Diverse Populations . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . .106

7

The Play Therapist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . 109 My Most Dramatic Play Terapy Experience . . . . . . . .
. . 111 Personality Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .115 Terapist Self-Understanding . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .121 Terapist Self-Acceptance . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .125 Being a Play Terapist. . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .128 Ryan---A Dying Child in Play
Terapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .130

8

Supervision and Play Therapy Training. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
135 Supervised Practice Facilitates Self-Insight . . . . . . . . . . .
.135 Play Terapist Self-Supervision. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . .138

Contents

Play Terapy Skills Checklist . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.140 Recommended Training Program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.142 9

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. 145 Explaining Play Terapy to Parents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .153 Preparing Parents for Separation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .156 Te Parent Interview and Transcript . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .157

10 The Playroom and Materials. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . 169 Playroom Characteristics. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .171 Rationale for Selecting Toys and Materials . . . .
. . . . . . . .175 Categories of Toys . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .179 Tote Bag Playroom . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .185 Recommended Toys and
Materials for the Playroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . .187 Special Considerations . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .190 11 Beginning the
Relationship: The Child's Time. . . . . . . . . . . . . 195 Objectives
of the Relationship. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .197 Te
Initial Encounter in the Waiting Room . . . . . . . . . . .201
Developing the Relationship in the Playroom . . . . . . . . .205 Te
Child's View of the Play Terapy Relationship . . . . .217 Questioning
Techniques of Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .221 Preparing to
End Each Session . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .229 12
Characteristics of Facilitative Responses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.235 Caring Acceptance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .238 Distinctive Qualities of Terapeutic Responses . . . . .
. . .239 Return Responsibility to Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . .250 Case of Dependent Darrell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .259 Purpose in Returning Responsibility. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .263 Facilitative Responses. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . 266 Play Terapy Transcript: A Manipulative
Child. . . . . . . .276

xi

xii

Contents

13 Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .285 Silence in
Play Terapy Has Meaning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .285 Responding to
Silence in Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .287 Transcript of a
Play Terapy Session: A Silent Beginning. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .290 Seemingly Insignifcant
Happenings Are Not Insignifcant. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .298 Discovering Emotional Blocks in
Play Terapy . . . . . . . .299 14 Therapeutic Limit Setting . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .303 Basic Guidelines in Limit
Setting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .303 Steps in the
Terapeutic Limit-Setting Process . . . . . . . . 317 Transcript of Limit
Setting in Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . .321 When Limits Are Broken.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .321 Situational
Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.328 15 Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ������335
What to Do If the Child Is Silent . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.335 What to Do If the Child Wants to Bring Toys or Food to the Playroom
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .338 What to Do If
the Child Wants to Hug or Sit in the Terapist's Lap . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 344 What to Do If the Child Tries to
Steal a Toy. . . . . . . . . . 346 What to Do If the Child Refuses to
Leave the Playroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .347 16 Issues in Play Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .351 Confdentiality. . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .351 Participation in
Child's Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .353
Accepting Gifs From Children in Play Terapy . . . . . . .357 Giving the
Child a Reward at the End of Sessions or a Memento at Termination . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360 Asking the Child to Clean Up.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 360 Bringing a Friend to the
Playroom . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 364

Contents

17 Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination . . . . . . . .369
Determining Terapeutic Movement Within Sessions . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .370 Behaviors and Temes Tat
Indicate Change . . . . . . . . . .371 Reference Points for Determining
Termination . . . . . . . .387 Procedures for Ending the Relationship .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .390 Children's Reactions to the Last Session .
. . . . . . . . . . . . .392 18 Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered
Play Therapy. . . . .395 Intensive Child-Centered Play Terapy . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .395 Research on Intensive Child-Centered Play Terapy.
. . .398 Short-Term Child-Centered Play Terapy . . . . . . . . . . . .
.403 Research on Short-Term Child-Centered Play Terapy. . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .403 Short-Term
Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 405 19 Research Evidence for CCPT . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 411 CCPT Meta-Analyses and
Systematic Reviews . . . . . . . 422 CCPT Individual Outcome Studies . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 426 Culturally Relevant CCPT Research . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .429 Strengths and Limitations of CCPT
Research . . . . . . . . .432 Resources for CCPT Research. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 434 Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 443

xiii

Preface

The process of writing this 4th edition began 5 years ago with making
notes on new thoughts about child-centered play therapy as they
sporadically occurred to me. Many of these new thoughts occurred during
the process of preparing for presentations, constructing PowerPoints,
interacting with play therapists at my workshops, and as a guest speaker
via Zoom for graduate students in play therapy courses. Some new
thoughts occurred while I was driving; others were stimulated by
unrelated events. Tis collection made a box full of ideas on pieces of
paper and thoughts more fully explored on pages of paper. Ten a year ago
I made a commitment to write this 4th edition and devoted most days
since then to developing these new thoughts. Writing a book is always a
consuming process for me with little time of. Te process of integrating
these new thoughts into the existing 3rd edition was a bit like working
on a giant puzzle, a frustrating and time-consuming process. During this
past year, some new thoughts occurred while I was sleeping. I would wake
up in the middle of the night and realize I had worked out how to
express what I had earlier in the day been unable to express to my
satisfaction. I would get up, write for a while and go back to bed,
contented. A continuing motivation in writing this 4th edition was to
make teaching points come alive for the reader. My struggle in writing
is always that I can't possibly communicate what I know, believe, and
have experienced about the dynamic world of children through such an
inadequate means as a few words written on a few pages of unresponsive
paper. Feelings and experiences cannot be conveyed adequately through
the medium

xv

xvi

Preface

of the written word, yet that is the structure I am restricted to using
in this part of my efort to impact the way adults interact with
children. Trying to communicate what I believe about children and have
experienced to be true in my heart is an awesome task. Will I be able to
make contact with the reader? Will I be understood? Will my excitement
for children be felt? Will the reader see children any diferently? Will
the dynamics and characteristics of the child's world be better
understood? Will what I write make a diference in how the reader
approaches and interacts with children? At this point, it is probably
obvious that I ventured forth into this writing process with some
apprehension. I have experienced child-centered play therapy to be a
dynamic approach to counseling with a child that allows me to fully
experience the child's world as I venture forth in the process of
presenting the person I am and opening myself to receive the delicate
and subtle messages communicated by the child, which declare the
uniqueness of the child's personality. My experience is that the
problems the child experiences do not exist apart from the person the
child is. Terefore, child-centered play therapy matches the dynamic
inner structure of the child with an equally dynamic approach. Children
are quite capable of teaching adults about themselves if adults are
willing, patient, and open to learning. Children are real people, not
simply appendages of those adults around them. Tey have feelings and
reactions independent of their parents' reactions. Te assumption of
"nervous mother, nervous child" does not hold true. Can we assume that
if the house is blown up and mother remains calm, the child will not be
afected? No. Children are persons in their own right and experience
feelings and reactions independent of signifcant adults in their lives.
Tis book is about signifcant learnings from children as they have taught
me about themselves and their world. Children are capable of much more
than I have been able to describe in these pages. Likewise, the
relationships and experiences referred to as play therapy are infnitely
more complex than this book portrays. Te process of relating to a child
who is experiencing permission to be himself or herself is indescribable
and can only be known in the actual shared moments of the relationship
together. My intent

Preface

has been to open the door to understanding the child's world of being,
experiencing, exploring, appreciating, and creating a world of wonder,
excitement, joy, sadness, and the vivid colors of life. Tis 4th edition
contains: New Chapters: • Being culturally responsive • Supervision and
training in play therapy • Discovering meaning in play therapy when
there seems to be no meaning • Te chapter on intensive and short-term
play therapy has been completely rewritten with research from the last
10 years • Te chapter on research evidence for CCPT has been completely
rewritten to focus on contemporary CCPT research employing stringent
research methodology which has led to CCPT's designation as an
evidence-based practice New Topics: • Conceptual model of the role of
play in therapeutic change • Deeper issues in child-centered play
therapy • Silence in play therapy has meaning • Emotional blocks in play
therapy • Tere are no insignifcant happenings in play therapy • Living
out Being With a child is sort of like breathing • History is not
destiny • Research confrms infants' innate ability to move toward the
positive in relationships • Te case of Cassie, a child who was sexually
abused • Discovering what I don't know that I don't know I don't know
New Play Terapy Transcripts: • A silent child in play therapy • Limit
setting using ACT with a child in play therapy • Emotional blocks in
play therapy • Te case of Dependent Darrell: Returning responsibility •
My most dramatic play therapy case

xvii

xviii

Preface

New Rules of Tumb: • 13 new Rules of Tumb, bringing the total to 31
Rules of Tumb that clarify the child-centered play therapy relationship
Changes and additions in this 4th edition present child-centered play
therapy with greater clarity. Research on intensive and short-term
child-centered play therapy (CCPT) and Child-Parent Relationship Terapy
(CPRT) since 1995 is included in this 4th edition. Research on the
efectiveness of reducing the time between play therapy sessions provides
impressive support for using a time-limited model that collapses the
time between sessions and reduces the number of sessions. I have
retained in this 4th edition an exploration of topics and issues my
graduate students have indicated were important in their learning about
the process of play therapy and the dynamics of the relationship with
children. Terefore, some of the essential topics included in this book
are as follows: • Unique aspects, key concepts, and objectives of the
childcentered play therapy philosophy and theory of the play therapy
therapeutic process • What children learn in the play therapy process •
Te person of the play therapist, necessary personality characteristics,
and the role of the play therapist in the therapeutic experience •
Characteristics of facilitative responses, with specifc guidelines on
how to help children assume self-responsibility • Detailed guidelines
for organizing a playroom and recommended toys and materials • Specifc
suggestions on relating to parents and how to explain play therapy •
Making contact with the reluctant/anxious child and structuring the
therapeutic experience in the playroom • When to set limits, steps in
therapeutic limit setting, and what to do when limits are broken

Preface

• Typical problems that occur in the playroom and suggestions on how to
respond • How children view the play therapy experience • An examination
of issues in play therapy, such as participating in the child's play,
accepting gifs, and who cleans up • Short-term and intensive play
therapy • Guidelines for determining therapeutic progress in play
therapy and termination procedures • Reading themes in play therapy Some
of this book is about me, my experiences, my reactions, and my feelings.
Terefore, I have tried to convey my personal reactions by using the
personal pronoun I. Using the customary phrase the author just did not
convey the personal dimensions I wanted to communicate.

xix

Acknowledgments

Te writing and completion of the 4th edition of this book was made
possible by the loving support and encouragement of my wife, Monica, who
took on the major role of all things tech. Computer problems wait in
hiding for me, then tech problems suddenly issue a growl that threatens
to consume me and the book in one gulp! Monica saved me and the book
from destruction many times. Monica also helped me transcribe my play
therapy videos for inclusion in this 4th edition. I am grateful for the
support, encouragement, and help of my daughter Kimberly Tatum for her
creative suggestions and help with proofreading. Dr. Sue Bratton gave
generously of her time as an invaluable resource in proofreading and
providing direction for the focus of Chapter 6: Being Culturally
Responsive. I am grateful for her support. My heart felt appreciation is
extended to Dr. Sue Bratton and Dr. Alyssa Swan for helping me complete
this 4th edition by completely rewriting the chapter on research
evidence for childcentered play therapy, focusing on contemporary CCPT
research employing stringent research methodology which has led to
CCPT's designation as an evidence-based practice. Tey are generous and
caring friends. My special thanks to Regine Chung, doctoral student in
the Center for Play Terapy at the University of North Texas, for her
thorough research in locating and summarizing the special areas of
short-term and intensive play therapy and the many other ways she
assisted me. I am grateful for the talented skill of Amber-Lea Martinez,
doctoral student in the Center for Play Terapy at the University of
North Texas, for designing the book cover of this 4th edition. Tanks to
Kristen Tatum for her graphic. xxi

xxii

Acknowledgments

Te excitement of my graduate students and workshop participants in
discovering the freeing and growth-promoting dimensions of the
child-centered play therapy process continues to be stimulating and
rewarding and was a signifcant factor in initiating the process of
writing a fourth edition of this book. I am grateful that so many people
found the frst three editions of this book helpful. I appreciate so much
my doctoral students who have continued to contribute to research on the
efectiveness of childcentered play therapy. It has been especially
rewarding to hear from people who have read the international
translations. Te photographs in this book are of volunteers, not of
clients. I am especially grateful to the children and their parents for
their cooperation. Acknowledgment and appreciation are extended to
editors of journals for permission to reproduce all or parts of some of
my articles, which initially appeared under the titles listed: "Lessons
for Living from a Dying Child" (1988) Journal of Counseling and
Development 67, 100 (reprinted by permission of the American Association
for Counseling and Development); "Who Is Tis Person Tey Call a Counselor
Who Has a Playroom?" (1982) Te School Counselor, 29, 35--361 (reprinted
by permission of the American Association for Counseling and
Development); "Te Uniqueness of the Play Terapist in a Child's Life"
(1982) Texas Personnel and Guidance Association Journal, 10, 77--81; and
"Play Terapy: Facilitative Use of Child's Play in Elementary School
Counseling" (1987) Elementary School Guidance and Counseling Journal,
21, 253--261 (reprinted by permission of the American Association for
Counseling and Development).

Chapter

1

About Me, Garry Landreth

I have always felt that knowing the author, or at least knowing
something about the author, helped me to more clearly understand what
the author was trying to communicate. Terefore, I want to let you know
something about me. Perhaps this will help you better understand the
meaning of what I write, even though my words may not adequately convey
the message. Printed words on a page are at best an inadequate method
for communicating something important---and what could be more important
than talking about children and their world? I experience a very real
feeling of apprehension and inadequacy when I think about trying to
convey through this medium what I have experienced with children, my
feelings for children, my belief in children, my hopes for children, and
the signifcance of this process we call play therapy in the lives of
children. Perhaps that is why I appreciate so much the opportunities I
have to be with children in play therapy relationships, for there we are
not limited to words to communicate. As a child I was scrawny and
underdeveloped and attended a one-room, all eight grades, rural
elementary school taught by my mother. In that setting, I developed a
genuine appreciation for simple things, a propensity to strive, a love
for learning, and a sensitivity for the child, like me, who did not get
chosen for social

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-1

1

2

About Me, Garry Landreth

activities or skill games like sofball. Because of those experiences, I
am keenly aware of children who do not get noticed. I have not always
been comfortable with children, as I suspect many of you who read this
text have been, and that I regret, for I did not know experientially or
emotionally the world of children. Oh, I knew intellectually from books
and a university undergraduate course in child development, but I only
knew about children. I did not know children with my heart in a way that
touched them and their world. Children were there. I noticed them, but
it simply did not occur to me to try to establish communication with
them. Te child in me had long before been pushed into the background out
of my need to be appreciated for being mature, an adult. Being adult for
me meant being serious about life, being responsible. I know now that
was partially an attempt to overcome some feelings of inadequacy and the
fact that, throughout my undergraduate years and my frst year as a
21-year-old high school teacher, I looked much younger than my
chronological age and was ofen mistaken for one of the high school
students. Afer 4 years of teaching, a master's degree, and 2 years as a
high school counselor, I gained my frst glimpse into the child's world
as a doctoral graduate assistant in the Manzanita Counseling Center on
the University of New Mexico campus. Tere, my supervisor, who was a
sensitive and perceptive professor and play therapist, saw in me
qualities which were unknown to me and encouraged me to consider
learning to work with children in play therapy. His insight changed my
life and introduced me to the exciting, multifaceted dimensions of play
therapy through which I began to slowly discover and experience the
unfolding of the child's world. Is it possible to truly describe the
discovery of a life-changing dimension in one's life? If so, then the
experience must have been rather small or insignifcant, or both, for
most words are small and insignifcant. At this moment, I sit here
wanting to convey the genuine pleasure of making contact with children
and how that added a new depth dimension to my life, and I must admit
that I am unable to do so. How does one describe children's wonder,
excitement in experiencing life, the fresh newness with which they
approach living, and their incredible resiliency? I feel inept;

About Me, Garry Landreth

my mind has suddenly come to a screeching halt. It is no longer active.
All the circuits are open and searching. No words come to describe that
experience, although I know the feeling well. Life cannot be described;
it can only be experienced and appreciated. Descriptions can always be
evaluated, but life cannot. Life is. It unfolds and is in totality at
that moment, no more and no less. We do not look at a person and judge
or evaluate that person to have too little of life or too much. Indeed,
one of my important discoveries was that little children seldom, if
ever, evaluate the lives of other little children. Tey interact with
each other and accept the other person as enough. In those early years
of my professional development, experiencing the unconditional
acceptance of children was a profound experience. Tey did not wish I
were more or less. I experienced children accepting me for what I was at
that moment. Tey did not try to change me or make me diferent in some
way. Tey liked me the way I was. My early interactions with children in
play therapy awakened in me a deep appreciation for the unfolding
process of life as experienced by children and in turn a new
appreciation for the process of my own life, not as something to change,
or undo, or overcome, or prove the worth of, but to appreciate and live
out the excitement of the process of being the person God has created me
to be---to be me! Being more fully me means being more fully human,
accepting my strengths as well as my weaknesses, for I do have strengths
as well as weaknesses, and my mistakes are only a declaration of the
fact that I am indeed fallible---human. Tat was a signifcant discovery
for me, and yet as I look back, it was not a discovery, for that seems
to indicate an event in time. Like life, it was a process I experienced
and gradually became aware of and slowly began to appreciate. What I
would like to say to children is wonderfully expressed in Peccei's
(1979--1980) "In the name of the children": If we were to allow the
wonder of the life of a child to reach us fully and truly and to be our
teacher, we would have to say: Tank you, child of man ... for reminding
me about the joy and excitement of being human. Tank you for letting me
grow together

3

4

About Me, Garry Landreth

with you, that I can learn again of what I have forgotten about
simplicity, intensity, totality, wonder and love and learn to respect my
own life in its uniqueness. Tank you for allowing me to learn from your
tears about the pain of growing up and the suferings of the world. Tank
you for showing me that to love another person and to be with people,
big or small, is the most natural of gifs that grows like a fower when
we live in the wonder of life. (p. 10)

As I progressed in my relationships with children in play therapy, I
made a rather startling discovery about my counseling sessions with
adolescents and adults. Te counseling process seemed to be speeding up,
and I was becoming more efective. With some adult clients with whom I
had experienced being stuck, with little progress, therapeutic movement
began to develop, and a new depth of sharing and exploring of self
occurred for the client. As I examined this development, the change
could be accounted for by my having become more aware of and responsive
to the subtle cues in the client that had always been there. I
attributed this increased sensitivity to clients' subtle cues to my
increased sensitivity to children's subtle forms of communication. I
joined the Counselor Education Department at the University of North
Texas in 1966 and taught my frst course in play therapy in 1967. Play
therapy was not very well known in Texas in those days, or anywhere else
in the nation for that matter, but from that meager beginning has come
tremendous growth. What an exciting adventure that has been. Te Center
for Play Terapy, which I founded at the University of North Texas, is
now the largest play therapy training program in the world. One thing I
really enjoy about teaching play therapy is that the child part of me
can emerge in the role-playing I ofen do, and that helps to balance my
tendency to be too serious about things. I am now able to really prize
the child part of the person I am and thus to more fully appreciate and
be sensitive to those qualities in children. I have discovered that when
I am with children, the person I am is much more important than anything
I know how to do in my mind.

About Me, Garry Landreth

I am still learning about children and about myself as I experience with
them the complex simplicity of their play and the unfolding of the
vibrant colors of their emotional inner worlds.

Reference Peccei, A. (1979--1980). In the name of the children. Forum,
10, 17--18.

5

Chapter

2

The Meaning of Play

Birds fy, fsh swim, and children play.

Garry Landreth

Children must be approached and understood from a developmental
perspective. Tey are not miniature adults. Teir world is one of concrete
realities, and their experiences ofen are communicated through play. In
seeking to facilitate children's expression and exploration of their
emotional world, therapists must turn loose from their world of reality
and verbal expression and move into the conceptual--expressive world of
children. Unlike adults, whose natural medium of communication is
verbalization, the natural medium of communication for children is play
and activity.

Functions of Play Te universal importance of play to the natural
development and wholeness of children has been underscored by the UN
proclamation of play as a universal and inalienable right of childhood.
Play is the singular central activity of childhood, occurring at all
times and in all places. Children do not need to be taught how to play,

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-2

7

8

The Meaning of Play

nor must they be made to play. Play is spontaneous, usually enjoyable,
voluntary, and not goal directed. In order to make children's play more
acceptable, some adults have invented a meaning for play by defning it
as work. In their push to be successful and to hurry up the process of
growing up, many adults cannot tolerate "the waste of children's time by
playing." It is regrettable that play has been identified by writers as
children's work. This seems to be an effort to somehow make play
legitimate, intimating that play can be important only if it somehow
fits what adults consider important in their world. Just as childhood
has intrinsic value and is not merely preparation for adulthood, so play
has intrinsic value and is not dependent on what may follow for
importance. In contrast to work, which is goal focused and directed
toward accomplishment or completion of a task by accommodating the
demands of the immediate environment, play is intrinsically complete,
does not depend on external reward, and assimilates the world to match
the child's concepts, as in the case of a child using a spoon as a car.
Frank (1982) suggested play is the way children learn what no one can
teach them. It is the way they explore and orient themselves to the
actual world of space and time, of things, animals, structures, and
people. By engaging in the process of play, children learn to live in
our world of meanings and values, at the same time exploring and
experimenting and learning in their own individual ways. According to
Woltmann (1964), Te spontaneous and self-generated activities of the
child enable him to conceptualize, to structure, and to bring to
tangible levels of activity his experiences and the feelings with which
he invests them. Play, in this meaning, furnishes the child with
opportunities to "act out" situations which are disturbing, conficting,
and confusing to him. Te small child especially lacks semantic fuency
since the development of his apperceptive processes is in a state of
growing ... fux, various types of play materials seem to be ideally
suited for the expression of his feelings and attitudes. (p. 174)

The Meaning of Play

Below age 10--11, most children experience difculty sitting still for
sustained periods of time. A young child has to make a conscious efort
to sit still, and thus creative energy is consumed in focusing on a
nonproductive activity. Play therapy provides for children's need to be
physically active. In play, children discharge energy, prepare for
life's duties, achieve difcult goals, and relieve frustrations. Tey get
physical contact, discharge their needs to compete, act aggressively in
socially acceptable ways, and learn to get along with others. Play helps
children give their imaginations free rein, learn the trappings of their
culture, and develop skills (Papalia & Olds, 1986). As children play,
they are expressing the individuality of their personalities and drawing
upon inner resources that can become incorporated into their
personalities.

Children Communicate Through Play Children's play can be more fully
appreciated when recognized as their natural medium of communication.
Children express themselves more fully and more directly through
self-initiated, spontaneous play than they do verbally because they are
more comfortable with play. For children to "play out" their experiences
and feelings is the most natural dynamic and self-healing process in
which they can engage. Play is a medium of exchange, and restricting
children to verbal expression automatically places a barrier to a
therapeutic relationship by imposing limitations that in efect say to
children, "You must come up to my level of communication and communicate
with words." Te therapist's responsibility is to go to a child's level
and communicate with children through the medium with which they are
comfortable. Why must the child accommodate the adult? Te therapist is
the one who is supposed to be well adjusted, to have developed coping
skills, to know how to communicate efectively at all levels, and to
possess a developmental understanding of children. When the therapist
says, "Tell me about it," young children are placed at a disadvantage of
having to accommodate the therapist.

9

10

The Meaning of Play

A therapeutic working relationship with children is best established
through play, and the relationship is crucial to the activity we refer
to as therapy. Play provides a means through which conficts can be
resolved and feelings can be communicated. "Te toys implement the
process because they are defnitely the child's medium of expression ...
. His free play is an expression of what he wants to do ... . When he
plays freely and without direction, he is expressing a period of
independent thought and action. He is releasing the feelings and
attitudes that have been pushing to get out into the open" (Axline,
1969, p. 23). Feelings and attitudes that may be too threatening for the
child to express directly can be safely projected through self-chosen
toys. Instead of verbalizing thoughts and feelings, a child may bury in
the sand, shoot the dragon, or spank the doll representing baby brother.
Children's feelings ofen are inaccessible at a verbal level.
Developmentally they lack the cognitive, verbal facility to express what
they feel, and emotionally they are not able to focus on the intensity
of what they feel in a manner that can be expressed adequately in a
verbal exchange. We know from the research of individuals such as Piaget
(1962) that children are not developmentally able to engage fully in
abstract reasoning or thinking until approximately age 11. Words are
made up of symbols, and symbols are abstractions. No wonder, then, that
so much of what we try to communicate verbally is of an abstract nature.
Te child's world is a world of concretes and must be approached as such
if contact is to be made with the child. Play is the concrete expression
of the child and is the child's way of coping with her world. Children
live in the world of the present, yet, many of the experiences they
encounter in the adult world are future oriented and abstract. When
children re-enact these future-oriented and abstract experiences through
play, they become here-andnow concrete happenings enabling them to make
sense of the abstract on their terms. As children play out these
experiences, the unfamiliar becomes familiar. Te most normal and
competent child encounters what seem like insurmountable problems in
living. But by playing them out, in the way she chooses, she may become
able to cope with them in a

The Meaning of Play

step-by-step process. She ofen does so in symbolic ways that are hard
for even her to understand, as she is reacting to inner processes whose
origin may be buried deep in her unconscious. Tis may result in play
that makes little sense to adults at the moment or may even seem ill
advised, since we do not know the purposes it serves or how it will end.
When there is no immediate danger, it is usually best to approve of the
child's play without interfering, just because he is so engrossed in it.
Eforts to assist him in his struggles, while well intentioned, may
divert him from seeking, and eventually fnding, the solution that will
serve him best. (Bettelheim, 1987, p. 40)

Play in the Therapeutic Process Play is a voluntary, intrinsically
motivated, child-directed activity involving fexibility of choice in
determining how an item is used. No extrinsic goal exists. Te process of
play is usually enjoyed, and the end product is less important. Play
involves the child's physical, mental, and emotional self in creative
expression and can involve social interaction. Tus, when the child
plays, one can say that the total child is present. Te term play therapy
presupposes the presence of some possible activity that would be
considered play. We do not say of a child who is reading a story, "She
is playing." In keeping with this description of play, play therapy is
defned as a dynamic interpersonal relationship between a child (or
person of any age) and a therapist trained in play therapy procedures
who provides selected play materials and facilitates the development of
a safe relationship for the child (or person of any age) to fully
express and explore self (feelings, thoughts, experiences, and
behaviors) through play, the child's natural medium of communication,
for optimal growth and development. Consistent with person-centered
theory and therapy (Rogers, 1951), the essential element in this
defnition is a focus on the relationship. Te success or failure of
therapy in fact rests on the development and maintenance of the
therapeutic relationship. It is the relationship with the child that
becomes the vehicle for sustainable change and growth by the child.
Development of this

11

12

The Meaning of Play

relationship is facilitated by providing a developmentally appropriate
modality for the child to express himself as he desires. Although most
adults are able to put their feelings, frustrations, anxieties, and
personal problems into some form of verbal expression, children are not
able to express themselves fully through the medium of verbalization.
Play is to the child what verbalization is to the adult. Play provides a
developmentally responsive means for expressing thoughts and feelings,
exploring relationships, making sense of experiences, disclosing wishes,
and developing coping strategies. Given the opportunity, children will
play out their feelings and needs in a manner or process of expression
that is similar to that for adults. Te dynamics of expression and
vehicle for communication are diferent for children, but the expressions
(fear, satisfaction, anger, happiness, frustration, contentment) are
similar to those of adults. When viewed from this perspective, toys are
used like words by children, and play is their language. To restrict
therapy to verbal expression is to deny the existence of the most
graphic form of expression---activity (Figure 2.1). Te goal of some play
therapists is to "get the child to talk." When this is the case, it
usually reveals the therapist's own state of anxiety or
uncomfortableness and a need to be in control by getting the child to
talk. Play therapy is not limited to a talking cure. If there can be a
talking cure, then why not a playing cure? Play therapy ofers the
opportunity to respond to the total behavior of the child, not just the
verbal behavior. According to Smolen (1959), who analyzed improvement in
children who exhibited very little verbal interchange with the
therapist, We came to the rather obvious conclusion that the "talking
cure" was efective only insofar as it represented an adequate substitute
for an "acting cure." Tat words are not always adequate substitutes for
actions, even in the therapy of adults, is indicated by the vast amount
of literature which has grown up around the problems of the acting-out
patient in therapy. Words, then, as substitutes for and abstractions of
behavior can ofen be quite meaningful to adults who have had many years
of experience. But how much less true is this of children who, by virtue
of the maturational process alone, have not yet attained a capacity to

The Meaning of Play

FIGURE 2.1 For children to "play out" their experiences and feelings is
the most natural, dynamic, and self-healing process in which they can
engage.

utilize adequately abstractions or symbolic forms of speech or thinking.
Even though many children may have the vocabulary, they do not have the
rich background of experience and associations which would render these
words meaningful condensates of emotional experiences in terms of their
potential usefulness in therapy. (p. 878)

Children may have considerable difculty verbally describing what they
feel or how their experiences have afected them, but, if permitted, in
the presence of a caring, sensitive, and empathic adult, they will
reveal inner feelings through the toys and materials they choose, what
they do with and to the materials, and the stories they act out.
Children's play is meaningful and signifcant to them, for through their
play they extend themselves into areas they have difculty entering
verbally. Children are able to use toys to say what they cannot say, do
things they would

13

14

The Meaning of Play

FIGURE 2.2 In play therapy, children use toys to say what they cannot
say and express feelings they might be reprimanded for verbalizing.

feel uncomfortable doing, and express feelings they might be reprimanded
for verbalizing. Play is the child's symbolic language of
self-expression and can reveal (a) what the child has experienced; (b)
reactions to what was experienced; (c) feelings about what was
experienced; (d) what the child wishes, wants, or needs; and (e) the
child's perception of self. Tese are important messages the play
therapist looks for in children's play in play therapy experiences
(Figure 2.2). Play represents the child's attempt to organize her
experiences, her personal world. Trough the process of play, the child
experiences a feeling of being in control, even though in reality
circumstances may dictate otherwise. Tis attempt by the child to gain
control is explained by Frank (1982): Te child in his play relates
himself to his accumulating past by continually reorienting himself to
the present through play. He rehearses his past experiences,
assimilating them into new

The Meaning of Play

perceptions and patterns of relating ... . In this way the child is
continually discovering himself anew, revising his image of himself as
he can and must, with each alteration in his relations with the world.
Likewise, in his play the child attempts to resolve his problems and
conficts, manipulating play materials and ofen adult materials as he
tries to work through or play out his perplexities and confusions.
(p. 24)

Tere are many experiences in childhood in which children feel they have
little or no control. Play is children's way of working out balance and
control in their lives, for, as children play, they are in control of
the happenings in play, although it may not be possible to actually be
in control of the life experience represented in the play. It is the
sense or feeling of being in control in the play therapy experience,
rather than actual control, that is essential to children's emotional
development and positive mental health. An understanding of children's
play behavior provides cues to help the therapist enter more fully into
the inner emotional life of the child. Because the child's world is a
world of action and activity, play therapy provides the therapist with
an opportunity to enter the child's world. Te selection of a variety of
appropriate toys by the therapist can facilitate a wide range of
feeling-oriented expressions by children. Tus, children are not
restricted to discussing what happened; rather, they live out at the
moment of the play the past experiences and associated feelings.
Terefore, the therapist is allowed to experience and participate in the
emotional lives of children rather than relive situational happenings.
Because children thrust their total beings into their play, expressions
and feelings are experienced by children as being specifc, concrete, and
current, thus allowing the therapist to respond to children's present
activities, statements, feelings, and emotions rather than to past
circumstances. If the reason the child was referred to the therapist is
aggressive behavior, the medium of play provides the therapist an
opportunity not only to experience the aggressive behavior frsthand as
the child bangs on the Bobo or attempts to shoot the therapist with a
dart gun but also to provide the child opportunities to learn
selfcontrol by responding with appropriate therapeutic limit-setting

15

16

The Meaning of Play

procedures. Without the presence of play materials, the therapist could
only talk with the child about the aggressive behavior the child
exhibited yesterday or in the past weeks. In play therapy, whatever the
reason for referral, the therapist has the opportunity to experience and
actively relate to that problem in the immediacy of the child's
experiencing. Play allows children to make their internal world
external. Axline (1969) viewed this process as one in which the child
plays out her feelings, thus bringing them to the surface, getting them
out in the open, and facing them. Tis process was readily evident in
4-year-old Kathy's play in her play therapy experiences. At frst glance,
Kathy appeared to be just a 4-year-old playing pretend. As she became
agitated about the panties on the doll, placed a blanket over the doll,
took the doll to the doctor for a detailed examination, and expressed
the need for the doll's legs to be down, a pattern or theme began to
emerge. Although she was quite young when she was abused, it appeared
that she was working through some of those experiences.

Symbolic Play According to Piaget (1962), play bridges the gap between
concrete experience and abstract thought, and it is the symbolic
function of play that is so important. In play, the child is dealing in
a sensory-- motor way with concrete objects that are symbols for
something else the child has experienced directly or indirectly.
Sometimes the connection is quite apparent; at other times, the
connection may be rather remote. In either case, play represents the
attempt of children to organize their experiences and may be one of the
few times in children's lives when they feel more in control and thus
more secure. Te child-centered play therapy philosophy considers play
essential to children's healthy development. Play gives concrete form
and expression to children's inner worlds. Emotionally signifcant
experiences are given meaningful expression through play. A major
function of play in play therapy experiences is the changing of what may
be unmanageable in reality to manageable situations through symbolic
representation, which provides children with

The Meaning of Play

opportunities for learning to cope by engaging in self-directed
exploration. Te play therapist uses play with children because play is
children's symbolic language of self-expression. "A therapist who is too
literal minded and who cannot tolerate a child's fight into fantasy
without ordering it into adult meaningfulness might well be lost at
times" (Axline, 1969, p. 127). Symbolic play allows children to freely
assimilate their experiences without environmental constraints.
Assimilation, although usually outside the child's awareness,
facilitates substantive change. When children are playing in the play
therapy experience, they are seldom if ever aware of the symbolic
representation in their play. It is this dimension of distancing from
the event that makes the play experience safe for children. A child does
not consciously think "I'm afraid of my father who is abusing me and
this father doll too closely represents my father; so I will pretend the
lion is my father and I am the lion cub, and no one will know what I am
doing." In play, children can safely express their experiences and
feelings because they are not cognitively aware that they are
symbolically playing out a threatening experience. By acting out a
frightening or traumatic experience or situation symbolically, and by
returning to that happening again and again through play and perhaps
changing or reversing the outcome in the play activity, children
experience being in control of the experience and move toward an inner
resolution and then are better able to cope with or adjust to the
problem. Tat children unconsciously express happenings, experiences,
concerns, and problems in their play can readily be seen in my play
therapy sessions with 6-year-old Brenda, who had to wear a catheter as a
result of complications following surgery. She experienced considerable
difculty trying to empty the bag appropriately at school and make the
necessary connections to put it back in place. Te connections were
always leaking and that caused her a great deal of frustration and
embarrassment. In her play therapy sessions, she repeatedly played out a
story using the dollhouse and depicting a problem with a leaky sink or
some related plumbing problem. With great exasperation, she would grab
the phone, call a plumber, and say, "Te dumb sink is leaking again! Come
fx

17

18

The Meaning of Play

this stupid thing again." She stopped acting out these scenes the week
she learned to attach the catheter bag correctly (Figure 2.3). Tere are
times, though, when children are aware of the literal message in their
play, as in the case of showing the therapist something they have done.
Seven-year-old Scott grabbed Bobo (the bop bag) around the neck in a
hammer lock and yelled to me, "I'm gonna show you what I did to Roger on
the playground today!" Te following conceptual model of the role of play
and the therapeutic dimensions of change for a child in child-centered
play therapy will perhaps provide a better understanding of the
facilitative process that occurs for a child in a play therapy
experience. Children live in the world of the present/concrete, yet many
of the experiences they encounter in the larger world are future
oriented and abstract. Te child's natural inclination in play therapy is
to play out these abstract happenings, that which is not understood, in
an efort to make meaning out of that which is not understood. When
children re-enact these future-oriented and

FIGURE 2.3 Feelings and attitudes that may be too threatening for a
child to express directly can be safely projected through self-chosen
toys.

The Meaning of Play

abstract experiences through play, they become here-and-now concrete
happenings enabling them to make sense of the abstract on their terms.
As children play out these experiences, the unfamiliar becomes familiar.

Play is always a current concrete experience. Terefore, as the child
plays out the abstract experience, the child gains some control over
that experience. Tus, play bridges the gap between that which is not
understood, abstract, and that which is concrete, the present. As a
child plays, she is organizing her experiences, her world, to be the way
she wants it to be. Terefore, for this time of selfdirected play, the
child experiences being in control of her life, although reality outside
the playroom dictates otherwise. As the child plays, she experiences a
process of reorienting self to the present because play is a concrete,
present-oriented experience. Tus, play therapy becomes a living
relationship of change in which the play therapist is a dynamic part of
the relationship as the child freely organizes her personal world to be
the way she wants it to be, incorporating these changes in
understanding. Tis is a process in which the child is continually
discovering self anew. Tis could be described as a new perception of
self. A vivid reminder of diferences in the way children and adults
express their feelings and reactions occurred in the days and weeks
following the terrorist attack on the World Trade Center buildings in
New York on September 11, 2001. Adults told and retold their experience
of shock and terror. Children who sufered through the same experience
almost never talked about it. Teir fearful reactions were expressed
through their play. Children built towers out of blocks and crashed
airplanes into them. Buildings burned and crashed to the ground, sirens
wailed, people were killed and injured, and ambulances took them to the
hospital. A 3-year-old child in play therapy repeatedly crashed a
helicopter into the wall, watched it fall to the foor, and said
vehemently, "I hate you helicopter! I hate you helicopter!"

19

20

The Meaning of Play

Stages in the Play Therapy Process Process is movement in the play
therapy relationship. It is not a goal to be achieved or an activity to
be accomplished or completed. Te play therapy process is a relationship
in which the play therapist and a child build and develop their
relationship. Play therapy is a process rather than an event. Stages in
the play therapy process are the result of shared interactions between
the therapist and the child, experienced in the nonevaluative, freeing
environment of the playroom, facilitated by the genuine caring for and
prizing of the child as communicated by the total person of the
therapist. In this unique living relationship, in which the unique
nature and individuality of the child are accepted and appreciated, the
child experiences permission to expand the horizons of himself in
keeping with the degree of acceptance inwardly felt and communicated by
the therapist. Tis experiencing and expanding of the possibilities of
self ofen are manifested in identifable stages of change in the
developing play therapy process. In Moustakas' (1955a) analysis of case
studies of emotionally disturbed children in play therapy, he observed
that children progress through fve identifable stages in the therapeutic
process of moving toward self-awareness. Initially difuse negative
feelings are expressed everywhere in the child's play, as in the case of
a child who cannot tolerate any kind of mess and is overly concerned
with cleanliness and neatness. Sometimes the reaction may be difuse
hostility expressed toward the room, toys, and therapist. Tere may also
be accompanying high levels of anxiety, as in the case of a child who
just stands in the middle of the playroom, unable to initiate any
activity. Following these expressions, in the second stage the child
usually expresses ambivalent feelings that are generally anxious or
hostile. Moustakas described a child who picked up the puppets one by
one, banged each puppet on the table with exclamations of disgust, threw
each puppet on the foor, and said, "I don't like any of them, but I like
this one" as she picked up the mouse puppet. She then quickly added, "I
don't like this one either," as she squeezed the mouse's head. Te third
stage is characterized by more focused direct negative feelings
expressed toward parents, siblings, and other

The Meaning of Play

persons in the child's life. Tese feelings or attitudes are ofen evident
in the child's symbolic play, as in the case of a child who acted out
strong negative reactions toward her parents and new baby by lining up
the mother, father, and baby family doll fgures, and then announced,
"Tey're robbers, and I'm going to shoot them," which she did, one at a
time. In the fourth stage, ambivalent feelings are expressed again in
the child's play but in the form of positive and negative feelings and
attitudes expressed toward parents, siblings, and other persons in the
child's life. Six-year-old David hits and kicks the bop bag with great
vigor, yelling, "I'm gonna beat you up. Nobody likes you!" Later he gets
the doctor kit, doctors the bop bag, and says, "I'll bet that makes you
feel better." Te ffh stage is characterized by clear, distinct,
separate, usually realistic positive and negative attitudes, with
positive attitudes predominating in the child's play (Moustakas, 1955a,
p. 84). Tis fnal stage is a direct result of an understanding,
accepting, and caring relationship established by the therapist in which
the child feels safe enough to be more fully the person the child is
capable of becoming. It is this quality of being that is more important
than anything the therapist does. In an accepting and safe environment
such as that aforded the child in play therapy, each child's uniqueness
is expressed more freely and thus more completely. As this unique self
is appreciated and accepted by the therapist, the child internalizes
that acceptance and begins to accept and appreciate his own uniqueness,
thus beginning the process of self-knowledge. Tis self-knowledge is then
expressed through the facilitative process of play. In one of the most
comprehensive studies of the process of play therapy, Hendricks (1971)
reported a descriptive analysis of the process of child-centered play
therapy. She found that children's play behavior and emotional
expression followed patterns across sessions: Sessions 1 through 4: At
this stage, children expressed curiosity; engaged in exploratory,
noncommittal, and creative play; made simple descriptive and informative
comments; and exhibited both happiness and anxiety.

21

22

The Meaning of Play

Sessions 5 through 8: Here children continued exploratory, noncommittal,
and creative play. Generalized aggressive play increased, expressions of
happiness and anxiety continued, and spontaneous reactions were evident.
Sessions 9 through 12: Exploratory, noncommittal, and aggressive play
decreased; relationship play increased; creative play and happiness were
predominant; nonverbal checking with the therapist increased; and more
information about family and self was given. Sessions 13 through 16:
Creative and relationship play predominated; specifc aggressive play
increased; and expressions of happiness, bewilderment, disgust, and
disbelief increased. Sessions 17 through 20: Dramatic play and role play
predominated, specifc aggressive statements continued, and increased
relationship building with the therapist occurred. Expression of
happiness was the predominant emotion, and children continued to ofer
information about self and family. Sessions 21 through 24: Relationship
play and dramatic and role play predominated, and incidental play
increased. A second major comprehensive study of the child-centered play
therapy process was completed by Withee (1975). She found that during
the frst three sessions, children gave the most verbal verifcation of
play therapists' refections of their behaviors; exhibited the highest
levels of anxiety; and engaged in verbal, nonverbal, and play
exploratory activities. During sessions 4 through 6, curiosity and
exploration dropped of and aggressive play and verbal sound efects
reached their peaks. During sessions 7 through 9, aggressive play
dropped to the lowest point, and creative play, expressions of
happiness, and verbal information given about home, school, and other
aspects of their lives were at their highest. During sessions 10 through
12, relationship play reached its highest point, and noncommittal play
sank to its lowest level. In sessions 13 through 15, noncommittal play
and nonverbal expressions of anger peaked, anxiety rose over its
previous level, and verbal relationship interactions and attempts to
direct the therapist

The Meaning of Play

were at their highest levels. Diferences also were found between boys
and girls. Boys expressed more anger, made more aggressive statements,
engaged in more aggressive play, and made more sound efects. Girls
exhibited more creative and relationship play, happiness, anxiety,
verbal verifcation of therapist responses, and verbalizations of
positive and negative thoughts. Tese studies illustrate that discernible
stages are evident in the process of children's play in the therapeutic
relationship established in the playroom. As the play therapy process
develops, children begin to express feelings more directly and
realistically and with more focus and specifcity. Children initially
engage in exploratory, noncommittal, and creative play. In the second
stage, children exhibit more aggressive play and verbalizations about
family and self. In latter sessions, dramatic play and a relationship
with the therapist become important. Anxiety, frustration, and anger are
expressed.

Play of Adjusted and Maladjusted Children Te play of adjusted and
maladjusted children, as described by Moustakas (1955b), difers in
several areas. Adjusted children are conversational and prone to discuss
their world as it exists for them, whereas some maladjusted children may
remain completely silent in their frst few play sessions, speaking only
with great difculty to the therapist. Other maladjusted children may
keep up a rapid-fre fow of questions and conversations during the frst
sessions. Te initial reactions of maladjusted children are cautious and
deliberate. Adjusted children are free and spontaneous in their play.
Adjusted children will examine the whole play setting and use a large
variety of play materials, in contrast to maladjusted children, who use
a few toys and play in a small area. Maladjusted children ofen want to
be told what to do and what not to do. Adjusted children use various
strategies to discover their responsibilities and limitations in the
therapeutic relationship. When bothered or annoyed, adjusted children
use a concrete way to bring out their problem. Maladjusted children are
more

23

24

The Meaning of Play

likely to express their feelings symbolically with paints, clay, sand,
or water. Maladjusted children ofen are aggressive and want to destroy
the play materials and sometimes the therapist. Aggression also is seen
in adjusted children, but it is clearly expressed without massive
destruction, and responsibility is accepted for the expression. Adjusted
children are not so serious and intense in their feelings about
themselves, the therapist, or their play as are maladjusted children.
Moustakas (1955b) concluded from his experiences with adjusted and
maladjusted children in play therapy that all children, irrespective of
the quality of their adjustment, express similar types of negative
attitudes. Te diference between welladjusted and maladjusted children
lies not primarily in the type of negative attitudes they demonstrate,
but rather in the quantity and intensity of such attitudes. Adjusted
children express negative attitudes less ofen and with more focus and
direction. Maladjusted children express negative attitudes frequently
and intensely, with less focus and direction. Howe and Silvern (1981)
identifed diferences in the play therapy behaviors of aggressive,
withdrawn, and well-adjusted children. Aggressive children presented
frequent play disruptions, conficted play, self-disclosing statements,
high levels of fantasy play, and aggressive behavior toward the
therapist and toys. Withdrawn boys were identifed by their regression in
response to anxiety, bizarre play, rejection of the therapist's
intervention, and dysphoric content in play. Well-adjusted children
exhibited less emotional discomfort, less social inadequacy, and less
fantasy play. Withdrawn girls could not be diferentiated from
welladjusted girls. Perry (1988) studied the play behaviors of adjusted
and maladjusted children in play therapy and found that maladjusted
children expressed signifcantly more dysphoric feelings, confictual
themes, play disruptions, and negative self-disclosing statements than
did adjusted children. Maladjusted children also spent a larger portion
of their playtime feeling angry, sad, fearful, unhappy, and anxious than
did adjusted children. Maladjusted children talked and played out their
problems and conficts during more of the play session than did adjusted
children. No signifcant diferences

The Meaning of Play

existed between adjusted and maladjusted children in the area of social
inadequacy play or the use of fantasy play. Te initial-session play
therapy behaviors of maladjusted and adjusted children were compared by
Oe (1989) to investigate the value of children's play for diagnostic
purposes. Maladjusted children expressed signifcantly more nonacceptance
of environment play behaviors than adjusted children. Although Oe found
there were no signifcant diferences in the frequency of initial-session
play behaviors of maladjusted children and adjusted children,
maladjusted children expressed signifcantly more intensity in dramatic
and role play behaviors than adjusted children in the playroom.
Maladjusted girls exhibited dramatic or role behaviors more ofen and
more intensely than maladjusted boys. Te play therapist is cautioned
about unrestrained inferences as to the meaning of children's play.
Neither the toys the child uses nor the manner in which the child plays
with the toys is an absolute indication of an emotional problem area.
Environmental factors, recent happenings, and economic deprivation may
be structuring factors.

References Axline, V. (1969). Play therapy. Houghton Mifin. Bettelheim,
B. (1987). Te importance of play. Atlantic Monthly, 3, 35--46. Frank, L.
(1982). Play in personality development. In G. Landreth (Ed.), Play
therapy: Dynamics of the process of counseling with children
(pp. 19--32). Charles C. Tomas. Hendricks, S. (1971). A descriptive
analysis of the process of client-centered play therapy (Doctoral
dissertation, North Texas State University, Denton). Dissertation
Abstracts International, 32, 36V89A. Howe, P., & Silvern, L. (1981).
Behavioral observation during play therapy: Preliminary development of a
research instrument. Journal of Personality Assessment, 45, 168--182.
Moustakas, C. (1955a). Emotional adjustment and the play therapy
process. Journal of Genetic Psychology, 86, 79--99. Moustakas, C.
(1955b). Te frequency and intensity of negative attitudes expressed in
play therapy: A comparison of well adjusted and disturbed children.
Journal of Genetic Psychology, 86, 309--324.

25

26

The Meaning of Play

Oe, E. (1989). Comparison of initial session play therapy behaviors of
maladjusted and adjusted children (Doctoral dissertation, University of
North Texas, Denton). Papalia, D., & Olds, S. (1986). Human development.
McGraw-Hill. Perry, L. (1988). Play therapy behavior of maladjusted and
adjusted children (Doctoral dissertation, North Texas State University,
Denton). Piaget, J. (1962). Play, dreams, and imitation in childhood.
Routledge. Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy. Houghton Mifin.
Smolen, E. (1959). Nonverbal aspects of therapy with children. American
Journal of Psychotherapy, 13, 872--881. Withee, K. (1975). A descriptive
analysis of the process of play therapy (Doctoral dissertation, North
Texas State University, Denton). Dissertation Abstracts International,
36, 6406B. Woltmann, A. (1964). Concepts of play therapy techniques. In
M. Haworth (Ed.), Child psychotherapy: Practice and theory (pp. 20--32).
Basic Books.

Chapter

3

History and Development of Play Therapy Play has long been recognized as
occupying a signifcant place in the lives of children. As early as the
18th century, Rousseau (1762/1930) wrote about the importance of
observing play to learn about children and to understand them. In Emile,
he expressed his ideas on the training and education of children and
observed that they are not tiny adults. An interesting point to note is
that 260 years later, we are still struggling against this concept of
children. Although Rousseau's comments on the play and games of children
were more in accord with educative purposes than with the therapeutic
uses of play, his writings reveal a sensitive understanding of the world
of children. "Hold childhood in reverence, and do not be in any hurry to
judge it for good or ill ... . Give nature time to work before you take
over her business, lest you interfere with her dealings ... . Childhood
is the sleep of reason" (Rousseau, 1762/1930, p. 71). As early as 1903,
Froebel emphasized the symbolic components of play. He proposed that
play has a defnite conscious and unconscious purpose regardless of the
nature of the play, and therefore can be looked to for meaning. "Play is
the highest development in childhood, for it alone is the free
expression of what is in the child's soul ... . Children's play is not
mere sport. It is full of meaning and import" (Froebel, 1903, p. 22).

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-3

27

28

History and Development of Play Therapy

Te frst published case describing the therapeutic use of play and a
psychological approach to working with a child was Sigmund Freud's
report in 1909 of the classic case of "Little Hans," a 5-year-old boy
with a phobia. Freud (1909/1955) saw Hans only one time for a brief
visit and conducted the treatment by advising Hans' father of ways to
respond with suggestions based on the father's notes about Hans' play.
"Little Hans" is the frst case of record in which a child's difculty was
attributed to emotional causes. Today, emotional factors are so readily
accepted that it is perhaps difcult to appreciate the magnitude of what
was then a new concept of psychological disturbance in children. Reisman
(1966) pointed out that at the dawning of the 20th century,
professionals generally believed childhood disorders were the result of
defciencies in the child's education and training. Kanner (1957)
concluded from his research that when the 20th century began, no
procedure or approach was being used with children that could in any
sense be regarded as child psychiatry. Play therapy developed from
eforts to apply psychoanalytic therapy to children. Considering how
little was known about children in the early 1900s, one may be a bit
surprised to realize that the formal and ofen highly structured approach
utilized in adult analysis to obtain material for interpretation,
primarily through the process of recall and recollections of the client,
was so quickly recognized as being inadequate and inappropriate for
child analysis.

Psychoanalytic Play Therapy Following Freud's work with Hans, Hermine
Hug-Hellmuth (1921) in the early 1900s seems to have been one of the
frst therapists to emphasize play as essential in child analysis and to
provide children in therapy with play materials to express themselves.
Although her work predates that of Anna Freud and Melanie Klein, she did
not formulate a specifc therapeutic approach. She did, however, call
attention to the difculty of applying methods of adult therapy to
children. It seems that the same problem we face now existed then---that
of attempting to apply established methods with adults to children and
discovering that child therapy is distinct and diferent from adult
therapy. In these early days,

History and Development of Play Therapy

analysts found that children were unable to describe their anxieties
verbally as adults did. Also, unlike adults, children seemed not the
least bit interested in exploring their past or discussing their
developmental stages, and many times refused to attempt to free
associate. Consequently, most therapists who worked with children in the
early 1900s resorted to indirect therapy contact by collecting
observations of children. In 1919, Melanie Klein (1955) began to employ
the "technique" of play as a means of analyzing children under 6 years
of age. She assumed that a child's play was as motivationally determined
as the free association of adults. Analysis was carried out by
substituting play for verbalized free association. Tus, play therapy
provided direct access to the child's unconscious. She reported that
additional material was exhibited in the child's play as a result of her
interpretations. During this same period, Anna Freud (1946, 1965) began
to use play as a way to encourage the child to form an alliance with
her. Unlike Klein, Anna Freud emphasized the importance of developing
the emotional relationship between the child and the therapist before
interpreting the unconscious motivation behind the child's drawings and
play. Both Klein and Freud stressed the importance of uncovering the
past and strengthening the ego. Both also believed play to be the medium
through which children express themselves most freely. Melanie Klein
(1955) used play as a way to encourage children to express fantasies,
anxieties, and defenses, which she then interpreted. A major diference
between Melanie Klein and Anna Freud was Klein's heavy reliance on
interpretation of preconscious and unconscious meanings of children's
play. She saw symbolic meaning, especially sexual, in almost every play
activity. She believed exploration of the unconscious was the main task
of therapy and that this could best be achieved through analysis of the
child's transference relationship with the therapist. Klein stressed
taking the desires and anxieties in the therapist--child relationship
back to where they originated---to infancy---and in relation to the frst
love objects---the parents, especially the mother. She believed that
reexperiencing early emotions and fantasies and understanding them,
gaining insight through the therapist's interpretations, diminished the
child's anxieties.

29

30

History and Development of Play Therapy

Klein (1955) explained the signifcance of interpretation by describing a
play therapy episode with a child who surrounded a few toy fgures with
bricks: I would conclude and interpret that the child shows a room and
that the fgures symbolize people. Such an interpretation afects a frst
contact with the child's unconscious. For through the interpretation, he
comes to realize that the toys stand in his mind for people and
therefore that the feelings he expresses toward the toys relate to
people; also, that preceding the interpretation he had not been aware of
this. He is beginning to gain insight into the fact that one part of his
mind is unknown to him, in other words, that the unconscious exists.
Moreover, it becomes clearer to him what the analyst is doing with him.
(p. 225)

Te toys and materials Klein used were primarily simple, small,
unstructured, and nonmechanical: little wooden men and women, animals,
cars, houses, balls, marbles, paper, scissors, clay, paints, glue, and
pencils. She kept each child's playthings locked in a drawer, which
represented the private and intimate relationship between child and
therapist. Klein did not allow physical attacks on herself, but she
provided opportunities for children to act out aggressive fantasies in
other ways, including verbal attacks on her. She stated that she was
usually able to interpret children's deeper motives in time to keep the
situation under control. Anna Freud (1946, 1965) used children's play
primarily as a means for facilitating children's positive emotional
attachment to the therapist, as a way to gain access to the child's
inner life. A major objective was to infuence the child to like her.
Direct interpretation of play was minimal, and she cautioned against
viewing everything in the play situation as symbolic. She believed some
play had little emotional value, because it was merely conscious
repetitions of recent experiences. Freud believed that children do not
form a transference neurosis. She delayed ofering direct interpretations
to children concerning the real meaning of their play until she had
gained extensive knowledge from play observations and interviews with
parents.

History and Development of Play Therapy

Because free association as developed by Sigmund Freud was cognitive in
nature, Anna Freud modifed the structure by involving the child in a
feeling-level experience. She encouraged the child to verbalize
daydreams or fantasies, and when the child had difculty discussing
feelings and attitudes, she encouraged the child to sit quietly and "see
pictures." By using this technique, the child learned to verbalize his
innermost thoughts and, using the interpretations of the analyst, to
discover the meaning of these thoughts. Tus, the child gained insight
into his unconscious. As the relationship with the therapist developed,
the emphasis of the sessions was shifed from play to more verbal
interactions. Klein (1955) visited the United States in 1929 and later
reported that play, as a part of the therapeutic procedure with
children, was little used here. Te works of Hermine Hug-Hellmuth, Anna
Freud, and Melanie Klein were revolutionary in changing attitudes about
children and their problems.

Release Play Therapy Te second major development in formulating play
therapy occurred in the 1930s with the work of David Levy (1938) in
developing release therapy, a structured play therapy approach for
children who had experienced a specifc stressful/anxiety-provoking
situation. Levy felt there was no need for interpretation and based his
approach primarily on a belief in the abreactive efect of play. In this
approach, the major role of the therapist is to be a shifer of scenes,
to recreate through selected toys the experience that precipitated the
child's anxiety reaction. Te child is permitted to engage in free play
to gain familiarity with the room and the therapist, and then the
therapist uses play materials to introduce the stress-producing
situation when he feels it is appropriate. Te reenactment of the
traumatic event allows the child to release the pain and tension it
caused. At other times, the child may be allowed to select her own free
play. In this process of "playing out" or reenacting the experience, the
child is in control of the play and thus moves out of the passive role
of having been "done to" and into an active role of being the "doer." As
the child plays, the therapist refects the verbal and nonverbal feelings
expressed.

31

32

History and Development of Play Therapy

Tree forms of activities of release therapy occur in the playroom: 1.
Release of aggressive behavior in throwing objects or bursting balloons
or release of infantile pleasures in sucking a nursing bottle 2. Release
of feelings in standardized situations such as stimulating feelings of
sibling rivalry by presenting a baby doll at a mother's breast 3.
Release of feelings by recreating in play a particular stressful
experience in a child's life Te following case described by Levy (1939)
presents the essence of the release therapy approach: A girl, aged two
years, was referred because of night terrors, onset two days before
referral. She awoke frightened and screamed that there was a fsh in her
bed ... . Te night terror was related to a visit to a fsh market on that
very day. Te fsh merchant ... lifed her up to see the fsh. A second
complaint was stammering, which had its onset fve months before
referral, although speech had developed normally up to that time ... .
Tere were ten play sessions. A fsh made of clay was introduced in the
second session. To the question, why was the doll afraid of the fsh, the
answer was that the fsh would bite, and the fsh would go "in here,"
pointing to her eye, her ears, and her vagina. A few days before the
night terror the patient had inquired about sex diferences afer seeing
the father naked. Other than the introduction of the fsh in various
parts of the play sessions, the method was chiefy to facilitate her own
type of play ... . For example, she saw fnger paint and wanted to play
with it. I showed her how, but she wouldn't touch it, nor let me put a
dot of paint on her hand ... . By playing with it myself and getting her
to handle it gradually, she got to prefer it... Following her frst
appointment there was no change in behavior ... . Fear of the fsh lef
afer the third or fourth session and the stammering showed improvement
afer the sixth, disappearing two weeks before the last session. A
follow-up was made seven months later. Improvement was maintained.
(p. 220)

History and Development of Play Therapy

Gove Hambidge (1955) extended the work of Levy under the title
"Structured Play Terapy" and was more direct in introducing events.
Following the establishment of a therapeutic relationship, the format
consisted of directly recreating the anxiety-producing situation,
playing out the situation, and then allowing the child free play to
recover from the intrusive procedure.

Relationship Play Therapy Te emergence of the work of Jesse Taf (1933)
and Frederick Allen (1934), referred to as relationship therapy,
constituted the third signifcant development in play therapy. Te
philosophical basis for relationship play therapy evolved from the work
of Otto Rank (1936), who deemphasized the importance of past history and
the unconscious and stressed the development of the therapist--client
relationship as crucial, with a consistent focus on the present, the
here and now. In relationship play therapy, the primary emphasis is
placed on the curative power of the emotional relationship between the
therapist and the child. As Allen (1934) stated, I am interested in
creating a natural relation in which the patient can acquire a more
adequate acceptance of himself, a clear conception of what he can do and
feel in relation to the world in which he continues to live ... . I am
not afraid to let the patient feel that I am interested in him as a
person. (p. 198)

No efort is made to explain or interpret past experiences. Present
feelings and reactions are the primary focus of attention, and this
approach reportedly led to considerable reduction in the length of the
therapy. Allen and Taf stressed regarding children as persons of inner
strength with the capacity to alter their behaviors constructively.
Terefore, children were given freedom to choose to play or not to play
and to direct their own activity. Te hypothesis was that children
gradually come to realize that they are separate persons with their own
strivings and that they can exist in a relationship with other persons
with their own qualities. In this approach, the child has to assume
responsibility in the

33

34

History and Development of Play Therapy

growth process, and the therapist concentrates on those difculties that
concern the child, rather than on those concerning the therapist.

Nondirective/Child-Centered Play Therapy Te work of the relationship
therapists was studied and expanded by Carl Rogers (1942), who extended
these concepts and developed nondirective therapy, later referred to as
client-centered therapy (Rogers, 1951) and today as person-centered
therapy. Te fourth major development in play therapy was the work of
Virginia Axline (1947), a student and later colleague of Carl Rogers.
She efectively operationalized the philosophy and principles of Rogers'
nondirective/person-centered theory (i.e., belief in the individual's
natural strivings for growth and the individual's capacity for
self-direction) for application in relationships with children in play
therapy. Nondirective play therapy makes no efort to control or change
the child and is based on the theory that the child's behavior is at all
times caused by the drive for complete self-realization. Te objectives
of nondirective play therapy are self-awareness and self-direction by
the child. Te therapist has a well-stocked playroom, and the child has
the freedom to play as she chooses or to remain silent. Te therapist
actively refects the child's thoughts and feelings, believing that when
a child's feelings are expressed, identifed, and accepted, the child can
accept them and then is free to deal with these feelings. In summarizing
her concept of play therapy, Axline (1950) stated, "A play experience is
therapeutic because it provides a secure relationship between the child
and the adult, so that the child has the freedom and room to state
himself in his own terms, exactly as he is at that moment in his own way
and in his own time" (p. 68). Tis approach was later referred to as
client-centered play therapy and then as child-centered play therapy.
Childcentered play therapy, an evidence-based approach, is the most
widely researched and the approach most used by play therapy
practitioners (Smith et al., 2022).

History and Development of Play Therapy

Play Therapy in Elementary Schools Te establishment of guidance and
counseling programs in elementary schools in the 1960s opened the door
to the ffh major development in play therapy. Until the 1960s, play
therapy was largely the domain of the private practitioner with a focus
on treatment of maladjusted children, and the literature related to play
therapy refected this condition. However, with the addition of
counselors to elementary schools, counselor educators such as Alexander
(1964); Nelson (1966); Muro (1968); Landreth et al., (1969); Waterland
(1970), Myrick and Holdin (1971); and Landreth (1972) were quick to
describe their play therapy experiences in the literature. Tese authors
encouraged the use of play therapy in school settings to meet a broad
range of the developmental needs of all children, not just the
maladjusted. Tis trend toward the preventive role of play therapy has
continued. I taught my frst play therapy course at the University of
North Texas in 1968, and several elementary school counselors enrolled
in that course. Dimick and Huf (1970) suggested that until children
reach a level of facility and sophistication with verbal communication
that allows them to express themselves fully and efectively to others,
the use of play media is mandatory if signifcant communication is to
take place between child and counselor. Tey proposed that the main
question is not whether the elementary school counselor, school
psychologist, or social worker should use play therapy, but rather how
play therapy should be used in elementary schools. Te ultimate objective
of elementary schools is to assist the intellectual, emotional,
physical, and social development of children by providing adequate
learning opportunities. Terefore, a major objective of using play
therapy with children in an elementary school setting is to help
children get ready to proft from the learning experiences ofered.
Children cannot be made to learn. Even the most efective teachers cannot
teach children who are not yet ready to learn. Play therapy, then, is an
adjunct to the learning environment, an experience that helps children
maximize their opportunities to learn.

35

36

History and Development of Play Therapy

In recent years, growth in the number of elementary school counselors
who utilize play therapy has been impressive and accounts for a large
percentage of the total number of mental health professionals who use
play therapy. Many university counselor education programs now require
play therapy training in their school counseling tracks.

Association for Play Therapy Te establishment of the Association for
Play Terapy (APT) in 1982 constitutes the sixth major development in the
progressive growth of the feld of play therapy. Te organization of APT
was the brainchild of Charles Schaefer and Kevin O'Connor, who
envisioned an international society dedicated to the advancement of play
therapy. Te APT is interdisciplinary and eclectic in orientation. APT
publishes the Play TerapyTM Magazine and the International Journal of
Play Terapy and sponsors the Annual Association for Play Terapy
International Conference each year in October in a diferent region of
the United States. APT is a growing organization and currently has 7,500
members. Tere are 43 state branches of APT. APT encourages membership
from mental health professionals interested in working with children.
Contact www.info@a4pt.org for information about membership.

Center for Play Therapy Te Center for Play Terapy established on the
University of North Texas campus in 1973 is the seventh major
development in the feld of play therapy. Te center serves as a
clearinghouse for play therapy literature, training, and research as
well as a site for ongoing play therapy training and research. Te center
has eight fully equipped play therapy rooms and three activity therapy
rooms, each with video equipment and one-way mirrors. Te Center for Play
Terapy in the Department of Counseling, Development, and Higher
Education ofers eight master's and doctoral-level courses in play
therapy, including supervised practicum and internship experiences each
semester; provides a 2-week Summer Play Terapy Institute, including a
4-day intensive supervised

History and Development of Play Therapy

practicum in June; ofers certifcation training in Child-Centered Play
Terapy and Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT); has produced a video
series of clinical play therapy sessions featuring distinguished
contributors to play therapy; and provides scholarships for master's
degree and doctoral degree study. Te Center for Play Terapy is
recognized as the largest play therapy training program in the world,
Scholars, researchers, graduate students, and university professors from
numerous countries have studied in the center or used the facilities for
their university research sabbatical. Contact: Email cpt@unt.edu ----
website cpt.unt.edu ---- phone (940) 565-3864

University Training Te eighth major development in the feld of play
therapy has been the increasing number of universities ofering courses
and supervised experience in play therapy in response to the heightened
interest in play therapy training by professionals in the feld and
preprofessionals in training. According to the Association for Play
Terapy data, in 2022, at least 173 universities in the United States are
ofering play therapy training in the form of one or more full-semester
courses. In 1989, only 33 universities ofered a course in play therapy.
Te APT provides an online directory of universities ofering play therapy
training at Find University Play Terapy Directory on their Web site.

Filial Therapy Te nature of parent--child relationships is of primary
importance to the present and future mental health of children.
Terefore, clearly, if the mental health of future adult populations is
to be signifcantly impacted in positive ways, greater efort must be made
to substantially improve the mental health of all children. Te skills of
professionals in the mental health professions must be given away
through training to parents, who are in the best position to profoundly
impact the lives of future adults. Filial

37

38

History and Development of Play Therapy

therapy, the training of parents to be therapeutic agents in their
children's lives, was a revolutionary concept developed by Bernard and
Louise Guerney, a husband-and-wife team, in the 1960s. Filial therapy is
the ninth major development in the feld of play therapy. When frst
proposed by the Guerneys, this concept was considered radical and
unthinkable by many professionals in the mental health feld. Te flial
therapy model, as conceived by the Guerneys, trains parents in basic
child-centered play therapy skills to become the therapeutic agent in
their children's lives by conducting weekly special play times in their
own homes. Perhaps a more complete picture of flial therapy could be
achieved by presenting a defnition of flial therapy. Filial therapy is
defned as a unique approach used by professionals trained in play
therapy to train parents to be therapeutic agents with their own
children through a format of didactic instruction, demonstration play
sessions, required at-home laboratory play sessions, and supervision in
a supportive atmosphere. Parents are taught basic child-centered play
therapy principles and skills, including refective listening,
recognizing and responding to children's feelings, therapeutic limit
setting, building children's self-esteem, and structuring required
weekly play sessions with their children using a special kit of selected
toys. Parents learn how to create a nonjudgmental, understanding, and
accepting environment that enhances the parent--child relationship, thus
facilitating personal growth and change for both child and parent.
(Landreth & Bratton, 2020, p. 10)

Building on the work of the Guerneys, I developed a more condensed,
10-session parent training format, Child Parent Relationship Terapy
(CPRT) (Landreth, 1991), based on my experience that time and fnancial
constraints ofen hindered parents' participation in longer training
periods. Landreth and Bratton (2006, 2020) formalized the 10-session
format in a text, Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT): A 10-Session
Filial Terapy Model. Te CPRT protocol has been manualized (Bratton,
Landreth, Kellam, & Blackard, 2006). Bratton and Landreth (2020)
published a second edition of the Child-Parent Relationship

History and Development of Play Therapy

Terapy Treatment Manual, allowing for replication of the model. Tis
manualized treatment approach is a frst in the feld of play therapy.
Filial therapy is an encouraging development in the mental health feld.
Terapeutic skills should be shared with parents. If what the therapist
does with children in the playroom is helpful to children, those same
behaviors exhibited by parents can be helpful to children's overall
growth and development.

Adult Play Therapy Tere is a developing interest in the use of play
therapy with adults in therapy settings. In these play sessions, the
adult becomes absorbed in the activity of play itself and thus engages
in a kind of awareness that is not possible through mere verbalization.
Trough play, the adult has a conversation with self that is a very
personal experience because direct involvement is called for. Te
dollhouse, sandbox, dart gun, paints, Bobo, and other typical play
therapy toys can be facilitative materials for adults. Play therapy
sessions with elderly residents in nursing homes are described in my
book Innovations in Play Terapy: Issues, Process, and Special
Populations (2001) as being highly efective. Some therapists have
reported exciting results from allowing adult clients to choose toys
freely in the playroom for use as they talk about their concerns. Other
therapists conduct group therapy sessions in the playroom and ask the
adult members to choose objects that represent symbols for themselves.
Tese objects then become the points of focus for sharing by the member
and for feedback from other members.

Play Therapy Procedures in Family Therapy Family therapists are
beginning to recognize the value of bringing toys and art materials to
their sessions to facilitate involvement and expressions of children and
parents. Children below the age of 9 or 10 do not possess the verbal
facility necessary to participate efectively in family interviews.
Without the inclusion of play media, many family therapy sessions
consist primarily of verbal interactions between the participating
adults, with the

39

40

History and Development of Play Therapy

children either fulflling the role of spectator or wandering aimlessly
around the room in actuality or in their thoughts. Handing a child the
family doll fgures and asking him to show what happens at home is far
more efective than asking the child to verbally describe or confrm what
an interaction is like at home. At other times, involving the whole
family in a play activity can be very facilitative and quite therapeutic
for all involved. When parents are asked to participate with their
children in planning play activities, they learn problem-solving methods
that will be helpful to them in future family interactions. Family play
therapy allows the therapist to assume a variety of roles in interacting
with the family, including play facilitator, role model, participant,
and teacher or educator.

Group Play Therapy Although group play therapy has been used throughout
most of the developmental history of play therapy, utilization has been
very limited. Haim Ginott's Group Psychotherapy with Children: Te Teory
and Practice of Play Terapy, published in 1961 and republished in 1994;
Daniel Sweeney and Linda Homeyer's Handbook of Group Play Terapy,
published in 1999; and Daniel Sweeney, Jennifer Baggerly, and Dee Ray's
Group Play Terapy: A Dynamic Approach, published in 2014, are the only
texts published on the topic of group play therapy. As in group
counseling for adolescents and adults, group play therapy is basically a
psychological and social process in which children, in the natural
course of interacting with one another in the playroom, learn not only
about other children but also about themselves. In the process of
interacting, children help one another assume responsibility in
interpersonal relationships. Children are then able to naturally and
immediately extend these interactions with peers outside the setting of
group play therapy. Unlike most other approaches to group counseling, in
group play therapy there are no group goals, and group cohesion is not
an essential part of the developing process. By watching other children,
a child gains the courage to attempt the things she wants to do.

History and Development of Play Therapy

Play Therapy in Hospitals Hospitalization can be a frightening and
stressful experience for young children. Tey are in a strange
environment where all sorts of invasive procedures are carried out. In
new and strange activities and surroundings, children ofen experience
anxiety and a feeling of loss of control. According to Golden (1983),
the play therapist's toys are every bit as important as the surgeon's
knife in assisting children to leave the hospital healthier than when
they arrived. If children do not have an opportunity to appropriately
express and deal with their fears and apprehensions, emotional problems
may emerge, and healthy adjustment will be altered. Te application of
play therapy principles and procedures can be found in hospitals
internationally. In the United States, Child Life Programs have been
instrumental in incorporating playrooms and play therapy procedures into
what would otherwise be a sterile environment. Using hospital equipment,
syringes, stethoscopes, masks, and so forth, in combination with dolls
or puppets, the Child Life therapist can acquaint children with medical
procedures through directed play and thereby signifcantly reduce
children's hospital-related anxiety. Positive results also have been
achieved by allowing children to choose materials and direct their own
play. Children ofen will act out in their play procedures what they have
just experienced. Tis could be viewed as the child's way of trying to
understand what has been experienced or as the child's way of developing
control. When children are playing, they are in control of their world.
Structured Doll Play is also an excellent procedure for helping children
understand and adjust to new and anxiety-provoking experiences such as a
hospital setting or other settings (see Structured Doll Play on pages
334--336 in Landreth & Bratton (2020) Child-Parent Relationship Terapy
(CPRT): An EvidenceBased 10-Session Filial Terapy Model).

References Alexander, E. (1964). School centered play therapy program.
Personnel and Guidance Journal, 43, 256--261.

41

42

History and Development of Play Therapy

Allen, F. (1934). Terapeutic work with children. American Journal of
Orthopsychiatry, 4, 193--202. Axline, V. (1947). Nondirective play
therapy for poor readers. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 11, 61--69.
Axline, V. (1950). Entering the child's world via play experiences.
Progressive Education, 27, 68--75. Bratton, S., Landreth, G., Kelllam,
T., & Blackard, S. (2006). Child-parent relationship therapy (CPRT)
treatment manual: An evidence-based 10-session flial therapy model.
Routledge Bratton, S., & Landreth, G. (2020). Child-parent relationship
therapy (CPRT) treatment manual: An evidence-based 10-session flial
therapy model (2nd ed.). Routledge. Dimick, K., & Huf, V. (1970). Child
counseling. William C. Brown. Freud, A. (1946). Te psychoanalytic
treatment of children. Imago. Freud, A. (1965). Te psycho-analytical
treatment of children. International Universities Press. Freud, S.
(1909/1955). Te case of "Little Hans" and the "Rat Man." Hogarth Press.
Froebel, F. (1903). Te education of man. D. Appleton. Ginott, H.
(1961/1994). Group psychotherapy with children: Te theory and practice
of play therapy. Aronson. Golden, D. (1983). Play therapy for
hospitalized children. In C. Schaefer & K. O'Conner (Eds.), Handbook of
play therapy (pp. 213--233). John Wiley. Hambidge, G. (1955). Structured
play therapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 25, 601--617.
Hug-Hellmuth, H. (1921). On the technique of child analysis.
International Journal of Psychoanalysis, 2, 287. Kanner, L. (1957).
Child psychiatry. Tomas. Klein, M. (1955). Te psychoanalytic play
technique. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry, 25, 223--237. Landreth,
G. (1972). Why play therapy? Texas Personnel and Guidance Association
Guidelines, 21, 1. Landreth, G. (1991) Play therapy: Te art of the
relationship. Routledge. Landreth, G. (2001). Innovations in play
therapy. Routledge. Landreth, G., & Bratton, S. (2006). Child-parent
relationship therapy (CPRT). Routledge. Landreth, G., & Bratton, S.
(2020). Child-parent relationship therapy (CPRT): An evidence-based
10-session flial therapy model (2nd ed.). Routledge. Landreth, G.,
Allen, L., & Jacquot, W. (1969). A team approach to learning
disabilities. Journal of Learning Disabilities, 2, 82--87. Levy, D.
(1938). Release therapy in young children. Psychiatry, 1, 387--389.
Levy, D. (1939). Release therapy. American Journal of Orthopsychiatry,
9, 713--736.

History and Development of Play Therapy

Muro, J. (1968). Play media in counseling: A brief report of experience
and some opinions. Elementary School Guidance and Counseling Journal, 2,
104--110. Myrick, R., & Holdin, W. (1971). A study of play process in
counseling. Elementary School Guidance and Counseling Journal, 5,
256--265. Nelson, R. (1966). Elementary school counseling with
unstructured play media. Personnel and Guidance Journal, 45, 24--27.
Rank, O. (1936). Will therapy. Knopf. Reisman, J. (1966). Te development
of clinical psychology. Appleton-Century-Crofs. Rogers, C. (1942).
Counseling and psychotherapy. Houghton Mifin. Rogers, C. (1951).
Client-centered therapy. Houghton Mifin. Rousseau, J. (1762/1930).
Emile. J. M. Dent & Sons. Smith, E., Carns-Holt, K., McKim, C., &
Barrows, M. (2022). Impact of play therapy training on students in
counselor preparation programs. International Journal of Play Terapy,
31(1), 1--9. Sweeney, D., & Homeyer, L. (1999). Handbook of group play
therapy. Jossey-Bass. Sweeney, D. S, Baggerly, J. N. & Ray, D. C.
(2014). Group play therapy: A dynamic approach. Routledge. Taf, J.
(1933). Te dynamics of therapy in a controlled relationship. Macmillan.
Waterland, J. (1970). Actions instead of words: Play therapy for the
young child. Elementary School Guidance and Counseling Journal, 4,
180--197.

43

Chapter

4

A View of Children

Although some people have said space is our last frontier to explore,
childhood may in fact be our last frontier. We know so little about the
complex intricacies of childhood and are limited in our eforts to
discover and understand the meanings in childhood because we are forced
to allow children to teach us. RULE OF THUMB: What is most important
about children can be learned only from children. Only the child with
whom the play therapist is interacting in the play therapy relationship
can teach the therapist what he does not know about the child that is
important. We can only learn about children from children. Children
bring to the relationship with the therapist a rich tapestry of
emotional possibilities from which they weave the intricacies of their
personalities. Te direction these emotional possibilities take is
afected by the person of the therapist, the kind of responses the
therapist makes, and what children sense in the therapist.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-4

45

46

A View of Children

Tenets for Relating to Children Te process of relating to children from
a child-centered frame of reference is based on the following tenets
about children that compose, for the therapist, the framework for an
experiential selfprojecting attitude about children. Te tenets are as
follows: 1. Children are not miniature adults. Te therapist does not
respond to them as if they were. 2. Children are people. Tey are capable
of experiencing deep emotional pain and joy. 3. Children are unique and
worthy of respect. Te therapist prizes the uniqueness of each child and
respects the person the child is. 4. Children are resilient. Children
possess a tremendous capacity to overcome obstacles and circumstances in
their lives. 5. Children have an inherent tendency toward growth and
maturity. Tey possess an inner intuitive wisdom. 6. Children are capable
of positive self-direction. Tey are capable of dealing with their world
in creative ways. 7. Children's natural language is play. Tis is the
medium of self-expression with which they are most comfortable. 8.
Children have a right to remain silent. Te therapist respects a child's
decision not to talk. 9. Children will take the therapeutic experience
to where they need to be. Te therapist does not attempt to determine
when or how a child should play. 10. Children's growth cannot be speeded
up. Te therapist recognizes this and is patient with the child's
developmental process. Children are persons in their own right. Tey do
not become persons upon the attainment of some predetermined age or afer
having met certain criteria. Each child is a unique personality, and
that uniqueness is not dependent on any signifcant person in the child's
life; neither is personal signifcance limited to or a function of the
child's behavior. Terefore, children are worthy of respect because they
have worth and dignity as individuals.

A View of Children

Teir uniqueness is prized and appreciated by the therapist, who responds
to the child as a person. Children are people. Tey do not have to earn
that distinction. Te child is not an object for study but, rather, is a
person to be known in the dynamics of the moment. Te child standing
before the therapist in the playroom is not a problem to be analyzed but
a whole person to be related to and understood. Children, indeed all
persons, have a longing to be heard, to be recognized as persons of
value. For some children, it is as though they go through their lives
day afer day waiting to be noticed and loved. And day afer day, adults
in their lives ignore these emotional messages. In the playroom,
however, children are noticed, listened to, heard, responded to, and
allowed to chart their own lives. Tis is a freeing process for children
which allows them to draw on their inner resources for growth and
self-direction. Te acceptance, safety, and permissiveness experienced in
the playroom allow children to express the fullness of their
personalities.

Children Are Resilient Children possess an inner strength and are
resilient. Tey bounce back. Attempting to explain that they are products
of their home environment seems to be far too simplistic and does not
account for the diferences and variability in children reared in the
same environment. How do we account for some children who seem to be
invulnerable to what would appear to be devastating experiences in their
lives? Some children experience regular beatings by unloving and
insensitive parents but are not beaten down psychologically in the
process. Some children are reared in poverty but grow up rich in spirit
and outlook on life. Some children have alcoholic parents but, unlike
"co-dependent brothers and sisters," are themselves independent and well
adjusted. Some children are reared by emotionally disturbed parents and
are themselves quite successful and well-adjusted as teenagers and
adults. A possible explanation seems to be the way these experiences
have been internalized and the integration that has occurred within
individuals

47

48

A View of Children

as they have interacted with their environment. Such examples emphasize
the capacity and striving of the human organism to grow toward fulflment
and maturity even in the midst of adverse circumstances (Figure 4.1).
Signifcant variables that researchers have suggested as contributing
factors to making some children invulnerable are high self-regard,
self-control, inner motivation, and a sense of personal identity. Tese
children have confdence in themselves. Tey feel capable of exerting
control over their environment and are goal directed. Researchers have
found that parents of such children have allowed considerable
self-direction (Segal & Yahraes, 1979). Tese fndings echo the dynamics
and process of the play therapy relationship as experienced by children.
When I think of resilient children, I am reminded of 18-monthold Jessica
McClure, who fell down an abandoned well shaf in

FIGURE 4.1 Children possess an innate capacity to strive toward growth
and maturity. The play therapy relationship facilitates the development
of that capacity.

A View of Children

west Texas and captured the attention of people around the world. What a
horrible and terrifying experience for a small child, surely as
frightening as anything an adult could possibly experience. She was
stuck in that small shaf for almost 2 whole days, with no one to talk to
her, no one to touch her, no one to comfort her. Tere was no way for her
to know where she was or what had happened to her. Tose 2 days must
surely have been an eternity for Jessica. When rescue workers frst made
contact with her through a microphone afer she had been wedged into that
dark shaf and all alone for 46 hours, they heard this tiny toddler
singing sofly to herself. What a remarkable demonstration of the inner
natural motivation of children to comfort and take care of themselves.
We adults are not wise enough to know the capacity and potential of
children. Our view of children is typically much too narrow and
restrictive. Some adults want to limit children to their fnite
comprehension; the capacity of the human organism surpasses our level of
understanding. Normally, children have fun. They are exuberant. When
provided with opportunities to do so, children approach life with
excitement, openness, and wonder. All children should experience some
joy in their life every day, and this should be the goal of all adults
who interact with children on a regular basis. Children are deprived of
joy when they are rushed to complete tasks and hurried to grow up.
Places of calmness and patience should exist in all children's lives
for, in the midst of calmness and patience, children can discover and
test their inner resources. Children are basically trusting and are,
therefore, vulnerable. Adults must be careful that they not take
advantage of children's trust. Adults must be very sensitive to the
inner experiencing of children. Children do not hold onto yesterdays. Te
world of the child is now. We cannot say to children, "Wait," because
their world is a world of experiencing now. Te world of the child is a
world of slow, amply punctuated with whirlwind activity. Children
appreciate simple things. Tey do not try to make things more complex.
Children are constantly growing and changing inwardly and outwardly, and
this dynamic process must be matched with an equally dynamic therapeutic
approach.

49

50

A View of Children

Some Children Are Like Popcorn, and Some Are Like Molasses Anyone who
has ever been in the presence of children for any extended period of
time is well acquainted with the personality and behavioral variability
they exhibit as they go about exploring their world in their own
individual, unique ways. Some children are like popcorn; they do
everything with great bursts of energy and activity. When something
occurs to them, they pop forth with exuberance to activate this new and
wonderful idea. Tey are like bumblebees, capable of seemingly motionless
hovering when something captures their attention; then they zoom of with
a great burst of motion and buzz of noise to fnd something else of
interest. Other children are like molasses and can barely be poured from
one place to another. Tey do everything with great deliberateness and
careful consideration, caught up in their own seeming inertia,
impervious to activity being generated around them. Tey are like
gyroscopes; everything is functioning and spinning on the inside as it
should, but little if any movement or change is observable on the
outside. Some children are like mushrooms; they pop forth overnight.
Other children are like orchids; they take 7--12 years to bloom (Nutt,
1971). Te efective play therapist is the kind of person who waits for
orchids but is patient with mushrooms. Each child has his unique
approach to the solution to problems and how life should be lived.
Terefore, as the child already possesses those qualities necessary for
growing and becoming a well-adjusted, mature individual, the therapist
waits patiently for the child to discover that unique self. Te therapist
has a sincere belief in the child's ability to work out difculties and
so does not, out of his or her impatience, suggest that the child become
involved in other activities or talk about more important topics---which
other signifcant adults have said are important and should be explored
because this child needs to change. Because the therapist respects

A View of Children

the child, he does not interrupt or "talk down" to the child, nor does
the therapist discount what the child says or the feelings he
experiences.

References Nutt, G. (1971). Being me: Self you bug me. Broadman. Segal,
J., & Yahraes, H. (1979). A child's journey: Forces that shape the lives
of our young. McGraw-Hill.

51

Chapter

5

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Child-centered play therapy is an approach that must be internalized and
lived out, not just talked about or known about. Te child-centered play
therapy (CCPT) approach is an encompassing philosophy for living one's
life in relationships with children---not a cloak of techniques the play
therapist puts on upon entering the playroom and takes of when leaving,
but a philosophy resulting in attitudes and behaviors for living one's
life in relationships with children. It is a way of being based on an
intentional commitment to certain beliefs about children and their
innate capacity to strive toward growth and maturity. Childcentered play
therapy is a complete therapeutic system, not just the application of a
few rapport-building techniques, and is based on a deep and abiding
belief in the capacity and resiliency of children to be constructively
self-directing. Children are quite capable of appropriately directing
their own growth, and they are granted freedom in the play therapy
relationship to be themselves in the process of playing out feelings and
experiences. Children create their own histories in the playroom, and
the therapist respects the direction determined by each child. Te
child-centered play therapist trusts the child's innate, inner
directional, constructive, forward-moving, creative, self-healing
movement toward growth. When this philosophical belief is lived out with
children in the playroom, they are DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-5

53

54

Child-Centered Play Therapy

empowered and their developmental capabilities are released for
self-exploration and self-discovery, resulting in constructive change. A
research study at Yale University in 2007 confrmed babies as young as
6--10 months old have an innate ability to move toward the positive in
relationships. Babies 6--10 months old were shown a googly-eyed toy
trying to climb up a roller-coaster mountain. In the second scene, a
diferently dressed googly-eyed toy helped the frst toy up the mountain.
In the third scene, another googly-eyed toy came and pushed the frst
googly-eyed toy of the mountain. Te babies then had the opportunity to
choose the helpful or the not helpful googly-eyed toy to play with.
Nearly every baby chose the helpful googly-eyed toy to play with. Te
CCPT therapist is concerned with developing the kind of relationship
that facilitates inner emotional growth and children's belief in
themselves. CCPT is an attitude, a philosophy, and a way of Being With
children rather than a way of doing something to or for children. Being
With requires seeing and experiencing what the child sees and
experiences, achieving the child's frame of reference, contentment with
not knowing, patience, and understanding a child's emotional struggle.

Personality Theory Some "important" information the therapist can
provide is not what is important to personality development. How a child
feels about herself is what makes a signifcant diference in behavior.
Each child possesses a personal perceptual view of self and the world
that is reality for the child, and this view of self provides a basis
for individual functioning in whatever daily experiences occur in the
child's life. Tis view of self and the limitless potentialities within
each child are the basis for the theory of personality structure on
which the child-centered approach to play therapy is based. Tese
principles provide a framework for understanding the complex intricacies
of the therapist's beliefs, motivation, and attitude that form a
lifestyle approach to children. At this point, my tendency is to go on
writing about children and the wonderfully fresh and exciting ways they
approach the creative living of life, but a discussion of theory is
necessary. An

Child-Centered Play Therapy

understanding of and adherence to a system of theoretical personality
constructs provides consistency to the therapist's approach to children
and enhances the therapist's sensitivity to the child's internal world
of experiencing. I feel the need to point out that a counseling theory
is based on a theory of personality and behavior that is not age
restricted. In teaching my play therapy courses, I have at times been
disturbingly puzzled by the reactions of some graduate students and
mental health practitioners who are excited about utilizing a
child-centered approach in their play therapy sessions with children,
but do not believe that the same theoretical constructs of personality
and behavior are applicable to adolescents and adults in counseling
experiences. A counseling theory is an inclusive theory of development
that explains personality development and behavior across all ages and
does not change when applied to older or younger persons. How is it
possible to believe that a 5-year-old child has an innate
self-actualizing tendency and, therefore, the therapist needs to follow
the lead of the child, and then in the next moment explain that a
30-year-old adult is predisposed to cognitive vulnerabilities that lead
to psychological distress, and therefore, the therapist's role is to
educate the adult about what is rational or irrational? I am unable to
sort through the incongruities generated by the application of such
opposing views to individuals dependent on their age. Having said that,
let's return to an exploration of theory. Te theoretical constructs of
CCPT are focused on the inner dynamics of the child's process of
relating to and discovering the self that the child is capable of
becoming. Te child-centered theory of personality structure is based on
three central constructs: (a) the person, (b) the phenomenal feld, and
(c) the self (Rogers, 1951).

Person Te person is all that a child is: the child's thoughts,
behaviors, feelings, and physical being. A basic proposition in CCPT is
that every child "exists in a continually changing world of experience
of which he is the center" (Rogers, 1951, p. 483). As the child reacts
to this changing world of experience, the child does so as

55

56

Child-Centered Play Therapy

an organized whole, so that a change in any one part results in changes
in other parts. Terefore, a continuous dynamic interpersonal interaction
occurs in which the child, as a total system, is striving toward
actualizing the self. Tis active process is toward becoming a more
positively functioning person, toward improvement, independence,
maturity, and enhancement of self as a person. Te child's behavior in
this process is goal directed in an efort to satisfy personal needs as
experienced in the unique phenomenal feld which for that child
constitutes reality (Rogers, 1951).

Phenomenal Field Te phenomenal feld consists of everything the child
experiences (whether or not at a conscious level), internal as well as
external--- including perceptions, thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Te
phenomenal feld forms the basis of internal reference for viewing life.
RULE OF THUMB: Perception is the basis of reality. Whatever the child
perceives to be occurring is reality for that child. Terefore, a basic
tenet in child-centered play therapy is that the child's perception of
reality is what must be understood if the child and the behaviors of the
child are to be understood. Te child's phenomenal world is the point of
focus and must be understood if a signifcant relationship is to be
established with the child. Te child's behavior is viewed as being
goal-directed in an efort to satisfy personal needs as experienced in
the unique phenomenal feld which for the child constitutes reality.
Whatever the child perceives in the phenomenal feld, therefore, assumes
primary importance as opposed to the actual reality of events. Because
reality is subjectively determined, the child's behavior must always be
understood by looking through the child's eyes. Tus, the therapist
intentionally avoids judging or evaluating even the simplest of the
child's behaviors (i.e., a

Child-Centered Play Therapy

picture, stacked blocks, attempts at spelling, playdough creations) and
works hard to try to understand the child's internal frame of reference.
If the therapist is to make contact with the person of the child, the
child's phenomenal world must be the point of focus and must be
understood. Te child is not expected to meet predetermined criteria or
ft a set of preconceived categories. Te constantly changing interaction
of the person of the child---thoughts, behaviors, feelings, and physical
being---with the experiential environment is such that the child's
perspective, attitude, and thoughts are constantly changing. Tis dynamic
has great signifcance for the therapist, who may see the child only once
a week. Te child this week is in some ways diferent than the child was
last week, and the therapist must remain open to the child's perceptual
world and where the child is this week. Events that were reacted to one
way last week by the child may be reacted to diferently this week, as
the child's perception and inner world of reality changes. Tis
constantly changing integration within the child seems to explain the
tremendous resiliency within children and the generating efect on hope.
Life is a constant process of personal dynamic experiences, and children
are constantly experiencing an internal reorganization of thoughts,
feelings, and attitudes. Terefore, past experiences are not experienced
with the same degree of intensity or impact day afer day. Tus, the
child-centered play therapist has no need to take the child back to past
experiences, because the child's perceptual view of her world has
changed since former events, and past experiences no longer have the
same impact they formerly had. Terefore, the therapist allows the child
to lead, to take the current playroom experience to where the child
needs to be.

Self Te self is the third central construct of the child-centered theory
of personality structure. Rogers (1951) hypothesized that every child
exists in a continually changing world of experience, of which the child
is the center. Te child reacts as an organized whole to this feld as it
is experienced and perceived, which for the child is reality. As the
developing infant interacts with the environment,

57

58

Child-Centered Play Therapy

especially through interactions with signifcant others, a portion of the
child's total private world (perceptual feld) gradually becomes
recognized as "me" (diferentiated as the self), and concepts are formed
about himself or herself, about the environment, and about himself or
herself in relation to the environment. Te self, then, is the totality
of those perceptions of the child. According to Patterson (1974), the
child can become a person and develop a self only in interactions with
other persons. Te self grows and changes as a result of continuing
interaction with the phenomenal feld. Rogers (1951) described the
structure of the self as \[A\]n organized confguration of perceptions of
the self which are admissible to awareness. It is composed of such
elements as the perceptions of one's characteristics and abilities; the
percepts and concepts of the self in relation to others and to the
environment; the value qualities which are perceived as associated with
experiences and objects; and the goals and ideals which are perceived as
having positive or negative valence. (p. 501)

Te child's behavior, therefore, is generally consistent with the child's
concept of self. As the child develops, the child experiences reactions
and evaluations from parents and signifcant others, and perceives
himself as good or bad dependent on these evaluations. A child whose
parents react to him as stupid and incapable comes to view himself as
stupid and incapable. How can a child feel capable if no one responds to
her as capable? How can a child like herself if no one likes her? How
can a child trust herself if no one trusts her? How can a child feel
acceptable if no one accepts her? How can a child feel wanted and
important if no one wants to be with him? How can a child believe in
himself if no one believes in him? How can a child discover what
self-responsibility feels like if no one provides opportunities for him
to assume self-responsibility? Rogers (1951) hypothesized that the self
grows and changes as a result of continuing interaction with the
phenomenal feld. Te child's behavior is viewed as being consistent with
the concept of self. Terefore, the play therapy experience can
facilitate positive

Child-Centered Play Therapy

change in self-concept. In the child-centered play therapy relationship,
a child experiences an adult who genuinely cares for her, accepts her as
she is, wants to be with her, believes she is capable, trusts her to
make responsible decisions, believes in her as a person, and returns
responsibility to her in an atmosphere of permissiveness and acceptance.
In this kind of safe relationship, the therapist becomes a signifcant
person in the child's life. Te child then internalizes the therapist's
attitudes and responses to the person she is and comes to feel adequate,
accept herself, believe in herself, see herself as capable, trust
herself, like herself, and act responsibly.

A Child-Centered View of Personality and Behavior Rogers (1951)
articulated 19 propositions regarding personality and behavior that
provide a conceptual framework for understanding human development,
behavior, and motivation. His hypotheses refect the philosophical core
of CCPT and also explain the facilitative nature of the therapeutic
relationship and how psychological change occurs in a child. Tese
propositions, summarized below as they apply to children, describe a
childcentered view of the person and behavior of the child and provide a
basis for relating to children in play therapy. Every child exists in a
continually changing world of experience, of which the child is the
center. Te child reacts as an organized whole to this feld as it is
experienced and perceived. Tis perceptual feld is, for the child,
"reality." As the child develops and interacts with the environment, a
portion of the child's total private world (perceptual feld) gradually
becomes recognized as "me" (diferentiated as the self), and the child
forms concepts about himself or herself, about the environment, and
about himself or herself in relation to the environment. Te child has a
basic tendency to strive to actualize, maintain, and enhance the
experiencing self. Te resulting behavior is basically the goal-directed,
emotionally infuenced attempt of the child to satisfy needs as
experienced, in the feld as perceived.

59

60

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Terefore, the best vantage point for understanding the child's behavior
is from the internal frame of reference of the child. Most of a child's
behavior is consistent with the child's concept of self, and behaviors
inconsistent with the self-concept are not owned. Psychological freedom
or adjustment exists when the self-concept is congruent with all of the
child's experiences. When this is not the case, the child experiences
tension or maladjustment. Experiences that are inconsistent with the
self-concept may be perceived as a threat, resulting in the child
becoming behaviorally rigid in an efort to defend the existing
self-concept. When there is a complete absence of any threat to the
perception of self, the child is free to revise his or her self-concept
to assimilate and include experiences previously inconsistent with the
self-concept. Te resulting well-integrated or positive selfconcept
enables the child to be more understanding of others and thus to have
better interpersonal relationships. Te child moves from external
motivation to internal motivation that incorporates realization of the
value within himself or herself (Rogers, 1951, pp. 481--533). Rogers' 19
propositions are further delineated as follows: Te child is viewed
as: 1. Being the best determiner of a personal reality. Te child's
perceptual feld is "reality." 2. Behaving as an organized whole. 3.
Striving toward independence, maturity and enhancement of self. 4. Goal
directed in an efort to satisfy needs. 5. Being behaviorally infuenced
by feelings that afect rationality. 6. Behaving in ways that are
consistent with the self-concept. 7. Not owning behavior that is
inconsistent with the self-concept. 8. Responding to threat by becoming
behaviorally rigid. 9. Admitting into awareness experiences that are
inconsistent with the self if the self is free from threat. (Rogers,
1951, pp. 481--533)

Child-Centered Play Therapy

An understanding of and grounding in these theoretical constructs of
personality and behavior provide the play therapist with the necessary
dimensions for understanding the person and behavior of a child and help
the play therapist to see more clearly what a child sees in her world of
perceptual reality. Tus, the role of the play therapist in the play
therapy relationship will be more consistent and efective.

Key Concepts of Child-Centered Play Therapy Child-centered play therapy
is both a basic philosophy of the innate human capacity of children to
strive toward growth and maturity and an attitude of deep and abiding
belief in children's ability to be constructively self-directing. It is
based on an understanding of the observable natural forward movement of
the human organism through developmental stages of growth that are
normally progressive and always toward greater maturity. Tis tendency is
innate and is not externally motivated or taught. Children are naturally
curious, delight in mastery and accomplishment, and energetically live
life in their continual pursuit of discovery of their world and
themselves in relation to the world. Speaking of the process of
self-discovery and self-growth, Moustakas (1981) said: Te challenge of
therapy is to serve, to wait with interest and concern for the child to
activate the will and to choose to act, to dare to pursue what is
present in the way of interest and desire. Tis calls for unusual
patience and an unshakable belief in the child's capacity to fnd the
way, to come to terms with the restraints and tensions of living, a
belief in the child's powers to listen inwardly and to make choices that
are self-enhancing. (p. 18)

An inherent tendency exists within children to move in subtle directness
toward adjustment, mental health, developmental growth, independence,
autonomy of personhood, and what can be generally described as
self-actualization. Te basic character or nature of children's lives is
activity. Teir approach to living is an

61

62

Child-Centered Play Therapy

active process, and this can perhaps best be seen in a close observation
of their play, which is active and forward moving, not passive, toward
enhancing self-sufciency in the activity of living life. Tis inherent
push toward discovery, development, and growth is readily observable in
the developmental stages of infants and young children. When they
experience difculty or frustration in their attempts to accomplish or
master a physical developmental task, infants naturally strive forward
toward mastery using their own unique coping skills and the propensity
to try again with renewed vigor, efort, and determination. Infants are
not content to continue crawling from one place to another. An inner
urge to stand up, followed by a developmental forward-moving
continuation of the inner striving, results in their learning to walk.
Tis is not a conscious decision, a wellthought-out plan, or the result
of some signifcant adult's eforts to teach walking. It occurs
spontaneously as a result of growth and development inherent in a
child's nature, if the necessary conditions are present. Tis inherent
directional process does not automatically ensure a smooth succession of
transitional steps. Te infant pulls up to a standing position, turns
loose, takes a faltering, wobbly step forward, falls, stands up, wobbles
forward for a few steps, and falls again. Although some pain may be
experienced in this process, the infant continues this forward-striving
directional process toward growth. It is not necessary for someone to
explain to the infant what causes the pain, what is being done the wrong
way, how his behavior afects signifcant adults, or what behaviors need
to be changed in order to achieve the desired goal. Tis directional
striving will occur spontaneously when the infant is ready to take the
next step, even though a period of temporary regression to crawling may
occur. Te infant will try again and again until walking is mastered to
his satisfaction. Since the infant has been responsible for self in
these experiences, the accomplishment and accompanying satisfaction are
internalized and strengthen the self. Tis continual striving for growth
makes mature behavior more satisfying than immature behavior. Although
this example may seem to be an oversimplifcation of a very complex
process, it clearly highlights the point that

Child-Centered Play Therapy

children are capable of self-determination. Tis propensity to move in
the direction of increasing independence, self-regulation, and autonomy
and away from control by external forces is not limited to developmental
accomplishments in infants or toddlers but can be seen as a primary
motivating force of the whole person at all developmental levels and
phases of life as individuals strive for meaningful interpersonal
relationships and enhancement of self. Children have a far greater
capacity for self-direction than is readily recognized, and they are
capable of making appropriate decisions. A powerful force exists within
every child that strives continuously for self-actualization. Tis
inherent striving is toward independence, maturity, and self-direction.
Te child's mind and conscious thoughts are not what direct her behavior
to areas of emotional need; rather, it is the child's natural striving
toward inner balance that takes the child to where she needs to be: Te
behavior of the individual at all times seems to be caused by one drive,
the drive for complete self-realization. When an individual reaches a
barrier which makes it more difcult for him to achieve the complete
realization of the self, there is set up an area of resistance and
friction and tension. Te drive toward self-realization continues, and
the individual's behavior demonstrates that he is satisfying this inner
drive by outwardly fghting to establish his self-concept in the world of
reality, or that he is satisfying it vicariously by confning it to his
inner world where he can build it up with less struggle. (Axline, 1969,
p. 13)

Adjustment and Maladjustment Te inner drive toward self-realization and
afrmation of the worthwhileness of self are basic needs, and each child
is striving continually to satisfy these needs: An adjusted person seems
to be an individual who does not encounter too many obstacles in his
path---and who has been given the opportunity to become free and
independent in his own right. Te maladjusted person seems to be the one
who, by some

63

64

Child-Centered Play Therapy

means or other, is denied the right to achieve this without a struggle.
(Axline, 1969, p 21)

Manifestation of this last principle can readily be seen in the lives of
some children, such as in the following case of Matt. Seven-year-old
Matt walked methodically beside me into the counseling center, hands
stufed into his pockets, shoulders hunched, and a hollow look on his
face. He looked older, defeated by the jarring, awful reality of having
been locked in a hot, smelly, dark jail cell on the upper foor of a
county government ofce building for 4 days, without anyone with whom he
was familiar to comfort him. His parents lived within walking distance
of the jail, but they had not visited him, their reason locked somewhere
deep inside and either unknown to them or deliberately withheld. When I
saw Matt standing in the cell earlier that morning, he tried hard to
appear calm and almost nonchalant, but the fright in his eyes and the
bright red half-circle outlining his bottom lip betrayed his inner
anxiety and revealed a frightened little boy, the victim of a system not
prepared to understand or provide for the needs of children and that had
no juvenile detention facility. Earlier in the school year Matt had been
referred to the Center for Play Terapy by his second-grade teacher for
"aggressive behavior, short attention span, frequently tardy, and being
moody." Test results were inconclusive but did indicate satisfactory
academic progress potential. He was recommended for play therapy and
walked the one block from his school to the center, accompanied by a
school staf member, once a week for six sessions. When Matt missed his
seventh session, I called the school and was informed that he was in
jail. Matt had been caught stealing empty sof drink bottles from a
grocery store and, as this was the second such incident in a month, the
county judge, having been given legal jurisdiction over Matt by his
parents because "We can't do anything with him," declared Matt
incorrigible and ordered him sent to jail. I persuaded the court to
release Matt to my custody, and now here we were in the play therapy
room together again. As he banged out his frustration on Bobo, he said,
"Sometimes a guy gets to wondering if his parents really love him, and
what you gotta do is go out and do something kinda bad. Ten when your

Child-Centered Play Therapy

parents fnd out about it, if they beat up on you, you know they love
you." Matt was striving to enhance his self and yet, at the same time,
was pushing the very thing he wanted farther away because his behavior
made him unacceptable to his parents. Matt wanted to feel that he was a
lovable person, to be accepted and included in the family as a worthy
member. He found himself, however, in a home environment where
relationships were not lovingly supportive enough to provide the
security and sense of belonging necessary for him to demonstrate
directly in a constructive way that part of himself that longed to be
appreciated and responded to as a lovable person. Because Matt was not
able to express outwardly his inner drive to enhance his self, he
resorted to indirect and ultimately self-defeating ways of afrming the
worthwhileness of his self. Axline (1969) explained the diference
between well-adjusted behavior and maladjusted behavior this way: When
the individual develops sufcient self-confdence ... consciously and
purposefully to direct his behavior by evaluation, selectivity, and
application to achieve his ultimate goal in life---
self-realization---then he seems to be well-adjusted. On the other hand,
when the individual lacks sufcient selfconfdence to chart his course of
actions openly, seems content to grow in self-realization vicariously
rather than directly, and does little or nothing about channeling this
drive in more constructive and productive directions, then he is said to
be maladjusted ... . Te individual's behavior is not consistent with the
inner concept of the self which the individual has created in his
attempt to achieve complete self-realization. Te further apart the
behavior and the concept, the greater the degree of maladjustment. (pp.
13--14)

All maladjustments result from an incongruence between what is actually
experienced and the concept of self. Whenever a child's perception of an
experience is distorted or denied, a state of incongruence between the
self-concept and experience exists, resulting in psychological
maladjustment. Incongruence between the child's self-concept and
experience basically results in incongruence in behavior. Terefore, the
child-centered play therapist

65

66

Child-Centered Play Therapy

is intentional about looking through the child's eyes to understand the
child's perception of self and experiences and builds an understanding
and accepting relationship in which the child feels safe enough to
express himself and explore experiences as he perceives them. As
previously stated, children possess the capacity to experience the
factors of their psychological maladjustments and the capacity and the
tendency to move away from a state of maladjustment toward a state of
psychological health in the context of a safe relationship.

Therapeutic Conditions for Growth Tis forward-moving, actualizing
tendency previously described is the central tenet of the child-centered
approach to play therapy and was succinctly described by Rogers (1980)
as follows: "Individuals have within themselves vast resources for
self-understanding and for altering their self-concepts, basic
attitudes, and self-directed behavior; these resources can be tapped if
a defnable climate of facilitative psychological attitudes can be
provided" (p. 115). Te attitudes of the play therapist that form the
basis for the therapeutic relationship and facilitate the release of the
child's inner resources for growth are genuineness (being real),
nonpossessive warmth (warm caring and acceptance), and empathy
(sensitive understanding) (Rogers, 1986).

Being Real Te CCPT relationship is not an experience in which the
therapist assumes a certain role or tries to do things in a prescribed
manner. Tat would not be real or genuine. An attitude is a way of living
life, not a technique to be applied when it seems to be needed.
Genuineness is a basic and fundamental attitude that is for the
therapist a way of being rather than a way of doing. Realness is not
something to be "put on" but, rather, a "living out" of self at the
moment in the relationship. Te extent to which this is possible is a
function of the therapist's awareness of his own feelings

Child-Centered Play Therapy

and attitudes. Genuineness or realness implies that the therapist
possesses a high degree of self-understanding and self-acceptance and is
congruent in what he feels and what he expresses in the relationship.
Tis concept does not imply that the play therapist must be fully
self-actualized; rather, it is a statement regarding the importance and
necessity of the therapist having insight and being congruent in the
relationship with the child. Te play therapist must have ample
self-understanding and insight into personal feelings in areas such as
rejection, which may be experienced in relation to a child's behavior in
the playroom. Tis area of self-understanding is especially important for
beginning play therapists, whose experiences and value systems may
result in their experiencing feelings of rejection or even dislike of a
child who exhibits messy behavior, tries to manipulate, or is verbally
abusive to the therapist. A play therapist who lacks self-understanding
of her own motivation in this area may inappropriately project rejection
to the child. Play therapists should work through such issues in
supervisory or consultation relationships outside the play therapy
experience. Being real is being aware of and accepting one's own
feelings and reactions with insight into the accompanying motivation and
being willing to be oneself and to express these feelings and reactions
when appropriate. At such times the therapist is being real or genuine
and is experienced by the child as a person, rather than as a
professional. If the therapist feels uncomfortable about something the
child has asked her to do, expressing those feelings of being
uncomfortable is being very real. Children are sensitive to the play
therapist's way of being and are keenly aware of any false front or
professional role presented. Te experience of being with an adult who is
living a life of realness at the moment with the child can be very
rewarding for a child. Such an experience was summed up by one child who
said, "You don't seem like a counselor. You just seem like a real
person."

Warm Caring and Acceptance A discussion of warm caring and acceptance
must frst focus on the necessity of the play therapist's acceptance of
self. Te time

67

68

Child-Centered Play Therapy

with the child is not an objective relationship in which some kind of
mechanical acceptance of the child exists but, rather, is an extension
of self as being acceptable to self and relating on that basis. Children
are nonassuming in their acceptance, and their acceptance is basically
unconditional. I have learned from my experiences with children that
they like and accept me for the person I am, for the way I am. Tey do
not try to analyze or diagnose me. Tey accept me, my strengths, and my
weaknesses. Experiencing their acceptance has freed me to be more
accepting of the person I am. How can a play therapist extend to a child
genuine warmth if the therapist does not feel that for himself? How can
the therapist be accepting of a child if the therapist experiences
self-rejection or nonacceptance of the person he is? How can I respect
the child if I do not respect myself? Acceptance, like genuineness, is
an attitude, a way of being, an extension of the person of the therapist
and all that the therapist is at that moment. Tis kind of acceptance and
warm caring is characterized by positive respect for the child as a
person of worth. Te therapist experiences a genuine feeling of warmth
and caring for the child which is unconditional. Tis caring is
experientially felt; it is not some abstract attitude of respect and
acceptance of the worth and dignity of other persons one can pick up
from readings or graduate courses in counseling or psychology. Te
therapist really cares for the child and experiences a genuine prizing
of the person of the child, so what occurs is an absence of evaluation
or judgment. Experiential caring is based on interactions within a
relationship, getting to know the person of the child, and therefore,
does not automatically exist at the deepest levels possible within the
frst few minutes of encountering the child. Neither is it likely, as
Rogers (1977) has pointed out, that the therapist will experience
unconditional caring at all times. Unconditional caring and acceptance
is not an all-or-none characteristic but is best thought of as a matter
of degree, experienced in relation to the child out of the play
therapist's deep, abiding feeling for, faith in, and appreciation of
children's lives. Te child is respected and prized just as much when she
is defant, moody, angry, or resistive as when she is cooperative, happy,
or pleasantly engaging the therapist (Figure 5.1).

Child-Centered Play Therapy

FIGURE 5.1 Warm caring and acceptance grant the child freedom and
permission to be fully himself or herself in the emerging togetherness
of the relationship in the playroom. The therapist really cares for the
child, and there is an absence of evaluation or judgment.

Warm caring and acceptance grant the child freedom and permission to be
fully herself in the emerging togetherness of the relationship in the
playroom. Te therapist does not wish the child were diferent in some
way. Te attitudinal message consistently projected is, "I accept you as
you are," not "I'll accept you if ..." Acceptance does not imply
approval of all of the child's behavior. As is discussed in Chapter 14,
many behaviors are considered unacceptable in the playroom necessitating
the setting of therapeutic limits. However, the central concept here is
that none of the child's behaviors is evaluated as making the child any
more or any less worthy of being accepted or prized as a unique person.
Such nonevaluative acceptance is absolutely essential to establishing
the kind of relationship in which the child feels safe enough to express
and reveal her innermost feelings and thoughts.

69

70

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Most children have a strong desire to please adults and are quite
sensitive to even the most subtle cues of rejection by the therapist.
Children are keenly aware of and sensitive to whatever the play
therapist experiences. Terefore, the importance of therapist
selfawareness and self-understanding needs to be emphasized again.
Children are egocentric and are likely to internalize a therapist's
feelings of boredom, impatience, veiled criticism, or other negative
behaviors as rejection of themselves. Because children have been
developmentally dependent on "reading" nonverbal communication cues of
adults, they are sensitive to whatever the therapist is feeling. If the
therapist experiences some inner tenseness as the child takes a fst full
of playdough and repeatedly squishes it in the cup of brown tempera
paint, that will be sensed by the child and will inhibit further
experiential communication and exploration. Impatience with a child who
stands in silence in the middle of the playroom and is slow to begin
playing may show in a slightly diferent tone of voice or verbal
expression such as, "You don't want to play with any of the toys here?"
or a suggestion, "Beth, maybe you would like to play with some of those
dolls right there?" Beth hears these as messages of rejection, that she
is not pleasing the therapist. In response to a 10-year-old boy flling
the nursing bottle with water and sucking on it at length, the
therapist's reaction may be, "Now what! He's too big to do that! Maybe
he's regressing, and I should do something to stop it." Such a critical
reaction may show in raised eyebrows, squinted eyes, or clinched teeth
and will be quickly perceived by the child as disapproval. Te child's
reaction, then, is likely to be feelings of guilt for engaging in "baby"
play. If the therapist readily responds to some play activities by the
child and not so readily to others, the child takes note of that as
disapproval of the play that is not readily responded to. Tese are
subtle but signifcant forces in the play therapy relationship, and they
have a major impact on the degree of acceptance experienced by the
child. Warm caring and acceptance are basically an attitude of
receptiveness toward the experiential world of the child and facilitate
in the child an awareness that the therapist can be trusted.

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Sensitive Understanding Te typical approach in most adult--child
interactions is characterized by an attitude of evaluation of children
based on what is known about them. Seldom do adults strive to understand
the internal frame of reference of children, their subjective world.
Children are not free to explore, to test boundaries, to share
frightening parts of their lives, or to change until they experience a
relationship in which their subjective experiential world is understood
and accepted. Sensitive understanding of children occurs to the extent
the therapist is able to put aside his own experiences and expectations
and appreciate the personhood of children, their activities, their
experiences, their feelings, and their thoughts. According to Rogers
(1961), this kind of empathy is the ability to see the world of another
by assuming the internal frame of reference of that person: "To sense
the client's private world as if it were your own but without ever
losing the 'as if' quality---this is empathy, and it seems essential to
therapy" (p. 284). Attempting to sensitively understand children from
their viewpoint may be one of the most difcult and also potentially most
critical factors of the therapeutic relationship, for as children feel
understood by the play therapist, they are encouraged to share more of
themselves. Such understanding seems to have a magnetic quality for
children. As they feel understood, they feel safe enough to venture
forth further in the relationship, and their perception of their world
is changed. Tis process of coming forth and familiar objects taking on
new meaning is graphically described in the delightful story of Te
Little Prince (de Saint Exupery, 1943). Te fox in the story tries to
convince the Little Prince to tame him (to establish a relationship with
him). He tells the Little Prince his life is monotonous and boring, that
he hunts chickens and men hunt him. Tere is no change in expectation or
the routine. He describes the chickens as all being just alike, and all
the men as just alike. Ten the fox says, But if you tame me, it will be
as if the sun came to shine on my life. I shall know the sound of a step
that will be diferent from all the others. Other steps send me hurrying
back underneath the ground. Yours will call me, like music, out of my
burrow. And

71

72

Child-Centered Play Therapy

then look: you see the grain-felds down yonder? I do not eat bread.
Wheat is of no use to me. Te wheat felds have nothing to say to me. And
that is sad. But you have hair that is the color of gold. Tink how
wonderful that will be when you have tamed me! Te grain, which is also
golden, will bring me back the thought of you. And I shall love to
listen to the wind in the wheat. (p. 83)

Te similarity between this description and the impact an understanding
and accepting relationship in play therapy can have in changing a
child's perception is striking. What a wonderful description of the
healing power of a relationship to alter a child's perception of the
world and in the process that which had little meaning takes on new and
signifcant meaning. Perceptions are changed as a result of meaningful
relationships. A play therapist I supervised described the impact of a
meaningful relationship on perception and her struggle to be real in her
case description of her eighth session with Ricardo. She wrote, It was
very interesting to me that Ricardo was convinced that many of the toys
in the room were new. He noticed so many toys for the frst time, even
though he had played with some of them in previous sessions. It was as
though he was seeing everything in a new light, discovering a new part
of himself. I feel as though we both are beginning to be ourselves more
in the sessions. I realize now that my guardedness and hesitation to be
myself may have encouraged the same behavior in Ricardo. I am now freer
to be myself in the playroom. I no longer walk into the playroom
overwhelmed by my needs to rescue a child. It seems as though, the
deeper my faith in the child and in the process, the freer I am to be
myself. I am not only freer to be myself, but also freer to enjoy each
child's wondrous unfolding.

When the play therapist begins to trust herself, she is then able to
trust the child and the relationship moves into a deeper level in which
the child perceives himself diferently. When a child's perception of
himself changes, he then perceives his world differently, more fully. A
similar process was described by another play therapist I was
supervising. Jamal had been coming to the playroom for nine

Child-Centered Play Therapy

sessions, and in the tenth session, he began to point to numerous toys
and comment "You got a new toy." "Tis one wasn't here last time." "Oh,
another new toy." No new toys had been added to the playroom. Jamal's
perception of himself had changed as a result of the play therapy
relationship and he was now seeing his world diferently. He was now
capable of taking in more of his world. In a play therapy relationship,
the therapist anticipates the child's inner rhythm and is sensitive to
the emotional movement of the child in the fow of the play therapy
process. Being empathic with a child ofen is regarded as a passive
process of sitting in a chair in a playroom and allowing the child to do
whatever comes to mind, with little or no reaction or response from the
play therapist. Nothing could be further from the truth. Tis
relationship of being fully with a child is a highly interactive,
emotional, mental and verbal process on the part of the therapist.
Sensitive understanding that is accurate requires the therapist to
maintain a high level of emotional interaction with the child. Te
therapist has a sense of personal identifcation (as if) with the child,
rather than a mere refection of feelings now and then as the child
plays. Tis process of being fully with the child and sensitively and
accurately understanding the child requires a commitment of self to the
relationship with the child. Being fully committed to the relationship
with the child results in one of the most active experiences in which a
therapist can be engaged, necessitating signifcant emotional and mental
involvement and verbal responsiveness on the part of the therapist. Tis
is not some objective observational activity to be entered into lightly.
Mental and emotional efort is required to accurately sense and enter
into the child's private world with understanding. Children know when
they have been "touched" in this way (Figure 5.2). Sensitive
understanding means the play therapist is in full emotional contact with
the child's perceptual, experiential world of reality. No questioning or
evaluation is made of the child's verbal or acted-out description of
feelings or experiences in relation to this personal world of
experiencing. Te therapist tries hard to be fully in tune with all that
the child is experiencing and expressing at the moment. Te therapist
does not try to think ahead of

73

74

Child-Centered Play Therapy

FIGURE 5.2 The relationship with a child is a continual prizing of the
uniqueness of the child and an empathic experiencing of the
momentby-moment living out of the child's world at a pace of unfolding
determined by the inner direction of the emerging child.

the child's experience or to analyze the content in some way to derive
meaning. Te attitude of the therapist is to sense as deeply as possible
the experiencing of the child at that moment and to accept as fully as
possible the emerging intuitive empathic response within herself as
being sufcient for the moment. Tus, the relationship with the child is a
continual prizing of the child's uniqueness and an empathic experiencing
of the momentby-moment living out of the child's world at a pace of
unfolding determined by the inner direction of the emerging child. Te
therapist does not try to send painful experiences of the child away by
unnecessary reassurance, such as reassuring a frightened child that
"Everything will be okay" or attempting to comfort a child with, "But
your mother really does love you." To do so would be to reject what the
child is feeling at the moment. Such responses give a clear message to
the child that it is not

Child-Centered Play Therapy

permissible to experience pain. Whatever the child feels is considered
by the therapist to be a legitimate feeling. If Jef feels sad over the
loss of a favorite crayon, the therapist experiences that sadness,
perhaps not to the extent the child feels it, but nevertheless an
experiencing occurs of the sadness "as if." Even though the therapist
may never have been physically abused by an alcoholic father, the terror
and anger felt by Kevin are experienced within the intuitive
experiencing of the therapist "as if" and verbally communicated with
feeling to Kevin "You felt completely helpless and were so scared of
your father. You feel really angry at him." Te therapist must be careful
not to allow his life experiences to encroach upon and color such
feelings and experiences.

The Therapeutic Relationship Child-centered play therapy is a personal
relationship in which the play therapist gives of herself or himself to
the person of the child as fully as is possible in the immediacy of the
relationship. Tis giving of self is a special gif upon which the play
therapy relationship is built. It is not possible to adequately describe
this relationship, because words are inadequate to the task, or perhaps
it is that my words seem so inadequate in attempting to describe what
cannot be touched but is known in my mind and felt in my heart and soul.
I fnd words terribly inadequate when I attempt to describe the kind of
relationship that is experienced when I listen to understand the child
rather than listening to answer, when I accept the child as she is
without wishing she were diferent in some way, when I know without
knowing the child is capable of becoming so much more than has been
described to me by signifcant adults in the child's life. Attempting to
describe the almost imperceptible but fully present subtle nuances
characteristic of a shared relationship with the person of a child is a
bit like trying to pick up a small bubble of mercury with your fngers.
Te very nature of the mercury is such that it defes being picked up. How
does one adequately describe the shared experience, the exuberance of a
child who struggles to express the unbelievable emotional release
experienced in the safety of being fully accepted as a person of worth?
Are there

75

76

Child-Centered Play Therapy

words that will adequately describe the emotion experienced in such
moments? If so, they are unknown to me, for words always seem to be such
an inadequate means for attempting to convey the essence of such a
shared moment with a child. Perhaps we should look to children who live
out such experiences in the playroom for descriptions of the meaning of
the relationship. Five-year-old Jasmine stood in the middle of the
playroom finging her arms up and down and excitedly repeated, "Who would
have thought there was such a place like this in the whole world!"
Indeed, this relationship is for most children like no other they have
experienced. Here, the adult allows the child to be---just that, to be!
Te child is accepted for the person she is and what she is at that time.
When I am with a child in the playroom, I want to listen so carefully
that I will hear completely and understand the child's deeper messages
that no one else has heard. I want to give of myself to the child so
fully in the moment that I will touch what is untouchable in the child.
In CCPT, it is the relationship that is therapeutic, and the person of
the therapist is more important than anything the therapist knows how to
do. I want to become so absorbed in the relationship with the child that
everything I do becomes a response to the relationship. Everything that
is important in play therapy happens within the context of the
relationship, and everything that happens in play therapy impacts the
relationship. It is the relationship that is the therapy. Attempting to
describe the play therapist's giving of himself or herself to the
relationship is difcult because there is no prescribed identifable role
for the child-centered play therapist to be a certain way. Te
relationship is a way of being rather than a way of doing. Te
child-centered play therapy relationship is not an experience in which
the therapist assumes a certain role or tries to do things in a
prescribed manner. Tat would not be being real or genuine. When I
immerse myself in the immediacy of the relationship with a child, it is
not possible for me to think about being a certain way, doing a certain
thing, or planning what I think should be done next. Tis is a way of
living life with a child moment by moment, not a technique to be applied
when it seems to be needed. What I am trying to describe is a way of

Child-Centered Play Therapy

being with a child that is devoid of planning or predetermined
structure, a relationship in which the play therapist has no
expectations of the child, a relationship in which the child feels safe,
safe enough to express and explore whatever wells up in her, a place
where she can just be her "own little 'ol self" on her terms without
being concerned about meeting someone else's expectations, a place of
understanding and acceptance, a place where she can discover unknown and
unused strengths, a place where she is prized as a person of worth, a
healing relationship. A beginning play therapist I was supervising
described her discovery of this process in this way: "Trough
experiencing children in play therapy, I have come to understand the
living nature of the therapeutic relationship. I more fully understand
and feel the dynamic experience of encountering a child, fnding in the
child what I can never discover in textbooks---myself in action with the
child. I needed to move beyond intellectual descriptions and
classifcation, beyond the abstract view of helping, and to encounter my
own inner experience. It is not easy to be in an intense relationship
with a child." She discovered being a play therapist is a process of
becoming rather than an event. Tis kind of relating, of truly
experiencing Being With a child with the permission of the child to know
her inner world, is not learned by training or by sharpening of the
intellect. It is a learning open only to the heart. Being With is an
attitude of heart commitment to a child, a willingness of the heart to
live out the pain experienced by the child. Te fox in Te Little Prince
described this kind of relationship as he said good bye to the Little
Prince. "Here is my secret, a very simple secret. It is only with the
heart that one can see rightly; what is essential is invisible to the
eye." When a child is experiencing deep agony and pain, the child does
not need problem-solving answers or solutions that come from the mind.
Te child needs someone who is willing to experience Being With him.
Giving answers or "solving problems" may be a way for the therapist to
avoid the child's pain. I want to be willing to stand in the gap with a
child when the walls of the child's life have been breached, knowing
that I cannot prevent the child from hurting. But I can be with the
child and help sofen the blow.

77

78

Child-Centered Play Therapy

RULE OF THUMB: If you aren't listening to a child with your heart, you
probably aren't listening. Te importance of responding out of one's
heart in a relationship with a child is vividly described by the Tin
Woodman in his conversation with the Scarecrow in Te Wizard of Oz: "I
don't know enough," replied the Scarecrow cheerfully. "My head is stufed
with straw, you know, and that is why I am going to Oz to ask him for
some brains." "O, I see," said the Tin Woodman. "But, afer all, brains
are not the best things in the world." "Have you any?" inquired the
Scarecrow. "No, my head is quite empty," answered the Woodman, "but once
I had brains, and a heart also; so having tried them both, I should much
rather have a heart." (Baum, 1956, pp. 55--56)

Respect for the person of the child and a prizing of the child's world
are not activities of the mind. Tey are genuinely felt and experienced
in the inner person of the therapist and are sensed and felt by the
child, who deeply appreciates and values the therapist for such
unconditional acceptance. Tis relationship with the child in the
playroom, then, is a mutually shared relationship of acceptance and
appreciation in which each person is regarded as an individual. Tis is a
unique relationship based on expectancy, not expectation. Expectations
are usually based on previous information about a child and focus on
behavior, expecting a child to be a certain way, to exhibit certain
behaviors that have previously been identifed, to play a certain way. A
relationship of expectations is based on performance as the basis for
identity and value. Expectations restrict and box a child in. Since I
have no expectations of Bryan in the playroom, I will never be
disappointed in Bryan. Expectancy is an attitude, a Being With, a way of
living your life in the play therapy relationship, a dynamic quality of
anticipation

Child-Centered Play Therapy

of being together. What will Bryan be like today? Te child centered play
therapist lives out an attitude of eagerness, sharing, and discovery.
Expectancy is alive, dynamic, an unknown potential. A relationship of
expectancy does not rely on the past or information about a child. I
have no expectations of a child. I want to hear what has not been heard
in a child. I don't accept what is said or reported about a child as all
there is to know about a child. Other people's thoughts about a child
are not my thoughts. Perhaps what I have been told is not true or is
incomplete. I think I have always approached my relationships with
children in play therapy with an expectancy, an eagerly looking forward
to what the child will be like. I have no expectations of what the child
will do or what the child will be like with me. I want to hear what has
not been heard in the child. Since a feeling of expectancy is foremost
in my mind and heart, I am ok with not knowing what a particular
happening means. I have sometimes experienced a fantasy that the
developing relationship with a child in play therapy is like going into
a completely dark room, in which someone has placed a beautiful and very
valuable vase on a stand. I enter the pitch-black room with eager
expectancy knowing the vase is in there somewhere and wanting to make
contact with it so that I can discover what it is like and appreciate
its beauty. Under such conditions I would not stride right into the
darkness of the room and begin to grope for the location of the vase.
Neither would I swing my arms rapidly to try to make contact, lest I
unexpectedly and unintentionally strike the stand or the prized vase,
causing it to topple to the foor. Such behavior would be unthinkable.
Instead, I enter the darkness of the room with caution and frst stand
there to begin to adjust to these new surroundings, trying to sense the
dimensions of the room. I focus all of my energy on being sensitively
aware of the possible existence of nearby objects. Having adjusted to
the initial darkness of the room and being guided by great caution, I
proceed to gently explore what is available to me in the room. My
movements are slow. I begin to get acquainted with what I experience in
the room, to see as clearly as I can in my mind that which I experience
and sense with my total being. Everything about me is straining to sense
the presence of

79

80

Child-Centered Play Therapy

the vase. Afer a few moments of not being successful in my eforts to
locate the vase, I do not change my approach and move ahead quickly or
try a new procedure and start crawling around on the foor. Quite the
contrary, I know the vase is here somewhere; so I proceed with great
patience to gently feel for the vase. I do not try to rush the
discovery. Instead, I persevere with persistent patience in my efort to
make contact with the vase. Finally, one of my gentle hand movements
touches something; I am very still, knowing it is here! I experience a
food of relief, joy, anticipation, and wonder at what the vase will be
like. Ten I begin ever so gently to touch the vase, allowing my hands to
explore its shape and beauty and to picture that beauty in my mind. Te
play therapy experience with a child is like this experience with the
vase, and in like manner I want to approach, experience, and "touch" the
emotionally vulnerable child. When I am in a relationship with a child,
I experience an unspoken inner struggle to touch what is untouchable in
the child. To accomplish this, I have learned to appreciate and enjoy
the child's inner quietness. Waiting is a part of the therapeutic
process. Waiting for the child conveys a belief in the child, a
willingness to trust the child. I want to be patient with the child's
inner process. If I am to be successful in my efort to make contact with
the child, I must be still within myself and see the child. I must be
still and listen to the child. I must be still and make contact with the
imagination of the child. I must be still and follow the lead of the
child. I must be still and experience the child. I must be still within
myself and touch the hidden inner person of the child. I must be still
within myself and wait for the child. If I am to be helpful to a child,
I must make contact with the person of the child at all levels of
experiencing in our shared time together. Being still within myself does
not mean I am

Child-Centered Play Therapy

unresponsive and silent. A great deal is always being communicated
verbally and nonverbally by a child, and I want to communicate what I
hear and understand to the child. I would like to gently touch the
child's emotional world and also to hear as fully as I can the child's
expressed thoughts, reactions, and descriptions. I would like the total
response of my person, verbally and nonverbally, to convey to the child
the depth of my yearning to know and understand, to the extent to which
I am fully capable, the child's experiential inner world of feelings and
thoughts as known, experienced, felt, expressed, and lived out at the
moment. Just as I want to hear, the child has a longing to share what he
may perceive as a frightening part of his life, or a part of his life
that the child fears may be rejected by me or others. So the child
ventures forth in this relationship in ways that may seem to lack focus
or direction as he experiences this inner confict of wanting to be heard
and fearing evaluation and criticism. At such times a tentative and
perhaps almost imperceptible sharing occurs of this vulnerable part of
the child's self in what may be an obscure or oblique manner that could
easily go unnoticed, because the message is so inconspicuous or veiled.
Te child is perhaps at that moment only vaguely aware at some deeper
level of this underlying part of herself or her experience that she
would like to share, perhaps not even at a conscious level, in the
immediacy of our experiencing relationship. At other times, one can
sense at an immediate conscious level a deep longing on the part of the
child to have this vulnerable part of self heard and accepted. In the
midst of the child's behavior that may sometimes be bizarre or sometimes
monotonous or sometimes seemingly out of control or deliberately
provocative, there is the person of a child who is frightened, a child
who feels lost, desperately alone, a child who is hurting. At these
moments in our developing relationship, I would like by my attitude,
words, feelings, tone of voice, facial and bodily expression, by the
total person I am, to communicate to the child my Being With: my
hearing, understanding, and acceptance of this deeper message in a way
that will help the child to feel safe, accepted, cared for, and
appreciated. I want by all that I am at that moment to confrm the
child's existence.

81

82

Child-Centered Play Therapy

I would like for my words to gently touch the child's pain and fear with
great caring and by my empathic response communicate to the child, "I am
willing to experience that with you. You're not alone now, I trust you
in this process." When I am able to communicate that kind of attitude
and belief to the child, I convey my belief in the child's strength as a
person. At such moments, I touch what is untouchable in the child. One
of my adult clients described in a note the impact of this kind of Being
With relationship: A place to be me All of me, any me And somebody to be
all of me with What a treasure ... a miracle. A child expressed a
similar feeling to a sibling he invited to his sixth play therapy
session: "In here you can just be your own little ol' self". He felt
safe.

Another adult client wrote about the importance of our Being With
relationship this way: Maybe you are lucky if you have even one person
who knows what you are worth. It is something to have one person who
helps you discover riches that you didn't even know were there, who
helps you discover the dimensions of your own being so that you can
really believe how precious, how valuable, how full of wonder you are.
You are that person for me.

Sometimes by my response in such moments, it seems to me I am very
gently opening a door the child has come to stand in front of in our
journey together; and by that gesture, I am saying to the child, "I'm
really not sure either what is on the other side of the door. I
understand what is there may be frightening to you or something you
would rather not face. But I am willing to walk through that door with
you. I am not willing to lead you through the door, nor will I push you
or follow you through the door. I will be fully present beside you, and
we will discover together what is

Child-Centered Play Therapy

there. I trust you in this process to be able to face and cope with
whatever we fnd there." Tis kind of relationship was described by Rogers
(1952, p. 70) as "the process by which the structure of the self is
relaxed in the safety of the relationship with the therapist, and
previously denied experiences are perceived and then integrated into an
altered self." Te beginning of this movement toward a diferent self is
facilitated when the warmth, interest, caring, understanding,
genuineness, and empathy experienced by the therapist are perceived and
felt by the child. In this climate of facilitative psychological
attitudes (Rogers, 1980), the child comes to rely on her own vast
resources for self-directed behavior and for altering her self-concept
and basic attitude. Tus, the power to change resides within the child
and is not a result of direction, advice, or information the therapist
might have to ofer. As expressed by Rogers (1961, p. 33), "If I can
provide a certain type of relationship, the other person will discover
within himself the capacity to use that relationship for growth and
change, and personal development will occur." Te relationship then can
be described as therapeutic and a function of basic key attitudes of the
child centered play therapist who is willing to know the child and to be
known in the process of the developing relationship. Facilitating the
CCPT relationship is sort of like breathing. My natural tendency is to
be with a child as completely as possible. I do not think about this
process. Terefore, there is no series of questions that must be
examined, no specifc information I am interested in acquiring. Tinking
about such questions would make the process of the relationship
artifcial. I am just living out Being With a child, sort of like
breathing. I don't think about why I am breathing, or how long or short
my breaths should be, or how ofen I should breathe, or which breaths I
should withhold. I am not working on building a relationship. I'm living
it out, sort of like the unconscious process of breathing. I am not
planning what to do. I do not need to know more about the child's
problem or problems. Te play therapy relationship at this moment is
enough. I don't need to see beyond the moment. I am lost in the moment.

83

84

Child-Centered Play Therapy

RULE OF THUMB: Live out the moment with the child. Te solution to the
problem will take care of itself. When I am with a child in the
playroom, I only have moments. Te process of living out the moment
builds the relationship and the relationship is the therapy. It is not
possible to Be With a child and • think about what you want to do next •
ask questions about what you want to know about the child • focus on
yourself • experience the efects of stress, fatigue, not enough sleep,
illness, worry, anxiety • make decisions for a child • hope the child
will talk or play • structure a game or activity Child-centered play
therapy is an immediate and present experience for children in which the
therapeutic process emerges from a shared living relationship developed
on the basis of the therapist's consistently conveyed acceptance of
children and confdence in their ability to be of help to themselves,
thus freeing children to risk using their own strengths. Experiencing
this acceptance of themselves, children begin to value themselves and
come to perceive and accept themselves as unique and separate. As
children gradually experience being themselves, they are free to
experience living in the present and to make creative, responsible use
of their individuality. Te therapist can do nothing to make this happen.
Te therapist tries to see and experience the child's point of reference
and understand the meaning to the child without imposing her beliefs or
solutions on the child. Tis basic intent of the therapist does not vary
with the presenting problem or the cultural background of the child.
According to Glover (2001), "It is exactly this accepting and respectful
relationship that makes CCPT an ideal intervention for children who are
of a diferent culture than the therapist" (p 32).

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Because the motivation for learning and change spring from an intrinsic
self-actualizing tendency in the child, I have no need to motivate the
child, to supply energy, or to direct the child's behavior toward some
predetermined goal. I trust the child to lead our experience together to
where the child needs to be. I am not wise enough to know where a child
should be in our relationship, or what a child should do. I trust the
child's intuitive inner direction to take the experience to where the
child needs to be. I can never be sure I know what the child should be
working on in our time together. And I don't depend on what I have been
told by parents, teachers, or any other adults for direction regarding
the child's life and needs. In the play therapy relationship, I trust
the child will take me to where the child needs to be. Te signifcance of
this dimension in CCPT can graphically be seen in the following case.
Five-year-old Cassie was referred to the Center for Play Terapy at the
University of North Texas for biting children in her kindergarten class.
She had also bitten the kindergarten teacher several times. Cassie's
parents described her as waking up at night frightened and they didn't
know why. Tey were also concerned because she "had become a discipline
problem and she used to be a very cooperative child." When asked how
long they had been concerned about these behaviors, they said "for about
6 months. We thought she would get better but she hasn't." Each of these
behaviors could potentially be dealt with relatively easily. Te parents
and the teacher could be taught to use techniques and behavioral
procedures for addressing the child's biting behavior, sleeping problem,
and discipline problems. At the Center for Play Terapy, we are not
concerned about correcting problems. A child centered play therapist
trusts that the child will take the focus of the session to where the
child needs to be. Cassie was placed with a child centered play
therapist I was supervising. Fifeen minutes into Cassie's third play
therapy session, she went over to the shelf containing a medical kit,
picked up the syringe, walked over to the play therapist and said, "Take
your shirt of. I'm going to give you a shot." Te play therapist
responded, "My shirt is not for taking of." She pointed to the doll area
and said, "You can pretend one of the dolls is me and take the doll's

85

86

Child-Centered Play Therapy

shirt of." Cassie went over to the dolls, chose an adult female doll,
undressed the doll and used the syringe to perform a very explicit
sexual act on the doll. As I was observing the session, it occurred to
me that what I was observing wasn't exploratory or accidental behavior
because it was much too specifc and purposeful. Cassie had either seen
what she was acting out or the sexual activity she was portraying had
been done to her. Either way, she had probably been sexually abused and
no one knew, except of course the perpetrator. If a play therapist had
focused on the identifed problems, what would have happened to Cassie?
Te experience of sexual abuse might have been locked inside her forever.
One thing is clear. Only the child can teach us what we don't know about
a child. In the child-centered approach, the child selects the theme,
content, and process of the play. Te child chooses which toys to play
with and sets the pace. Te therapist does not make decisions for the
child, no matter how insignifcant the decision may seem to be. Tus, the
child is encouraged to accept responsibility for himself and in the
process discovers his own strengths. Te nature of the interaction
between the therapist and child in the child-centered approach was
clarifed by Axline (1969) in her Eight Basic Principles, which serve as
a guide for therapeutic contact with children. Tese principles in
revised and extended form are listed here: 1. Te therapist is genuinely
interested in the child and develops a warm, caring relationship. 2. Te
therapist experiences unqualifed acceptance of the child and does not
wish that the child was diferent in some way. 3. Te therapist creates a
feeling of safety and permissiveness in the relationship, so the child
feels free to explore and express herself completely. 4. Te therapist is
always sensitive to the child's feelings and gently refects those
feelings in such a manner that the child develops self-understanding. 5.
Te therapist believes deeply in the child's capacity to act responsibly,
unwaveringly respects the child's ability to solve personal problems,
and allows the child to do so.

Child-Centered Play Therapy

6.  Te therapist trusts the child's inner direction, allows the child to
    lead in all areas of the relationship, and resists any urge to
    direct the child's play or conversation.
7.  Te therapist appreciates the gradual nature of the therapeutic
    process and does not attempt to hurry the process.
8.  Te therapist establishes only those therapeutic limits necessary to
    anchor the session to reality and which help the child accept
    personal and appropriate relationship responsibility. In this
    approach, the child and not the problem is the point of focus. If
    the focus of the play therapist's interactions with a child is on
    solving the child's identifed problem, then the message communicated
    to the child is, "Your problem is more important than you are." RULE
    OF THUMB: When you focus on the problem, you lose sight of the
    child. Te child is always more important than any problem the child
    may be experiencing. I would be dismayed if a child ever thought
    that I was more interested in or concerned about a problem she might
    have than I was about her as a person. Every child is so much more
    than anything the child has done or experienced. I have learned from
    children that experiences do not defne the person they are. Children
    are not bound by their experiences. Tey are not limited to what they
    have done or accomplished. It is very likely that someone reading
    this book has experienced a shattering experience in his or her
    life, the destruction of a dream, an overwhelming tragedy, a deeply
    disturbing experience, a traumatic event, or a heart-breaking loss.
    Te person you are is not defned by that experience. Perhaps you are
    reading this book because you are in graduate school and now have
    direction in your life. You have overcome that devastating
    experience, a testimony to the resiliency of the human organism and
    the fact that the person you are is not defned by that experience.

87

88

Child-Centered Play Therapy

RULE OF THUMB: Te facts about a child don't tell very much about the
person of a child. Facts about a child are just a snapshot of a child.
Facts are focused on behaviors. An acting out behavior, abuse, an
accident, or chronic illness do not defne the person of a child. Such
happenings or experiences are just a snapshot of a child. A snapshot may
look hopeless but a snapshot is just one frame, one picture of a child
who is in the process of living out his or her life. I believe deeply
that a child is much more than anything the child has experienced. Te
deeper issue is not what the child has done or what has happened to a
child. Te deeper issue is what is this child capable of becoming. In my
play therapy relationships, I want to focus on the person of the child,
what the child is capable of becoming, not on the child's ways of being
in the past. RULE OF THUMB: History is not destiny. Te play therapist
must avoid becoming blinded by her limited understanding of a child and
a prisoner of her own solutions to complex problems. Te child's
identifed problem may be only an observable symptom of a deeper issue,
the cause. I do not assume that what I have been told about a child by
parents, teachers, and other signifcant individuals in the child's life
is the most important thing about the child or all there is to know
about the child. Terefore, my objective in the play therapy relationship
is to discover what I don't know that I don't know I don't know. I am
not wise enough to know what I should be looking for in a child. And
because I don't know what to look for, how can I go looking for it? I
discover what I don't know by listening to deeper unspoken messages of a
child. Tere is so much I don't know about children. Perhaps what is most
important is what I don't know. I am not wise enough to

Child-Centered Play Therapy

know what a child should be working on; therefore, I trust the child to
take me in this relationship to where the child needs to be. I am
content with not knowing. Tere are benefts of not knowing in the play
therapy relationship: not knowing requires faith and trust, not knowing
returns responsibility to the child and the relationship, not knowing
places the child in charge, knowing places the therapist in charge, not
knowing allows for creativity and uniqueness to emerge. I make no
preconceived decisions about a child. To do so would block the creative
growth of the child. I wait patiently with wonder and eager anticipation
as the vulnerable inner person of the child emerges. RULE OF THUMB:
Child-centered play therapy is a journey of discovery. Child-centered
play therapy is a journey of discovery in which the therapist and child
live out a relationship of discovering what the child is capable of
becoming. Tis discovery cannot be designed, planned, or made to happen.
It cannot be measured. Tis discovery is a knowing that cannot be
determined by reasoning. Tis discovery can only be experienced. It is an
intuitive discovery that the child lives out. Te journey of the
relationship is what is signifcant, not the determining of the child's
past history, not the determining of causes, not the uncovering of past
behaviors, not the discovery of environmental factors, not the
development of an educational plan, not direction provided by the
therapist, not the structuring of interventions, not the solving of the
child's problem, but Being With the child, fully experiencing the
child's world, seeing, experiencing, and taking in a part of the child I
have not experienced before. A play therapist in a supervision group
concluded, "Terapy is not something I have to do, but rather is
something to be a part of. Play therapy is a journey I get to take with
a child." Diagnosis is not necessary, because CCPT is not a prescriptive
approach. Te therapist does not vary the approach to meet demands based
on a specifc referral problem. Te relationship

89

90

Child-Centered Play Therapy

that develops and the creative forces this relationship releases in the
child generate the process of change and growth for the child. Te
relationship is the therapy; it is not preparation for therapy or
behavioral change. It is the relationship that facilitates release of a
child's inner resources and capabilities and supports a child's playing
out, making sense of, and mastering difcult experiences. Whatever growth
emerges in a child as a result of the play therapy relationship was
already there. Te therapist does not create anything in the child. Te
therapist only helps to release what already exists in the child. Te
potential for whatever positive behavioral changes or growth that occurs
or whatever the child becomes already existed in the child before the
therapist saw the child. Terefore, the therapist cannot take credit for
the change. In this relationship, the child is responsible for herself
and is quite capable of exercising that responsibility through
self-direction resulting in more positive behavior. In CCPT, the
relationship---not the utilization of toys, or the application of
techniques, or the interpretation of behavior---is the key to growth.
Terefore, the relationship is always focused on the present, living
experience with the child: Person of the child . . . rather than . . .
problem Present . . . . . . . . . . . . rather than . . . past Feelings
. . . . . . . . . . . . rather than . . . thoughts or acts Understanding
. . . . . . rather than . . . explaining Accepting . . . . . . . . . .
rather than . . . correcting Child's direction . . . . rather than . . .
therapist's instruction Child's wisdom . . . . . rather than . . .
therapist's knowledge Te relationship provides consistent acceptance of
the child, which is necessary for the development of enough inner
freedom and security in the child for her to express herself in
self-enhancing ways. Te key facilitative elements in the relationship
which are growth-promoting for the child can be summed up in the
following therapeutic dimensions in the play therapy relationship:
Belief in the child Respect for the child Acceptance of the child

Child-Centered Play Therapy

Hearing the inner child Acceptance of the child's will Focus on the
child's needs Freedom for the child to set his own direction Opportunity
for the child to make choices Respect for the child's boundaries
Patience with the process

Objectives in Child-Centered Play Therapy When we speak of objectives in
the CCPT approach, the emphasis is on broadly defned therapeutic
objectives rather than on individualized prescriptive goals for the
child. Setting specifc goals is inconsistent with child-centered
philosophy because goals are evaluative and imply specifc achievements
required of the child which have been externally established. When
specifc objectives or goals are set for the individual child, the
therapist will almost assuredly drif into the trap of subtly or directly
pushing the child to work on the objective related to the identifed
problem and will thus restrict the child's opportunity for
self-direction. Does this mean the therapist is not interested in the
"problem" that parents or teachers have identifed? Not at all, for such
information about the child is a part of the child's total life and can
(but will not necessarily) help the therapist to better understand what
the child is communicating in the playroom. An important caution to note
is that knowing such pretherapy information about the child may bias the
play therapist's perceptual view of the child and result in the
therapist not "seeing" other parts of the child Although this is a
realistic concern, exposure to information about the child prior to
encountering the child for the frst time is largely unavoidable in that
the therapist will ofen need to interview parents or teachers prior to
working with the child, because the setting precludes the availability
of another staf member to conduct the interview. Tis potential problem
can largely be overcome if the therapist has a high degree of
selfunderstanding, is aware of the potential perceptual bias, and is

91

92

Child-Centered Play Therapy

committed to the process of allowing the child to be fully the person
she is at the moment with the therapist. Te general objectives of CCPT
are consistent with the child's inner self-directed striving toward
self-actualization. An overriding premise is the necessity for building
a relationship with the child that will provide the child with a
positive growth experience in the presence of an understanding,
accepting, and supportive adult so the child will be able to discover
internal strengths. RULE OF THUMB: You can't build a relationship with a
problem. Because CCPT focuses on the person of the child rather than on
the child's problem, the emphasis is on facilitating the child's eforts
to become more adequate, as a person, in coping with current and future
problems that may afect his life. To that end, the broad therapeutic
objectives of CCPT are to help the child 1. Develop a more positive
self-concept. 2. Assume greater self-responsibility. 3. Become more
self-directing. 4. Become more self-accepting. 5. Become more
self-reliant. 6. Engage in self-determined decision making. 7.
Experience a feeling of control. 8. Become sensitive to the process of
coping. 9. Develop an internal source of evaluation. 10. Become more
trusting of himself. Tese objectives of CCPT provide a general framework
for understanding the characteristics and the process of the approach.
Because specifc objectives are not set for the child, the therapist is
free to facilitate the development of these person-focused objectives.
Tis does not preclude the child from working on specifc problems she
feels a need to express, but frees the child to do so. In this
child-centered relationship, the therapist believes in and trusts the
child's capacity to set her own goals. Children in play therapy,
however, seldom establish specifc goals for themselves, at

Child-Centered Play Therapy

least not verbally and perhaps not consciously. A 4-year-old does not
voluntarily say, "I need to stop hitting my 1-year-old brother," or a
5-year-old does not state, "My goal is to like myself better." Likewise,
a 6-year-old does not say, "I'm here to work on the anger and rage I
feel toward my father, who sexually abused me." Although such problems
may not be stated as goals by children, such problems will be acted out
through their play, and in the process of the relationship children will
work on the problems in their own way. In this approach, children need
not be aware they have a problem for play therapy to be benefcial. In
CCPT, no attempt is made to control a child, to have the child be a
certain way, or to reach a conclusion the therapist has decided is
important. Te therapist is not the authority who decides what is best
for the child, what the child should think, or how he should feel. If
this were the case, the child would be deprived of the opportunity to
discover his own strengths.

What Children Learn in Play Therapy Because the majority of children who
are referred for play therapy are involved in some sort of school
experience, a pertinent topic to examine is that of learning. Most
teachers spend their day involved in the process of helping children
learn, so teachers naturally may want to know just what children learn
in play therapy, especially if a child has to miss part of the
instructional time in order to attend play therapy sessions. Actually,
for children, play therapy is a unique learning experience under the
most favorable growth-promoting conditions possible and, as such, is
viewed from a developmental perspective with objectives consistent with
those of the school: to assist children in learning about themselves and
their world. Play therapy assists the development of children by helping
them to know and accept themselves. Play therapy also assists in
accomplishing the broader school objective of learning about the world
by helping children to get ready to proft from the learning experiences
provided by teachers. Children who are anxious or worried, have poor
self-concepts, are experiencing a divorce in

93

94

Child-Centered Play Therapy

the home environment, or have poor peer relationships cannot achieve
maximum learning from even the most masterful teacher. Play therapy,
therefore, is an adjunct to the learning environment, an experience that
helps children maximize opportunities to learn in the classroom. Risk
taking, self-exploration, and self-discovery are not likely to occur in
the presence of threat or the absence of safety. Te potential learning
experiences available in play therapy are directly related to the degree
to which the therapist is successful in creating a climate of safety
within which children feel fully accepted and safe enough to risk being
and expressing the innermost totality of their emotional being. Tis is
not a conscious decision on the part of children but, rather, the result
of a permissive climate void of criticism, suggestions, praise,
disapproval, or eforts to change them. Children are accepted just as
they are; therefore, there is no need to please the adult in this
relationship. As one child expressed it, "In here you can just be your
own little ol' self." Because there is no threat to self,
self-exploration and self-discovery occur naturally. Tis is not meant to
imply that self-expression occurs with reckless abandon, as might be the
case in the early stage of the therapeutic process. In response to the
feeling of permissiveness established in the playroom, the safety to be
fully one's self, and the careful use of therapeutic limits (which will
be discussed later), children learn self-control and responsible freedom
of expression. Most of what is learned by children in the play therapy
relationship is not a cognitive learning but a developing experiential,
intuitive learning about the self that occurs over the course of the
therapeutic experience. Tis kind of learning about self in the CCPT
relationship is a result of the kind of relationship facilitated by the
therapist. Te following Eight Basic Learning Experiences About Self
facilitate change in children: • Children learn to respect themselves.
Te play therapist maintains and communicates a constant regard and
respect for children, regardless of their behavior---whether they are
playing passively, acting out aggression, or being

Child-Centered Play Therapy

whiny and dependently insisting on help with even the simplest tasks.
Children sense and experience the therapist's respect, feel respected,
and, because an absence of evaluation and an ever-present acceptance
exists, they internalize the respect and thus learn to respect
themselves. Once children have respect for themselves, they learn to
respect others. • Children learn that their feelings are acceptable.
Trough the process of playing out their feelings in the presence of an
adult who understands and accepts even the intensity of the feelings,
children learn that all of their feelings are acceptable. As children
experience their feelings are acceptable, they begin to be more open in
expressing their feelings. • Children learn to express their feelings
responsibly. Once children's feelings have been openly expressed and
accepted, they lose their intensity and can more easily be controlled
appropriately. As children learn to responsibly control their feelings,
they are no longer controlled by those feelings. Tis, then, is a freeing
process for children to experience in that they are free to go beyond
those feelings. • Children learn to assume responsibility for
themselves. In the natural process of development, children strive
toward independence and self-reliance but ofen are thwarted in their
eforts by adults who, although wellintentioned, take charge by doing
things for children and thus deprive them of opportunities to experience
how being responsible for themselves feels. In the play therapy
relationship, the therapist believes in children's ability to be
resourceful and so resists doing anything that would deprive them of the
opportunity to discover their own strength. As the therapist allows
children to struggle to do things for themselves, children learn to
assume responsibility for themselves and discover what that
responsibility feels like. • Children learn to be creative and
resourceful in confronting problems. When children are allowed to fgure
things out for themselves, to derive their own solutions to

95

96

Child-Centered Play Therapy

problems, to complete their own tasks, their own creative resources are
released and developed. With increasing frequency, then, children will
tackle their own problems, even those that were formerly overwhelming,
and experience the satisfaction of doing things all by themselves.
Although a child may initially resist the opportunity to solve his own
problems, the creative tendency of the self will come forth in response
to the therapist's persistent patience. • Children learn self-control
and self-direction. If no opportunities are available to experience
being in control, learning self-control and self-direction is not
possible. Although this principle seems simplistically obvious, the
absence of opportunities like this in children's lives is overwhelmingly
conspicuous when one takes the time to carefully observe children's
interactions with signifcant adults. Unlike most other adults in
children's lives, the play therapist does not make decisions for
children or try to control them either directly or subtly. Limits on
children's behavior in the playroom are verbalized in such a way that
children are allowed to control their own behavior. Because control is
not applied externally, children learn self-control and self-direction
as they are allowed to make their own decisions. • Children gradually
learn, at a feeling level, to accept themselves. As children experience
being accepted just as they are with no conditional expectations from
the therapist, they gradually, and in sometimes imperceptible ways,
begin to accept themselves as worthwhile. Tis is both a direct and an
indirect process of communication and learning about self. Te therapist
does not overtly tell children they are accepted, because that would
have little or no positive impact on the relationship or the way
children feel about themselves. Acceptance is an attitudinal message
communicated verbally and nonverbally by all that the therapist is and
does. Acceptance is frst felt by children and then becomes known to them
as they experience being accepted nonjudgmentally for who they are,

Child-Centered Play Therapy

just as they are, with no desire that they be diferent. Tis increased
self-acceptance is a major contributing factor to the development of a
positive self-concept. • Children learn to make choices and to be
responsible for their choices. Life entails a never-ending series of
choices. But how can children learn how to make a choice or what making
a choice feels like if they are not allowed to experience the process of
making choices: the indecision, the struggle, wanting to avoid, feeling
incapable, the anxiety, and the apprehension that one's choice will be
unacceptable to others? Terefore, the therapist avoids making even
simple choices for children, such as which color to use in a drawing or
which toy to play with. Making decisions builds character. Tese are all
desirable indices of growth in maturity.

References Axline, V. (1969). Play therapy. Ballantine. Baum, K. (1956).
Te wizard of oz. Rand McNally. de Saint Exupery, A. (1943). Te little
prince. Harcourt, Brace. Glover, G. (2001). Cultural considerations in
play therapy. In G. Landreth (Ed.), Innovations in play therapy: Issues,
process, and special populations (pp. 31--41). Brunner-Routledge.
Moustakas, C. (1981). Rhythms, rituals and relationships. Harlow Press.
Patterson, C. (1974). Relationship counseling and psychotherapy. Harper
& Row. Rogers, C. (1951). Client-centered therapy: Its current practice,
implications, and theory. Houghton Mifin. Rogers, C. (1952).
Client-centered psychotherapy. Scientifc American, 187, 70. Rogers, C.
(1961). On becoming a person. Houghton Mifin. Rogers, C. (1977). Carl
Rogers on personal power: Inner strength and its revolutionary impact.
Delacorte. Rogers, C. (1980). A way of being. Houghton Mifin. Rogers, C.
(1986). Client-centered therapy. In J. L. Kutash & A. Wolf (Eds.),
Psychotherapist's casebook (pp. 197--208). Jossey-Bass.

97

Chapter

6

Being Culturally Responsive

Play is an integral part of childhood in all cultures and is critical in
the development of children's expressive language, communication skills,
emotional development, social skills, decision-making skills, and
cognitive development. Children from all cultures engage in play
spontaneously, and their play is culturally contextual. Play is also a
medium for exploration and discovery of interpersonal relationships,
experimentation with adult roles, and understanding of the child's own
feelings. Although play behaviors are infuenced by a child's cultural
group, developmentally all children use play as a natural medium of
communication. Play is the most complete form of self-expression
developed by the human organism. Play is the universal language of
children. Tis chapter is intended to provide a brief discussion of the
cultural responsiveness of child-centered play therapy (CCPT) and a
Being With cultural philosophy. Te intent is to encourage the
development of ongoing discussions regarding what it means to be
culturally responsive within the therapeutic relationship. A central
tenant of the Being With cultural philosophy is that the greatest
respect the CCPT therapist can show the person of a child and the
child's culture is to focus fully on the person the child is and Be With
the child as completely as the therapist is capable in the moment. Play
therapists can refer to Ray and colleagues (2022) for an in-depth
examination of cultural considerations for DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-6

99

100

Being Culturally Responsive

working with children and their families. Te authors provide a
comprehensive review of multicultural play therapy through the lens of
CCPT including cultural humility and CCPT's cultural responsiveness to
various racial, ethnic, and cultural groups.

Child-Centered Play Therapy and Cultural Responsiveness Te CCPT
therapist is sensitive to the uniqueness of each child, fully accepts
the child as the child is, and is respectful of individual diferences,
including cultural diferences. Tis accepting and respectful relationship
makes child-centered play therapy an ideal intervention for children who
are of a diferent culture than the therapist. Multicultural sensitivity
is not something to be done or added on to the CCPT approach; rather, it
is a natural part of the CCPT philosophy and process and is viewed as
being equally important to the relationship as any other dimension of
the relationship. Te CCPT therapist lives out an openness to discovery
and development of self-awareness of dimensions of self that might
interfere with unconditional acceptance of a child. Te therapist's
understanding of the child's world may be impacted by the therapist's
phenomenal feld and past experiences, including known and unknown
cultural biases. Te therapist acknowledges the importance of discovering
and addressing blind spots and personal limitations through supervision
and education to expand cultural knowledge. Child-centered play therapy
is a way of Being With a child that is devoid of planning or
predetermined structure. Sensitive understanding of children occurs to
the extent the therapist is able to put aside their own experiences and
expectations and appreciate the personhood of children, their
activities, their experiences, their feelings, and their thoughts. Tis
is a unique relationship based on expectancy, not expectation.
Expectations restrict and box a child in. Since I have no expectations
of Maria in the playroom, I will never be disappointed in Maria.
Expectancy is an attitude, a Being With, a way of living your life in
the play therapy relationship, a dynamic quality of anticipation of
being together. What will Maria be like today? Te child centered play
therapist lives out an attitude of eagerness, sharing, and discovery.

Being Culturally Responsive

Expectancy is alive, dynamic, an unknown potential. A relationship of
expectancy does not rely on the past or on information about a child. I
want to hear what has not been heard in a child. I don't accept what is
said or reported about a child as all there is to know about a child. In
the play therapy relationship, I want to discover what I don't know that
I don't know I don't know. I am not wise enough to know what I should be
looking for in a child. And because I don't know what to look for, how
can I go looking for it? I am dependent on the child to take me in the
relationship to where the child needs to be, what the child needs to
explore. I discover what I don't know by listening to deeper unspoken
messages of a child. Te CCPT therapist provides a relationship in which
the child feels safe, safe enough to express and explore how she views
herself, her experiences with others and her worldview. Te childcentered
relationship with the play therapist is a place where the child can just
be her "own little 'ol self" on her terms without being concerned about
meeting someone's expectations, a place of understanding and acceptance,
a place where the child can discover unknown and unused strengths, a
place where she is prized as a person of worth, a healing relationship.
A basic tenet of child-centered play therapy is whatever the child
perceives to be occurring is reality for that child. Terefore, in every
cultural group, each child is uniquely diferent. Te child's perception
of reality is what must be understood if the child and the behaviors of
the child are to be understood. Whatever the child perceives in the
phenomenal feld, therefore, assumes primary importance as opposed to how
others view the reality of the child's world. Te child and the child's
behavior must always be understood by looking through the child's eyes.
Te CCPT therapist tries to see and experience the child's point of
reference and understand the meaning to the child without imposing
beliefs or solutions on the child. Te therapist provides a culturally
sensitive relationship by allowing the child the freedom to be who the
child is with no expectations. Tis basic intent of the therapist does
not vary with the presenting problem or the child's background and
history. However, the CCPT therapist is intentional in including toys
and materials representative of the diversity of children served to

101

102

Being Culturally Responsive

facilitate children's play language. Children's self-directed play takes
on aspects of their culture and transcends language barriers. When a
child plays out their story and is responded to with empathy, genuine
warmth, and acceptance by the therapist, the child begins to develop
empathy and acceptance of self, including their culture, because their
full expression of self and experiences is accepted (Figure 6.1). Te
CCPT therapist does not encourage or insist on direct verbal expression
and allows children to choose the method of communication most
comfortable to them. Because play is children's natural language of
expression, children most comfortably play out rather than talk out
their experiences and feelings in direct but more ofen symbolic ways
that allow them to distance themselves from the pain and distress
involved in exploration of actual happenings and experiences. Although
some cultural groups may discourage the direct expression of emotions,
children from such

FIGURE 6.1 Child-centered play therapy is a culturally responsive
intervention because children's self-directed play takes on aspects of
their culture and transcends language barriers.

Being Culturally Responsive

groups are still able to fully express and explore intense emotional
reactions in the safety of their play in the child-centered play therapy
relationship. In some approaches to play therapy, the therapist expects
children to volunteer information, especially information related to
problems and their life experiences, so play therapy sessions can be
structured to deal overtly with these issues in the course of therapy.
Such an approach goes counter to the values of some cultural groups that
believe problems should not be disclosed to strangers and should be
handled within the family. Te CCPT therapist does not question children
about their problems because the child-centered approach is not a
prescriptive approach. Te child's presenting issue and background
information do not provide guidance for how the therapist enters into
the relationship with a child in the playroom. Each child is a unique
person embedded in their culture, and it is the whole person of the
child that is the focus of the CCPT therapist. Tis position does not
diminish the importance of knowing information about diverse cultures,
but what I've learned about a child's particular cultural group or any
other information is set aside when I meet the child. Tis allows me to
fully attune to a child in the moment and follow the child's lead. Te
focus of child-centered play therapy is on knowing, understanding and
relating to the unique person of each child. Empathy, acceptance,
understanding, and genuineness on the part of the therapist are provided
to children equally, irrespective of their color, condition,
circumstance, concern or complaint. Te child is free to communicate
through play in a manner that is comfortable and typical for the child,
including cultural adaptations of play and expression. (Sweeney &
Landreth, 2009, p. 135)

According to Glover (2022), "to know a people is to know their story"
(p.129). Children learn their culture from their family and community.
Initial and ongoing parent consultations provide valuable opportunities
for understanding the child's and the family's unique culture. As
mentioned earlier, although it is important that therapists know about
diverse cultures, information learned about a particular cultural group
is not necessarily true for every

103

104

Being Culturally Responsive

family in that cultural group. Instead, the CCPT therapist recognizes
cultural opportunities to actively explore the family's cultural
identity and experiences (Ray et al., 2022, p. 2).

A Being With Cultural Philosophy Te CCPT therapist's purpose in the
playroom is to be fully with the child in whatever the child is feeling,
experiencing, and expressing at that moment. If the play therapist
enters a session with a plan to look for opportunities to make a
culturally sensitive response, that is the therapist's need. Te play
therapist is no longer "looking through the child's eyes." Te Being With
concept has no preconditions, exclusions, or "ifs." However, the CCPT
therapist can embrace opportunities as they present themselves in the
relationship to respond in ways that are culturally pertinent, just as
the CCPT therapist would respond to other relevant happenings that the
child plays out in the relationship. When I am with a child in a play
therapy experience, my objective is to live out the moment with the
child. Te greatest respect I can show the person of a child and his
culture is to focus completely on the person this child is and to Be
With this child as fully as I am capable in this moment. "We cannot ever
fully know the cultural experiences and perceptions of another but we
seek to know with great curiosity, care, and empathy for the person"
(Ray et al., 2022, p. 13). Terefore, I will follow the child's lead into
any dimension, including cultural issues. My focus is on the person of
the child. I am living out the moment with this child. In the playroom,
I am open and eager to explore any part of the child's life that the
child may express. I have no plan for our experience together. I trust
the child will take me to where the child needs to be.

Child-Parent Relationship Therapy (CPRT) and Cultural Responsiveness Te
development of CPRT was a natural response to a felt need to give away
child-centered play therapy philosophy and skills to

Being Culturally Responsive

parents to use with their own children. CPRT is an evidence-based
10-session flial therapy model. CPRT relies on the child's natural means
of communication, play, as the primary medium for communicating the
child's feelings, needs, wants, wishes, fantasies, experiences, and
thoughts. Play is also the medium for building the child-parent
relationship. In CPRT, CCPT therapists train parents to be therapeutic
agents with their own children through a format of didactic instruction,
demonstration play sessions, required at-home laboratory play sessions,
and supervision in a supportive atmosphere. Parents are taught basic
child-centered play therapy principles and skills including refective
listening, recognizing and responding to children's feelings,
therapeutic limit setting, building children's self-esteem, and
structuring required weekly play sessions with their children using a
special kit of selected toys. Tese basic CCPT skills have been proven to
be necessary and efective dimensions in facilitating the development of
secure attachment relationships across cultural groups. Parents learn
how to create a nonjudgmental, understanding, and accepting environment
that enhances the parent--child relationship, thus facilitating personal
growth and change for child and parent. (Landreth & Bratton, 2020,
p. 10)

In the special playtimes, parents learn to appreciate the child's use of
play to communicate, and the child is allowed to lead their time
together. Te person of the child and the parent's relationship with the
child is always more important than the problem the child may have. CPRT
is primarily experientially based, relying on the principle of learning
by doing. CPRT is one of the most culturally accommodating modalities in
the mental health feld. CPRT empowers parents to be the therapeutic
agent of change in their children's lives by training parents in basic
child-centered play therapy skills that are utilized in required weekly
supervised play sessions with their children. Te design and structure of
CPRT special playtimes facilitates the integration of the family's
cultural identity in a natural way through play and the responses of
parents. In the process of playing, children integrate cultural
experiences, values, and beliefs.

105

106

Being Culturally Responsive

"Te focus on the family and the uniqueness of each individual positions
this intervention as especially responsive to cultural variables"
(Landreth & Bratton, 2020). CPRT honors the collective orientation many
minoritized populations share by working with the parent--child dyad and
conducting the intervention in a group format. By believing in parents'
ability to become the therapeutic agent for their child, CPRT empowers
parents, which is especially important for parents who face oppressive
factors that disempower them. Conducting CPRT in homogenous groups with
respect to ethnic and racial identity may provide a more comfortable
setting for parents to share cultural values related to parenting
practices. As mentioned previously, the CPRT therapist acknowledges the
importance of self-awareness to discover and address potential biases
and limitations related to culture when working with diverse groups of
parents.

Child-Centered Play Therapy Research with Culturally Diverse Populations
Lin and Bratton (2015) conducted a meta-analytic study of 52 studies,
published since 1995, examining CCPT approaches, including CPRT.
Children ranged in age from 2 to 11 years. Interestingly, results
indicated that non-White children, for many of whom English was not
their frst language, demonstrated signifcantly greater improvement as a
result of CCPT than White children. Te authors hypothesized that the
CCPT approach allowed these children to utilize their self-directed play
to transcend language barriers, thus allowing them a nonverbal means of
expressing their inner feelings, thoughts, and experiences that they may
be unable to express fully in an English-speaking world. Te authors
concluded that meta-analytic fndings indicate practitioners can
confdently consider CCPT an efective intervention across cultural groups
and presenting issues. Peer-reviewed, published outcome studies show
CCPT's and CPRT's efcacy and responsiveness to diverse cultural groups.
Specifc to the efectiveness of CCPT, rigorous controlled group studies
show that children from specifc cultural groups

Being Culturally Responsive

demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement following CCPT,
including African American/Black children (Taylor & Ray, 2021),
Immigrant Hispanic/Latinx children (Garza & Bratton, 2005), children
living in poverty (Bratton et al., 2013), and Chinese children (Shen,
2002). In several additional controlled studies showing statistically
signifcant positive efects of CCPT, the majority of child participants
were from diverse ethnocultural and socioeconomic backgrounds
(evidencebasedchildthera py.com). Numerous controlled group studies
examining the efectiveness of CPRT, in which the CPRT therapists' race
or ethnicity matched parent participants, show CPRT's efcacy across
ethnic/ racial, socioeconomic, and cultural groups. Statistically
signifcant benefcial fndings, along with anecdotal data from parent
report and therapist observations regarding cultural considerations,
demonstrate that the 10-session CPRT/flial therapy model was efective
with African American/Black children (SheelyMoore & Bratton, 2010),
Immigrant Hispanic/Latinx children (Ceballos & Bratton, 2010), Israeli
children (Kidron & Landreth, 2010), Immigrant Chinese children (Chau &
Landreth, 1997; Yeun et al., 2002), Immigrant Korean children (Lee &
Landreth, 2003), Korean children (Jang, 2000), and Native American
children (Glover & Landreth, 2000). An expanded review of CCPT and CPRT
research studies and fndings is presented in Chapter 19. Complete study
descriptions and fndings for CCPT and CPRT research studies are
available at evidencebasedchildtherapy.com.

References Bratton, S., Ceballos, P., Sheely-Moore, A., Meany-Walen, K.,
Pronchenko, Y, & Jones, L. (2013). Head start early mental health
intervention: Efects of child-centered play therapy on disruptive
behaviors. International Journal of Play Terapy, 22(1), 28--42.
Ceballos, P., & Bratton, S. C. (2010). School-based child-parent
relationship therapy (CPRT) with low-income frst-generation immigrant
Latino parents: Efects on children's behaviors and parent-child
relationship stress. Psychology in the Schools, 47(8), 761--775. Chau,
I., & Landreth, G. (1997). Filial therapy with Chinese parents: Efects
on parental empathic interactions, parental acceptance of child and
parental stress. International Journal of Play Terapy, 6(2), 75--92.

107

108

Being Culturally Responsive

Garza, Y., & Bratton, S. (2005). School-based child-centered play
therapy with Hispanic children: Outcomes and cultural considerations.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 14(1), 51--80. Glover, G. (2022).
Cultural opportunities with indigenous populations. In D. Ray, Y. Ogowa,
& Y. Cheng (Eds.), Multicultural play therapy (pp. 128--146). Routledge.
Glover, G., & Landreth, G. (2000). Filial therapy with Native Americans
on the Flathead Reservation. International Journal of Play Terapy, 9(2),
57--80. Jang, M. (2000). Efectiveness of flial therapy for Korean
parents. International Journal of Play Terapy, 9(2), 39--56. Kidron, M.,
& Landreth, G. (2010). Intensive child parent relationship therapy with
Israeli parents in Israel. International Journal of Play Terapy, 19(2),
64--78. Landreth, G., & Bratton, S. (2020) Child-parent relationship
therapy (CPRT): An evidence-based 10-session flial therapy model (2nd
ed.). Routledge. Lee, M., & Landreth, G. (2003). Filial therapy with
immigrant Korean parents in the United States. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 12(2), 67--85. Lin, Y., & Bratton, S. (2015). A
meta-analytic review of child-centered play therapy approaches. Journal
of Counseling and Development, 93(1), 45--58. Ray, D., Ogawa, Y., &
Cheng, Y. (2022a). Multicultural play therapy. Routledge. Ray, D.,
Ogawa, Y., & Cheng, Y. (2022b). Cultural humility and the play
therapist. In D. Ray, Y. Ogawa, & Y. Cheng (Eds.), Multicultural play
therapy (pp. 13--28). Routledge. Sheely-Moore, A., & Bratton, S. (2010).
A strengths-based parenting intervention with low-income African
American families. Professional School Counseling, 13(3), 175--183.
Shen, Y. (2002). Short-term group play therapy with Chinese earthquake
victims: Efects on anxiety, depression, and adjustment. International
Journal of Play Terapy, 11(1), 43--63. Sweeney, D., & Landreth, G.
(2009). Child-centered play therapy. In K. O'Connor & L. Braverman
(Ed.), Play therapy theory and practice: Comparing theories and
techniques (2nd ed., pp. 123--162). Wiley. Taylor, L., & Ray, D. C.
(2021). Child-centered play therapy and social--emotional competencies
of African American children: A randomized controlled trial.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 30(2), 74--85. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pla0000152 Yuen, T. C., Landreth, G. L., & Baggerly, J.
(2002). Filial therapy with immigrant Chinese parents in Canada.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 11(2), 63--90.

Chapter

7

The Play Therapist

Te play therapist is a unique adult in children's lives, unique because
the therapist responds out of his own humanness to the person of the
child while controlling any desire to direct, probe, or teach, and
instead provides responses that are freeing to the child's natural urge
toward self-direction. Tat children are aware of this uniqueness may be
seen in this excerpt from a play therapy session: Chris: What color
should I paint this frog? Terapist: In here you can decide what color
you want the frog to be. Chris: I don't know. Would black be okay? Are
some frogs black? My teacher said frogs are green. Terapist: You would
like to paint your frog black, but you're not sure that would be okay.
Chris: Yeah, you're supposed to tell me what color to use. Terapist: You
would like for me to make the decision for you. Chris: Yeah, everybody
else does. Terapist: Everybody else would just decide for you so you
think I should, too, but in here you can decide the color you want your
frog to be. Chris: It's going to be blue! Te world's frst blue frog!
You're funny! DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-7

109

110

The Play Therapist

Therapist: I seem different to you because I don't tell you what to do.
Chris: Yeah! ... Like a blue frog.

Creating Differences Chris is right, of course. Terapists who use play
therapy are "funny" people. Tey are not "funny" as in creating humor,
but "funny" as in creating a new and diferent kind of adult--child
relationship for the child to experience. Te creation of this
relationship is contributed to by the presence of play materials that
provide unique opportunities for communication and relationship
development that are not possible in verbally bound experiences with
children. Te playroom is not necessarily unique, for most children will
have already played with many of the materials available. Te playroom
does, however, make it possible for the therapist to create those
diferences that make the therapist truly unique, "funny" in the child's
thinking. Tis adult, the play therapist, exhibits characteristics
children rarely experience with adults. Te child centered play therapist
does not do anything to a child, nor does she make a child do anything
or lead a child toward a predetermined point which some adult has
concluded is the place a child should be. To do so would be to attempt
to apply the therapeutic aspects of the play relationship to the child.
Te therapeutic qualities of the play therapy relationship cannot be
applied to a child. Tey can only be experienced by the child as a living
process. Te child, by his or her participation, enables therapy to
occur. Tis view of the child presents the child not as an object to be
changed but as a person, a dynamic person with the creative capacity to
change. Te child centered play therapist's attitude is one of a deep
desire to experience the person of the child, not to do something to the
child. Te philosophy described here is a philosophy of the present. Te
characteristics of acceptance of the child, respect for the child's
uniqueness, and sensitivity to the child's feelings identify the play
therapist as a unique kind of adult. Te therapist sees the child as an
individual with thoughts, feelings, beliefs,

The Play Therapist

ideas, desires, fantasies, and opinions worthy of respect. Many adults
never see the child. Tey are too busy to notice the child. Tey have too
many "important" things to do that must be done now, and afer all, it is
important that things be done in a hurry. Consequently, the child is not
really seen. In such circumstances, the adult is only vaguely aware of
the child's presence. For most children who come to the playroom,
receiving the play therapist's complete and undivided attention for 45
minutes is a truly unique experience. Te play therapist notices
everything the child does and is genuinely interested in the child's
feelings and play activities. Unlike most other adults, the therapist
has a block of time devoted exclusively to the child. Te child-centered
play therapist is intentional about creating an atmosphere. Terapists
must be aware of what they do and why they do it. Tis makes therapists
unique because they are not stumbling through a relationship with a
child, but are being careful about their own words and actions. Te
therapist is working hard at creating an atmosphere conducive to the
building of a relationship with the child. A diference is created
because the time together is child centered, and the child is allowed to
be separate from the therapist. Te child is viewed as a capable and
unique individual. Te following description of Caleb is an example of a
truly unique child, waiting to be noticed.

Caleb---My Most Dramatic Play Therapy Experience When Caleb was two
years old, he would wake up early, go downstairs and fx his own bowl of
breakfast cereal, which necessitated getting a jug of milk from the
refrigerator. In those days, milk was delivered in glass jugs. His
mother and grandmother were afraid he might drop the jug and cut
himself, so to prevent that happening, when they put him to bed at
night, they tied him to the bed so he couldn't get out of bed. Caleb
protested vehemently during this process and the mother and grandmother
would say to him, "Night, night, damn you, don't cry!" Now as a
three-yearold, that was Caleb's entire vocabulary, "Night, night, damn
you, don't cry."

111

112

The Play Therapist

Mother and grandmother brought Caleb to the Children's Center, where I
was doing my doctoral internship. Tey wanted a diagnosis of mental
retardation so they could place Caleb in a state facility. Te Children's
Center diagnostic team diagnosed Caleb as being autistic, not mentally
retarded, and recommended Caleb be placed in play therapy. I was
scheduled to be Caleb's play therapist. In our frst play therapy
session, Caleb walked into the play room with me, went directly to the
sand box, sat in the middle of the sandbox, and proceeded to
rhythmically pour buckets of sand over his head without any breaks in
this activity. I made frequent tracking and refective responses: "You're
scooping up more sand." ... "You're pouring lots of sand on your head."
... "You like doing that." ... "Tat sand just goes all over you." Afer
30 minutes, it was obvious this activity was not going to be helpful to
Caleb or our relationship, and I ended the session. (One of only two or
three times I have ever done that.) For the following sessions, I
scheduled Caleb in one of the small counseling ofces with a small
4-foot-long table and two chairs. My objective was to increase the
opportunities for contact with Caleb by limiting the possibilities of
him losing himself in an activity like the sand activity in the previous
session. However, Caleb found a plastic "do not disturb" hang tag on the
inside door of the ofce and lost himself in spinning the tag round and
round for the entire session. In the next play therapy session, I made
sure the hang tag was not on the inside of the door. Caleb spent some of
the time twirling himself around rapidly and never became dizzy. Tat
amazed me. He did spend some time crawling up on the chair and repeated
this activity for some time---crawling up and crawling down. In the
sixth session, Caleb crawled up on the 4-foot-long table and afer
exploring what that was like, attempted to get down, but his foot
wouldn't reach the foor. He tried getting down from various parts of the
table, then tried extending his foot of the table but could never reach
the foor. My responses were: "You want to get of that table." ...
"You're reaching way down with your foot." ... "It's a long way down to
the foor." ... "You're working hard to get down." Afer making endless
attempts to get of the table, he

The Play Therapist

stood up on the table, turned to face me, looked straight into my face,
and stuck his arms out toward me. At that moment, I knew Caleb trusted
me. My heart gave a quick extra beat, as I reached out toward him. He
jumped into my arms, and I gave him a quick hug. He crawled of my lap to
the foor. Tat was our frst contact in six sessions. Caleb felt safe
enough to allow me into his world for a brief moment. In the following
six sessions, I met Caleb in the waiting room, took his hand and walked
with him to the glass entry door, stepped outside, closed the door with
Caleb on the inside and played a hand game with him by placing my hand
on the glass. On the other side of the glass door, he placed his hand to
match my hand, thus admitting me to his world. He was very attentive in
this activity. Tis was the second signifcant contact. We then went to
the play therapy room. He didn't play in the sand. In the 20th week, I
decided to place Caleb in the Children's Center preschool class with fve
other children for their lunch time and following 30-minute free play
time to help develop his social skills. I continued to have play therapy
sessions with Caleb. Although Caleb's social skills remained far behind
the social skills of the group, this adventure was a success for Caleb
over time. Caleb was capable of making contact with me, but unable to do
so because of overwhelming circumstances that existed in his life
(i.e. autism and the harmful relationship he had experienced with his
mother and grandmother). My personal search was to fnd a way to make
contact with Caleb, build a relationship with him, and still be true to
myself, my theory, and what I believed about Caleb---that on some level
he was capable. Te problem was not Caleb's inability to communicate but
my difculty in making contact and building a relationship with Caleb in
a way that was comfortable for me and consistent with my theoretical
position. I needed to make adjustments in my approach in the same way I
would make adjustments for a child who was blind or a child in a
wheelchair.

Being With When a child frst views the play therapist, no observable
signifcant diferences exist between the therapist and other adults. Te

113

114

The Play Therapist

therapist may be taller or shorter than most adults, or he or she may
have a memorable face, but no physical diferences exist that can signal
to the child that this person will be special. Te diferences between an
efective play therapist and other adults, therefore, must come from
within as the self of the therapist is made fully present and available
to the child. Several qualities make the child centered play therapist a
different kind of adult to the child, and one of the most signifcant is
the art of being fully present---that is, interacting with the child by
observing, listening, and making statements of recognition. In many
children's relationships with adults, being fully present rarely exists.
Parents are lost in what their cell phone has to ofer or children are
observed through the din of the television or they are recognized
primarily when they do something wrong. Te play therapist is an adult
who intently observes, empathically listens, and encouragingly
recognizes not only the child's play but also the child's wants, needs,
and feelings. Te play therapist knows that being present with the child
requires much more than a physical presence; Being With is truly an art
form that makes the play therapy experience unique for the child. Te
play therapist is a person who hears the hurt in a child's heart; a
person who cares enough to listen to the depth of a child's pain; a
person who accepts without judgment the person of the child; a person
who prizes the child's uniqueness in the midst of the child's despair; a
person who appreciates the desperation of a child's loneliness; a person
who understands and is willing to be with a child. Te uniqueness of the
play therapist is heightened by listening actively not only to what the
child verbalizes but also to the messages conveyed through the child's
activity. Te therapist understands that the toys and materials children
select and how they play has meaning as a part of their total efort to
communicate. Te child receives the therapist's complete attention.
Unlike many other adults, who are too busy and too involved with
satisfying their own needs, the therapist is unhurried, committed to
understanding the child's needs, and really does want to hear the child.
In fact, for the duration of the time they have together, to hear and
understand are the therapist's primary objectives Te impact

The Play Therapist

of this Being With relationship can be seen in a child's reaction
looking back on the play therapy experience several years later, "As I
think back ... you didn't seem to do a thing but be there. And yet, a
harbor doesn't do anything either, except to stand there quietly with
arms always outstretched waiting for the travelers to come home. I came
home to myself through you" (Axline, 1950, p. 60). Out of respect for
the child, the child centered play therapist puts all previous knowledge
and information about the child aside and experiences the child as
though for the frst time. Te therapist wants to know the child through
the child's eyes and respects the child, the child's struggle, what the
child says and feels, and the child's boundaries.

Personality Characteristics Te following discussion may well sound like
a description of an unattainable, perfect person. However, that is not
the intent in attempting to describe personality characteristics that
are conducive to helping children grow and develop in ways that are
personally rewarding to them. Te attainment of these characteristics is
not nearly as important as the continual, self-motivating, never-ending
process of striving to attain and incorporate these dimensions into
one's life and relationships with children. Te play therapist's
intentionality in this striving is the dynamic therapeutic facilitative
quality in the process, not the attainment of describable dimensions.
Intentionality defes description but nevertheless exists in the inner
recesses of the therapist's attitudes and motivations, and determines
the extent to which the following personality characteristics are
identifable in the therapist's behavior. Objective and fexible. Te
efective play therapist is objective enough to allow the child to be a
separate person and fexible in accepting and adapting to the unexpected
with an attitude of willingness to be receptive to the new. Tese
dimensions are based on an uncompromising resistance to imposing
conforming behavior on children. Te therapist has a genuine appreciation
for the world of the child

115

116

The Play Therapist

and attempts to understand that world on the basis of the child's own
expressions. Tis appreciation is characterized by a sensitive
understanding of, interest in, caring for, and liking of children. RULE
OF THUMB: How the therapist feels about a child is more important than
what the therapist knows about a child. Nonjudgmental. Te therapist has
no need to evaluate or judge children or what they produce or do not
produce. An unwillingness to judge or evaluate stems from the
therapist's experiential understanding of just how rewarding an
experience can be when one is not being judged or evaluated. Te
therapist accepts the child's choice to play or not to play, to talk or
not to talk. Te child does not need to change or behave in any
particular way to receive the therapist's acceptance. Te therapist
endeavors to meet the child where she is at the moment and moves with
the child. Open-minded. Te therapist is open-minded rather than
close-minded. Openness and sensitivity to the child's world are basic
prerequisites for play therapists. Children are considered and related
to primarily on the basis of their own merit---who they are rather than
who they have been described to be. Tere is an absence of any need to
distort meanings, because the therapist is relatively free of threat and
anxiety and is, therefore, open to receiving children as they are or
will become. Te therapist is able to turn loose of his world of reality
and experience the child's world of reality. Tis open-minded dimension
allows the therapist to receive fully and with accuracy the meanings
communicated by children verbally, nonverbally, and in their play.
Persistently patient. Te play therapist is persistently patient with the
child in the moment, is patient with the child's expression, is patient
with the child's process, and waits with eager expectancy for the child
to come forth at the

The Play Therapist

child's own pace. Patience allows the play therapist to take in, see,
and experience what the child sees in the child's world. Te process of
this kind of patience is vividly described by White (1952): Raising
plants is one of mankind's most successful activities. Perhaps success
comes from the fact that the husbandman does not try to thrust
impossible patterns on his plants He respects their peculiarities, tries
to provide suitable conditions, protects them from more serious kinds of
injury---but he lets the plants do the growing. He does not poke at the
seed in order to make it sprout more quickly, nor does he seize the
shoot when it breaks ground and try to pull open the frst leaves by
hand. Neither does he trim the leaves of diferent kinds of plants in
order to have them all look alike. Te attitude of the husbandman is
appropriate in dealing with children. It is the children who must do the
growing, and they can do it only through the push of their own budding
interests. (p. 363)

Children feel rejected and lose confdence in themselves when play
therapists try to speed up the process of growth or try to push them
into changing more rapidly. When the therapist accepts a child's unique
developmental progress, that child comes to accept and trust herself
more. Te therapist must be very patient with this process. Such patience
is anchored in the child centered play therapist's unshakable belief in
the child's inner-directional, constructive, forward-moving, creative,
self-healing power. High tolerance for ambiguity. Efective play
therapists have a high tolerance for ambiguity, which enables them to
enter into the child's world of experiencing as a follower, allowing the
child to initiate activity, topic, direction, and content with
encouragement from the therapist, who continually centers responsibility
on the child. Te child-centered play therapist does not need facts or
answers about a child and is quite content with the process of not
knowing what a child's behavior should mean. Te therapist is comfortable
living in the child's world of uncertainty.

117

118

The Play Therapist

Future-minded. Because the child is always in a process of becoming, the
play therapist is future-minded in relating to the child and responds to
the child as a person who is capable of being more than he is at the
moment. A friend of mine is a wood carver of western fgures. He can see
the potential in an old dead tree stump---a cowboy boot, a western hat,
a rugged cowboy face. He does not respond to the present condition of
the old dead tree stump, but rather to the potential that the stump
holds. In his work, he intentionally and consistently responds to the
potential he sees and focuses all of his energy on releasing what the
stump is capable of becoming. In like manner, the childcentered play
therapist relates to what the child is capable of becoming and does not
restrict the child through attitude or verbal responses pertaining to
the past, even the last session a few days ago. Te therapist is always
trying to "catch up" to where the child is, and so, has no need to fnd
out what happened yesterday, or last week, or last month, or a year
ago---unless the child's leading goes in that direction. Ten, the
therapist is quite willing to follow. Te therapist does not refer to the
previous session, because the child is no longer at that point. Assuming
once-a-week sessions, the child has had a whole week to grow, develop,
and change since the therapist last saw him. Terefore, the therapist
will need to catch up to where the child is this week and will avoid
responding in ways that focus on the past. It is obvious that the agenda
of the play therapist in the following interaction in the sixth play
therapy session is focused on the past. Child: (Painting a picture at
the easel.) Terapist: Just like last time, you don't want any white
spots on your picture. Child: (Later in session, plays a game.)
Terapist: You're trying your new trick like you did last time. Child:
(Shows therapist a plastic ring brought from home.) Terapist: You
brought a ring from home just like last time.

The Play Therapist

Te responses of this therapist are not therapeutic because they keep the
child focused on the past and overlook the fact that there is a
constantly changing interaction of the thoughts, behaviors, feelings,
experiences, and physical being of a child. Tus, a child's perceptual
world is constantly changing, and the child in the playroom this week is
in some ways diferent. Terefore, past experiences are no longer
perceived or experienced in the same way, and the child does not feel
understood because the child is focused on what he is doing now, not
what he did last week. Future-mindedness does not project or lead the
child into the future, but is an attitude of receptivity to the child
being in a continuous process of becoming. Te play therapy process is a
journey of discovery. Personal courage. Te efective play therapist acts
and responds out of personal courage by admitting mistakes, by being
vulnerable at times, and by admitting inaccuracies in personal
perceptions. Personal courage is needed to take risks and to act on
intuitive feelings in response to the child's creative expressions of
self at the moment. Personal courage is also necessary for the therapist
to allow herself to be vulnerable enough to be impacted or touched
emotionally by the child's experiences and feelings without becoming
defensive. Personal courage based on inner confdence may be required
when a child is testing the limits of the relationship by threatening to
throw a block of wood at the therapist or shooting the therapist with a
dart gun. Terapists who have low tolerance for risk-taking behaviors may
respond inappropriately in such situations by being punitive or
threatening. Such situations also call for a high degree of patience.
Being real, warmth and caring, acceptance, and sensitive understanding.
Because the dimensions of being real, warmth and caring, acceptance, and
sensitive understanding were discussed in Chapter 5, they are mentioned
here just to let the reader know that I recognize their worth as
personality dimensions in the therapeutic process. Tese dimensions can
be further described as being loving and compassionate. Helen Keller
(1954) described in

119

120

The Play Therapist

her autobiography the signifcance a loving, compassionate person can
have in facilitating a life-changing process: Once I knew the depth
where no hope was and darkness lay on the face of all things. Ten love
came and set my soul free. Once I fretted and beat myself against the
wall that shut me in. My life was without a past or future, and death a
consummation devoutly to be wished. But a little word from the fngers of
another fell into my hands that clutched at emptiness, and my heart
leaped up with the rapture of living. I do not know the meaning of the
darkness, but I have learned the overcoming of it. (p. 57)

Personally secure. Te efective play therapist is personally secure and
thus recognizes and accepts personal limitations without any sense of
threat to her feelings of adequacy. Tere is nothing a child can say
about the therapist that will threaten the therapist (Figure 7.1). Some
play

FIGURE 7.1 The play therapist is personally secure and trusts the child
to lead the relationship to where the child needs to be.

The Play Therapist

therapists feel they must be helpful to all children Out of their own
fear of being perceived as inadequate, they continue to work with
children far beyond their ability to be helpful, or they accept child
clients whose emotional diffculties exceed the limits of their training.
Knowing when to make a referral is an absolute must for the play
therapist. Sense of humor. Children have fun. Tey enjoy playing and
discovering. Tey laugh right out loud when something is funny to them.
Te play therapist should possess a sense of humor and be able to
appreciate the humor in what the child experiences as being humorous.
However, for the therapist to laugh at a child is never appropriate.

Therapist Self-Understanding General agreement exists among authorities
that, regardless of the age group worked with, all therapists need
self-understanding and insight into their own motivations, needs, blind
spots, biases, personal conficts, and areas of emotional difculty as
well as personal strengths. Terapists should not assume they can keep
their own values and needs compartmentalized and separate from their
relationships with children. Te therapist is a real person, not a robot.
Terefore, personal needs and values are a part of the person and thus
become a part of the relationship. Te question, then, is not whether or
not the therapist's personality will enter into the relationship but,
rather, to what extent it will do so. A responsibility of the therapist
is to be involved in a process of self-exploration that will promote
self-understanding, thus minimizing the potential impact of the
therapist's motivations and needs. Tis process of knowing self can be
facilitated through personal therapy, and either individual or group
therapy is highly recommended to learn about self. Another source of
self-exploration would be supervisory or consultative relationships,
which allow the therapist, out of personal willingness, to explore his
motivations and needs. Because self-understanding is a process and not
an event, being involved in such a process

121

122

The Play Therapist

throughout their professional career can be helpful to therapists.
Exploring the following questions might enhance the process of
self-understanding: What needs of mine are being met in play therapy?
How strong is my need to be needed? Do I like this child? Do I want to
be with this child? What impact do my attitudes and feelings have on
this child? How does this child perceive me? A therapist who is unaware
of personal biases, values, emotional needs, fears, personal stresses,
anxieties, and expectations of self and others probably will not be
efectively sensitive to such dimensions in children. Te therapist does
not leave personality needs outside when entering the playroom with a
child. Consequently, these needs become a part of the relationship and
the developing therapeutic process. If the therapist is not fully aware
of a need to be liked, a fear of rejection, guilt feelings related to
limit setting, or a need to be admired or successful, these needs will
emerge in subtle manipulative ways that control and restrict the
exploration and expression of the child. Te play therapy relationship is
much more than the result of observable criteria. Terapist attitudes,
motivations, expectations, needs, and beliefs about the child constitute
intangibles that can have a signifcant impact on the development and
outcome of the therapeutic relationship. Some degree of subtle
structuring is inherent in all therapeutic relationships and exists to a
greater or lesser extent depending on the play therapist's awareness of
personal needs, motivation, intent, expectations, and beliefs about the
child. Tese intangibles are sensed or felt by the child in the
relationship and thus afect or structure the behavior of the child,
whether the play therapist intends such structuring or not. Intangibles
in the play therapy relationship of which the play therapist should be
aware are listed below (as you read this list of intangibles, select two
that you think you probably need to work on):

The Play Therapist

• Is your intent to change the child's behavior? Can there be genuine
acceptance of the child if the play therapist's intent is to change the
child? • Do you hope the child will play? Is the child really free in
the playroom to set his own direction if the play therapist hopes the
child will play? • Are you more accepting of some behaviors than others?
Will the child feel liked and appreciated if the play therapist approves
of only certain behaviors? • Do you have a low tolerance for messiness?
Is the child free to express her need to be messy if the play therapist
has a low tolerance for messiness? • Do you have a need to rescue the
child from pain or diffculty? Will the child discover her inner
strengths and resources if the play therapist has difculty tolerating
children's pain? • Do you have a need to solve a child's problems? Is
the child free to direct his own play if the therapist is structuring
the play toward a solution to the predetermined problem? • Do you have a
need to be liked by the child? Can therapeutic limits be set as needed
if the play therapist is unaware of his need to be liked by the child? •
Do you feel safe with the child? Can the child feel safe in the play
therapy relationship if the play therapist does not feel safe with the
child? • Do you trust the child? Is it possible for the child to trust
herself if the play therapist is not able to trust her? • Do you expect
the child to deal with certain issues? Is the child really free to
explore his inner issues and concerns if the play therapist expects the
child to deal with certain issues? Tese are nonquantifable intangibles
that subtly infuence the dynamics of the process of play therapy. Play
therapist selfunderstanding can lessen the impact of these variables on
the play therapy relationship.

123

124

The Play Therapist

Te most signifcant resources the therapist brings to the play therapy
relationship are the dimensions of self. Skills are useful tools, but
therapists' use of their own personalities is their greatest asset. As
important as training and skills are in becoming a play therapist, they
simply are not enough. Te therapist must be the kind of person who
appreciates the perceptual-experiential world of children, a person who
delights in Being With children and experiences their world as exciting.
Although training and the use of therapeutic procedures are important,
the therapist's ability to be human is of prime importance. RULE OF
THUMB: Te person of the therapist is more important than anything the
therapist knows how to do. Te therapist must be the kind of person with
whom children feel safe, safe enough to explore, safe enough to risk
being themselves; the kind of person children experience as being
trustworthy and caring. With such a person, children will fnd satisfying
encouragement for self-growth. Tis positive result is not an automatic
process. Whether or not the person of the play therapist is therapeutic
is totally dependent on the emotional, mental and physical state of the
play therapist and how the therapist approaches the child in the
therapeutic relationship. I was reminded of this fact several years ago
as I stood on top of the Great Wall of China, a magnifcent structure
that stretches 1,500 miles across north central China. As I thought
about how the wall did its job of keeping the northern tribes out of
north central China, I was reminded that play therapists build their own
great wall in the play therapy relationship • when they fail to take
care of their own problems • when they doubt their own intuitive
direction • when they push for a quick fx to the child's problem • when
they are blinded by the need for a solution and fail to see the child •
when they fail to listen sensitively to the inner child and thus fail to
be fully with the child

The Play Therapist

Therapist Self-Acceptance Te child-centered play therapy approach is a
function of the therapist's attitude toward herself and the child. Tis
attitude is characterized by an acceptance of herself and the child and
a deep and abiding belief in the capacity of the child to be responsible
for himself in the process of exercising self-direction resulting in
more positive behaviors. Te therapist must accept herself sufciently
enough to allow a child in the therapy experience to be diferent from
her. Such self-acceptance is an inner strength that allows the therapist
to be intentional about Being With the child and accepting the child.
Tis attitude of commitment respects children's right to make choices and
recognizes the capacity of children to make choices that are more mature
and also satisfying to them and ultimately acceptable to society. A
signifcant result of therapist self-acceptance is the building of a
relationship in which a child will feel safe enough to change or not to
change. RULE OF THUMB: A child will not change until the child is free
not to change. Tis therapeutic dimension is entirely dependent on the
therapist's acceptance of self and acceptance of the child. Carl Rogers
so appropriately described this process as "the curious paradox is that
when I accept myself just as I am, then I can change" (Rogers, 1961,
p. 17). When a child is accepted just as he is, then he can change. Te
therapist does not wish the child were diferent in some way. Te child is
enough at this moment. Te objective of the therapist is to create a
climate in which the child feels free to be fully who she is at the
moment in the shared experience of learning about self and each other.
Out of a deep respect for the person of the child, the therapist gives
full, complete, undivided attention and acceptance to the child. Te play
therapist's giving of self in this way means the therapist is keenly
sensitive to personal experiences and feelings that may be identifed
with the child and is careful to sort out or

125

126

The Play Therapist

distinguish those feelings that are emotional reattachments to previous
experiences. Te therapist is careful to avoid projecting emotional
reactions or needs onto the child. Tus, the play therapist must be
engaged in a continual process of self-awareness and self-acceptance.
Being in the process of self-discovery can be as rewarding to the
therapist as to the child and is necessary for self-acceptance. Play
therapists ofen begin this process of selfacceptance as a result of
experiencing such acceptance in training programs. Te impact can be seen
in this self-evaluation by one of my graduate students: Play therapy is
very rewarding to me because I am helping a child to accept himself. A
great deal of the reward in play therapy comes from being able to keep
my personal needs out of the child's way. I believe when a person is
able to keep her needs in check that she is not only recognizing her own
feelings, but accepting those feelings and, therefore, accepting
herself. I began the process of accepting myself during this class. I
was able to act responsibly and keep my needs out of the play sessions.
Of course, the process of accepting one's self is continuous throughout
life, but oh, what a beginning I have been able to make. Now, I want to
begin generalizing my self-trust to the other areas of my life! Tank you
for accepting me.

Another student wrote, "Te feedback in my supervision sessions gave me
permission to be more myself, to go with my intuitive responses. Tat's
important. I needed that. As I relaxed more and really got into the
experience, I thoroughly enjoyed it!" Te play therapist has faith in the
nature of children, believes that a universal characteristic of children
is the urge to grow, and respects that growth as characterized in the
uniqueness of each child. Te inner dynamics of this urge may have been
suppressed or thwarted but can be revitalized under the proper
conditions. Te therapist's belief in growth and change does not come
from a static, intellectual decision position but is determined largely
by an experiential process of being aware of her own continuous
developmental unfolding of discovery about self in relationships and
life experiences. Tis

The Play Therapist

self-understanding and accompanying self-acceptance enables the
therapist to wait expectantly for the emerging self within the child. No
impatience is felt toward the current projected self of the child,
because there is a willingness to accept personal imperfection and to
forgive himself for not being perfect. Te therapist accepts his own
humanness. Terefore, no need exists to have the child be perfect. RULE
OF THUMB: You can't accept another person's weakness until you are able
to accept your own. Te freeing aspect of self-understanding and
self-acceptance is described by a beginning play therapist this way: Te
more I understand myself and admit to being imperfect, the more I can
let go of self-consciousness and the need to fulfl a role expectation of
being a therapist. Tis preconceived image has deprived me of the freedom
and spontaneity through which my best strengths may be developed. I no
longer feel in the playroom that I am performing a stressful chore, but
constructing a personally creative encounter with Michael. I am
discovering that when I am uptight it is difcult to approach another,
and that with increased relaxation I can see myself in action, to note
the false moves or the extra steps I have unconsciously incorporated
into my behavior.

Te attitude of the play therapist sets the tone of the play therapy
session and quickly permeates the entire experience. Play therapy is not
a role; it is a way of being. Te therapist who attempts to use a
"method" or set of techniques will appear stilted and artifcial and
ultimately will be dissatisfed and unsuccessful. Te inner person of the
child is much more likely to emerge in growth-enhancing ways to the
extent that the therapist is able to give up a role of authority and
leadership in the play therapy experience. Such positions serve to
create dependency expectations on the part of the child. Te therapist's
goal is to project a

127

128

The Play Therapist

personal self as fully as possible. Tis in turn facilitates the movement
of the child toward becoming the self he is in the developing
relationship. Children are very sensitive to all the subtleties of the
person of the therapist, and are therefore much more afected by the
person of the therapist than by any technique the therapist may use.
Efective therapists appreciate their own uniqueness and are therefore
able to accept the uniqueness of others.

Being a Play Therapist CCPT standards always point to the child and
everything the play therapist does is a focus on the child. Te therapist
has no need to direct or lead the child to a particular topic or
activity. Te therapist allows the child to lead the way and is content
to follow. What is important is not the therapist's wisdom, but the
wisdom of the child; not the therapist's direction, but the child's
direction; not the therapist's solution, but the child's creativity.
Terefore, the child is accepted for all that she is in order to free the
child to be unique. Te child centered play therapist is not a
supervisor, teacher, peer, babysitter, investigator, playmate, or parent
substitute. Dibs summed up his view of Axline, his play therapist, by
saying, "You're not a mother. You're not a teacher, you're not a member
of mother's bridge club. What are you? It does not really matter. You
are the lady of the wonderful playroom" (Axline, 1964, p. 204). Te
therapist does not solve problems for the child, explain behavior,
interpret motivation, rescue the child, or question intent. Taking on
any of these roles would deprive the child of opportunities for
self-exploration, self-creativity, self-evaluation, and self-discovery.
Does this mean, then, that the therapist is passive? Absolutely not! Te
therapist is active in the play therapy relationship. Must the therapist
do things for or to children before she can be described as being
active? Does being active require the therapist to exhibit a high level
of physical activity? Being active does not have to be an observable
quality. Te therapist is emotionally active, requiring sensitivity, an
appreciation of what the child is doing and saying, and an attitude of
receptive responsiveness. Tis emotional investment is characterized by
an interactive quality that is both

The Play Therapist

felt by the child and therapist and overtly experienced in the
interactive verbal expressions of the therapist. Te therapist is
actively involved in the process of play therapy, not in the sense of
directing or managing the experience, but by being directly involved and
genuinely interested in all of the child's feelings, actions, and
decisions. Can the therapist's eforts teach children about themselves?
Can the wisdom of the therapist that comes from years of graduate study,
reading, and experiencing children be imparted to child clients?
Gibran's (1923) Te Prophet addressed this issue, saying, "No man can
reveal to you aught but that which already lies asleep in the dawning of
your own knowledge ... . For the wisdom of one man lends not its wings
to another man" (p. 32). Te play therapist is not a person who tries to
make things happen, for that is not an option within the possibilities
that exist in reality. To make happen or create for others the inner
wisdom necessary for living life simply is not possible. Whatever is
important or necessary for children's growth already exists in children.
Te child centered play therapist does not take on the responsibility of
trying to reshape children's lives or make them change in some
predetermined way but, rather, to respond in ways that facilitate
release of the creative potential that already exists in children. Te
living of life is never a static occurrence; it is a process of
relentless learning and renewal. Pasternak was reacting to this process
when he said: When I hear people speak of reshaping life it makes me
lose my self control and I fall into despair. Reshaping life! People who
can say that have never understood a thing about life---they have never
felt its breath, its heartbeat, however much they may have seen or done.
Tey look on it as a lump of raw material that needs to be processed by
them, to be ennobled by their touch. But life is never a material, a
substance to be moulded ... . Life is constantly renewing and remaking
and changing and transfguring itself. (Salisbury, 1958, p. 22)

Te signifcance of the child-centered play therapy relationship for the
child and the therapist---for the therapist is also afected by the
person of the child and the relationship---is readily seen in the
following description of my play therapy experiences with Ryan.

129

130

The Play Therapist

Ryan---A Dying Child in Play Therapy Two brothers, ages 7 and 5, were
wrestling, and the 7-year-old suffered a broken leg. A trip to the
hospital resulted in a surprising and traumatic fnding. Cancer had
weakened the bone, necessitating immediate, radical surgery to amputate
the leg at the hip in an efort to stop the spread of the cancer. Te
diagnosis: Ryan had only a few months to live.

Play Therapy My frst contact with Ryan came as a result of play therapy
sessions with his 5-year-old brother, who had been referred to me by
wise parents who recognized the potential emotional trauma for the
5-year-old and the possibility of deep personal guilt. Prior to the
eighth session with the 5-year-old, his mother called to say the
5-year-old wanted to invite Ryan to come with him to the special
playroom. I viewed this as a signifcant positive development in the
5-year-old's growth. He was willing to share the playroom experience.
Perhaps he recognized at some level that something in the play therapy
relationship might be helpful to Ryan; and in our relationship, that he
felt secure enough to bring Ryan. When I met Mom and the two children in
the waiting room, I was immediately emotionally impacted by Ryan's
condition. Most of his hair was gone, his face was too thin, there were
purple marks on his face to direct the radiation "gun," and dark shadows
circled his eyes. Tis was the frst time I had seen Ryan, and I
experienced a feeling of deep sadness. Te 5-year-old showed Mom and Ryan
the way to the playroom. Mom carried Ryan, sat him down in the middle of
the playroom, and lef. Ryan's condition so captured my attention that I
forgot about Ryan's brother for a few moments. I was deeply immersed in
the scene Ryan was portraying. He took the 10-inch-tall dinosaur, stuck
a toy soldier in the wide-open, gaping mouth, and with his fnger slowly
pushed the soldier all the way into the mouth, until the soldier fell
down the dinosaur's throat into

The Play Therapist

the hollow body. He then stood the dinosaur on the foor and lined up
three rows of toy soldiers facing the dinosaur. Ryan very carefully made
sure all the weapons were pointed toward the dinosaur, then leaned back
and studied the scene for several moments. Not one shot was fred---all
that strategic placement of soldiers and they just stood there,
unexpectedly impotent facing the huge monster. No, the feeling was
clearer now. Tis was not a monster; this was the enemy within Ryan. Te
enemy that could not be stopped. Te soldiers were powerless, their
weapons useless. Te monster was too powerful. He could not be stopped!
Ryan did not say one word or make any kind of sound during this entire
process, and he did not need to. I was in touch with him, and he was
communicating. Tis was one of those rare experiences in the living
relationship of the playroom when, for a few brief moments, time and the
reality of everything outside the feeting experience of the moment did
not exist in consciousness for either one of us. I was sensing Ryan's
inner experiencing, captivated by the awesomeness of the scene before
me. I experienced and intuitive awareness, "He knows. He knows the
monster inside him can't be stopped." Ten the moment was gone, and I was
reminded of the reality of his brother's presence by Ryan asking his
brother for the can to put the soldiers in. His brother needed me as
much as Ryan did. (Later, afer the play therapy session, I thought about
my experience with Ryan. I was reminded of the scene with soldiers
pointing guns at the dinosaur and thought about radiation "guns"
pointing at Ryan.) Tis began my brief but extraordinary journey of
learning about living as Ryan shared living with me. I saw Ryan in play
therapy sessions during the last 2 months of his life. Ryan's condition
deteriorated rapidly over the next few weeks, necessitating several
trips to the hospital, and each time the pronounced diagnosis was, "He
has only a few hours to live." A kind and sensitive mom asked a friend
to call me on these occasions, and afer I hung up the phone, I
experienced sadness for a dear, little friend I would not see again. Ten
I would receive word that Ryan had rallied, and a few days later he
would be back in his home, asking to see me again.

131

132

The Play Therapist

During the last month of his life, Ryan was too weak to leave his bed,
so I carried my traveling play therapy kit to his home where his parents
had set up a hospital bed in the frst foor den. I was eager for the
opportunity to be with Ryan, but each time I parked in front of his
home, I sat there a few minutes preparing myself to properly greet Ryan,
to be open to his world of experiencing, to share in what he wanted to
share. Although weak and emaciated, Ryan delighted in our sessions
together. While I held the large newsprint tablet, he drew pictures of a
large brown Mickey Mouse (Ryan's name for the picture) with huge hands
and 40 fngers thrust outward, a porcupine, and a buzzard, which seemed
to me to represent his struggle against cancer. Ryan was delightfully
uninhibited. I had never imagined I would need to assist a child with a
urine bottle in the middle of a play therapy session; thus, my initial
reaction to his request to "Find the urine bottle. I need to go to the
bathroom" was an awkward and fumbling, "I'll go get the nurse." Ryan's
reaction was, "We don't need her." And indeed, we did not. Ryan trusted
me and was patient with my awkwardness. Te next week Ryan was in the
hospital again, made another dramatic recovery, and asked to see me
again. In this session, Ryan drew the Mickey Mouse fgure again, but with
a smaller body and hands. He colored Mickey dark purple, and the face
looked hollow, with very dark eyes. It did indeed look like death. Ryan
then chose an egg carton from the kit, colored each of the egg cells a
bright color, closed the egg carton, and colored it black all over. (It
reminded me of a casket.) Yes, beauty and color and brightness and hope
are on the inside. Next, Ryan drew a picture of a straw house, a stick
house, and a brick house; he talked about the straw house and stick
house being blown down and the three pigs being safe in the brick house.
An interesting feature of the houses was that the brick house had the
largest door. I believe Ryan somehow intuitively felt death was near,
and that he would be in a safe place. Ryan then said, "I'm tired." I
responded, "You look tired and you sound tired, Ryan. We will stop for
today." I began putting toys back into my traveling play therapy kit.
Ryan said, "Tis has been our special time." I responded, "Yes, Ryan,
this has been

The Play Therapist

our special time and you are a special person." I picked up my toy kit
and lef. Tat was the last time I saw Ryan. He died 3 days later. During
our times together Ryan had led the focus and exploration of the
sessions into those areas important to him, had walked down the road he
had chosen, and had played in the way he wanted to play. In our
relationship, I discovered that even under the most personally stressful
circumstances, children can experience the pleasure of playing and can
feel in control even when circumstances seem to be out of control.

What I Learned About Me I know so little about what it is like for a
child to face death. Terefore, I will be open to learning what Ryan
taught me. I experience sadness when I think of a child dying. Terefore,
I will need to protect children from my feelings. I know so little about
life. Terefore, I will be open to the continuous wonderment of living as
experienced by children. I am not capable of knowing what should be
signifcant or important for another person. Terefore, I will resolve in
my relationships with children to discover their needs. I like it, too,
when another person "sees" my world. Terefore, I will struggle to be
sensitive to the child's world. I am more fully me when I feel safe.
Terefore, with all that I am capable, I will try hard to help children
to feel safe with me.

The Relationship With Ryan Tis special relationship with a special
little person at a crucial time in his life gave me an unusual
perspective on allowing children to lead the relationship into areas
important to them. I experienced a genuine prizing of this unique child,
an appreciation

133

134

The Play Therapist

for his expressive eagerness, which was only temporarily dimmed by
overwhelming fatigue from the physical struggle. Our times together
seemed to be an oasis in his life, a time when he was free to be in
control of the direction of his experiences, even though reality
dictated that he could not control what he was experiencing in his body.
During our times together, Ryan focused on living rather than dying, on
joy rather than sadness, on creative expression rather than on apathy,
and on his appreciation of our relationship rather than on the loss of
relationships. It was with wonder and awe that I experienced with this
dying child the shared joy, release, and excitement of the moment as he
played out our living relationship. Play was special to Ryan, and he
prized our relationship. Success or progress in therapy might not be
what some individuals perceive to be needed, or the correcting of a
problem. It may indeed be the brief momentary experiencing of a caring,
safe relationship in which the child is free to be all that he is
capable of being at that moment. Society will report that Ryan died, but
I have recorded in my heart his struggle to live, the oxygen mask, the
bright splotches of color he chose, the pain he endured, the fatigue
laden with delight in his squeaky little voice, the enthusiasm and vigor
with which he drew pictures. So, he lives. Not the part they see, but
what I see. Ryan, a child who was dying, taught me lessons for living
(Landreth adaptation).

References Axline, V. (1950). Play therapy experiences as described by
child participants. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 14(1), 53--63.
Axline, V. (1964). Dibs: In search of self. Ballantine. Gibran, K.
(1923). Te prophet. Alfred Knopf. Keller, H. (1954). Te story of my
life. Grossett & Dunlap. Landreth, G. L. (1988). (Adaptation) Tis case
is an adaptation of "Te Case of Ryan---A Dying Child" from Landreth.
Reprinted with permission of the American Association for Counseling and
Development. Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person. Houghton Mifin.
Salisbury, F. (1958). Human development and learning. McGraw-Hill.
White, R. (1952). Lives in progress. Dryden Press.

Chapter

8

Supervision and Play Therapy Training Graduate class work, discussions,
reading, workshops, role-playing, and observing experienced play
therapists are necessary and signifcant prerequisites in learning to be
a play therapist. However, the most important learnings are those
derived from experiences, and the possibilities for learning about self,
children, and play therapy from supervised play therapy experiences are
limitless. Not until the play therapist experiences children can they be
known. Not until the therapist experiences the struggle to relate to a
child can the play therapy relationship be understood. Not until the
therapist experiences Being With a child can apprehensions be discarded.
Not until the therapist attempts to apply training can developed skills
be appreciated.

Supervised Practice Facilitates Self-Insight Play therapists should not
assume they can keep their personality, needs, life issues, etc.
compartmentalized and separate from their relationships with children in
play therapy. Te question is not whether or not the person of the play
therapist will afect the play therapy process but, rather, to what
extent it will do so. A responsibility of the therapist is to be
involved in a process of

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-8

135

136

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

self-exploration that will promote insight and self-understanding, thus
minimizing the potential negative impact of the therapist's motivations,
needs, and life issues. Tat children sense what is going on emotionally
in the play therapist was evident in a happening in my Introduction to
Play Terapy course. In this course, there is a supervised play therapy
mini practicum. Each team of three graduate students is assigned a
volunteer well-adjusted child, and each member has a 30-minute play
session with the well-adjusted child in the Center for Play Terapy
playrooms, followed by a 30-minute supervision feedback experience with
members of the team and the supervisor. Just prior to the supervised
experience, Cheryl requested to have her play session and feedback frst,
so she could leave early to drive 3 hours to attend the funeral service
of her best friend. Cheryl assured me she was emotionally ok and had
already had a counseling session to work through her grief. In Cheryl's
play session, the 5-year-old girl explored the room for about 5 minutes.
Ten she picked up the medical kit and doctored and nurtured a teddy bear
and a doll for the next 25 minutes. Te next two times the child was in
the playroom with diferent students, she didn't use the medical kit or
engage in any nurturing play. I am convinced this child sensed something
emotional was going on in Cheryl. Supervision that focuses primarily on
conceptualizing client behavior and predicting future behavior avoids
emphasis on the person of the supervisee as a therapeutic variable and
the importance of the relationship. Supervision should focus on the
person of the therapist. Te person of the play therapist is more
important than anything the therapist knows how to do. Te signifcance of
supervision that focuses on the person of the play therapist is summed
up in the following statements made by post masters level play
therapists in one of my summer intensive 3-day supervision workshops on
my campus. "For the frst time, I fully experienced trusting myself and
the child enough to allow the child to go where the child needed to go
and do what the child needed to do. I was struck by the resourcefulness
and vast creative language of the child."

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

Another play therapist in that supervision group concluded from her
experience that "Play therapy is not something I have to do, but rather
is something to be a part of." I think this therapist is saying she
found play therapy to be personally rewarding and growth promoting for
her and the child when she was able to stop trying to control the child
or what happens in the play therapy relationship. All play therapists
should be engaged in a process of never-ending self-critique, and
viewing videos of your own play therapy sessions is by far the best
possible means of self-supervision and supervision of play therapists in
training by other professionals. Seeing your own video is essential for
self-growth and is considered a must in supervision. It is simply not
possible for a play therapist to know what kind of play therapist he is
without having seen videos of his play therapy sessions. Transcribing
the video of one of your own play therapy sessions can be a dynamic,
insight-provoking experience. I asked a graduate student I was
supervising to transcribe the video of one of her play therapy sessions.
Her summary report shows the experience was enriching and stimulated
depth dimensional insight. She described that experience as follows: "By
the time I had completed transcribing the video, I realized I had not
been seeing the world through Jef's eyes, and I was not in tune with
him. I also realized I was not relying on his innate ability to heal.
Tis awareness surprised me. I understand the importance of having a deep
belief in this aspect of the child. However, I had never thought of
myself as 'relying' on the child's innate ability. As I refect back on
my thoughts about Jef, I become aware of feeling as though I am a life
boat he is clinging to. I have a sense that he is drowning. My frst
inclination is to keep him afoat, but I know now I must descend into the
depth of his pain with him. It is painful to allow myself to see his
sorrow, but it is the only way I know to help him unlock the miracle of
healing within him. It is obvious to me now that I have actually been
rescuing myself from feeling his pain. I wonder if his frequent requests
for me to help him with some parts of his play are related to him
needing me to descend with him into his pain." Transcribing requires
intense

137

138

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

attention to the details of the session and that results in depth
dimension discoveries about self. I have used the following procedures
for self-supervision of my supervisees with huge success.

Play Therapist Self-Supervision Using: Play Therapy Skills Checklist •
Critique play therapy video of self. • Play therapist rates self by
using Play Terapy Skills Checklist (see page 140). • Play therapist
compares her ratings to the supervisor's rating and discusses
discrepancies. • Keep journal focused on insights into self from each
play therapy session.

Focusing on Responding Skills • Critique play therapy video of yourself.
• Select 10 responses (or more) you would like to change.

Format • Record what child said or did in the session: • Your response:
• Reason for change: • How you wish you had responded: • Why you think
this response is better:

Focusing on What You Learned • Write self-refection of play therapy
sessions. • Focus on what you learned about yourself, child, process,
and your responses. With the availability of electronic devices, a play
therapist's reluctance to video some of his play therapy sessions may
reveal defensiveness or insecurity. Any play therapist, regardless of
years of experience, should be open to continued learning about self.

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

Te Play Terapy Skills Checklist (PTSC) (see Table 8.1), developed by the
Center for Play Terapy at the University of North Texas, is an excellent
scale for use in supervision/consultation to help play therapists focus
on child-centered play therapy verbal responses and nonverbal skills. Te
PTSC is flled out while observing a play therapy session and can be used
in self-supervision of video recorded sessions and also by a supervisor
to provide feedback to play therapists whose play therapy sessions have
been video recorded or are observed live through a one-way mirror. Te
scale is best utilized as a stimulus for discussion as well as
supervisor feedback. Play therapist insight can be expanded by asking
play therapists to rate themselves, compare their ratings to the
supervisor's ratings, and discuss the discrepancies. Supervision/
consultation is essential in helping play therapists develop a
consistent theoretical model and approach. As is true in child-centered
play therapy where the primary focus is the child rather than the
child's behaviors, in supervision, the primary focus is on the person of
the therapist and skill development is secondary. Te supervisor is
sensitive to the underlying deeper issues in the therapist-child
relationship such as therapist intangibles discussed earlier in this
chapter: Is the therapist aware of her own needs? How does she feel
about the child? Does she trust herself? Does she feel safe with the
child? Is she more accepting of some behaviors than others? Is she
tolerant of the ambiguity of the child's uncertainty? Te following
self-evaluations from play therapists in training provide a glimpse into
the impact and insight derived from supervised play therapy experiences.

Play Therapist: Maria Trough experiencing children in play therapy, I
have come to understand the living nature of the therapeutic
relationship. I more fully understand and feel the dynamic experience of
encountering a child, fnding in Jefrey what I can never discover in
textbooks---myself in action with the child. I needed to move beyond
intellectual descriptions and classifcation, beyond the abstract view of
helping, and to encounter my own inner experience. It is not easy to be
in intense relations with a child.

139

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

Table 8.1 Play Therapy Skills Checklist (Center for Play Therapy,
University of North Texas, Denton, Texas). Play Therapy Skills Checklist
Center for Play Therapy University of North Texas Therapist:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Child (age): \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
(\_\_\_\_\_\_\_)

Need More Need More

None

Appropriate

Therapist Responses/ Examples

Other Possible Responses

None

Too Much

Therapist Nonverbal Communication

Appropriate

Observer:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Date: \_\_\_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_\_/\_\_\_\_\_\_

Too Much

140

Therapist Responses/ Examples

Other Possible Responses

Lean Forward/Open Appeared Interested Relaxed Comfortable
Tone/Expression Congruent with Child's Affect Tone/Expression Congruent
with Therapist's Responses

Therapist Responses Tracking Refecting Feelings Refecting Content
Facilitating Decision Making/ Responsibility Facilitating Creativity/
Spontaneity Esteem Building/ Encouraging Facilitating Understanding

Limit Setting: Protect Child and Therapist, Maintain Therapist
Acceptance/ Relationship, Protect Room/Toys, Structuring, Reality
Testing Immediacy/Spontaneity: Child Made Contact/Connection:
Therapist's Strengths: Areas for Growth:

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

Play Therapist: Keith One of the clearest discoveries I have had in my
play therapy sessions has been a realization that I am too impatient. I
have not learned to wait, and this compounds the experience of stress.
Perhaps this is why it is difcult for me to see things from any
perspective but my own. I have learned that I need to respond to the
child instead of trying to make a good response. When Justin refused to
leave the playroom, I was able to stand patiently by the door and
experience how efective acceptance of feelings and permissiveness can be
when he walked out the door under his own steam afer only a couple of
minutes.

Play Therapist: Ghalen Tis second session brought with it the
realization of one of my worst apprehensions---the child who continually
asks questions. It was obvious from the types of questions Eric asked
that he had a poor self-concept. It seemed to be difcult for him to rely
on his own judgment, or to decide for himself how to use his time in the
playroom. For me, it was difcult to answer his questions simply and then
give the lead back to Eric. He sought my approval on almost every new
activity he took on. Some of my responses were facilitative, others were
not. I learned that this inconsistency can facilitate more questions
which, in turn, increases my anxiety and my inappropriate responses. I
think it is extremely important to remember that the child learns
something from what I say. It is important to communicate that I have
faith in the child's own judgment so that he can learn to rely on his
own judgments. Te responsibility to change or not to change is in the
child's hands. What a boost for the child's self-confdence,
self-respect, and self-esteem.

Play Therapist: Ching During my play therapy sessions, I found that
initially the child felt strange with me because of my diferences in
nationality and speech pattern and also because I was too quiet and not
responsive

141

142

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

enough. Te initial diference set an unfamiliar stage for the child, and
then my reserved or quiet behavior added to the unfamiliarity. I learned
that I must increase my rate of response to help put the child at ease.

Recommended Training Program Commitment to children demands that the
therapist make every effort possible to ensure that children receive
quality help from competent play therapists. The field of play therapy
is experiencing a growing and enthusiastic interest as a viable approach
for meeting children's needs, and because children cannot speak for
themselves on this matter, professionals in the field must try to ensure
that individuals who practice play therapy possess specialized knowledge
and skills that render them effective in play therapy to serve the best
interests of children. With this commitment in mind, the following,
tentative guidelines are suggested for training play therapists. A basic
premise is that the professional standards required for using play
therapy in counseling with children should be no less than those
required for working with adults in a counseling relationship: • A
master's degree in an area of the helping professions, such as
counseling, psychology, social work, or a related area • Content areas
of study in child development, theories of counseling and psychotherapy,
clinical counseling skills, and group counseling • Content area of study
in play therapy equivalent to 90 clock hours of instruction, a
supervised practicum, and supervised internship in play therapy •
Personal counseling, either as a member of a counseling group,
individual counseling, or other pertinent experience that provides
opportunities for self examination over an extended period of time •
Observation and case analysis of children from the normal population as
well as maladjusted children

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

• Observation of experienced play therapists with opportunity to discuss
and critique the sessions • Supervised experience in play therapy by a
professional who has experience in play therapy In my Introduction to
Play Terapy course, which is a one-semester, 3-hour graduate credit
course, students are involved in the following sequence of laboratory
experiences in addition to lectures, discussions, reading, and writing
papers related to various aspects of play therapy: • Observe play
therapy sessions of master's and doctoral practicum students in our
Center for Play Terapy. • Observe and critique videos of my play therapy
sessions. • Observe at least one of my current play therapy sessions or
a special demonstration for the class. • Role play, with me playing the
part of the child, to improve responding skills and to become
comfortable with the unexpected things children may do in the playroom.
• Role play in pairs in the playrooms, taking turns being the child to
gain insight into children's feelings and their perception of the
experience. • Conduct play sessions with volunteer adjusted children in
an undisturbed room in a nursery school, day-care center, church Sunday
School classroom, or room in their home. Students bring a box of
appropriate toys, video the sessions, and write a critique of the
experience focusing on what they learned about the child, play therapy,
and themselves. • Participate in supervised play therapy sessions with
volunteer adjusted children in the Center playrooms and receive
immediate feedback. Sessions are supervised by doctoral students and
play therapists in private practice. Students write a critique of the
experience. In addition to this introductory course, master's degree
students are required to take a course in advanced play therapy, group
play therapy, or flial therapy. Students receive live supervision with
immediate feedback in a one-semester on-campus supervised

143

144

Supervision and Play Therapy Training

play therapy practicum in the Center for Play Terapy. Following
successful completion of the practicum, the graduate students are placed
in an internship in an elementary school, agency, or clinic where they
can continue their supervised play therapy experience. Tese guidelines
for training are made with full recognition that, until more university
programs ofer training in play therapy, some of these requirements will
need to be fulflled in nontraditional academic ways, such as intensive
training workshops Tese workshops could be ofered in a format of 45-hour
sequencing that builds on previous workshop training. Te typical 1 and
2-day general overview introductory workshops will not sufce. Te crucial
factor is supervised experience, and although no substitute exists for
that, a variety of ways are available so that the play therapist can
receive supervision other than through a traditional, organized campus
practicum. A qualifed play therapist could be contracted for individual
supervision or with several staf members in an agency on a regular
basis, or arrangements could be made for a university play therapy
program to provide a condensed, short-term, 45-hour, supervised
practicum in play therapy One of the most dynamic experiences I engage
in is the supervision of 12 practicing play therapists who are
private-practice and agency professionals in a 3-day, 8-hours-per-day,
individual and group play therapy practicum each summer, assisted by
four of my advanced doctoral students. Tis model of supervision is
described in Bratton et al. (1990). Te suggestions in this chapter are
intended as minimum procedures and should not be taken as recommended
standard procedures.

Reference Bratton, S., Landreth, G., & Homeyer, L. (1990). An intensive
three day play therapy supervision/training model. International Journal
of Play Terapy, 2(2), 61--78.

Chapter

9

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Counseling with children requires consideration of certain dimensions
and aspects of the relationship not encountered in counseling with
adults. Children usually are dependent on a signifcant adult, most ofen
the parent, in their life to make arrangements for scheduling play
therapy. Terefore, any efort by the therapist to be helpful to children
must begin with consideration for the parameters of the relationship to
be established with the parent. Will the parent be involved in therapy?
What are the complexities involved in informing parents of children's
behavior in the playroom? Maintaining sensitivity to the complexity of
the changing parental role in our society is a major challenge requiring
awareness and sensitivity to high divorce rates, increasing numbers of
single parents, changing parental roles, cultural issues, increasing
levels of stress in families, and greater personal isolation. Such
factors critically impact the parent's level of involvement and
directional intensity. Although parents today generally are more
sophisticated about counseling, the therapist cannot assume they know
anything about play therapy. Parents also need assistance in informing
their children about play therapy and how to help in the separation
process for the frst session.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-9

145

146

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Background Information Interviews with parents and teachers can provide
useful information to help the therapist better understand what is going
on in the child's life outside the playroom experience and can provide
cues to understanding the meaning of a child's play. Such information
can result in the therapist being more sensitive and empathic with the
child and so is helpful in facilitating the process of the developing
relationship. However, outside information also can "color" or structure
the therapist's perception and stimulate the therapist's latent tendency
to be interpretative with the child in a way the therapist would never
be without such information. Consider the following case of 4-year-old
Paula, who learned, along with her therapist, of her mother's pregnancy
4 weeks prior to the occurrence of the following events in the playroom:
For two consecutive sessions, Paula busily arranged all the chairs in a
tight cluster, bound them together with string, and covered the entire
construction with paper. She lef a small opening and crawled in and out
with some nervous giggling. Armed with his knowledge of the pregnancy,
the therapist "understood" the play as a symbolic acting out of
fantasies about pregnancy and birth. Afer making some observations to
Paula about her manifest behavior, her pleasure, and her "worried"
giggle, he considers the best way for interpreting to her his "certain"
interpretation of its latent meaning. However, since the second of these
sessions is about to end, he decides to wait to deliver his
interpretation until next week. In the intervening week, he meets with
Paula's parents in a regularly scheduled interview. Tey tell him that
three weeks earlier, the family had gone camping. Tey were very pleased
that Paula was able to manage this experience without signifcant fears
and say, "Tat's something she couldn't have done a few months ago." Tey
did note that she was a bit anxious about sleeping in a tent with them
and her older brother, but she was easily reassured. (Cooper & Wanerman,
1977, p. 185)

Clearly Paula's play behavior is related to the more recent camping trip
and the tent episode. Typically, a play therapist knowing about the
mother's pregnancy and not knowing about the camping trip would "read
into" the child's playroom behavior anxiety

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

about the mother's pregnancy. Te child-centered play therapist
intentionally focuses on the child and the relationship in the playroom
and, out of respect for and belief in the child, does not take the
residue of information learned outside the play therapy relationship
into the unique developing relationship with a child in the playroom.
Play therapists must never assume they know everything about a child.
Our information is always incomplete. Information received by the
therapist does not result in a change in approach by the child-centered
play therapist. Tis is not a prescriptive approach that varies with the
presenting problem. No attempt is made to match a certain technique with
a specifc problem. Te therapist's belief in the child is unwavering,
regardless of the specifc problem. Tus, the therapist is consistent
across sessions and with diferent children. Te therapist at all times
interacts with the child rather than focusing on a problem. Terefore,
background information is not essential to the child centered therapist
but may be secondarily helpful in formulating an overall picture as a
basis for assessing growth or change or may be used as a basis for
ofering parenting suggestions. An ideal procedure would be for another
therapist to interview and counsel with the parent(s), thereby removing
the play therapist from the potential bind of having to disregard
background information in order to remain perceptually open to the
child. Tis also would alleviate the problem of interference with the
therapist--child relationship when the child knows the therapist is
talking with the parent(s). Because most play therapists do not work in
a setting where another therapist is available to work with the
parent(s), if counseling with parents is necessary, sessions can be
scheduled for a separate time when the child is not with them. However,
many parents' work schedules prohibit their making two trips to the
therapist's ofce. When this is the case, the therapy hour may have to be
split between the child and the parent(s) for periodic parental
sessions. Tis procedure is not recommended as a standard course of
action but may be the only course of action if the therapist considers
working with the parent(s) to be essential. If the therapy hour is split
between the parent(s) and the child, the parent(s) should be seen frst.
Tis helps to diminish the tendency of children to feel the therapist is
"telling on them," as may

147

148

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

happen when the child is seen frst. Children should always be informed
of meetings with parents, so they will not be surprised to fnd out such
a meeting has taken place. Older children may be allowed to choose to
have their play therapy session before or afer the therapist meets with
the parent(s).

Must Parents Also Be in Therapy? Parents play a vital and signifcant
role in the lives of their children and, therefore, should be included
in some kind of therapeutic procedure whenever possible. Whether parents
need therapy or training in better parenting skills is a question for
the play therapist to determine. Frequently, Child-Parent Relationship
Terapy (CPRT) is the recommended intervention for working with parents.
CPRT is a 10-session flial therapy model in which child centered play
therapists train parents in child-centered play therapy skills to be
therapeutic agents with their own children through a format of didactic
instruction, required at-home 30-minute special play times once a week
using a kit of carefully selected toys, and supervision in a supportive
atmosphere. Parents learn how to respond empathically to their child's
feelings, build their child's self-esteem, help their child learn
self-control and self-responsibility, and set therapeutic limits during
these special playtimes. Play is the most natural way children
communicate. Toys are like words for children and play is their
language. For 30 minutes each week, the child is the center of the
parent's universe. In this special playtime, the parent creates an
accepting relationship in which a child feels completely safe to express
herself through her play. Tis is not a typical playtime. It is a special
playtime in which the child leads and the parent follows. In this
special relationship, there are no reprimands, put-downs, evaluations,
requirements (to draw pictures a certain way, etc.), judgments (about
the child or his play as being good or bad, right or wrong). Many
parents simply do not know how to be helpful to their children's
emotional adjustment and cannot be expected to know, because they have
had no appropriate training anywhere in their lifetime. However, when
parents feel better about themselves, are less anxious, and are better
adjusted, they are more likely to

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

respond in positive, self-enhancing ways to their children. Te point
being made here is that parent training is the preferred but not the
exclusive approach. If the child's problems are not serious enough to
require the skills of a professional play therapist and the parent is
emotionally and mentally stable, I usually recommend CPRT. For more
information on CPRT see G. Landreth and S. Bratton (2020) Child-Parent
Relationship Terapy (CPRT): An Evidence-Based 10-Session Filial Terapy
Model. A frequently asked question is, "Can play therapy be efective if
the parents don't receive therapy?" Although involving parents in
therapy or parent training is always recommended if possible, and
positive results may be achieved in less time if they are, children in
play therapy can and do change in signifcantly positive ways without
their parents being involved in therapy or parent training. Children are
not completely at the mercy of their environment. If they were, how
would we account for those children who have grown up in absolutely
terrible home environments, yet go on to be quite well-adjusted and
successful adults? Although this is possible, it is not typical---but it
does point to the individual's capacity to grow and to overcome. Play
therapy can be efective without parents receiving therapy or parent
training. Further evidence of this can be seen in elementary school
counseling programs. Many parents work and are not available during the
day for counseling sessions. To expect an elementary school counselor to
work with the parents of every child seen in a counseling relationship
is unrealistic. In most elementary schools, counselors report signifcant
changes in children's behavior even though they have only limited
contact with a minimum number of parents. And what of residential
institutions for children where parents are not available? Can therapy
with children in these settings be efective? Is help to be withheld
because parents are not there? Or is help to be withheld until a newly
placed child forms a relationship with a signifcant adult staf member in
the institution so the signifcant adult can be worked with? Te answer to
such questions is obvious. Experiences in schools and residential
institutions have demonstrated children's capability to cope, adjust,
change, and grow even though parents did not receive counseling. To
insist that children not be seen

149

150

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

in therapy until their parents can be worked with is to deny the growth
potential and coping ability of children and the ability of parents to
alter their own behavior in relation to a child's change in behavior.
When the behavior of a child changes as a result of the play therapy
experience, parents unconsciously perceive the change, be it ever so
slight, and in turn respond to the child in a slightly altered way, thus
encouraging the change in the child. Said another way, the child goes
home and is a little diferent; so, the parents respond a little
diferently. Some obviously gross exceptions do exist to this premise, as
in the case of severely emotionally disturbed parents or parents who
habitually abuse drugs, but generally this premise is true. How this
process of change works can be seen in the following case. Tree-year-old
Latesha's father described her this way: "We don't dare leave her alone
for one minute or something will be destroyed. She messes everything up,
colors on the walls. She just can't be trusted." In play therapy, as
Latesha experienced the therapist's consistent acceptance of her, her
persistent demands, her "baby" behavior (sucking on the nursing bottle,
etc.), and her need to be messy, she became less demanding and much more
agreeable. Some of her messy behavior resulted in therapeutic limit
setting, thus allowing her to learn to control her terrible mess in the
bathroom at bath time, which was her father's task to clean up. As
Latesha began to demonstrate greater self-control, her father became
more accepting of her, was more relaxed with her, and began to play with
her spontaneously. Tey began to have fun together, and Latesha felt
accepted. Latesha no longer tried to pinch or hurt her 5-month-old baby
brother, began to play by herself more, and, in her mother's words, "She
doesn't follow me around whining all the time." Mother also relaxed with
Latesha, became more trusting of her, responded more readily to her need
for nurturing, and was able to say, "I have my lovable little girl
back." Neither parent was worked with in therapy, nor were they told
anything about what Latesha did in the playroom. As is demonstrated in
this case, children not only can change but do, without concomitant
parent therapy. Of course, it is recommended that parents be involved in
counselling sessions if possible.

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Parents as Partners in the Play Therapy Process Prior to the frst play
session, the play therapist meets with the parents without the child
present. Te child is not included as a precaution to protect the child
from hearing parents describe a stream of negative descriptions and
complaints about the child and the child's behavior that would be
harmful for the child to hear. Many parents are considering play therapy
for their child because they are frustrated with the child, are at their
"wits' end," are angry at the child, feel hopeless, are desperate, and
they may dump pent-up emotions focused on the child. Children should not
experience the brunt of such venting from parents and, therefore, are
seldom involved in consultations with parents. Te therapist's primary
task during this session is to build a relationship with the parents,
focusing on the parents' needs and concerns and conveying to them their
importance in their child's therapy. Parents bring to this initial
meeting the intensity of their concerns about their children and
accompanying emotional reactions. Some parents feel overwhelmed, and the
sensitive therapist will respond to these feelings with the same
empathic caring that comes forth in the relationship with a child in the
playroom. Emotional contact with parents helps them to trust the
therapist, an absolutely essential element if parents are to be
consistent in bringing their children to play therapy. Parents need to
know they have been heard and understood. In this initial parent
consultation, the sensitive therapist will respond equally to parents'
concerns about their children's problems and the deeper level of
parents' emotional reactions, moving back and forth between these
dimensions in the interview process. Tis is not a time for education and
instruction, which can quickly become overwhelming and feel judgmental
to parents. Te initial parent consultation provides the play therapist
with the opportunity to inform parents about play therapy---what play
therapy is, why it is used with children (toys are like children's
words, etc.), how play therapy works (how it is helpful to a child),
what to expect during the process---and to show the parents the playroom
so they will be familiar with where the child is spending

151

152

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

time in their absence. Te experience of standing in the middle of the
playroom usually helps parents relax. Te therapist will also want to
prepare parents for unexpected happenings in the waiting room such as
how to respond if their child resists separating and clings to them, and
how to respond when their child returns to the waiting room at the end
of the session. (How to respond to happenings in the initial experience
in the waiting room is explained in the next section.) I have found that
it is best to anticipate happenings and coach parents on how to respond.
In the Center for Play Terapy at the University of North Texas, we
provide parents with a small brochure that gives examples of how we hope
parents will respond to anticipated happenings in the waiting room as
well as what to tell their child about coming to the playroom. Special
considerations for the child that might impact the therapeutic process
will also be inquired about in this initial parent consultation:
medications, child's fears, allergic reactions to sandbox dust, toilet
training for very young children, and so forth. Te importance and
characteristics of confdentiality will need to be discussed. Although,
in most states, children do not have the legal right to confdentiality,
the play therapist emphasizes the need for children to experience
confdentiality of specifc actions and words in the playroom. In play
therapy, parents are not allowed to observe their children's play
therapy session so that the child can feel free to fully express
thoughts, feelings, and actions. In the frst consultation, the therapist
reviews the importance of attendance, indicating that sporadic
participation in play therapy interferes with progress. Te play
therapist highlights the need for a fnal session if the parents decide
to prematurely terminate therapy. Meeting with parents on a regular
basis, at least once a month, is considered to be essential in that this
helps keep parents involved in the process, provides an opportunity for
parental feedback regarding developmental progress and
emotional/behavioral change, and continues the process of building a
relationship with parents. Frequency of meetings with parents is
determined by the unique needs of the child and the parents. If a child
is traumatized or experiences a crisis situation during the course of
therapy,

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

meeting more frequently may be needed to provide the parent needed
support or the child may need additional play therapy sessions each
week.. Tese continuing consultations provide opportunities for brief
training of parents in skills to help them respond to their child in
more positive ways. Tese skills are introduced in the context of
parents' discussing their child's behavior. Typically, parents are
taught basic Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT) skills of refection
of content and feelings, choice giving, building self-esteem, returning
responsibility, and limit setting (Landreth & Bratton, 2020; Bratton, &
Landreth, 2020).

Explaining Play Therapy to Parents Helping parents understand what play
therapy is may be one of the most important things the play therapist
does because, in most cases, the cooperation of the parent is essential
in bringing the child to the sessions. Parents immediately think of fun
and games when they hear the term play therapy and wonder why they are
being asked to bring their child to play when the child already plays at
home. If parents do not understand how play therapy works, they cannot
be expected to trust the process or to have faith in the therapist, and
if they do not, their negative attitude may afect the child's feelings
about the sessions. Comments like, "It's costing a lot of money for you
to just go in there to play. And besides, you're still wetting the bed,"
are sure to make the child feel guilty and undermine the therapeutic
relationship. Te following explanation about play therapy could be
given, modifed to allow the therapist's own uniqueness and approach to
be communicated: I know you are concerned about Lisa. She seems to be
having a difcult time coping (at home, at school, with the divorce, with
other children, etc.). In the process of growing up, most children
experience difculty adjusting at some time. Some children may need more
help than others in some areas and less help in other areas. Children
have a hard time sitting in a big chair, like the one you are sitting
in, and talking about what bothers them. Tey

153

154

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

don't know the words to describe what they are feeling inside or what
they are thinking, so sometimes they act out or show how they feel. In
play therapy we provide toys, and I will show you the playroom in a few
minutes, for children to use, to say with the toys what they have
difculty saying with words. In the play therapy experience, toys are
like the child's words, and play is the child's language. When children
can communicate or play out how they feel to someone who understands,
they feel better because the feelings have been released. You have
probably experienced the same thing when you were bothered or worried
about something and told someone who really cared about you and
understood; then you felt better and could handle the problem better.
Well, play therapy is like that for children. Tey can use the dolls,
puppets, paints, or other toys to say what they think or how they feel.
Terefore, how children play or what they do in the playroom is very
important, just like what you say here is very important. In play
therapy, children learn how to express their thoughts and feelings in
constructive ways, to control their behavior, to make decisions, and to
accept responsibility. Afer the play therapy sessions, if you were to
ask Lisa what she did, she would probably say she just played. And if
someone asked you what you did here today, you would probably say we
just talked. But what we have talked about is very important. What
children do in the playroom is also very important. Tey work through
their problems with the help of the counselor. Children are sometimes
unaware at the moment that something important has happened in the
playroom; so they don't have anything important to say. Sometimes it is
easier for children to explore feelings, especially their fears or
anger, with someone who can be more objective and accepting than parents
or teachers. Terefore, it is best that you refrain from quizzing Lisa
about what she did, what happened, or if she had fun. Te time in the
playroom is a special, private time for children. Tey should not feel
they have to give a report to anyone, even parents. Play therapy
sessions with children are confdential, just like counseling sessions
with adults. I want to respect Lisa just as much as I respect you as an
adult. Terefore, I will be happy to share with you my general
impressions and to ofer suggestions, but I am not free to tell you the
specifcs of what Lisa says or does

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

in the playroom. I will share with you general information I think you
should know. If you came to see me for counseling and shared something
you were concerned about, I would not later tell your spouse or your
employer. Our time together would be confdential. When Lisa and I come
out of the playroom, it would be best if you didn't ask, "How did things
go?" or, "Did you have fun?" Just say, "Hi. We can go home now."
Sometimes Lisa may take a painting or drawing home with her. If you
praise the painting, she may feel she should make other paintings for
you. It would be best just to make comments about what you see in the
painting. "You used lots of colors. Tere's some blue, and green, and a
lot of brown all the way across the bottom of the picture." Because
paints can sometimes be messy and the playroom foor may have sand
spilled on it, I suggest you let Lisa wear some old play clothes you
won't mind getting soiled. Please do not reprimand Lisa or be surprised
if she has paint smeared on her hands or arms. Most children get some
paint on them when they paint in the playroom. Te paint is washable.
Some children really enjoy the freedom to be messy with paints, and that
can be a part of the therapeutic process. I am sure you are wondering
what to tell Lisa about coming to see me. You may tell her she will be
coming to be with Mr. Landreth in his special playroom every week, where
there are lots of toys for her to play with. If Lisa wants to know why
she is going to the playroom, you can tell her something general like,
"Tings don't seem to be going very well for you at home (or other
general statement related to the identifed problem), and sometimes it
helps to have a special time just for yourself to share with a special
person."

Tis explanation is given in bits and pieces interspersed with comments
and questions for the parent that allow the parent to comment. Giving a
parent the entire explanation without a break would be more than a
parent could take in and assimilate. As a part of the initial interview,
a tour of the playroom or opening cabinet doors in your ofce to reveal
play materials will help the parent to better understand what you have
been trying to explain about play therapy. Don't rush this part of the
process. Be sure to encourage the parent to ask questions. Tis is a good
time to explain further the purpose of play.

155

156

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Preparing Parents for Separation Parents ofen feel awkward and
embarrassed if their child is reluctant to go to the playroom and may
make some very inappropriate statements in an efort to get their child
to leave the waiting room with the therapist. A parent who says, "If you
don't go with the nice man to his playroom, he will think you are ugly"
has doomed the beginning of the relationship to a difcult start. A
reluctant child is just expressing herself in the only way he or she
knows how at that moment---no more and no less. Being reluctant and
saying, "I don't want to go to the playroom," does not mean the child is
ugly or bad or anything negative. It just means the child does not want
to leave her mother or father or does not want to go to the playroom or
some other reason the adults do not understand at the moment. When
parents know what to expect on their frst visit with their children to
the playroom and have been told how to respond, the process of
separation usually is less difcult for parent and child and a relief to
the therapist. With preparation, parents are better able to help their
children assume more independence. Te therapist may fnd the following
explanation helpful to parents: When children come here for the frst
time, they are sometimes reluctant to go with me to the playroom because
this is a strange place to them and they have never seen me before. Most
children, though, are quite eager to go see the playroom. When I come
into the waiting room and introduce myself to Andre, I will say, "We can
go to the playroom now." It would be helpful if you would say, "Fine.
I'll wait here, and I'll be here when you're fnished in the playroom,
Andre." (Parents should not say "Bye bye," because that may result in
the child feeling he is going to be gone for a long time or perhaps even
forever! Always remember how things may seem to the child.) Please do
not tell Andre to "Be nice" or any other instructions. If Andre is
reluctant to go to the playroom with me, I will be patient with his
reluctance and will refect his feeling. He may need a minute or two to
decide he is willing to go to the playroom. During this time, I hope you
will just sit quietly and allow me to do all the work. I am comfortable
with a child's reluctance to go to the playroom and believe we will get
to the playroom. It just may

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

take a few minutes. If afer several minutes, Andre is still reluctant to
go to the playroom, I may ask you to walk down the hall to the playroom
with us. When we get to the door of the playroom, I will let you know if
I think you need to go into the playroom with us. If I should ask you to
go into the playroom, just go right in, sit in the chair I point to, and
watch. If Andre wants to show you toys or interact with you during the
play time, I will respond for you.

Parents should be forewarned that they may hear their child yelling or
throwing things, and that such noises are not unusual, because children
play hard in the playroom. Or they may hear their child crying, because
the child wants to leave the playroom. Tis behavior also is acceptable.
Loud noises and crying do not mean anything is wrong. Ofen parents want
to tell the therapist something about their child just as soon as the
therapist enters the waiting room. Te therapist should remind parents
that he wants to give their child full attention in the waiting room.
Terefore, the best procedure would be for parents to hold their comment
until a scheduled meeting time. If doubts or concerns exist about the
child's physical functioning, advise parents to consult their
pediatrician. Tis is always an appropriate suggestion when problems such
as bedwetting or enuresis are discussed.

The Parent Interview and Transcript Admitting that they or their child
need help is a very sensitive and difcult area for most parents. Te
tendency is to put of asking for help as long as possible, hoping
"things will get better." In many cases, when the parent fnally contacts
the therapist, the area of concern is long-standing or has escalated in
intensity to the point of frightening or frustrating the parent. Te
therapist should be especially sensitive to the struggle the parent has
undergone to reach the point of asking for help and should relate to
that struggle with understanding, rather than rushing to focus on the
presenting problem. Te parent may feel guilty, frustrated, inadequate,
or angry, and these feelings will need to be

157

158

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

related to frst by employing the same empathic approach utilized in the
playroom. Consistent with the child-centered play therapy approach, the
relationship established with the parent is considered to be crucial. Te
parent's own emotional adjustment and level of frustration tolerance may
be the determining factor in whether the parent seeks therapy for the
child. A study by Shepherd et al. (1966) of 50 children referred to a
child guidance clinic and a group of 50 children matched for age and
symptom who had not been referred for therapy found that the mothers who
had been seen in the clinic were depressed, upset by stress, anxious,
perplexed by their children's problems, and worried about what to do.
Mothers in the matched group tended to be casual about their children's
behaviors and viewed their children's problems as temporary, requiring
patience and time to overcome. Tey seemed to have more self-confdence.
Te fndings of this study and others highlight the need for the therapist
to be sensitive and responsive to the emotional dynamics underlying the
parent's reactions. Te skillful therapist will, with the help of the
parent, weave an intricate tapestry of interaction going in and out of
focusing on the presenting problem and the parent's feelings as the
therapist follows the parent's movement back and forth between these
issues in the initial interview. If the session were to be dissected,
some parts would be just like a therapy session, other parts would
clearly portray typical intake interview material, and other parts would
reveal a parental guidance function with the ofering of suggestions for
the parent to consider. For example, in a case involving difculty in
getting a child to bed at night, upon learning that the parent did not
read to the child, I suggested the parent read a short story to the
child just before tucking her into bed. Te therapist must be very
cautious in making such suggestions before the parent, child, and the
relationship are more fully understood. Tis process of smoothly
responding to all levels of the parent's concerns is illustrated in the
following initial interview I had just prior to seeing a child for a
preliminary diagnostic session in the playroom to determine the need for
play therapy.

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.:

I have fve kids put into one. He must keep you very busy. Yes, I work a
full-time job and keep a house and him. As far as school, he does pretty
good as long as he's on his medication. Now, if he's not on his
medication, that kid, there's no controlling him. What kind of
medication is he taking? He's on Ritalin. Did you give him medication
this morning? Uh huh. He gets two before he goes to school in the
afernoon and another one afer school. He seems to get a streak of energy
right at nighttime when the medication has worn of. Tat kid's got
energy. Sounds like that's a busy time, a hard time for you, when he
gets that streak of energy. Yes. It's nighttime and that's when I'm
tired and I want to relax. It's hard trying to work a full-time job and
take care of him and the house and with all his energy. He's had that
energy since day one. Working full-time and taking care of Anthony is
just about all you can keep up with, and he has been overly active ever
since he was a tiny baby. Yes. Nobody would agree with me. I said he was
hyper and had a lot of energy, but no one would agree with me. I was
home almost 2 years with him. When we put him in day care and started
having trouble, that was when people fnally started listening to me and
said, "Tis kid has something wrong." He's very artistic. He can be good
when he wants to be, but the majority of the time he's not. But you know
that he can control his behavior when he decides to, is that what you're
saying? Sometimes. You're not very sure he really can. Not very ofen.
And you really got to get afer him, and I mean you got to get on him
hard. What does that mean, you have to be hard on him?

159

160

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:
Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

You have to keep afer him constantly, I mean stay on him. You know, you
tell him to do something, and he won't do it. You have to follow him
around and see that he does it. More or less, and there's times that
he's gotten paddlings for not doing what he's told, and he's got a very
smart mouth. So he talks back to you. Yes. He tries. How ofen would you
say that you paddle Anthony? It's hard to say because I try to avoid it.
Like I was saying, when he breaks the camel's back. Te last resort. Yes,
it's not something that happens every day, and I try to avoid it unless
he just gets to the point where I can't take any more of it. Uh huh.
Ten---you see, now I don't even have to use it. Sometimes all I have to
do is threaten to use it. And then he stops the behavior. He starts
doing what he's told. So it sounds like he can control himself, but then
at other times he's so active that he doesn't think about controlling
himself. Right. Tat's about it. He's got too much energy---if we could
drain the energy out of him, I think everything would be all right.
(Laughs). But there's no way to do that except with the medication,
which slows him down. How long has he been on the medication? About 2
years now. When was the last time the pediatrician adjusted his
medication? It was about maybe a month ago. We alter the dosage
depending on what he goes through. Te doctor more or less goes by what I
feel. If I see that he's doing good then we bring the dosage down. We
brought it down for a while because he seemed to be doing better.

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.:

Ten once he started school again, he started getting up again, so we
increased it. You said a minute ago that the medication seems to wear of
by nighttime. What are bedtimes like for Anthony? Horrible! What does
that mean, horrible? Well, it's not really that bad going to bed; he
usually falls asleep on the couch with me. I'll be sitting on the couch
relaxing, and he'll fall asleep. But it's usually 10 o'clock before he
falls asleep. Now, he's waking me up between 4 and 5 o'clock every
morning, and I'm not up at 4 o'clock in the morning! (Laughs.) Tat's
really early for you. You're not functioning very well. Very early! And
he wants to lay in bed with me, and I won't have it. Tere's not enough
room, and I want to sleep comfortably with the little bit of sleep I do
get. I fnally put him back in bed or on the couch, and he'll sleep for a
while. Sometimes he'll argue with me, sometimes he won't. But he doesn't
need a lot of sleep. We also have a problem with bedwetting. I can't get
him to quit. And, it's getting to be a pain. I mean he's 6 years old.
It's got to quit. Now his doctor said she could give him medication, but
I didn't want to push another medication on him. I think that one is
enough. You're really frustrated with the bedwetting. Has there ever
been a period when he did not wet his bed at night? Yes. We've gone
through periods of and on, going back a few years, where he would get up
in the middle of the night, go to the bathroom, and go back to bed
without ever disturbing me. He did that for a while. But it's been going
on for quite a while now. I would guess 6 months, a year. Tat must seem
like a long time. Yes, it's been a long time. So he wets his bed every
night or almost every night.

161

162

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Almost every night. Tere are some nights when he doesn't. Yes, but the
majority of the time he's wetting his bed at night. I think it's
laziness. He doesn't want to get up out of bed and go to the bathroom is
what I think it is. So you've decided he could stop if he wanted to.
Yes, if he would. If he could get his mind when he's sleeping, to get
him up, yes. Have you ever tried a routine of waking him up and taking
him to the bathroom? No. (Laughs) I don't get enough sleep as it is to
think about that. He wakes me up so early. Tis is a hard time for you,
not enough rest. How about Dad, does he ever get up with him? Daddy goes
to bed, he puts his head down, and he doesn't know anything until the
next morning. A bomb could go of under the bed, and he wouldn't know it.
Nothing bothers him. It's all up to you, then. Not in the least. Te only
time he gets his sleep disturbed is when one of us is very sick. I mean
we've got to be deathly sick is the only time he would hear anything.
Anthony comes jumping in the bed at 3, 4, 5 o'clock in the morning, and
Daddy doesn't know anything. So as far as that goes, that wouldn't work.
So you don't think you could depend on Dad for any help. No. Not when he
comes to bed late. Sounds like, from some of the things that you've
said, that you're primarily responsible for taking care of Anthony and
trying to help him change his behavior. Pretty much, the majority. Until
a month ago, Anthony spent 2 months home with Daddy because Dad was out
of work, and I couldn't pay for a babysitter as long as he was out of
work; so, he did take care of Anthony at that time. And things seemed to
be pretty good. I mean he still was overactive. Tey got along and were
pretty good at it, hardly any problems in school or

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent: Dr. L :

Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.:

anything, but now we're back to babysitters. Now, I can't keep him in a
day care. I've gone through four or fve diferent day cares and none of
them can handle him because of his activeness. Right now, he's at a home
sitter, which seems to be working pretty good. And it's a one-on-one. So
things are a lot better at home and school when Anthony has lots of
close attention. He needs one-on-one attention is what I've been told by
the majority of the people. He needs one-on-one. I've threatened him to
quit working and stay with him 24 hours a day because of trying to keep
him someplace, and he doesn't like the idea. He doesn't want Mommy to
quit working, because then there's no more toys, there's no more extras.
Sounds like you're so exasperated you are willing to try almost anything
to get him to control himself. Yes, but to get him to control himself
totally, he doesn't understand that. I don't know if it's that he
doesn't want to or he can't. I really hear the confusion there for you.
Tere's a part of you that thinks, "Well, maybe if he really worked hard
at it he could control himself." But there's another part of you that
kind of knows it's not something he really can control sometimes. I
don't know. Just not sure about that. No. What I'd like and what happens
are two diferent things. I mean I've been putting up with it for so
long. My major problem, though, is I'm afraid about what will happen
when he's fnished kindergarten. We've got the medication to control him
pretty much now, but what's going to happen when he goes to school all
day? And he's very big for his age. And that's another problem I'm
afraid of---I mean he is tall. So you're looking ahead to frst grade and
knowing that if this is still going on, he is going to have some real
problems.

163

164

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Parent: Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.:

Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

Dr. L.: Parent:

And I'm going to have the problems. And you're also going to have
problems with him. I hear your frustration. Tere are times when you just
get so frustrated, almost too much for you to take care of. Yes, and
other people don't see it, what I go through, and there have been a
couple of times over the last 6 months that I thought I was going to
have a nervous breakdown trying to control everything. At one point I
thought I almost did. Something has just got to be done, and if it's not
done soon, it's not going to be a question of Anthony surviving, it's
going to be Mommy surviving. Te pressure has really been hard on you.
You've been working hard a long time to keep everything together, and
now you're just almost at the breaking point sometimes. Yes, I am, and
it's got to change, that's all there is to it. But I'm the one who has
been pushing this, and I'm the one who needs it, and I just feel
that---at one time I had a hard time even getting my husband to go to
this stuf. It's hard to get him---I mean my husband is a lot older. My
husband is 58 years old, and he's set in his ways. And that's another
thing that I'm fghting against, is that he's set. It's hard for you to
get him involved, and you feel you need some help. It's almost
overwhelming to you trying to take care of everything by yourself. Yes.
I mean he's been getting more involved lately than he had ever before
because I've been doing a lot of screaming and yelling, because I'm at
the point of no return and I can't handle it. So you're fnally getting
your message across to him that you really need some help, but even that
you have had to work so hard at. You just feel so desperate. Yes, that's
pretty much the way it is, and I've just got to have some help.

Te session ended with an explanation of play therapy and a visit to one
of the playrooms. It is obvious this mother needs therapy for herself,
so she will be better able to cope with her son.

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Ethical and Legal Issues in Play Therapy Because play therapists have
received training in a specifc area of the feld of mental health such as
counseling, psychology, or social work, it is assumed that they have
received thorough training in and have a working knowledge of the
general areas of ethical and legal issues related to their area of study
as prescribed by their state licensing board and professional
organizations to which they belong. It does seem important, though, to
focus some attention on legal and ethical issues specifcally related to
working with young children because they are a dependent population. Te
intent of this section is to call attention to fundamental guidelines
related to the unique setting of working with children in play therapy,
a sort of reminder. Te purpose of this section is not to provide an
exhaustive review of legal and ethical issues. Play therapists are
advised to follow ethical guidelines and standards of practice of
professional organizations which require that they take appropriate
precautions such as obtaining informed consent, professional
consultation, and supervision to ensure clients are protected, and that
they are practicing within the boundaries of their profession. State
laws difer regarding therapy with minors, and play therapists are
advised to familiarize themselves with the laws of the state in which
they practice. Legal and ethical considerations dictate that parents
should be involved when mental health professionals are working with
children. Sweeney (2001) noted: When working with children, it is
imperative to remember that while the child may be the focus of
treatment, the legal guardian is essentially the client from a legal and
ethical perspective. Tis is simply because the presumption of the state
is that minors are legally incompetent. Tis means that children are not
considered to have the legal capacity to consent (or refuse) services,
or the right to obtain and retain privilege in regard to confdential
information. It is the legal guardian, which is most ofen the parent,
who is the holder of these rights. Tis can make the legal and ethical
aspect of counseling children occasionally ambiguous for all involved
persons. (p. 65)

165

166

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

Tompson and Rudolph (2000) noted that "Te rights of minors and the
rights of parents to serve in a 'guiding role' can cause confusion.
While adults agree on the worth and dignity of children, it must be
recognized that legally, minors have fewer rights than adults because of
their supposed limited experiences and cognitive abilities to make
decisions" (p. 502). Parents must be informed about the purpose and
process of play therapy and appropriate informed consent secured.
Obtaining informed consent is a complex issue for play therapists.
According to Sweeney (2001), To satisfy the principle of informed
consent, which is essentially a legal and ethical doctrine, the consent
of clients must be given in a voluntary, knowledgeable, and competent
state. Because of their minor status, children are not considered
voluntary, knowledgeable, and competent clients. Play therapists choose
to use play as a means of communicating with children because they lack
the developmental skills to engage in therapy in the same manner as
adult clients. Te very concept of informed consent is sophisticated and
abstract, and as such is counter to this basic rationale for using play
therapy. Since children are generally considered legally incapable of
consenting to the process of play therapy, a substitute must make the
decision. In most cases, this will be the parent or legal guardian.
(p. 68)

Permission must be obtained from the child's legal guardian prior to
scheduling for play therapy. Te therapist would be well advised not to
assume that the parent who arranges for the child to be in play therapy
has custody of the child. Te adult in your ofce discussing the child may
indeed be the child's mother, but she may be divorced and the father may
have full custody. In cases involving divorced parents, it is
recommended that the therapist obtain copies of the most current
designated court orders pertaining to the child's issues. Obtaining a
divorce decree may not result in the most current information. As a
precaution, the play therapist's notes should refect their request for
the most recent court order in addition to obtaining a copy for their
fle. Te therapist must obtain informed consent from the legally
appropriate guardian giving permission for the named child to be in play
therapy

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

and verifying that the parent is the legal guardian. A separate form is
needed for granting permission for release of information and to make
audio and video recordings of the sessions. Always obtain parental
permission before discussing a child's case with school personnel, an
agency, and so on. Tis point cannot be overemphasized. Never release
information or discuss a child with teachers or other signifcant
individuals in the child's life, other than the child's legal guardians,
without obtaining permission from the legal guardian. Tis rule would not
apply in many elementary schools, where the counselor is viewed as a
part of the educational team and discussions with teachers are
recommended.

Psychiatric Referral In cases that require a psychiatric evaluation and
residential care is deemed necessary, the therapist may need to be
reminded that many psychiatric facilities are not equipped to adequately
care for young children. Te therapist will want to visit facilities and
ask important questions of the staf. What kind of training and
experience do they have in working with children? What degrees and
licensure or certifcation do the staf members hold? What procedures are
used with children below the developmental age of 10? Do they use the
same approach with all ages---that is, only group work based on verbal
interaction with groups of eight children ages 5 to 12? I hope not.
Children ages 5 to 6 should be placed in individual or group play
therapy, not with children ages 7 (second grade) to 12 (seventh grade),
because developmentally, kindergarten children have nothing in common
with children in second grade and older. Children below age 9 should be
placed in individual or group play therapy. Children age 10 to 12 could
be placed in verbal group counseling. Te general rule for forming play
therapy groups or "talk" groups of children is that the age of members
should not span more than two years, except in play therapy groups
involving children from the same family. Other areas of concern: Do the
staf members seem to really care about and understand children? Are they
warm persons? Is there a play therapy room? If so, ask to see it. You
should not assume a highly

167

168

Parents as Partners in Play Therapy

qualifed staf exists in all areas just because the program is a part of
a psychiatric facility. Tis is information the therapist will need in
order to assist in referrals.

References Bratton, S. & Landreth, G. (2020). Child parent relationship
therapy (CPRT) treatment manual: An evidence-based 10-session flial
therapy model (2nd ed). Routledge. Cooper, S., & Wanerman, L. (1977).
Children in treatment: A primer for beginning psychotherapists.
Brunner/Mazel. Landreth, G. & Bratton, S. (2020). Child parent
relationship therapy (CPRT): An evidenced based 10-session flial therapy
model (2nd ed). Routledge. Shepherd, M., Oppenheim, A., & Mitchell, S.
(1966). Childhood behavior disorders and the child-guidance clinic.
Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 7, 39--52. Sweeney, D.
(2001). Legal and ethical issues in play therapy. In G. Landreth (Ed.),
Innovations in play therapy: Issues, process, and special populations
(pp. 65--81). Brunner-Routledge. Tompson, C., & Rudolph, L. (2000).
Counseling children (5th ed.). Brooks/ Cole.

Chapter

10

The Playroom and Materials

The atmosphere in the playroom is of critical importance, because that
is what impacts the child frst. Te playroom should have an atmosphere of
its own that conveys warmth and a clear message: "Tis is a place for
children." Creating an environment friendly to children requires
planning, efort, and a sensitive understanding of how it feels to be a
child. Children are more likely to feel comfortable in places where a
sense of openness exists that says to the child, "You are free to use
what is here. Be yourself. Explore." Te feeling in the playroom should
be like putting on a well-worn, warm sweater. Te look of the toys and
materials should say, "Use me." It is difcult to accomplish this kind of
feeling in a new room with all new toys. Te feeling in such rooms ofen
is cold. Great efort and creativity are required to transform a new
playroom into a comfortable place that invites the child's interaction.
A well-worn feeling is preferred.

Playroom Location Because children are sometimes noisy, the playroom
should be located in an area of the agency, school, or suite of ofces
least likely to distract or disturb other clients and staf members. If
parents or other children hear what is going on in the playroom, the
child may feel that his privacy has been violated, and DOI:
10.4324/9781003255796-10

169

170

The Playroom and Materials

the relationship may sufer. Likewise, parents may unnecessarily question
the child about what they heard, thus threatening the child. Although
some writers have recommended the playroom be soundproof, that seems to
be unrealistic and largely unattainable. When a child yells, throws the
blocks, or pounds with the mallet, the noise will be heard outside the
playroom. Acoustical tile on the ceiling will reduce the noise level
considerably. Do not put acoustical tile on the walls, because the
texture invites children to pick, poke, and pull pieces of. Also, there
is absolutely no way paint can be washed of or removed from the porous
material. Complete isolation of the playroom is probably an unrealistic
goal, although I once worked for several years in a private counseling
agency that had a small house located on the back of the property that
we converted into a children's place with two play therapy rooms. It was
a wonderful experience, and the children quickly identifed with the
"little house."

Playroom Size A room approximately 12 feet by 15 feet seems to meet the
purposes of play therapy best. Although I have worked in playrooms with
smaller dimensions, an area of 150--200 square feet feels almost ideal,
because the child is never too far away. A long narrow room or a larger
room would defeat this purpose. In larger rooms, the therapist may
"chase" the child around the room in an efort to be close and in the
process deprive the child of the opportunity to take the lead in
approaching the therapist on the child's terms. A room of the size
recommended here provides ample space for group play therapy with two or
three children but no more, because the typical high activity level
causes too many conficts resulting from physical encroachments on other
children's activities, or on the child who wants to play alone for a few
minutes, or on the child who wants to sit contemplatively. Enough space
must be available for children to have their own activity space if they
desire without continually bumping into each other or disrupting each
other's play. Yes, children do need to learn to play together. However,
the play therapy setting can be a very intense, emotional

The Playroom and Materials

experience, and some children need the opportunity to pull aside, to be
alone, to regroup psychologically; they are not able to ask for such
space, nor are other children likely to recognize the need in the midst
of their own self-motivated period of high activity. A combination of
not enough space and too many children is potentially chaotic and
damaging to children. For larger play therapy groups of fve children, a
playroom of approximately 300 square feet is desirable.

Playroom Characteristics Te room should provide privacy from view, with
no windows on inside walls or in the door. A window on an outside wall
will probably not present a problem, but curtains that can be drawn or
miniblinds of some kind will be needed. No windows to contend with is
the best plan. Durability and ease of cleaning makes vinyl tile squares
the preferred foor covering, and damaged squares can be easily and
inexpensively replaced. For that reason, solid sheet vinyl is not
cost-efective. Carpet of any kind is avoided. Carpet is difcult to keep
clean; it is almost impossible to remove sand from, and spilled paint
makes a real mess. In playrooms and play areas where carpet cannot be
replaced, a large piece of sheet vinyl can be placed under the easel.
However, this procedure may convey to children that they should be
careful and clean. Carpet can present the same message. Te walls of the
playroom will need to be painted with washable enamel because ease of
cleaning is a major consideration. Vibrant, dark, and somber colors are
avoided. An of-white color is preferable, because it contributes to a
bright, cheerful atmosphere. If funds permit, a special addition is the
inclusion of a one-way mirror and wiring for sound for supervision and
training purposes. Play therapy sessions can be flmed through the
one-way mirror, thus avoiding distracting the child with the presence of
the video camera in the playroom. Having a video camera in the playroom
usually results in children "hamming it up," and the therapist's anxiety
level will be heightened if an expensive camera has to be protected.

171

172

The Playroom and Materials

Although parents are typically not allowed to watch play therapy
sessions, a highly desirable procedure is for parents to watch
demonstration sessions with their children when parent training, as in
Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT)/flial therapy, is employed. For
parent training, the one-way mirror can be the most valuable tool
available. Te opportunity for parents to see the therapist demonstrate
what has been discussed in the training, and then having the opportunity
to have their own session with their child supervised, is invaluable. A
sink with cold running water is recommended. Hot water is potentially
dangerous and is not needed. Disconnect or turn of the hot water valve
underneath the sink and screw the cold water valve about half closed, so
the child can turn the water on all the way without it splashing all
over the place. Te sink also is less likely to overfow with less water
coming out of the faucet. Tis kind of planning ahead allows the
therapist to be more permissive and eliminates the need for so many
limits. A chalkboard with a tray across the bottom can be mounted to the
wall approximately 21 inches from the foor, to best accommodate the wide
variability in children's height. An eraser and white and colored chalk
are made available. Break the new chalk into pieces, so children will
not feel they have to be careful. Mount a polished metal mirror, not
glass, on the wall. Children use the mirror to check out their facial
expressions, to study themselves, and to enact play scenes involving
their home. Te typical playroom will probably need shelves on two walls
to provide enough space for the toys and materials to be displayed
without being crowded or piled on top of each other. Selfcontained,
boxed shelves sturdy enough to be climbed on and permanently fastened to
the wall are ideal. Te top shelf should be no higher than 38 inches, so
that small children will be able to reach the toys without assistance
and without having to climb on top of something (Figure 10.1). If you
have the opportunity to design a playroom for a new building or
remodeled space, a very small bathroom with just enough space for a
commode and designed for the door to open into the playroom will
eliminate the problems associated with children having to leave the
playroom to go to the bathroom. Te therapist's dilemma of how many times

The Playroom and Materials

FIGURE 10.1 Sturdy shelves make a great place to hide when feeling small
and vulnerable.

to allow a trip to the bathroom and whether or not the request is based
on genuine need will be eliminated. Children also will use the bathroom
as an extension of the playroom to act out bathroom scenes, as a place
to hide or retreat from the therapist, and to fnd out what it is like to
completely shut out and ignore an adult. Sturdy, wood, or hard-surface
child-sized furniture is needed in the playroom. A table and three
chairs, one adult size, will be needed. A storage cabinet with a
countertop for painting, playdough, fnger painting, and so on is highly
recommended. Tis could be a part of the sink area.

Other Settings for Play Therapy Although desirable, a fully equipped
playroom is not essential for children to express themselves. I never
accept the excuse that there is no space for play therapy. What is
important is that children be provided with an opportunity to choose the
mode of

173

174

The Playroom and Materials

communication that is most natural for them. For some children, this may
be a combination of the two modes available---play and verbalization. An
immediate therapeutic dividend resulting from being allowed to choose is
that children can set their own directions and assume responsibility for
doing so. One creative elementary school counselor in west Texas, who
serves fve elementary schools, converted the back half of a school bus
into a play therapy room. A partition separates the play area from the
front half, which serves as a group guidance area. She drives this
traveling play therapy room to each school 1 day a week and conducts
play therapy sessions while parked in the parking lot. Many therapists
in private practice and agencies are quite efective in conducting play
therapy sessions in one end of their ofce. In elementary schools, where
the counselor ofen serves more than one school and has a tiny "cubby
hole" for an ofce or shares an ofce with other staf members, play
therapy sessions can be held in the corner of a regular classroom when
vacated, a workroom, the nurse's ofce, or the corner of the cafeteria
afer the cooks have lef for the day. One innovative elementary school
counselor uses space in the bookroom afer textbooks have been removed
and distributed at the start of the school term. She displays the toys
and materials on several of the empty bookshelves, and the children play
in the foor space and on the shelves. She reports signifcant results in
this setting. Another counselor obtained permission from a church
adjoining the school grounds to use one of its Sunday School classrooms.
Other counselors have reported satisfactory results using the stage of
the auditorium or cafeteria. Tese areas ofen are unused, and a portion
of the stage or ofstage area can be made more private by closing the
stage curtains. In settings such as the cafeteria or classroom, a
physical approximation of the boundaries for the session can be
indicated by using chairs or tables to indicate the designated play
area. Te child should not be allowed to roam over the entire cafeteria.
Te development of a therapeutic relationship would be almost impossible
under such conditions. In these settings the therapist must be ready to
set more stringent limits. Wherever play therapy sessions are held,
every efort must be made to protect the confdentiality of the sessions.

The Playroom and Materials

When complete privacy and confdentiality are not possible, children
should be informed that they may be heard or seen by others. In these
modifed settings, the therapist can keep a selection of toys and
materials stored in a box or tote bag under the desk, in a corner, or in
a closet, and the play materials can be arranged on the corner of the
desk, on a chair seat, and on the foor just before each play therapy
session. A bookcase with a curtain across the front or a cabinet with
doors makes an excellent place to house play materials. Open display of
play materials prior to each session helps children feel more
comfortable, invites participation, and conveys permissiveness in a
setting that seems to say, "Tis is just for you."

Rationale for Selecting Toys and Materials Te intent in this chapter is
to present some guidelines for the therapist to use in selecting toys
and materials that will serve as a medium for children to express
feelings, explore relationships, and understand themselves. Some general
guidelines for selecting toys are that the toys are durable and
communicate a message of "Be yourself in playing," rather than a message
of "Be careful." Toys and materials are needed that provide children
with variety in choice of medium of expression. Te toys do not need to
be elaborate. Remember, the frst toys used by humans in play were sticks
and stones. Ageappropriate, noncomplex, nonmechanical toys that can be
easily manipulated by children avoid frustration. No toy should require
the child to seek the therapist's help to manipulate. Many children in
need of play therapy are already prone to be dependent, and the
therapist will want to avoid reinforcing such behavior. Terefore, toys
are selected that children can manipulate by themselves. Many games do
not ft these criteria and, by their very nature, necessitate the direct
involvement of the therapist, ofen in a competitive role. Te therapist
is then forced into a position of either defeating the child or being
dishonest and allowing the child to win. Children usually are sensitive
to the latter position and thus do not feel the satisfaction that is so
important to

175

176

The Playroom and Materials

the development of positive self-esteem. Noncompetitive board games can
be quite facilitative with older children. Selecting toys and play media
materials is a deliberate process based on a sound rationale and always
takes into account the basic rationale for using play therapy with
children in the frst place: a recognition of children's developmental
level, which is expressed naturally through their play and activity. As
I pointed out earlier, toys are children's words and play is their
language. Terefore, toys and materials (words) are selected that
facilitate children's expression by providing a wide range of play
activity (language). Children can express their feelings and reactions
more fully through their play. Terefore, the toys and materials selected
for play therapy are a signifcant therapeutic variable. Toys and
materials are selected that: 1. Facilitate a wide range of creative
expression. 2. Facilitate a wide range of emotional expression. 3.
Engage children's interests. 4. Facilitate expressive and exploratory
play. 5. Allow exploration and expression without verbalization. 6.
Allow success without prescribed structure. 7. Allow for noncommittal
play. 8. Have sturdy construction for active use. Toys and materials are
part of the communicative process for children. Terefore, careful
attention must be given to the selection of appropriate items. Te rule
is selection rather than accumulation. Play areas and playrooms
containing an assortment of randomly acquired toys and materials ofen
resemble junk rooms and doom the play therapy process to failure. RULE
OF THUMB: Toys and materials should be selected, not collected. Toys and
materials should be carefully selected for (a) the contribution they
make to the accomplishment of the objectives of play therapy and (b) the
extent to which they are consistent with the

The Playroom and Materials

rationale for play therapy. All play materials do not automatically
encourage the expression of children's needs, feelings, and experiences.
Cell phones, mechanical and electronic toys or electronic games are not
appropriate for play therapy. Electronic games do not facilitate the
development of a relationship or a child's creativity. Tey also do not
allow symbolic play because the game is preprogramed. Te item should do
only what the child prescribes. Toys and materials are used by the child
in the act of play to communicate the child's personal world. Terefore,
toys and materials should be selected that facilitate the Six Essentials
in Play Terapy: expression of a wide range of feelings, exploration of
real-life experiences, reality testing of limits, development of a
positive self-image, development of self-understanding, and opportunity
to develop self-control.

Expression of a Wide Range of Feelings Te expression of a wide range of
feelings is facilitated when toys are available, such as puppets, that
lend themselves to the expression of those feelings. Choosing toys that
are easily used in the expression of feelings will facilitate the
expression of those feelings when the need arises within the child. If
the need arises and the means to express a particular feeling are not
available, the child is stymied in that area. Puppets provide a safe way
to express feelings without being threatened, because the characters of
the puppets are the ones expressing the feelings. Very few, if any,
board games meet the criteria of facilitating a wide range of feelings,
exploration of real-life experiences, or testing of limits. What board
game can be used by a child to act out her sexual abuse or the
accompanying terror?

Exploration of Real-Life Experiences Te expression of real-life
experiences is an essential ingredient in any therapy, whether for the
child or adult, because real-life experiences are what lead to the need
for therapy. Doll fgures representing mother, father, brother, sister.
and baby that represent diferent cultural groups the play therapist
encounters, as well as

177

178

The Playroom and Materials

some culturally sensitive toys and materials that represent these
diferent cultural groups, should be available. Selecting toys, such as a
medical kit, that the child can use to develop a feeling of control in
life situations promotes inner balance in the child. When the child is
able to express real-life experiences in play and have those experiences
understood and accepted by the therapist, then those real-life
experiences are trimmed to a manageable size.

Reality Testing of Limits Children will act out aggression, so toys such
as a dart gun give the child an opportunity to test the limits of what
is permissible and what is not. In the process of play therapy, the
child can learn where to draw the line between the two. Testing of
limits enables the child to fnd out where the boundaries are in the
relationship with the therapist. Te testing of limits also is a reality
experience in what could otherwise be fantasy. Pent-up feelings can be
expressed with great vigor as limits are tested.

Development of a Positive Self-Image Many children in need of play
therapy have poor self-images, so providing toys and materials such as
playdough, crayons, and blocks, which can be mastered and manipulated
easily, are necessary for building up a feeling that "In here I can do
things for myself. I am capable." Tese feelings are then generalized to
the rest of the child's life. Complicated and mechanical toys make
mastery diffcult and may reinforce an already existing poor
self-concept.

Development of Self-Understanding Self-understanding grows out of the
interaction with the play therapist in which the child feels safe enough
to be the person she is, to express feelings. Many of these feelings are
negative. As the child expresses these feelings and experiences the
therapist's acceptance and refection of those feelings, the child comes
frst to introject the therapist's acceptance and then seems to
understand

The Playroom and Materials

himself or herself better. A variety of toys and materials, such as the
bop bag and dolls, facilitate the expression of a wide range of feelings
and thus contribute to self-understanding.

Opportunity to Develop Self-Control Te development of self-control grows
out of the interaction between the child's responsibility to make
decisions---to choose without adult interference or guidance---and the
child's redirection of unacceptable behaviors into controlled,
acceptable avenues. Sand is an excellent medium for expressing feelings
and provides ample opportunity for limit setting and the development of
self-control.

Categories of Toys Although in this chapter a great deal of emphasis is
placed on the selection of appropriate toys and materials, the intent is
not to imply that toys and materials are considered to be of primary
importance in establishing a therapeutic relationship with the child.
Nothing can take the place of the emotional climate that develops as a
result of the therapist's attitude, the use of his or her own
personality, and the spontaneous interaction between the therapist and
child. Toys and materials can, however, determine or structure the kind
and degree of expression by the child and the interaction with the
therapist and, therefore, must receive careful attention as to their
selection. Some toys and materials, by the very nature of their
construction and design, are prone to elicit certain kinds of behaviors
more than others and to some extent structure the behavior of the child.
Crayons and paint suggest drawing and painting. Sand encourages digging
and burying. Tis initial structuring based on the qualities of the toy
or material is more likely to occur in the early stages of therapy, when
the child does not feel safe enough to be creative. Suggestions ofered
in this chapter are intended to provide the play therapist with some
broad guidelines for selecting a variety of structured and unstructured
toys and materials that seem to facilitate children's exploration and
expression. Appropriate toys and materials for play therapy can be
grouped into three broad categories.

179

180

The Playroom and Materials

1.  Real-Life Toys A doll family, dollhouse, puppets, and nondescript
    fgures (e.g., Gumby) can represent family members in the child's
    life and thus provide for the direct expression of feelings. Anger,
    fear, sibling rivalry, crises, and family conficts can be directly
    expressed as the child acts out scenes with the doll family fgures.
    A car, truck, boat, and cash register are especially important for
    the resistive, anxious, cautious (the word shy has negative
    meanings), or withdrawn child because they can be played with in
    noncommittal ways without revealing any feelings. When children are
    ready, they will choose play media that will help them express their
    feelings more fully and openly. When the therapist is ready, or when
    the therapist wants certain feelings expressed, is not important. A
    child should never be pressured to discuss topics or express
    feelings. When the child feels safe, experiences being accepted, and
    knows the therapist can be trusted, the child will express her
    feelings spontaneously (Figure 10.2).

FIGURE 10.2 Real-life toys provide children opportunities to play out
happenings and events they have experienced but do not have words to
describe.

The Playroom and Materials

Te cash register provides for a quick feeling of being in control as a
child manipulates the keys and calls out numbers. Te car or truck gives
an excuse for moving about and exploring the room. Tis also is a safe
way to approach the therapist, "to fnd out what the therapist feels
like" when the child gets physically close. Tere are subtle reasons
children do many of the things they do in the playroom, and the
therapist should be sensitive to these possible motivations. Te presence
of a chalkboard conveys permissiveness to many children, who come to the
playroom from classrooms where the rule is, "Don't mess with the
chalkboard!" An atmosphere of permissiveness is crucial if the therapist
is to make contact with the inner person of the child.

2.  Acting-Out Aggressive-Release Toys Children in play therapy ofen
    have intense pent-up emotions for which they do not have verbal
    labels to describe or express. Toys and materials such as the Bobo
    (bop bag), toy soldiers, alligator puppet, guns (absolutely no
    realistic looking guns), and rubber knives can be used by children
    to express anger, hostility, and frustration. Inclusion of
    aggressive toys, especially the Bobo, in the playroom is an area of
    concern and controversy for some play therapists, who believe the
    presence of a Bobo encourages aggressive behavior in children.
    Opponents of aggressive toys such as a Bobo in the playroom state
    that such toys elicit aggressive behaviors by children. Tey support
    their position by referring to research studies that conclude
    aggressive toys elicit aggression in children. Typically, in such
    studies, a Bobo and other toys are placed in a room. A child is
    introduced to the room and the noninteractive adult sits in the
    corner of the room and observes. Te amount of time a child plays in
    an aggressive way with the Bobo is recorded. Such studies do not
    have a trained play therapist in the room who responds in an
    understanding and accepting way to the child's feelings, refects the
    feeling such as anger or frustration, and sets limits on
    inappropriate behavior. It is the need to be aggressive that is more
    important than the acting out of

181

182

The Playroom and Materials

aggression. Terefore, the play therapist's refection of the feeling
results in the child feeling understood and accepted, and thus there is
a mediating and calming efect on the child resulting in less aggressive
behavioral expression. Opposition to having a Bobo in the playroom
reveals a lack of understanding of the process of child-centered play
therapy, which focuses on children's feelings and needs rather than on
behaviors in a relationship that allows the acting out of aggression on
inanimate objects within appropriate boundaries. A key element in the
presence of aggressive behavior is the use of therapeutic limit setting
that focuses frst on understanding the child's feeling. In this
accepting, understanding, and caring relationship, children express/play
out deeply felt emotions such as anger and frustration that have been
buried inside. In the process of playing out anger, children get their
feelings out into the open, and in the context of therapeutic limit
setting, they learn to cope with, control, and express these feelings in
a self-enhancing and acceptable way that is more maturely satisfying. It
is the therapist's acceptance of the accompanying feelings of anger or
aggression, as well as acceptance of the child's desire to break limits,
that constitutes the therapeutic dimension that facilitates a decrease
in the need for acting out the behavior and thus a decrease in the
acting out of aggressive behavior. Tis change can appropriately be
referred to as the development of self-control. As to the position that
the presence of a Bobo or other aggressive-release toys invites
aggression, my experience and a study of children's play therapy
sessions at the University of North Texas Center for Play Terapy refute
this position. A study of the case notes of 205 play therapy sessions
for 20 children found that 65% of the 205 sessions studied contained no
play with the Bobo. Aggressive play with the Bobo was reported in 22% of
the sessions, nurturing play was found in 11% of the sessions, and
noncommittal types of play with the Bobo were reported in 0.05% of the
play therapy sessions (Trotter et al., 2004). Tese fndings support the
observation of Smith (2002) that the Bobo was played with very little by
the 12 children in his play therapy research study. Te way children use
items in the playroom is generally more a function of their personal
needs than the design of the item.

The Playroom and Materials

Returning to the topic of toys recommended for play therapy, every play
therapy experience should contain something a child can destroy. Egg
cartons serve this purpose well. Tey can be stomped, cut, ripped apart,
painted, and so on. Popsicle sticks can be snapped in two or jabbed into
the playdough aggressively. Aggressive children seem to experience the
permission to release aggressive feelings in the accepting environment
of the playroom as satisfying and are able to move on to more
self-enhancing positive feelings. Shooting, burying, hitting, and
stabbing the toys are acceptable behaviors in the playroom, because they
are expressed symbolically. Te intensity with which angry and aggressive
feelings are expressed in the playroom can sometimes be unsettling to
the beginning play therapist. In such situations the therapist must be
aware of a personal need to protect himself from his own awkward,
unsettled feelings and will need to refrain from moving quickly to
intervene in the child's expression. However, at times setting a limit
on some of the child's behavior may be necessary--- if, for example, the
child begins to throw sand all over the room. Hammering on a pounding
bench toy releases feelings and at the same time facilitates the
focusing of attention and energy in a manner that increases
concentration. Animal toys that represent wild animals are necessary,
because some children in the early stages of play therapy fnd it difcult
to express aggressive feelings even against human fgure dolls. Tese
children, for example, will not hit a father doll but will hit a lion.
Some children will express their aggression through the alligator puppet
by biting, chewing, and crunching. Playdough is an example of a material
that fts into two categories---creative and aggressive. It can be
pounded, smashed, rolled out with great vigor, and pinched into pieces
as a way to express anger or frustration. Playdough also can be used by
the child to create fgures for play.

3.  Toys for Creative Expression and Emotional Release Sand and water
    (Figure 10.3) are probably the most used unstructured play media by
    children, but they are the least likely materials to be found in
    play therapy settings, even though water is one

183

184

The Playroom and Materials

FIGURE 10.3 Sand lacks structure and can be whatever the child wants it
to be: the surface of the moon, quicksand, the beach, something to clean
with---the possibilities are limitless.

of the most efective therapeutic mediums of all playroom materials. Te
absence of sand and water in play therapy settings is most likely the
result of therapists' low tolerance for messiness and a need to keep
things neat and clean. Reluctance also may stem from a legitimate
concern about having to clean up. However, this does not seem to be a
valid reason, as appropriate limit setting likely will keep most of the
sand and water confned to receptacles. In nonplayroom, limited-space
settings, a dishpan with an inch of sand and a bucket with a couple of
inches of water would serve the purpose quite well. Sand and water lack
structure and can be whatever the child wants them to be: the surface of
the moon, quicksand, the beach, something to clean with---the
possibilities are limitless. Tere is no right or wrong way to play with
sand and water. Terefore, the child is assured of success. Tis is
especially helpful for cautious ("shy") or withdrawn children.

The Playroom and Materials

FIGURE 10.4 Easel paints afford the child an opportunity to be creative,
to be messy, to pretend bathroom scenes, to smear, and to express
feelings.

Blocks can be houses, they can be thrown, they can be stacked and kicked
down, allowing the child to explore what being constructive and
destructive feels like. As with water and sand, the child can experience
a feeling of satisfaction, because there is no correct way to play with
blocks. Easel paints aford the child an opportunity to be creative, to
be messy, to pretend bathroom scenes and smear, or to express feelings
(Figure 10.4).

Tote Bag Playroom Until children reach a developmental level of
expressive competence with verbal communication that allows them to
express and explore fully the persons they are and their inner world of
emotions, toys and materials should be carefully selected to facilitate
this process. My experience has been that children can communicate a
wide range of messages and feelings with a limited

185

186

The Playroom and Materials

number of toys and materials. Secondary considerations, then, in
selecting toys and materials for use in a modifed play therapy setting
are their size and portability. Te following toys and materials are
considered to be the minimal requirements for conducting a play therapy
session and are recommended because they facilitate a wide range of
expressions and can easily be transported in a tote bag or stored out of
the way in a corner or in a closet: Aggressive hand puppet (alligator,
wolf, or dragon) Band-aids Bendable doll family Bendable Gumby
(nondescript fgure) Blunt scissors Costume jewelry Cotton rope Crayons
(eight-count box) Dart gun Doll Dollhouse (use box that holds reams of
paper, box lid serves as dollhouse, draw lines on inside of lid to mark
rooms; box doubles as storage container for toys) Dollhouse furniture
(at least bedroom, kitchen, and bathroom) Egg cartons Handcufs Lone
Ranger--type mask Medical mask (white dust mask will sufce) Nerf ball (a
rubber ball bounces too much) Newsprint Nursing bottle (plastic) Pipe
cleaners Playdough Popsicle sticks Rubber knife Small airplane Small car
Spoons (avoid forks because of sharp points) Telephone (two)

The Playroom and Materials

Toy soldiers (20-count size is sufcient) Transparent tape Two play
dishes and cups (plastic or tin) If storage space is available, an
infatable vinyl bop bag (Bobo) would be a special asset. A dishpan-size
plastic container with an inch of sand in the bottom also would be
useful in a more permanent setting. Rice could be used in place of the
sand if clean-up is a problem. A bucket with an inch or so of water
would be helpful.

Recommended Toys and Materials for the Playroom Te following toys and
materials for a fully equipped playroom have been found to be useful in
facilitating children's expressions in the Center for Play Terapy
playrooms at the University of North Texas. Tis list is the result of
years of experimentation, resulting in discarding items and adding
others and keeping those items that a wide range of children
consistently used in a variety of ways to express themselves: Balls
(large and small) Band-aids Barbie doll Bendable doll family Blunt
scissors Bobo (bop bag) Broom, dustpan Building blocks (diferent shapes
and sizes) Cereal boxes Chalkboard, chalk Colored chalk, eraser
Construction paper (several colors) Crayons, pencils, paper Cymbals Dart
gun Dinosaurs, shark Dishes (plastic or tin)

187

188

The Playroom and Materials

Dishpan Doll bed, clothes, blanket Doll furniture (sturdy wood)
Dollhouse (open-on-foor type that child can lean into) Dolls, baby
clothes Dress-up clothes Drum Egg cartons Empty fruit and vegetable cans
Erasable nontoxic markers Flashlight Food items (plastic) Gumby
(bendable nondescript fgure) Hand puppets (doctor, nurse, police ofcer,
mother, father, sister, brother, baby, alligator, wolf) Handcufs Hats:
freman, policeman, tiara, crown Lone Ranger--type mask and other masks
Medical kit Medical mask (white dust mask will sufce) Nursing bottle
(plastic) Pacifer Paints, easel, newsprint, brushes Pitcher Play camera
Play money and cash register Pots, pans, silverware Pounding bench and
hammer Puppet theater Purse and jewelry Rags or old towels Refrigerator
(wood or plastic) Rope Rubber knife Rubber snake, alligator Sandbox,
large spoon, funnel, sieve, pail School bus (Fisher Price type) Soap,
brush, comb, towel

The Playroom and Materials

Spider and other insects Sponge, towel Stove (wood or plastic) Stufed
animals (two or three) Telephone (two) Tinker toys Tissues Tongue
depressors, popsicle sticks Toy noise-making gun Toy soldiers and army
equipment Toy watch Transparent tape, nontoxic glue Truck, car,
airplane, tractor, boat, ambulance Watercolor paints Xylophone Zoo
animal and farm animal families Te play therapist is always sensitive to
issues of culture and diversity in the toy selection process. Many of
these toys and materials can be obtained inexpensively from garage sales
or donations from parents whose children have outgrown them. Community
agency therapists could present their play therapy program to civic
groups, outlining their needs for materials and asking for fnancial
support. Elementary school counselors could do the same with their
parent--teacher association (PTA) and request sponsorship of the play
therapy program with an annual donation for specifc materials. A list of
the above items could be posted in the agency or teacher's lounge,
asking for donations of the items children have outgrown. Tis should
only be done afer the counselor has explained the play therapy program
in a teacher's meeting. Avoid a random request for toys, because many
items will be "collected" that are not appropriate for play therapy.
Displaying the toys in an organized manner on shelves so they are
readily visible presents a visual picture of order and stability and
facilitates children's exploration and creativity. Grouping toys
together in laundry-type baskets scattered around the room or using
plastic containers on shelves to hold bunches of toys presents an image
of confusion and inhibits

189

190

The Playroom and Materials

the therapeutic process of expression. Children who are cautious or have
poor self-concepts do not feel safe enough to rummage through a basket
full of toys to fnd what is at the bottom of the basket. My experience
in visiting such play therapy rooms is that the use of baskets and
containers to hold toys typically means there are far too many toys in
the room. Ten small cars and a dozen stufed toys are not needed. Two or
three items that are similar is the general rule. Research shows that
when fve or six similar toys such as cars are present and a child
selects one car to play with, the child feels inclined to include
another car and another car in his play until all the cars are included
in his play, thus changing the story and the meaning of the play. Tis
propensity was borne out in a follow-up supervision session I had. A
play therapist reported "I took those two baskets of fgurines out of my
playroom immediately afer we talked and the following sessions have been
much more benefcial. Te children who had been using those fgurines have
used other toys and they have been more expressive, not just lining the
fgurines up for 30 minutes."

Special Considerations Although the successful completion of puzzles can
facilitate the development of frustration tolerance and a sense of
adequacy, they are not recommended because at least one puzzle piece
will invariably get lost, thus frustrating a child who already may be
frustrated. Experiences in the playroom should not perpetuate negative
experiences in children's lives. Children who sufer from feelings of
inadequacy and have difculty completing tasks should be able to
experience success with the toys and the resulting feeling of
satisfaction. Children's storybooks are highly recommended in other
settings, but not in the playroom because books in the playroom do not
fulfll the roll of facilitating children's expression and the acting out
of experiences. Books can be a major distraction, and their presence
invites children to sit for long periods of time looking at pictures or
reading. Children will ofen ask the therapist to read a story, and this
takes the therapist out of her customary role in the

The Playroom and Materials

playroom and puts the therapist in the lead as she reads a story, thus
shifing the focus from the child to the therapist. Lego-type
construction toys for building are avoided because they have too many
pieces. Even small boxes of such toys may contain as many 100--200
pieces. Finding all the pieces and putting them back in the container
can be a real problem for the therapist. Te patience and acceptance of
an already stressed or tired play therapist can be severely tested when
a child picks up a box containing 200 small pieces and with great glee
fings all 200 pieces into the four corners of the playroom. Te therapist
is very likely to groan inwardly when faced with the task of fnding and
picking up 200 small Lego-type pieces. Children are not allowed to bring
food into the playroom because food items are distracting and become the
point of focus. Parents are advised to give their children a snack to
eat before they are brought to the playroom. When the therapist enters
the waiting room and discovers the child is sipping on a bottle of
juice, the therapist can respond, "Looks like you are drinking juice.
Juice is for staying in this room. You can put it right there (pointing)
while we go to the playroom. It will be there when we come back." Remove
broken toys. Whatever is in the playroom should be intact, complete, and
should work. Many children referred for play therapy come from confusing
and frustrating environments. What is in the playroom should not add to
that confusion or frustration by being incomplete or broken. Washable
tempera paints should be kept fresh. Nothing inhibits or frustrates a
child more than the discovery of cups of dried, caked paints. Paints
also sour and develop a terrible odor and need to be replaced
periodically. When mixing tempera paints, squirt some liquid detergent
into each cup of paint to help retard the growth of the odor-producing
bacteria. Te detergent also makes removal of the paint from clothes
easier, even though the paints are labeled washable. Te use of small
disposable coffee cups inserted into the paint containers also makes the
job of cleaning and changing paints an easier task. Place only an inch
or so of paint in each cup as a precaution against paints being spilled
and to make the job of clean-up easier. Children do not need full cups
of paint. Tat's asking for trouble.

191

192

The Playroom and Materials

A sturdy, small plastic storage container can make an excellent sandbox.
Te sand should be heavily sprinkled with water periodically to keep the
dust down. Children need a place to escape or hide from the therapist.
Te puppet theater makes hiding possible, and the playroom can be
arranged so that some item such as the stove sits out into the room.
Children can then play on the other side of the stove, out of the view
of the therapist, when they feel the need to do so. Such separation or
rejection of the therapist is signifcant in the development of freedom
in the relationship. Te playroom should not be used as a place for
babysitting. Other staf members who do not work with children ofen have
a tendency to view the playroom as just that, a place for their parent
clients' children to play while the parent is in a counseling session.
Tis rule also applies to children who are in play therapy. Te play
therapy relationship is a special emotional relationship that takes
place in the special playroom. Te play therapy room is an emotional
place. Allowing a child to play unattended in the playroom while the
parent is being seen by the play therapist interferes with the
development of this important emotional relationship. Te playroom is
cleaned up and toys put back in their proper place by the play therapist
afer each session. (Te rationale for this position and the issue of
asking children to clean up is dealt with in Chapter 16.) Because toys
are the child's words, the child should not have to go searching for the
toys needed for expression. Children in play therapy ofen come from
chaotic, confused family settings. If toys are strewn carelessly around
the playroom and in diferent places from session to session, the play
therapist is reinforcing the child's experience that life is always
chaotic and confused. It is important that the playroom present an image
of order and consistency. Tese are therapeutic dimensions. A part of
consistency is that toys are in the same place in the playroom every
time the child enters the room. Te baby bottle is not sometimes on one
side of the playroom and at other times on the opposite side of the
room. Items are always somewhere on

The Playroom and Materials

their designated shelf. Tis does not mean the playroom must be neat and
clean, only orderly. Children feel more secure when they always know
where things are. Tat helps to make the room and the relationship
predictable. An organized playroom promotes consistency of the
environment, symbolizes the world can be orderly, and ensures the
child's play is not infuenced by the play of previous children. When
several staf members use the same playroom, an advisable procedure is to
schedule a once-a-month cleaning time when everyone who uses the room
meets in the room to give it a general cleaning and put the room in
order. If this is not done, the room can get to be a real mess in a
hurry, and a playroom that looks and feels like a junk room is not
therapeutic.

Suggested Titles for the Play Therapy Program in Schools In view of the
emotional reaction to the term therapy by some teachers, principals, and
parents, the elementary school counselor may want to consider a title
for the program other than a play therapy program. Play therapy programs
in schools could be referred to as "counseling with toys," "emotional
growth through play," "developmental growth through play," or a similar
title. Te elementary school counselor will be the best judge of the
potential reaction to the term play therapy in the local setting. Such
an important program for children should not be prevented from
functioning simply because someone objects to the term. Te elementary
school counselor is encouraged to take a creative approach to developing
a title that best describes the spontaneous and expressive use children
make of toys and materials provided for their use in communicating their
world to the counselor. When using play therapy, elementary school
counselors are encouraged to emphasize that they are employing an
approach that helps them in their eforts to efectively assist children
in their developmental growth. Te ultimate objective of play therapy in
a school is to help children get ready to proft fully from what teachers
have to ofer.

193

194

The Playroom and Materials

References Smith, M. (2002). Filial therapy with teachers of deaf and
hard of hearing preschool children. (Unpublished doctoral dissertation,
University of North Texas, Denton). Trotter, K., Eshelman, D., &
Landreth, G., (2004). Yes, Bobo should be in the playroom! Association
for Play Terapy Newsletter, 23(2), 25--26.

Chapter

11

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time Who would have thought
there was a place like this in the whole world?

Child in play therapy

Just what is that, really, the child's hour? It is one of those rare
times, one of those rare relationships in which the child directs
herself, a time when the child determines how time will be used. No
efort is made to direct the child's play. Tis is a special time
belonging to the child to do with in accordance with his wishes, to make
of as he chooses. Te child can be just as slow as he wants, inch along,
and no one says, "Hurry up." Te child can be grumpy, act grumpy, look
grumpy, and no one says, "Be happy." Te child can do nothing, accomplish
nothing, and no one says, "Get busy. Do something." Te child can be
loud, noisy, bang things together, and no one says, "Be quiet." Te child
can be silly, giggle, laugh right out loud, and no one says, "Act your
age." Te child can be small, tiny, suck on a bottle, and no one says,
"You're too big for that." Te child can use the glue, scissors, paste,
make a spaceship, and no one says, "You're too little to do that." Tis
is an extraordinary, singularly uncommon time, place, and relationship
when the child can be, experience, and express all she is at that moment
and be accepted fully. Tat makes this the child's time.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-11

195

196

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Te child centered play therapist recognizes that growth is a slow
process, not to be pushed, prodded, and hurried along. Tis is a time
when the child can relax, a place where growth takes place naturally
without being forced, a special relationship. Standing in the middle of
the playroom, 5-year-old Rafael summed up his feeling about the
uniqueness of the hour by saying, "I wish I could come live here." His
statement catches the essence of this special time, place, and
relationship for the child. What I have learned about children and how I
have come to incorporate that learning into my relationships with
children is perhaps best expressed in the following principles.

Principles for Relationships With Children Garry Landreth I am not all
knowing. Terefore, I will not even attempt to be. I want to be more
accepting of the child in me. Terefore, I will with wonder and awe allow
children to illuminate my world. I know so little about the complex
intricacies of childhood. Terefore, I will allow children to teach me. I
learn best from and am impacted most by my personal struggles. Terefore,
I will join with children in their struggles. I sometimes need a refuge.
Terefore, I will provide a refuge for children. I like it when I am
fully accepted as the person I am. Terefore, I will strive to experience
and appreciate the person of the child. I make mistakes. Tey are a
declaration of the way I am--- human and fallible. Terefore, I will be
patient with the humanness of children. I react with emotional
internalization and expression to my world of reality. Terefore, I will
relinquish the grasp I have on reality and try to enter the world as
experienced by the child.

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

It feels good to be an authority, to provide answers. Terefore, I will
need to work hard to protect children from me! I am more fully me when I
feel safe. Terefore, I will be consistent in my interactions with
children. I am the only person who can live my life. Terefore, I will
not attempt to rule a child's life. I have learned most of what I know
from experiencing. Terefore, I will allow children to experience. Te
hope I experience and the will to live come from within me. Terefore, I
will recognize and afrm the child's will and selfood. I cannot make
children's hurts and fears and frustrations and disappointments go away.
Terefore, I will sofen the blow. I experience fear when I am vulnerable.
Terefore, I will with kindness, gentleness, and tenderness touch the
inner world of the vulnerable child.

Objectives of the Relationship Te child centered play therapist does not
attempt to establish objectives for the child to accomplish but is
concerned about objectives as they relate to facilitating the
development of a therapeutic relationship with the child. Te focus is
the child. Te objective is to become so absorbed in the relationship
with the child that everything the therapist does becomes a response to
the relationship. Te following objectives express that purpose. 1. To
establish an atmosphere of safety for the child. Te play therapist
cannot make a child feel safe. Te child discovers that in the developing
relationship. Te child cannot feel safe in a relationship that has no
limits. A feeling of safety is also promoted by the consistency of the
therapist. 2. To understand and accept the child's world. Acceptance of
the child's world is conveyed by being eagerly and genuinely interested
in whatever the child chooses to do in the

197

198

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

playroom. Acceptance also means being patient with the pace of the
child's exploration. Understanding is accomplished by relinquishing
adult reality and seeing things from the child's perspective. 3. To
encourage the expression of the child's emotional world. Although the
play materials are important, they are secondary to the expression of
feelings by the child, which they facilitate. In play therapy, there is
an absence of evaluation of feelings. Whatever the child feels is
accepted without judgment. 4. To establish a feeling of permissiveness.
Tis is not a totally permissive relationship. An important aspect,
however, of play therapy is that the child feels or senses the freedom
available in this setting. Allowing the child to make choices creates a
feeling of permissiveness. 5. To facilitate decision making by the
child. Tis is accomplished largely by refraining from being an answer
source for the child. Te opportunity to choose what toy to play with,
how to play with it, what color to use, or how something will turn out
creates decision-making opportunities, which, in turn, promote
self-responsibility. 6. To provide the child with an opportunity to
assume responsibility and to develop a feeling of control. Actually,
being in control of one's environment may not always be possible. Te
signifcant variable is that children feel in control. Children are
responsible for what they do for themselves in the playroom. When the
play therapist does for children what they can do for themselves,
children are deprived of the opportunity to experience what
self-responsibility feels like. Empowering children by returning
responsibility to them helps children feel in control. Feeling in
control is a powerful variable and helps children develop positive
self-esteem. A survey of 2,800 children from inner-city schools showed
that the best predictor of academic achievement was the child's sense of
control over the environment (Segal & Yahraes, 1979).

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Making Contact With the Child Because the child probably has not made a
self-referral to play therapy, the implied assumption is that signifcant
adults in the child's life think the child needs to be changed.
Terefore, the child comes to the frst play therapy session with the
expectation that the therapist also wants him to change. Consequently,
when viewed from the child's frame of reference, one can understand that
the child initially may be resistive, angry, or withdrawn, feeling the
need to protect or defend himself. Whatever the feeling, that is the
existence of the child at that moment, and the child has brought to the
relationship what is being experienced. Te therapist does not view these
initial reactions and feelings as extraneous and something to get past
to the "real reason the child is here." Tat is the child, and whatever
the child is feeling is accepted as a declaration of the person of the
child at that moment under those conditions. Te process of making
emotional contact with a child begins when I frst come into the child's
presence. I experience a challenge: "What will we, the child and I, be
able to create here? What is the person of this child like? What does
this child want? How does this child feel right now? How does this child
perceive me? What does this child need from me?" Uppermost in my mind at
such times is the thought, "I don't want to be like most other adults in
my interactions with this child." Actually, it is more than a thought,
for I experience a genuine desire to be diferent. I do not want to crowd
the child physically, to come into the child's presence too quickly, or
to get too close. Tis child has never seen me before. "I wonder what I
look like to this child? What does this child see in my face? What does
this child hear in my tone of voice? Does the liking, the warmth I feel
for children show in my face? Does my tone of voice reveal kindness? I
would like somehow to be smaller at this moment in order to enter more
fully into this child's world. Does the child know that I think he is
important, the most important person in this room, more important to me
than even his mother? Do my eyes show that? Is my caring about how the
child feels inside being communicated? Do my words convey that caring?"
In most

199

200

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

experiences and relationships, especially those that are new, children
are always wondering: Am I safe? I don't know you. Will I be safe with
you? Is this a safe place? What is going to happen to me here? What are
you going to do to me? Can I cope? What if I can't do what you ask me to
do? What if I don't know the answers to your questions? What do I do if
you don't tell me what you want? What if I make the wrong choice? Will I
be accepted? Will you like me? Will you like what I do? What can I do to
make sure you like me? Te building of a relationship begins with what
the child sees and perceives in the therapist and is dependent on the
therapist's sensitivity to what the child is experiencing at the moment.
Making contact with the child means responding with gentleness,
kindness, and sofness to the child's communication of self. Trough the
process of accepting the child's attitudes, feelings, and thoughts, the
therapist enters the child's world. Once contact with the child has been
made in this way, a trusting relationship can begin to develop.
According to Moustakas (1981), making contact with a child "can happen
only when therapy is approached with a passion, with a courage to pursue
in depth, with a determination to stay on the path with the child, no
matter what" (p. 11). RULE OF THUMB: Be sensitive to how the child sees
his or her world. Being sensitive also means being aware that in most
other places where children are taken for a required purpose, someone
does something to them: doctor, dentist, testing for school placement,
and so on. Tat children may expect the play therapist also to do
something to them is understandable. It is also important that the play
therapist be sensitive to how the setting looks to children. Is it an
inviting looking place, or austere like a hospital? Are

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

the hallways sterile looking? Is there any color anywhere? Are the
pictures on the walls of the hall or waiting room the kind children
appreciate? Are they hung at the children's eye level? Does the image of
the waiting room say this is a place for children? Terapists will fnd it
helpful to look at themselves and the surroundings through children's
eyes.

The Initial Encounter in the Waiting Room Building the relationship
begins with the initial interactions between the therapist and child in
the waiting room. Te therapist enters the waiting room with eager
anticipation of the exciting possibilities this new relationship may
bring and is usually met by a concerned parent who is prepared to inform
the therapist about concerns related to the child's behavior. Te parent
has what she considers to be important information about the child that
the therapist should know, and she may have rehearsed the points so the
therapist will know exactly the nature of the problem. Te therapist
greets the parent, and immediately the parent begins to bring the
therapist up-to-date. Tis is not an appropriate time for the therapist
to practice active listening or to be patient and hear the parent out.
While the therapist stands there talking to the parent, the obvious
message is that the therapist considers the parent more important than
the child. Tat is not a recommended way to begin a signifcant
relationship with the child. Te child probably already feels
insignifcant and like a nonperson because he has experienced this scene
many times---the parent talking about the child in the third person as
though he was not present. Perhaps the therapist will fnd it helpful to
ponder what it would feel like to be an appendage, just stuck on, no
real useful purpose, jerked here and there at the whim of giants. Surely
that is how some children feel, unimportant and unnoticed---unless, of
course, they cause one of those giants a problem. Ten they get plenty of
attention. Well ... even negative attention is better than no attention.
Certainly, the therapist does not want to perpetuate

201

202

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

such a perception of self for the child. Terefore, the therapist will
politely inform the parent that now is not a good time to discuss those
issues, because they are important and time is needed to explore them,
and a time will be arranged later for that purpose. Te therapist will
then immediately crouch down and greet the child. Te therapist will fnd
it helpful to enter the waiting room, give the parent a short warm
greeting, immediately crouch down, make eye contact, give a warm smile,
and make an introduction to the child without giving the parent a chance
to initiate conversation. Te child is the most important person in the
whole building at that moment. Te therapist is there to build a
relationship with this important little person and to communicate the
child's importance. Terefore, the therapist does not stand in the
child's presence and discuss the child. Following the short introduction
to the child, the therapist can say, "We can go to the playroom now.
Your mother will wait here so she will be here when we come back from
the playroom." Te therapist then stands up, giving a visual cue to
support the verbal statement. Tis is not a time for questions such as,
"Would you like to go to the playroom?" or "We can go to the playroom
now, ok?" because such questions just ask for trouble from a skeptical
or resistive child who then responds, "No." Also, a choice is implied
when one is not intended. If the child does indeed wish she did not have
to go into the playroom, that is best dealt with inside the playroom,
where the child is free to express feelings and desires with materials
selected for that purpose. Te development of a relationship with a child
begins in the waiting room, and asking questions is not a recommended
way to begin a relationship with a child. On the way down the hall to
the playroom, if the therapist tries to engage the child by asking "How
old are you?" or "Where do you go to school?" the child will expect the
same approach once in the playroom and will wait dutifully for the
therapist to ask more questions. Questions keep the therapist in the
lead and therefore, are to be avoided. Instead of asking questions, the
child-centered play therapist engages the child with comments such as:
"We're going down this way to the playroom. Tere's a water fountain
right there. We're going to turn

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

just before the water fountain and go down this hall. We're looking for
a brown teddy bear sitting by the door to our playroom where we will be.
Ah! Tere's a brown bear on that side of the hall and we'll go in this
door right beside the brown bear." Outside the playroom, the presence of
parents or other observers may interfere with or stimulate reactions in
the child that otherwise might not originate. Stating that the parent
will wait in the waiting room and will be there when the child comes
back from the playroom reassures the child. Te therapist must always
remember that the child is going of with a perfect stranger, to an
unknown place, and for what could be a "forever" time in the child's
perception. Te play therapist might respond to a child who is reluctant
to go to the playroom with, "You need more time to decide about going to
the playroom. I'm going back to my ofce. You can choose to have 1 more
minute or 3 more minutes before you go to the playroom. Which do you
choose?" Choices elicit cooperation, because control is returned to the
child. Afer the chosen time has passed, if the child is still reluctant,
the therapist can say, "Mom, you may go down the hall with us to the
playroom, so Hayden will know you know where the playroom is." Hayden
can participate in this decision by the giving of a choice to decide if
he wants to walk beside Mom or hold her hand. Tis almost always results
in the child moving toward the playroom, because he is not about to stay
in the waiting room by himself while his mother walks away down the hall
with the therapist. Usually, the child will go right into the playroom
without the parent. If the child does not, the therapist can ask the
parent to accompany the child into the playroom by saying, "Mom, it
looks like Hayden would like to have you in the playroom for a while.
You can come in with us." As mom enters the playroom, the therapist
says, "You can sit there (points to a chair) and I will talk for you if
Hayden needs a response from you." As the session progresses and the
child relaxes, the therapist can indicate to the parent an appropriate
time to leave the playroom. Te parent should leave the room with no
comment. Whether or not to allow the parent into the playroom is at the
discretion of the therapist. Te therapist does need to anticipate that
once in the playroom it may be even more difcult for the

203

204

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

child to separate from the parent, because the child has already
experienced how his reluctant behavior succeeded in getting the parent
to stay in the playroom. Generally, the longer the parent stays in the
playroom, the more difcult the separation is for both parent and child.
Te therapist should recognize that the issue of separation may be more
difcult for the parent than it is for the child and consequently the
child, sensing that, reacts to the parent's feelings. If that is the
case, the issue of separation may as well be dealt with at the door of
the playroom. Another factor to be considered is the therapist's
feelings. Te therapist may be much more comfortable allowing the parent
into the playroom than having to deal with a reluctant child. However,
as long as the parent is in the playroom, the defnite possibility exists
that the child will not feel safe enough to explore some areas of
importance. Whether or not to go for therapy is much too weighty an
issue for a 4-year-old to decide. Parents would not allow a child whose
tonsils were so swollen she could not swallow to decide whether or not
to take medication; a 4-year-old is not mature enough to handle that
kind of responsibility. A parent would not allow an 8-year-old with a
broken leg to choose whether or not to be taken to the hospital.
Likewise, the decision of whether or not to go for therapy is too much
responsibility to grant a child. However, once inside the playroom, the
child is free to decide whether or not to participate in the experience,
to take advantage of the opportunity to change. Children can be provided
with opportunities for change, but they cannot be made to change. Tat is
for the child to decide. Te child could be allowed to choose which day
to go, or whether to go to the playroom or an ofce, but eventually there
must come a time when a decision has to be made. A child's emotional
well-being is no less important than his or her physical or educational
well-being. Tis is a time for the courage of conviction tempered by
great patience. Te decision to be made is that of the parent and the
child. Some writers recommend the therapist may have to carry the
reluctant child to the playroom. I do not feel comfortable in that
position. As an absolute last resort, the parent may decide to carry the
child to the playroom, but physical struggles are to be avoided if
possible. Although I have never had

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

to use this approach, I have been involved in some experiences that
required 20--30 minutes of patient work to help the child get ready to
go to the playroom.

Developing the Relationship in the Playroom Structuring in
child-centered play therapy is minimal and is in keeping with the
general philosophy and objectives of the approach: the facilitation of
freedom, safety, and self-control.

Introduction to the Playroom Minimal structuring of the relationship
begins with introducing the child to the playroom experience as the
therapist and child enter the playroom. Te therapist projects a warm and
friendly image with tone of voice and facial expression. Tis is not a
time to be overly serious or stern. Smile. Te therapist's facial
expression is animated and conveys what words cannot. Verbal
communication is kept to a minimum at this point. Tis is not the time to
try to convince the child that a wonderful time will be had. Te value of
the therapeutic experience cannot be explained verbally to a child who
has lived with fears of criticism, condemnation, or rejection throughout
life. Te value of the relationship can only be known and felt as it is
being experienced. Attempting to explain too much about the relationship
may unintentionally set limits on the relationship that will inhibit the
child's exploration and expression. Te mystery of the playroom cannot be
removed with words. Tat can only happen as the child risks exploring.
Words are chosen carefully to communicate to the child freedom,
self-direction, and the parameters of the relationship. Te therapist
might say something like, "Melissa, this is our playroom, and this is a
place where you can play with the toys in a lot of the ways you would
like to." Actually, this statement might seem a bit directing and
structuring, because the seemingly implied expectation is that the child
will play when, in fact, the

205

206

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

child is just as free not to play. However, expressing to a child that
she is free not to play is difcult without getting caught up in a
lengthy explanation. Te statement is freeing and allows the child to be
self-directing in that it conveys to the child responsibility for
direction. Boundaries on freedom are conveyed by the words "in a lot of
the ways" which, in efect, communicate limits on behavior. Tis is a key
phrase. Te words "any way you want" are avoided because this is not a
place of complete freedom. Inexperienced therapists ofen introduce a
child to the playroom with, "Tis is our playroom, and this is a place
where you can play with the toys any way you wish," only to have to
withdraw their absolute approval as they are about to be shot with the
dart gun or as the child throws the airplane at the observation mirror.
Te therapist is encouraged to give considerable thought to the initial
structuring of the phrase that is used.

Allow the Child to Lead Afer the introduction to the playroom, the
therapist now sits down, further communicating to the child the
therapist's willingness to allow the child to lead. Te therapist's chair
is the only neutral place in the playroom, and the therapist sits there
until invited by the child to enter the child's physical space or play.
Beginning each session by sitting in the same place communicates a
message of predictability to the child and helps the child feel safe.
Predictability contributes to a feeling of safety and both are
therapeutic dimensions. Sitting down also communicates returning of
responsibility to the child. Remaining standing may result in the
therapist towering over the child and conveys that the therapist is in
charge or is about to do something else, so the child waits expectantly.
Also, the tendency while standing is to follow the child around the
room, which will cause the child to feel overly self-conscious with the
therapist watching over her shoulder. When the play therapist allows a
child to lead in the play therapy relationship, the therapist is living
out both a basic philosophy of the innate human capacity of the child to
strive

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

toward growth and maturity and an attitude of deep and abiding belief in
the child's ability to be constructively self-directing. Tis philosophy
and the resulting attitudes and beliefs result in the therapist trusting
the child to take the play therapy experience to where the child needs
to be. Tis concept reminds me of how a giant ship waits patiently
outside the harbor until a tiny tug boat enters the giant ships' space
and leads it into the safety of the harbor. Only the tug boat knows how
to get there, and the captain of the giant ship trusts the tug boat to
take the giant ship to where it needs to be. In like manner, I want to
patiently follow the child. I trust the child's inner intuitive,
unconscious motivation to take us to where the child needs to be. I am
not wise enough to know what a child should be working on in our
relationship or what kind of person a child should become. My
information and knowledge are always incomplete. Terefore, I trust the
child to take me in our relationship to where the child needs to be. Te
therapist allows a child to lead in all areas of the relationship. Te
essence of this inner dimension of trusting the child is summed up in a
self-critique statement made by a play therapist in one of my
supervision groups. "For the frst time, I fully experienced trusting
myself and the child enough to allow the child to go where the child
needed to go and do what the child needed to do, and I was struck by the
resourcefulness and vast creative language of the child." Within the
structure of time limits and a minimal number of limits in the playroom,
the child experiences the freedom of choosing to play or not to play, to
talk and what to talk about or not to talk, to sit or stand silently in
the middle of the room, to include or exclude the therapist in her play,
to hide or not to hide from the therapist, to sit on the foor or run
around the room, to play fast or slow, to accept or reject the
therapist, to listen or not to listen to the therapist, to be loud or
quiet (Figure 11.1). Making choices is a critical part of the
therapeutic process in child-centered play therapy. Te opportunity to
choose whether or not to play or which toy to play with frst may seem
inconsequential, but for the child each choice made represents some
control over her life. In an attempt to communicate friendliness and a
relaxed atmosphere, some play therapists may sit on the foor. A result
is that

207

208

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

FIGURE 11.1 Children often use toys as a way to make contact with the
therapist in the building of the relationship.

the child is very likely to interpret the therapist sitting on the foor
to mean the therapist expects to be invited to play, and the child will
dutifully do so even though he had not intended to invite the therapist
to play. If the therapist had not sat on the foor, the child might never
have asked the therapist to play. Te foor is the child's territory, and
the therapist respects that until the child invites the therapist to
enter. Following the child's lead does not eliminate participation in
the child's play, but this participation is done at the direction or
invitation of the child. When participating in the child's play, the
therapist is careful to keep the child in the lead. Participation
involves taking cues from the child. Te child is the director and
choreographer of the drama and nothing happens in the play unless it is
the child's decision. Interference in the child's play may occur in a
variety of ways: asking questions, ofering solutions, making
suggestions, or allowing the child to manipulate the therapist into
becoming a teacher or doing things for the child. Children do not

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

learn self-direction and responsibility when the therapist provides
solutions or direction. Allowing the child to lead in the relationship
communicates the therapist's respect for the child. I trust the child to
take me in this developing relationship to where he needs to be, to what
the child needs to be working on in his life. Terefore, I am eager to
follow the child's lead, to be a part of the child's journey into self.
What a precious privilege to be allowed to experience a child's creative
discoveries about himself.

Limitations on Role Playing with a Child Of course, there are reasonable
limitations to following a child's direction. Te therapist would not
undress if directed to do so by a child, but would respond, "You want me
to take my clothes of. My clothes are not for taking of. You can pretend
the doll (points to doll) is me and take the doll's clothes of." Te
therapist is not the child's playmate, and maintains his therapeutic
role while participating in the child's play. An abused child creates a
play scenario in which an abusive father verbally attacks her. She then
directs the therapist, "You be my dad and yell and scream really loud at
me and call me names. Tell me I'm stupid, and you hate my guts!" Under
no circumstances would I be able to carry out such a role that so
violently violates my value system and caring for a child. I could never
scream abuses or yell at a child, even in play. Such abusive language
would be too emotionally penetrating, even in play. I would be deeply
troubled if a child ever thought that I might even consider doing her
harm. How could she ever feel safe with me afer such an experience? Te
therapist should be absolutely consistent and predictable in the play
therapy relationship. My response to the child would be, "I wouldn't
feel comfortable yelling at you or calling you names, even in pretend
play. I wouldn't want you to think I might hurt you, even in pretend
play. You can pretend the Bobo (punching bag) is me and have the Bobo
yell at you." Tis transition allows the child to continue to express and
explore what is needed. (My response has 44 words, far more than the
recommended 10 or

209

210

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

less, probably a result of the fact that this is a strong emotional
issue for me.) Another child created a scenario in which his father was
angry at him and said to the play therapist, "He's really mad at me. You
pretend you are my Dad and really cuss me out." Te play therapist
responded, "I don't feel comfortable cussing you. I'll pretend the Bobo
is you." Ten the therapist cussed the Bobo. Tat kind of dramatic change
in the play therapist's behavior is very confusing to a child. Yes, cuss
words are very common in some families, but the therapist didn't know
what cuss words mean to the child. Cussing is usually used in anger. By
cussing, the therapist implies to the child that the playroom is like
his home and cuss words are an acceptable way to express your anger. Te
therapist should not reinforce the negative things that go on in a home.
More importantly, the play therapist's behavior should be consistent.
Cussing doesn't present an image of a kind, caring, empathic play
therapist. Play therapists should think through these kinds of issues so
they have already examined the possible negative efects of not being
consistent. Being consistent is a signifcant dimension in developing a
therapeutic relationship. Five-year-old Toby sets up a row of toy
soldiers in front of the therapist and a row in front of himself, hands
the therapist a loaded dart gun, retrieves a dart gun for himself, and
puts the dart in the gun. He shoots one of the therapist's toy soldiers
and says, "Now it's your turn. You shoot one of mine." Before taking
action, the therapist will fnd it helpful to examine what is known about
child development and how young children perceive their world. We know
from child development literature that young children view their
possessions as extensions of themselves. Tis information should cause
the therapist pause. If he shoots Toby's toy soldiers, there is the
possibility that Toby might internalize the behavior as an act against
his person. Knowing that the therapist responds, "You can play my part
and shoot your soldiers," as he hands his dart gun to Toby. I am deeply
sensitive to the possibility that I might do something that would cause
a child to view me as unpredictable, or that a child might think I would
do him harm. I want to be so consistent in my behavior that a child can
predict

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

how I will respond or how I will be. Te child will then feel safe with
me. Consistency produces predictability, and predictability facilitates
a feeling of safety.

Consistency - a Therapeutic Dimension in the Play Therapy Relationship
Children who need play therapy ofen live in environments that are
inconsistent, unpredictable, and chaotic. Te playroom should present a
diferent world to the child, a world that is predictable. I want to be
predictable in my relationship with a child in the playroom. Afer the
frst play therapy session together in the playroom, the child will know
what I will be like in following sessions. I begin each session by
entering the playroom with the child and sitting in the same chair in
the same place in the room. I allow the child to lead our time together
and end by allowing the child to lead me out of the room (if possible)
afer I have indicated that our time in the playroom is up. In my
relationship with a child, • I am consistent in my acceptance and
nonjudgmental attitude. • I consistently respond to feelings, refect
actions, and return responsibility to the child. • I am patient, calm,
respect the child as a person, and convey faith in the child. • When
limits are set, they never change. What was prohibited last time is
prohibited every time. • Toys and materials in the playroom are
consistently the same in each session and are in the same place in the
room. • Te playroom is consistently organized and orderly. • Te child
creates the room to be the way she wants it to be, within boundaries. •
Time limits are always the same. Consistency makes the play therapist
predictable. Te child learns there is a place and a person of calm,
stability, and predictability. When the play therapist is predictable,
the child feels

211

212

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

safe, and feeling safe changes the child's perception of himself and
other people. Tis kind of Being With is an attitude, a way of living
your life with a child.

Hearing Nonverbal Expressions Most mental health professionals are more
dependent on client verbal expressions than they realize. Te efective
play therapist listens carefully to what is not verbalized by the child,
what the child has experienced, feels, desires, wants, thinks, wonders
about, and is not able to express verbally. A child is at all times
communicating something about the person he is but not necessarily in
words. RULE OF THUMB: Listen to the child with your eyes as well as your
ears. Most of what the play therapist needs to hear from a child cannot
be heard with ears. It is not possible to hear fright in a child's face
with your ears. Fright can only be heard with your eyes. You cannot hear
a tear trickle down a child's cheek with your ears. Tat can only be
heard with your eyes. Te most important messages in the play therapy
relationship can only be heard with your eyes. A child may play silently
with toys and yet speak volumes through his play. Isn't that why play
therapy is the developmentally responsive therapeutic modality of choice
with children? Play is the child's natural medium of expression, and
verbal communication is not necessary.

Respecting the Child's Space Te child is allowed to separate from the
therapist and maintain the physical distance that feels comfortable for
her. Tere is a reason why Karla sits playing with farm animals across
the room, with her back to the therapist, and that reason is respected.
Te child will approach the therapist when she

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

feels comfortable in doing so or when she needs to do so. Te therapist
is being very child centered when this dimension of the relationship is
respected. Such behaviors on the part of the therapist communicate
subtle but powerful messages about the relationship.

Physically Tracking the Child Te child can be followed around the room
without doing so physically, although that also might be appropriate at
times in later sessions when the therapist is asked to do so by the
child. Te therapist can be quite active without leaving the chair by
shifing body posture forward on the edge of the chair as the child moves
away or by leaning forward, arms folded across legs, to be closer to the
child's activity in the dollhouse, for example, which may be 4 or 5 feet
from the therapist's chair. Tis brings the therapist's head down to a
lower level and seems to project the therapist into the child's play,
conveying interest and involvement. Sustained involvement also is
conveyed when the therapist moves her whole body to swing around from
one side of the chair to the other as the child moves around the room.
RULE OF THUMB: Te therapist's toes should follow his or her nose. Te
child should be like a magnet attracting the whole person of the
therapist, including the physical part. Wherever the child is in the
playroom, the therapist's nose and toes are pointed in the child's
direction. In supervising play therapists, I have ofen observed
therapists turning their head 90 degrees to track children with their
eyes while the rest of their body remained motionless and projected away
from the child, communicating only minimal involvement with the child.
When the therapist's whole body swings around and her toes are pointed
toward the child, the child feels the therapist's presence.

213

214

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Te therapist also can follow the child around the room by thinking about
the child and by being totally absorbed in the child and the child's
activity, trying to feel the child's intensity, sensing his involvement,
wondering at his creativity, puzzling over the possible meaning in his
play, feeling the atmosphere of the moment, and communicating this
feeling of Being With in facial expression, tone of voice, and general
attitude. Te therapist can be involved in and a part of the child's
activity without physically following the child around the room. No
amount of routinely physically following a child around the room will
ever communicate the kind of involvement that is projected through an
attitude of genuine caring, unwavering interest, and heartfelt desire to
know the child's internal frame of reference. Afer the child and
therapist have begun to know and trust each other, the therapist may
feel comfortable moving his chair to a diferent vantage point in the
room to interact with the child. Because this is meeting the therapist's
need and not the child's, a helpful procedure is to inform the child of
what is about to take place so the child will not be startled or his
activity disrupted. Tis could be accomplished by saying, "Carlos, I'm
going to move my chair (as the therapist now begins to move the chair)
right over here by the sandbox, so I will be closer to your play." To
say "so I can see what you are doing" sounds like a parent checking on a
child and does not convey the therapist's intent. Again, these are
subtle diferences, but the impact on the relationship is signifcant.

Refecting Nonverbal Play Behavior: Tracking Te therapist responds to the
child's actions and nonverbal play expressions by making tracking
responses that describe with words what she hears with her eyes.
Tracking responses put into words what the therapist sees and observes
the child doing. Evan has just been introduced to the playroom for his
frst play therapy session and is walking around the room looking at some
of the toys; he puts his hands on his hips, and looks wonderingly across
the room. Te therapist tracks Evan's behavior, "Hmmm, you're trying to
decide what to play with frst." Evan walks across the room, picks up a
car, sits on the foor, and begins to move the

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

car back and forth. Te therapist tracks Evan's behavior, "You decided to
play with that. You're moving it forward and backward." Tracking
responses communicate the therapist's interest in the child and what the
child is doing. Tis therapeutic skill is explained more fully in the
next chapter.

Refecting Content Refecting verbal content in play therapy is similar to
refecting content in talk therapy with adolescents and adults. Te play
therapist summarizes or paraphrases and refects back the verbal
interaction of the child during the play session. A child then knows she
has been heard. Refecting the content of the child's verbal expression
helps the therapist immerse himself in the child's world. Jennifer picks
up a dinosaur and proceeds to share detailed information about
dinosaurs. Te therapist responds, "You know a lot about dinosaurs." Jef
(pretends a bomb is dropped near a car with people in it): "Te people
aren't hurt. Tey're hiding in the car, and the guy who dropped the bomb
doesn't know." Terapist: "Tey're safe, and the guy doesn't know." Tese
refections of content show understanding and acceptance and allow the
child to lead. Refecting content is explained more fully in the next
chapter.

Refecting Feelings Some play therapists try to rush rapport building by
unnecessarily reassuring the child that everything is okay, and in the
process they run roughshod over the child's feelings. Seven-year-old
Yolanda sits in a chair whining, "You don't have any good stuf. I don't
wanna stay here." Te therapist says, "Yolanda, other children really
have a lot of fun here. See the dolls over there. Maybe you would like
to play with them for a little while." Te therapist now feels better
because a suggestion has been ofered, but the child feels worse because
her feelings have been ignored. If Yolanda does follow the therapist's
suggestion, dependency has been fostered. An accepting therapist does
not push the child to play or talk. Tat is for the child to decide. A
response is needed that focuses on the child's feelings, "You don't like
what's in this

215

216

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

playroom, and you want to leave." Yolanda now feels understood.
Permissiveness implies the child can choose to play or not to play.
Pushing the child to play or talk ignores the child's feelings and
deprives her of decision making. In like manner, the accepting therapist
does not ask probing questions to "get the child started." Te child is
allowed to lead the conversation as well as the play (Figure 11.2). Te
therapeutic impact of refecting feelings can be seen in the following
examples. (sets play dishes on the table and smiles as she says) I know
just where everything goes. Terapist: You're proud of yourself. (Chang
now knows her feelings are important and acceptable and therefore, she
feels she is important and acceptable.) Chang:

•••

FIGURE 11.2 A being-with relationship is experienced as the therapist
emotionally experiences sharing the moment with a child and refects the
child's feelings.

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

(Yells at the Bobo, kicks him, hits him with his fsts.) You're stupid.
You never do anything right. Terapist: You're really angry. David:

••• (Several times while he was setting up the army men, they either
fell over or he accidentally knocked them over. He gave a big sigh and
looked frustrated.) Terapist: You're frustrated. Tey just keep falling
over. Jamal:

By playing out their feelings in the presence of an adult who
understands and accepts even the intensity of the feelings, children
learn that all of their feelings are acceptable. As children begin to
experience that their feelings are acceptable, they begin to be more
open in expressing feelings. Refecting feelings is explained more fully
in the next chapter.

The Child's View of the Play Therapy Relationship Te following monologue
draws on accumulated experiences with children in play therapy and is
the hypothesized interaction of a play therapist and child, the child's
view of the experience, and his reaction to his frst play therapy
experience. My mom says I'm going to have fun. Yeah, I've heard that
line before! She's telling me that I'll be in a room with lots of toys
and things 6-year-olds like to do. She says I'll be spending time with
some lady they call a counselor. But who is this lady who wants to spend
time playing with me? What is she like? Will I like her? Will she like
me? What's she going to do to me? Maybe I'll never go back home again. I
don't even know what she looks like. Oh, no, I hear footsteps ... could
it be ... Gulp ... . Tis lady must be the person they call the
counselor. She is warm and friendly and she says "Hello" to my mom and
introduces herself to me. She smiles a lot. Tat makes me feel more
comfortable, now so I say "Hi." She bends down close to me, says "Hi,"
and notices my Spiderman shirt and my new tennis shoes with red stripes.
She says they look like racing shoes. Tey

217

218

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

sure are! Oh, I like her better now! Maybe she'll be okay afer all.
Well, here we go down the hall. She's also noticing that I'm a little
afraid. She says this must seem strange because I haven't seen her or
her special playroom before and sometimes that's a little scary to
children. Guess she's kinda saying that it's okay to be afraid. It's
funny to hear that coming from an adult! She must be an understanding
person, and she seems to care about me. Maybe she was afraid once in her
life, too. She takes me to what she calls her special playroom. Boy, it
is diferent! Tere are toys in here! She tells me we'll be together in
the playroom for 45 minutes. Hmmm, that's strange. No one has ever told
me how long we would be together or how long I would have to play. She
says this is a place where I can play with the toys in a lot of ways I
would like to. Wow, can she really mean that? Yeah, she seems to care
about me and she seems to like me, even though she hardly knows me.
Tat's strange! I wonder if she treats every kid like that. Maybe I had
better wait and see what she wants me to do. Other adults always tell me
what to do. I'm going to be kinda quiet for a few minutes. She notices
me looking at the paints and says sometimes it's hard to decide just
what to do frst, but that this is a place where I really can decide for
myself. Tis whole thing sure is diferent. I pick up the paintbrush and
splash red all over the paper ... feels good. I think I'll paint a
purple apple tree. Wonder if that will be okay? Maybe I should just make
it red and green, but I hate green--- reminds me of asparagus. Yuk! I'll
ask her what color I should use. She says that's something I can decide.
Boy, everybody else would have told me just what colors to use. Seems
like I make most of the decisions in here. Well, here goes the purple
paint. She says it looks like I've decided to use lots of purple. Yep, I
sure have! It's kinda hard to get this thing to look just right. Hmmm,
that's a funny looking apple tree, but I like it because it's big.
Wonder if she thinks it looks okay. I'll just ask if she likes it. She
says it looks like I worked hard to get it just the way I want it. Yep,
that's right. It's just like I wanted it to be---all purple. Tis lady
lets me please myself. Tis is a funny place. I bet it would be fun to
paint her nose purple! A lady with a purple nose. Now, that will be
something!

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Boy, I'll just paint this whole blob of purple on her. I bet that will
get her out of the chair. She'll probably run clear around the room!
Hmmm, she doesn't look scared. She doesn't even yell at me to stop. She
just says she knows I would like to put paint on her, but she's not for
painting. She says I can paint on the paper or I can pretend the Bobo is
her and paint on the Bobo. She's so calm about everything. It's no fun
to put paint on her if she's not scared. Anyway, that sounds like a
super idea to paint the Bobo. I hadn't thought of that. I'm starting to
play with some other toys now. Funny, this person they call the
counselor seems to really be noticing what I'm doing. I like what I'm
doing. Wonder if she thinks it's important? She's paying attention to
me. Most adults don't do that. She's smart and catches on to what I'm
doing. She even comments on what things I enjoy playing with the most.
Yeah, she knows that the clay is my favorite. She's really interested in
me and in what I'm doing. Gosh, I like it here already. I think I'll try
a few more things, like playing in the sandbox. I'd like for her to play
in the sandbox with me, but she says she'll just watch me play in the
sandbox. I like the way she's so straightforward about it. Most adults
would just say, "I'll play with you in a few minutes," and then they'd
forget all about it. Anyway, I think I'm only going to stay in here for
a few minutes. I start to leave. She says we have 15 more minutes
together in the playroom and then I can leave. She seems to believe I'll
just do what needs to be done. Tat feels good. Let's see---what'll I do
next? It's fun getting to decide what I want to do next. At home, I
hardly ever get to do what I want to do. Te sitter always says what
we're going to do at such-and-such time, or my brothers are always
pushing me to do something I don't want to do, or my parents make me try
something that I'm not ready to try. Not this lady---she's not pushy at
all; she waits for me to make the move that I want to make. And she
doesn't criticize me for being slow like all the kids at school do. She
likes me because I'm me. Or at least, I think she does! I think I'll
play ball with this person they call the counselor. It's fun because we
can talk and catch the ball at the same time. Gosh, she's so interested
in whatever I do. And she's got a lot of what grown-ups call
self-discipline. When I throw the ball away

219

220

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

from her so she will miss it, she just lets the ball go, and she stays
where she is. She says that if I want the ball, I can go and get it. It
would be a lot easier for her to get the ball because she's closer. But
she knows that I'm trying to trick her. I like the way she doesn't let
me get away with that. My Mom would have fnally picked up the ball---IF
I had asked her enough times. But then, my Mom would end up screaming.
Tis lady just never gets upset about anything. I'm really enjoying
spending time with this person they call the counselor. She believes I
can do things without her help. When I asked her to take the top of the
glue jar because I was afraid I couldn't get it of, she said that was
something I could do. I did try, and you know what? It came of! I wish I
knew I could do things outside this room. Ten I could hit home runs at
the ball game instead of always striking out and embarrassing my dad.
Hmmm, maybe I can do some things like she believes I can. Tis lady is
lots of fun. Tis is a fun place to be. It feels good to do things all by
myself ... just the way I decide. I think I'll try to paint a picture of
a police car. Boy, it's looking neat ... all bright blue! Drat! Te red
paint for the light on top is running right down the side of my car! Tat
really makes me mad. She says I look angry about that. Well, I am! But
how did she know? Nobody else ever recognized my feelings. Does that
mean it's okay to get mad about some things? Must be okay. She doesn't
seem to mind my being mad. Wonder what she will think if I pretend this
big throwing dart is a rocket ship. Guess I could ask her, "What is
this?" She says in here it can be anything I want it to be. Imagine
that! An adult who lets it be what I want it to be. Wow, now I can zoom
around the room and pretend I'm going to the moon where no one can boss
me ... kinda like in here where I'm the boss of me. I wish it wasn't
time to leave now. Tere are so many things I wanted to tell her but
didn't get a chance to say. It's funny how sometimes it's so hard to
tell my parents just little things. But I feel like I could say anything
to her. She tells me to come back next week--- that she looks forward to
spending some time with me again. She sounds like she really means it. I
feel so good right now, because she's the frst person who has ever
treated me like a real person, not

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

just a kid. She respects me---that's what it is. And she knows that I
can do great things. Or at least, that's the way I feel now!!!

Questioning Techniques of Children A common practice of children is to
ask the therapist a multitude of questions, which may be their way of
making contact with the therapist and beginning to build the
relationship. However, the therapist will fnd it helpful to consider
that children already know the answers to many of the questions they
ask. Examined from this perspective, responding to children's questions
becomes a matter of trying to understand the motivation behind the
questions rather than attempting to provide an answer. Providing answers
to questions can inhibit children's use of items by binding children to
the therapist's world of reality. When 5-year-old Hershel holds up the
handcufs and asks, "What are these?" and the therapist answers,
"Handcufs," they can no longer be the special new kind of spaceship he
was thinking about. Te therapist could facilitate the coming forth of
Hershel's creativity and imagination by responding, "Tat can be whatever
you want it to be." Hershel is then free to proceed with what he already
had in mind but had not verbalized. When Judy asks, "Who broke this
doll?" she very well may be wondering what happens to children who break
toys in the playroom. A sensitive therapist would respond, "Sometimes
accidents happen in here." Judy then knows this is not a place of
punishment or a place where you must be careful. Tis is an adult who
understands that accidents do happen. She then feels free to express
herself more spontaneously and completely. RULE OF THUMB: Don't answer
questions that have not been asked. Answers to obvious questions can
result in lengthy questionand-answer routines that increase children's
dependency. When

221

222

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

children ask questions in play therapy, the therapist considers what the
underlying meanings are before responding to what seems to be the
objective of their questions. Rather than answering the child's
question, the therapist asks himself, "What is this child trying to tell
me?" When Scott picks up the baby bottle and asks, "Is this a
rocketship?" Scott is telling the therapist the baby bottle looks like a
rocketship to him. Terefore, the therapist responds, "Must look like a
rocketship to you." When a child points to the sandbox and asks, "Is
that a sandbox?" the therapist responds, "Must look like a sandbox to
you," thus accepting the child's perception that it is a sandbox. Trying
to anticipate what children are saying in their questions rather than
attempting to answer the questions is much more facilitative of
expression and exploration. What the therapist senses at the moment
would determine the kind of response to be made. Te following questions
and possible meanings underneath the obvious questions are provided for
consideration in stimulating awareness of what children may be
communicating. 1. Do other children come here? Huan might be a. Wanting
reassurance he is special; b. Establishing a sense of belonging in the
playroom, "my place," a sense of possessiveness; c. Curious about the
playroom because of its uniqueness; d. Wanting to feel secure in knowing
the room is his for this time; e. Wanting to know if other children play
with the toys; f. Wanting to know if there are going to be other
children with him in the room; g. Wanting to know if he can bring a
friend; or h. Noticing something is diferent about the room this week.
2. Do you know what I'm going to do next? Yi-Ju might be a. Indicating
that she has something defnite in mind that she plans to do; b. Wanting
to include the play therapist in her plans; or

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

c.  Finishing a project or changing the theme of play---a way of closure
    on one aspect of play.

<!-- -->

3.  Can I come back tomorrow? or, When can I come again? Dwight might be

<!-- -->

a.  Involved in a project that is important to him and wanting to fnish
    it;
b.  Enjoying what he has been doing and wanting the opportunity to do it
    again;
c.  Saying, "Tis is an important place to me";
d.  Seeking reassurance of his time---that he does have a time in the
    playroom that belongs to him;
e.  Unsure about trusting his world to be consistent and not
    disappointing him in this situation as it has in others; or
f.  Saying, "I really like to come here," "It is important to me that I
    can come again."

<!-- -->

4.  Does anybody play with this? Rachel might be

<!-- -->

a.  Saying, "Is it okay for me to play with this?";
b.  Unsure of the permissiveness of the playroom, seeking permission or
    reassurance of that permissiveness;
c.  Unsure of what the toy is or what she wants to do with the toy;
d.  Trying to decide what she wants to do; or
e.  Wanting to make contact with the therapist.

<!-- -->

5.  Do you know what this is? Mike might be

<!-- -->

a.  Proud of something he has made;
b.  Wanting to make contact with the therapist;
c.  Ready to use the toy for a specifc purpose---has plans for the use
    of the toy; or
d.  Asking for information.

<!-- -->

6.  What is this? Maja might be

<!-- -->

a.  Unfamiliar with the toy or play material and unsure of how it could
    be used;
b.  Trying to decide what she would like to do with the toy;

223

224

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

c.  Unsure of the permissiveness of the playroom and saying, "Is it okay
    for me to play with this?" or testing the permissiveness of the
    playroom;
d.  Wanting to make contact with the therapist;
e.  Seeking direction or approval from the therapist;
f.  Wanting to use the item for something other than the apparent use;
g.  Trying to establish a superfcial relationship with the play
    therapist while she checks out the room and the play therapist; or
h.  Trying to put things back on a "safe" level---ofen the play
    therapist will have touched on a sensitive issue or feeling.

<!-- -->

7.  Do you like children? or, Do you have any kids? Kevin might be

<!-- -->

a.  Establishing rapport with the play therapist;
b.  Trying to fnd out more about the play therapist;
c.  Afrming that he does indeed feel liked and accepted by the play
    therapist (this question usually seems to be followed by the
    statement, "I like coming here.");
d.  Showing possessiveness toward the play therapist;
e.  Trying to take the focus of himself;
f.  Trying to make "polite" conversation; or
g.  Leading up to "whose side are you on?" type questions.

<!-- -->

8.  What time is it? or, How much time is lef? Teresa might be

<!-- -->

a.  Enjoying herself and not wanting to leave;
b.  Wanting the feeling of certainty that there is time lef;
c.  Wanting to feel in control that she knows how much time remains;
d.  Anxious to go; or
e.  Planning a project and wanting to be sure it can be fnished.

<!-- -->

9.  Why do you talk like that? Robert might be

<!-- -->

a.  Unaccustomed to talking with adults;
b.  Having a surprise reaction to the verbal attention;

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

c.  Annoyed by too much refection of words; or
d.  Saying he notices the diference in the play therapist's
    refective-type responses.

<!-- -->

10. Will you fx this? or, Will you do this for me? Cheryl might be

<!-- -->

a.  Dependent and lacking confdence in her ability to do things;
b.  Trying to make contact with the play therapist; or
c.  Testing the freedom of the experience together.

<!-- -->

11. What would happen if I did this? Jose might be

<!-- -->

a.  Testing the limits of his environment;
b.  Expressing curiosity; or
c.  Wanting attention.

<!-- -->

12. Do I have to clean this up? Wendy might be

<!-- -->

a.  Becoming acquainted with the playroom and learning to feel secure
    there;
b.  Wanting to be messy;
c.  Wondering where the boundaries are; or
d.  Trying to fnd out if this place is diferent.

<!-- -->

13. Do children ever play together in here? Kirk might be

<!-- -->

a.  Feeling lonely;
b.  Feeling insecure;
c.  Trying to avoid building a relationship with the play therapist; or
d.  Wanting to bring a friend.

<!-- -->

14. Will you tell my mother? Serena might be

<!-- -->

a.  Afraid of being punished for doing something;
b.  Getting ready to break a limit; or
c.  Wanting to confrm the confdentiality of the relationship.

<!-- -->

15. Did you get any new toys? Jef might be

<!-- -->

a.  Having difculty making decisions about what to do;
b.  Bored and saying he would like new materials; or
c.  Indicating that he is getting ready to terminate.

225

226

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

16. How does this work? Szu-Yu might be

<!-- -->

a.  Actually wanting to know;
b.  Trying to manipulate the play therapist;
c.  Expressing dependence, getting the play therapist to show her so she
    doesn't have to fgure it out by herself; or
d.  Wanting to establish some contact with the play therapist.

<!-- -->

17. When will I come back? Jason might be

<!-- -->

a.  Wanting reassurance that he will get to come back;
b.  Wanting to know when he will come again;
c.  Having anxiety about coming and wanting to know if he has to come
    back; or
d.  Feeling his behavior has been so bad the therapist won't let him
    come back.

<!-- -->

18. What should I do? Chen might be

<!-- -->

a.  Wanting to shif responsibility to the play therapist;
b.  Wanting to know what she is allowed to do;
c.  Seeking permission to play; or
d.  Wanting to please the play therapist.

<!-- -->

19. Who broke this? Greg might be

<!-- -->

a.  Curious about who broke the item;
b.  Wondering what happens when someone breaks something; or
c.  Upset about the toy being broken.

<!-- -->

20. Where did you get this? Monica might be

<!-- -->

a.  Curious about where it came from;
b.  Wanting to make contact with the therapist; or
c.  Wanting time to check out the room and the therapist.

<!-- -->

21. Can I take this home? Chuck might be

<!-- -->

a.  Wanting permission to take the item;
b.  Wanting to know what will happen to him if he takes it;

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

c.  Wanting to extend the experience or relationship;
d.  Feeling possessive of the playroom;
e.  Trying to take the focus of himself;
f.  Trying to make "polite" conversation; or
g.  Leading up to "whose side are you on?" type questions.

<!-- -->

22. How do you play with this? Anita might be

<!-- -->

a.  Wanting the play therapist to interact with her;
b.  Afraid she will do something wrong; or
c.  Feeling insecure or dependent.

Explaining the Observation Mirror and Recording Trying to explain to
young children the idea of video recording through a one-way mirror can
be a confusing task and in many cases does not seem to be necessary.
Young children have difculty comprehending being able to see through a
mirror when all their experiences have been with mirrors at home that
cannot be seen through. Some young children think there is a room and
people inside the mirror, and that can be a very strange experience.
Although taking young children into the observation room for a look
through the mirror into the playroom does not seem to help them
comprehend, they can be shown the observation room if they express an
interest in seeing "the other room and those people." Te process can be
explained, however, to older children, and reassurance given that
parents, teachers, and others will not be watching. Videoing play
therapy sessions, with parental permission, for supervision and/or
self-supervision is highly recommended. When a session is to be videoed,
place the cell phone, laptop or tablet near the therapist's chair in an
inconspicuous place, out of normal reach of the child, and turn it on
prior to bringing the child into the room. Be sure the display screen is
turned of so the video is not being automatically displayed to the child
during the session. If an audio or video recording device is used,
children may notice and may want to watch the video or listen to the
recording.

227

228

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Teir request should be honored. Te last few minutes of the session seem
to be the best time for this. Typically, children do not request to
listen to or view recordings. However, those who do may react with
awkwardness and embarrassment to some of their negative behavior. Tey
also may be genuinely amused at themselves and some of their antics in
the playroom. Viewing their own behavior can result in new insights as
well as facilitation of the expression of additional feelings. Seeing
himself drip paint on the foor while painting at the easel, Jeremy
remarked, "I thought you were going to get on to me for splattering that
paint." (Viewing of self on video is an area in need of research.)

Taking Notes During the Session In my initial experiences with play
therapy, I took notes, but I found that to be distracting to me and the
child. I would look down at my note writing and look back up to discover
the child was in a diferent place, and I had missed some of the child's
play behavior. Terefore, I had missed some of the child's communication,
as the child's play is his language. I also noticed that I only took
notes on certain happenings, not everything the child did, only those
things I felt were important. Te child also noticed that, and I became
aware of the child doing more of some of the things that I made an efort
to record. I was infuencing and structuring the child's play, although
that was not my intention. Knowing that something is being written down
may be threatening to some children and consequently may restrict their
play. In one of my initial play therapy experiences, as I was writing
notes during a session with 6-year-old Matthew, he came over and wanted
to see my notes, so I handed them to him. (Tere should be no secrets in
the playroom.) Matthew took my notepad over to the easel, promptly
painted the whole page with black paint, and handed the notepad back to
me. I experienced that as a very powerful message about his reaction to
my writing down what he did. Tat was the last time I ever took notes
during a play therapy session with any child. Sometimes I learn quickly!
I am able to give the child my attention more fully when I am not
concerned about documenting what the child is doing. Notes on the
session can be

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

taken immediately following the session and are important for the
therapist's understanding of the development of themes in the child's
play and to determine progress. One innovative play therapist I know in
private practice takes her laptop into the playroom afer each session
and records her notes while she straightens the playroom. When the
playroom is lef in a mess that is difcult to describe with words, photos
can be taken and attached directly to the client's electronic fle.

Preparing to End Each Session Children ofen become intensely emotionally
and physically involved in their experiences in the playroom and are not
aware of the passing of time. A sensitive play therapist will help a
child anticipate the ending of each play therapy session by providing
the child with a 5-minute caution so the child is not suddenly surprised
by an announcement that time is up. "Kim, we have 5 more minutes in the
playroom, and then it will be time to go to the waiting room where your
mom is." Time is always stated in a specifc amount. Te therapist would
not say, "We have about 5 more minutes." "About" is an ambiguous term,
and no one knows how long "about" is. For some individuals, "about"
means probably another 10 or 15 minutes, for others it means as long as
they want it to be. Time is a part of the structure of the play therapy
experience, and the therapist is precise about the structure of the
experience. Tis 5-minute caution provides the child an opportunity to
bring herself under control and prepare to leave what is ofen a deeply
satisfying or fun experience. Sometimes when a child is intently
involved, an additional 1-minute caution may be needed. Avoid surprising
children with an abrupt ending. Providing a 5-minute caution shows great
respect for the child. Another concern of equal importance is what the
child does during the last 5 minutes of a session. Sometimes a child may
become involved in painting at the easel and the paint fnds its way to a
child's face, deliberately so. Seven-year-old Jason had missed our two
previous play therapy sessions, and in the process of telling me he had
chicken pox, he showed me what his face looked like by putting spots of
red tempera paint all over his face.

229

230

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

I thought this was very creative. He then moved on to other play, and
when I gave the 5-minute caution, the paint was still on his face. Tere
is now an additional issue of concern for the therapist: How will mom
react to the permissiveness of the playroom that allows her son to paint
himself? Even though the play therapist as a matter of routine informs
parents in the initial interview that children may paint their hands or
arms, a parent may react with extreme rejection when actually confronted
with such a spectacle. My concern is that a parent can with one quick
emotional burst of anger undo what I have been working toward. I waited
2 minutes to give Jason time to realize there was paint on his face and
wash it of. When he didn't, I said, "Jason, the paint on your face is
for washing of before we go to the waiting room where your mom is." If
there is not water in the playroom, on the way to the waiting room, the
therapist can stop by the bathroom and wait outside while the child
washes. If Jason does not wash the paint of, I will walk into the
waiting room before Jason and say to mom, "Jason has some paint on him
(to prepare her). You can take him to the bathroom and help him wash it
of." Allowing a child to proceed to the car with paint on his hands or
arms can be catastrophic when the child gets paint on the inside of the
car. Te cautions presented here are essential in maintaining parental
support for the play therapy process.

Play Therapists' Reactions to Their First Play Therapy Sessions Kathy It
had all begun before I had a chance to realize that it had. Tere I was
sitting in that chair reserved for that person they call a counselor who
has a playroom, the one I'd heard about, read about, and was supposed to
be about this very moment. Diverse thoughts fooded my mind, and although
I wasn't counting, I could have sworn several butterfies had found their
way to my stomach. I don't recall being nervous as much as I remember
being eager for the experience and for whatever it might bring. It was a
strange, but special feeling. I had experienced some apprehension, but

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

for that brief 30 minutes that passed like seconds, all that was,
strangely enough, the furthest thing from my thoughts.

Jaylen I thought I was ready. I thought everything would come naturally,
but I honestly had to struggle with the process. I wanted to direct the
child's actions, to tell him what to play with, to literally "move him
on." I wanted to explain what things were and "lead" the way, to do
things for him, e.g., fx, put together, open, close, etc. I had to
experience my frustration and leave him to struggle with his own
frustration so we could both grow. I think this session was actually
more therapeutic for me than it was for Brian. I learned so much about
me and my needs, especially my need to help, to lead, to direct, to make
things easier for children. Most importantly, I learned to hold me down
in order to give children a chance to grow.

Marilyn Before my frst play therapy session I felt myself becoming
nervous and uptight. My mind seemed to go blank as I tried to remember
the "right" things to say. It was one of the best things that could have
happened. As I walked hand-in-hand to the playroom with Karen, I felt
myself relaxing and enjoying the child at my side. As we entered the
playroom, I no longer felt that my mind was blank and in place of that
feeling, I felt open, receptive, and ready to experience with her the
marvelous relationship that was beginning.

Li Wei My frst experience in the playroom was an exhilarating
experience. I was able to drop the role of authority and healer and to
accept the child and let her take the lead. I did not feel that I had to
persuade or teach her. I could watch her and try to understand her
world. I was able to concentrate on her, not my technique. I know now
that I was feeling as much freedom as the child.

231

232

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

Basic Dimensions of the Relationship Te development of the play therapy
relationship with a child is facilitated by the therapist's subtle use
of self in responding to the child's communication of self in the
process of play and is dependent on the therapist's sensitivity to and
understanding of the dynamics of the child's world, as well as the
child's emotional expression communicated in the relationship. Only when
the child begins to feel safe with the therapist will the child begin to
express and explore the emotionally meaningful and sometimes frightening
experiences that have been experienced. Te therapist must wait for this
development. It cannot be rushed or made to happen. Tis is the child's
time, and the child's readiness or lack of readiness to play, talk, or
explore must be respected. When a child experiences the freedom and
permissiveness of directing his own play in the context of an empathic
and caring relationship, the child develops the self-discipline and
perseverance that comes from the sustained efort required to carry
through or complete a self-selected activity or project. Te process of
independently choosing an activity, directing the action, and relying on
self for the outcome enhances self and develops self-reliance. Te
therapist's responsibility in the relationship can be summed up in the
following four healing messages that the child-centered therapist works
hard to communicate to the child at all times, not just in words but
with his total person: I am here.

Nothing will distract me. I will be fully present physically, mentally,
and emotionally. I want to be so fully present that there will be no
distance between myself and the child. I want to enter fully into the
child's world, to move about freely in the child's world, to sense what
the child senses, to feel what the child feels. Once I have achieved
this kind of knowing contact, it is easy to know when I am not in touch
with the child. Can I enter so fully into the child's world that I have
no need to evaluate the child?

Beginning the Relationship: The Child's Time

I hear you.

I will listen fully with my ears and eyes to everything about the child,
what is expressed and what is not expressed. I want to hear the child
completely. Can I experience, hear, this child as she is? To accomplish
this kind of hearing, I must be secure enough within myself to allow
this child to be separate from me.

I understand. I want the child to know I understand what he is
communicating, feeling, experiencing, and playing and so will work hard
to communicate that understanding to the child. I want to understand the
inner depth and meaning of this child's experience and feelings, the
loneliness of feeling no one cares, the hollowness of failure, the
desperation that can accompany sadness. Te crucial dimension in therapy
is the communication of this kind of understanding and acceptance to the
child. I care.

I really do care about this little person and want her to know that. If
I am successful in communicating fully the frst three messages, I will
not be perceived as a threat, and the child will allow me into her
world. Ten, and only then, will the child know I care. What I have
experienced is that this kind of caring releases the dynamic potential
that already exists in the child. I don't create anything. Whatever
change or growth the child makes already existed in the child.

References Moustakas, C. (1981). Rhythms, rituals and relationships.
Harlow Press. Segal, J., & Yahraes, H. (1979). A child's journey: Forces
that shape the lives of our young. McGraw-Hill.

233

Chapter

12

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses The natural response of many
adults to children is to question, command, or provide answers and is
the consequence of an attitude that children only need to be told what
to do to "straighten them out." Responding to children in a way that
communicates sensitivity, understanding, and acceptance and conveys
freedom and responsibility is for many beginning play therapists like
learning a foreign language. A drastic shif in attitude and a
restructuring of words used in responses are required. A beginning play
therapist expressed the change this way, "I know how to respond. I just
don't know how to put it into words." From this new perspective,
children are viewed as being capable, creative, resilient, and
responsible. An objective of the adult-- child relationship, then, is to
respond to children in ways that release or facilitate the development
of these existing capacities. Te therapist genuinely believes children
are capable of fguring things out for themselves, trusts their decisions
as being appropriate for them within the boundaries of their
developmental capabilities, and communicates this attitude through
responses to children.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-12

235

236

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Sensitive Understanding: Being With Rachel was a small frst-grader who
always walked the few blocks home from school with other children. Her
mother constantly reminded her that she was to come directly home
immediately afer school was over for the day. Tis was drummed into
Rachel repeatedly, and her mother's concern was understandable when
Rachel was a few minutes late getting home one day. Rachel's mother
walked to the sidewalk and looked down the street, no sign of Rachel.
She paced the driveway for 10 minutes, and still no sign of Rachel. Afer
15 minutes, Mother became almost frantic. Twenty minutes had passed when
Rachel fnally came into view. Mother was relieved, but then became quite
angry. She yelled at Rachel in a loud voice, grabbed her by the arm, and
ushered her into the house. Afer several minutes of angry reaction,
Mother fnally asked Rachel for an explanation. Rachel told her mother
that on the way home she had passed by Sally's house and found Sally
outside in the yard crying because she had lost her doll. "Oh," Rachel's
mother replied, "and you stopped to fnd Sally's doll for her?" "No,
Mommy," Rachel said, "I stopped to help Sally cry." Tis story is a
child's description of the child-centered play therapy philosophy and
portrays so vividly a child's intuitive inclination to be child
centered. Te mother's focus was to help solve the problem of the lost
doll. Rachel's frst response was to be with Sally, to take in Sally's
emotional world, to empathically respond to Sally's pain and distress.
It did not occur to Rachel to solve Sally's problem, to go looking for
Sally's doll. Rachel intuitively knew "When you focus on the problem,
you lose sight of the child." Play therapists and perhaps all adults
should learn from Rachel the importance of Being With a child. RULE OF
THUMB: Listen to understand rather than listening to answer. Listening
to understand touches what is untouchable in a child. Understanding is a
deeper issue than anything the play therapist

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

can tell a child about solving a problem or changing a behavior. Rachel
spontaneously lived out the meaning of listening to understand rather
than listening to answer. Her empathic Being With describes the
relationship the play therapist strives for, not to the point of tears,
but to that kind of understanding that comes from Being With. Te typical
approach in adult--child interactions is characterized by problem
solving and an attitude of evaluation of the child based on what is
known about the child and previous circumstances. Seldom do adults
strive to understand the child's immediate internal frame of reference,
the child's subjective world, to genuinely be with the child. Sensitive
understanding of the child occurs to the extent the therapist is able to
put aside his personal experiences and expectations and appreciate the
personhood of the child, as well as the child's activities, experiences,
feelings, and thoughts. Children are not free to explore, to test
boundaries, to share frightening parts of their lives, or to change
until they experience a relationship in which their subjective
experiential world is understood and accepted. As with other therapeutic
dimensions, the attitude of the therapist is critical in making contact
with children in such a way that they feel understood and accepted for
who they are. Tis depth dimension understanding means remaining free of
a stylized role and participating deeply and meaningfully in the work of
understanding the child. Tis means putting aside the tendency to
evaluate and judge and to see instead from the viewpoint of the child.
When understanding and acceptance are lacking, little if any efective
therapeutic work is going on in the relationship. Being heard at the
deepest level possible seems to release a child to act. Most children
are unable to communicate the impact of being heard at this level;
therefore, I would like to use the words of adults. Following a
counselling experience, one of my adult clients summed up the experience
in a note saying, "Tere was just something about hearing what was inside
me, hearing my feelings coming back to me that was so freeing to me, and
hearing myself gave me the courage to act." I think this process is also
true of children in play therapy. Another one of my adult clients wrote,
"Tere's just something about the way you listen and then the way you
respond that brings

237

238

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

tears from way down deep inside me. I've never had anyone listen to me
like that in my whole life."

Caring Acceptance Acceptance grows out of a genuine and sincere interest
in children, a sensitivity to their rights, and a belief that they can
assume responsibility for themselves. Children who experience such an
atmosphere of acceptance in the playroom learn that they can depend on
others for support while developing their own sense of adequacy and
independence. Acceptance is communicated through the therapist's
patience and willingness to trust the process. Te therapist is always
patient with children. Patience allows the therapist to see things from
the child's perspective. Te therapist's acceptance is refected in
refraining from ofering advice, suggestions, or explanations, and in not
questioning or interrupting children. Te therapist's empathic responses
communicate understanding and acceptance to children, thus freeing them
to be more creative and expressive (Figure 12.1). Whether or not a
child's actions, behaviors, or feelings are good or bad simply does not
occur to the child centered play therapist. Tey are accepted as they
occur, without being screened through any hint of judgmental attitude.
By empathically refecting happenings and feelings, the therapist
expresses respect for the child and afrms the child's right to have
feelings and to express herself through actions. Acceptance, then,
occurs in conjunction with permissiveness but does not necessarily imply
approval of what the child is doing. An important dimension in the
therapeutic process is the child's need to be accepted as a person of
worth, regardless of inadequacies, defciencies, or behaviors. Te
creation of this kind of relationship allows the child to express
himself at his own pace without any hurry or pressure from the
therapist. Tat is the epitome of respect: to be accepted just as one is
without even the possibility of criticism, evaluation, judgment,
rejection, disapproval, censure, condemnation, punishment, penalty,
rebuke, reprimand, praise, compliment, reward, or accolade. Te
therapist's accepting responsiveness encourages a child to explore her
thoughts and feelings further. When a child's feelings

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

FIGURE 12.1 When a child feels understood and accepted, the child feels
safe enough to express himself or herself at his or her own pace.

are expressed and accepted by the therapist, they are experienced with
less intensity by the child, and the child's acceptance of those
feelings is facilitated. Te child then is more fully able to integrate
and deal with feelings by expressing positive and negative emotions in a
more focused and specifc way. Tis is a central postulate of
child-centered play therapy and is the basis for the therapist's
empathic responsiveness. Focusing on the child's feelings validates the
person of the child rather than the importance of the problem.

Distinctive Qualities of Therapeutic Responses Te following qualities of
therapeutic responses are skills considered to be essential to the
child-centered play therapy process. However, afer you learn the skills
(refecting feelings, etc.), forget the skills. Tere is a time to learn
skills; then a time to

239

240

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

"own" them, make them a part of yourself and the way you live out the
moment with the child in the playroom, and without even thinking, you
respond. A response occurs spontaneously. Give up trying to make a
"good" response. If you are thinking about how to respond, you aren't
listening to the child. Te extent to which these facilitative skills are
used is a function of the therapist's intuitive sensitivity to the child
in the immediacy of the moment. I am not saying skills are not
important. Skills should become so integrated into the person you are
that you unconsciously live them out without planning to do so.

Brief and Interactive Most therapists have a tendency to use too many
words when responding to children. Lengthy responses are confusing to
children and ofen communicate a lack of understanding on the part of the
therapist. A therapist will ofen respond to a child or tell a child
something, immediately assume the child did not understand, and then in
an efort to help the child understand, will add to or restate what was
said in a slightly diferent way. Lengthy responses from the therapist
result in the child being caught up in using energy to try to understand
what the therapist is saying, thus disrupting the child's focus and
interfering with the process of the child's play. Typically, this kind
of interruption tends to change the direction of the child's play
expression, and interferes with completion of the child's exploration
and expression. Children do not remember lengthy responses and cannot
internalize the intended meaning of the response. Lengthy responses
interrupt the child's focus on her play because she must divert energy
to try to understand all the words coming into her awareness. RULE OF
THUMB: Responses should be short---ten words or less. Terapeutic
responses are short, succinct, and focused on the child; they have an
interactive quality with the child that feels like

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

the rhythmic fow of a conversation, not just static statements or simple
word refections; and they match the fow and emotional intensity of the
child. Lengthy responses are typically the result of the therapist's
attempts to point out something to the child, educate the child, or
explain the child's behavior to the child. Short responses tend to be a
communication of the therapist's empathy and understanding and are
guided by the therapist's desire to be with the child as fully as
possible.

Help the Child to Go On Play therapist's responses should ft smoothly
into the child's expression without interrupting the natural fow of the
child's play or verbal communication. RULE OF THUMB: Play therapists'
responses should be like an Olympic high diver. Te Olympic high diver,
with seemingly little efort, gracefully springs of the diving board at
just the right moment and intersects the surface of the water with
hardly a ripple to show that the diver has been there. I like my
responses best when they are like the Olympic high diver. My response
has been ofered at just the right moment, interjected into the plane of
the child's communication with no disturbance of the surface, and the
blending has been so harmonious that the child hardly takes any notice.
I think my responses to a child are most facilitative when they are like
that, with no disruption of the fow of the child's expression. At such
moments, I feel a oneness with the child, a genuine understanding, and a
"living with" that transcends the circumstances of both of our lives. We
are here together, and a mutual acceptance exists. Te therapist is
sensitively aware of a child's reaction to his responses. When a child
reacts frequently to the therapist's responses by stopping her play,
changing the direction of the play, or changing the process of the play
in some way, the child may be

241

242

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

giving a clear message that the therapist's responses are interfering
with the child's expression. Consultation should be sought to help the
therapist respond diferently.

Refect Nonverbal Play Behavior: Tracking Te therapist is an involved,
verbally responsive participant with the child. Te relationship will
deteriorate when a child feels watched. A child's question of "Why are
you looking at me?" typically means the therapist has not been verbally
active enough. Te therapist responds to the child's actions and
nonverbal play expressions by making tracking responses that describe
with words what she hears with her eyes. Tracking responses put into
words what the therapist sees and observes the child doing and thus
validate the child. "You're painting lots of colors on that." "Now,
you're putting that one in there." "Tat one just crashed right into the
other one." (Note the items are not labeled for the child.) "You're
pushing that (car) right through there (tunnel)." Te focus of these
responses is on the child, thus helping the child to feel in control and
empowered. It is generally helpful to begin a tracking response with
"You're" or "You are." Maegan takes the stethoscope out of the medical
kit and listens to her heart. "You're listening to your heart." Such
responses confrm a child's existence. In some instances, it is
appropriate to describe the happening. "Hmmm, that just fell over," or
the child is painting at the easel, paint drips on the foor, and the
child looks down at the paint, "Tat dripped right on the foor." Tracking
responses acknowledge the child's play expression, help the child to
feel the therapist is interested in him and his play, demonstrate the
therapist is striving to understand the child's world, communicate the
therapist's involvement, and help the child to feel the therapist is
participating with him. If the therapist is silent during a child's
play, the child will begin to feel watched or that the therapist is not
interested. Sitting and watching without responding to a child can also
increase the child's anxiety. Feelings of security and warmth are
promoted as the child hears the therapist's voice and the description of
his

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

activities. Tracking responses convey interest in the child and what the
child is doing. A word of caution: Tracking can be overdone to the point
of making a child feel self-conscious, as in the following example that
occurred in 10 seconds. "You're walking over there. You're bending
down." "You're picking that up. You're looking inside that. You're
putting that back on the foor. Now you are looking for something else."
Such rapid-fre tracking responses do not sound genuine or
conversational, and a child would probably experience the comments as
intrusive. Tracking responses should not follow the child's activity or
play expression too closely, and they need to be stated in a genuine,
warm, caring, and conversational manner. Te play therapy relationship is
similar to being in a counseling session with an adult. Adults know that
the therapist cares and hears them when the therapist listens and
verbally responds. In like manner, the play therapist listens with ears
and eyes and verbalizes what she hears and sees.

Refect Content Just as is true with adults, children need to know they
have been heard and understood. Hearing a child confrms the child's
existence and worth. Refecting the content of what a child verbalizes in
play therapy is the same skill process that occurs in counseling
sessions with adults. Te play therapist summarizes or paraphrases and
refects back the verbal interaction of the child during the play
session. A child then knows he has been heard and understood. Refecting
content validates children's perception of their experience and helps to
clarify children's understanding of themselves. Refecting the content of
a child's verbalized communication is one of the four basic healing
messages the play therapist is intentional about communicating to a
child. Te following interaction in a play therapy session demonstrates
refection of content: Scott: (picks up can of playdough) What do you do
with this? Terapist: In here you can decide. Scott: Hey, it's a bomb!
(drops the can of playdough on top of a small car in the sandbox) Blam!
Did you see that car! Terapist: Just blew that car up!

243

244

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Yeah (grabs sand scoop, quickly digs hole, and buries car). Blew such a
big hole it covered the car up. Terapist: Yep, that's a big hole. Te car
can't be seen anymore. Scott: Te people aren't hurt. Tey're hiding in
the car, and the guy who dropped the bomb doesn't know. Terapist: Te
people are safe, and the guy doesn't know. Scott:

Te therapist's refective responses in this interaction are short,
succinct, interactive with the child's actions and verbal descriptions,
refect content, communicate the therapist's acceptance and
understanding, and allow the child to continue to lead as his story
unfolds. It is obvious the child feels understood and free to continue
his exploration.

Refect Feelings By playing out their feelings in the presence of the
play therapist who understands and accepts even the intensity of the
feelings, children learn that all of their feelings are acceptable. As
children begin to experience that their feelings are acceptable, they
begin to be more open in expressing them. Te play therapist communicates
understanding and acceptance of a child's feelings by verbally labeling
the feeling. ("You're frustrated with that.") When feelings are accepted
by the therapist and refected to children, they learn to trust their
feelings. Refecting a child's feelings validates the child and her
feelings and facilitates the child's trusting of herself. Te essential
quality in refecting a child's feeling is the communication of empathy,
a feeling of Being With in the experience. Chad: (picks up handcufs) How
do you lock this? Terapist: You're wondering how you lock that. (Tis is
an accurate refection but does not communicate a feeling of Being With.)
A more empathic response would be: Terapist: Hmmm, wonder how that
locks? (If a child is wondering about something, then the therapist who
is being empathic is also wondering. Tis response communicates a Being
With quality.)

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Te accepting therapist recognizes each feeling as being valid and so
accepts each feeling. No attempt is made to convince the child that
there is no good reason for feeling the way she does. Some therapists,
unaware of their own needs, reject a child's feelings in the process of
trying to unnecessarily reassure the child or make the child feel
"better." Miguel acted out an elaborate scene in the dollhouse involving
a child playing alone in a room and the mother doll coming into the room
and stabbing the child doll repeatedly. Considerable fear was acted out
as the child doll tried to escape. In a following scene, the mother doll
came into the child doll's bedroom, carried the sleeping doll outside
the dollhouse, and threw the child doll into the lake (sandbox). During
this enactment, Miguel verbalized his fear that, "Mother will get me.
She's going to do something real mean to me." Having interacted with the
mother in initial interviews and follow-up sessions, the therapist
responded, "Miguel, you know your mother loves you, and she would never
ever do anything to hurt you." Although the therapist may have
substantial evidence on which to base her conclusion, the therapist can
never be completely sure of another person's behavior. We cannot speak
for other people. We simply do not know what may take place in another
person's home. In her need to reassure Miguel, the therapist ignored his
feelings and so Miguel did not feel understood. Te therapist felt
better, but at what expense? A more appropriate response that would
refect Miguel's feeling would be, "You're really scared that your mother
will do something mean to you, that she might hurt you. Tat's
frightening." Refection and acceptance of feeling are demonstrated in
the following excerpt: (Picks up gun, looks angry, and pretends to shoot
therapist.) Terapist: You're mad at me. (Terapist refects child's
feelings and shows understanding.) Ricardo: I'm not mad at you. (Ricardo
may feel anger is not acceptable and so corrects the therapist.)
Terapist: Oh, you're not mad at me. Ricardo: But I'm really sick of it.
Terapist: So, you're not mad at me, you're just sick of it. Ricardo:

245

246

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

A therapeutic relationship emerges as the therapist communicates
acceptance and understanding. In this kind of relationship, children
begin to recognize their inner value when the play therapist responds
sensitively to the inner emotional part of their person by accepting and
refecting feelings, whether verbally or nonverbally expressed. An
empathic response that refects a child's feelings matches the child's
afect with facial expression, words, and tone of voice. Possible
response beginnings that refect feelings are You like ... You don't like
... You're curious about ... You're wondering about ... You feel
frustrated when ... You're really angry about ... Tat's really funny to
you.

Build Self-Esteem Te behavior of children is largely a function of how
they feel about themselves, so, the play therapist is intentional about
responding to children in ways that build up their self--esteem. A
self-esteem-building response gives the child credit for knowing or
doing. Four-year-old Isaiah counts all the family fgures. Terapist: "You
know how to count." Recognizing and responding to a child's efort and
energy enhances the child's sense of self. Esteem-building statements
help children experience themselves as capable when the therapist
responds to the efort rather than the product. "You made that just the
way you wanted it to be." "You're working hard on that." A child
struggles in the play therapy session to ft two objects together and
accomplishes the task, "Tere, you fgured that out." Other possible
self-esteem-building responses might be You know how to make that work.
You have something in mind. Looks like you know how to ... You
remembered where that was.

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

You decided ... You know just how you want it to look. Tere, you got it
open. Tere, you made it stay together. Self-esteem building responses
help children to feel capable, facilitate development of a child's
intrinsic sense of self, and thus build up intrinsic motivation.

Match Child's Level of Affect When responding to a child, the
therapist's facial expression and tone of voice can communicate more
meaning than the words used. Being empathic means Being With a child so
fully that the child's experiences and feelings are felt. In
communicating this Being With to the child, the therapist's tone of
voice and degree of afect match the level of afect/intensity expressed
by the child. Rate of therapist response also conveys understanding and
Being With the child by matching the degree of interaction of the child.
If the child is speaking thoughtfully or trying to fgure something out,
the pace of the therapist's response matches the child's pace. Te
therapist avoids getting overly excited beyond the child's level of
afect about little happenings. Erica runs her hand through the sand in
the sandbox, comes up with a small green rock, and matter-of-factly
states, "I found a rock." Te therapist responds, "Oh, my! Isn't that
wonderful! You found a colored rock in the sandbox!" Tis kind of
excitement may cause the child to feel something is wrong or to distrust
her own reaction because she does not feel equally excited. Expressing
afect beyond the level expressed by the child is structuring and will
lead the child into expressing afect and behaviors beyond what she is
genuinely feeling. Tis can be seen when David hits the Bobo with minimum
efort and the therapist responds with, "Wow! You really socked him that
time!" Following the therapist's lead, David then hits Bobo with all the
force he can muster. Some therapists have a tendency to raise the tone
of their voice when around small children, as though talking to a baby
or talking

247

248

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

down to the child. Such behavior projects a basic attitude about
children being incapable and has no place in the therapeutic
relationship. Te therapist also avoids slipping into a monotone; that
can be deadly. Use voice infection to convey meaning and feeling.

Avoid Asking Questions Questioning a child about the reasons for
behavior generally is not facilitative of exploration because the child
is expected to verbally communicate cognitive insight, and this is a
contradiction of the rationale for placing children in play therapy. If
the child were able to fully express himself through verbal means, he
would not be in play therapy in the frst place. Questions place the
therapist in a leading, controlling position and are seldom
facilitative. Even questions asking for clarifcation usually are not
helpful or needed. RULE OF THUMB: If you have enough information on
which to base a question, you have enough information on which to make a
statement. Questions imply the play therapist doesn't understand. It is
not possible to communicate understanding through a question. "Did that
make you angry?" communicates the therapist's lack of understanding, yet
the therapist senses or can see the child looks angry or she would not
ask the question. She either saw something in the child's facial
expression or physical activity or heard something in the child's tone
of voice that indicated anger. Te therapist should trust what has
emerged in her own intuitive system and make a statement, "You feel
angry." Empathic statements go into the child's heart and soul.
Questions go into the mind to be processed and evaluated. In like
manner, questions about a child's play also interfere with the process
of the play. Questions are usually a mistake. Questions prevent the
relationship from moving to a deeper level. I encourage you (the reader)
to make a commitment that you will not ask the child a

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

question in your next play therapy session. I also encourage you to make
the same commitment for your next counseling session with an adolescent
or adult. You will be amazed at the result. Your play therapy session
and other counseling sessions will be much more dynamic. One exception
to avoiding questions is when the therapist has been involved in role
playing at the request of the child. Te therapist may need to ask "What
do I do next?" or "How many eggs am I supposed to buy at the grocery
store?" Such questions keep the child in the lead. Questions designed to
satisfy the therapist's curiosity such as, "How many times have you been
sent to the principal's ofce?" or guesses such as, "Does your mother get
angry when you do that at home?" are inappropriate. Will the therapist
do anything differently once such information is obtained? Likewise,
questions that attempt to produce insight, such as, "Have you noticed
you use a lot of dark colors?" usually are beyond the level of the
child's awareness and thus are inefective. At one point, a therapist
asked 5-year-old Aaron to make up a story, and at the end of his story
asked, "What is the moral of your story?" to which Aaron asked, "What
does that mean?" A therapist sensitive to the developmental level of
children should know a 5-year-old probably will not know what the word
"moral" means. In addition, such a question calls for abstract reasoning
beyond the child's developmental level. Later, Aaron was acting out a
loud fght between a dinosaur and a snake, and the therapist asked,
"Wonder what would happen if all dinosaurs and snakes were friends
instead of fghting each other?" Aaron did not respond, and no wonder!
Even the ability of most adults to give an adequate response to such an
abstract question is questionable. Te therapist was completely out of
touch with Aaron, and he expressed frustration with the therapist by
throwing the dinosaur at her. Te therapist's response was equally
inefective: "Aaron, seems like you're pretty mad at me. I'm guessing
maybe that you don't like coming here. And maybe you're a little mad at
Mom for making you come here. Cause, by making you come here, that means
she's in charge, and you don't like it when she's in charge." Te
therapist completely avoided the personal issue between herself and the
child and placed the blame on the parent with an

249

250

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

interpretative response that was much too lengthy for a 5-yearold. She
also drew a series of abstract associations that were bewildering to the
child. Te therapist probably felt quite satisfed, but we must wonder how
Aaron felt. Te therapist gave very little indication that she understood
Aaron. RULE OF THUMB: Questions put children in their minds. Children
live in their hearts. Questions tend to move children (or clients of any
age) from the world of emotion into the world of cognition, which
essentially defeats the developmental rationale for using play therapy.
Questions also structure the relationship according to the therapist's
agenda, thus placing the focus of the relationship on the therapist
rather than the child. Questions prevent the relationship from moving to
a deeper level. In a supervision session, I suggested Katy make a
commitment to avoid asking any questions in her next play therapy
session and see what happens. Te next week she wrote me a note. "Today,
I practiced not leading and not asking questions and although I faltered
and asked one question, my play therapy sessions were deeply moving,
even profound. Not asking questions seemed to release children to work
on their problems."

Return Responsibility to Children Allowing a child the freedom to engage
in the process of decision making provides opportunities for the child
to project his own personal meaning onto the item or material. Tis inner
experience of making decisions strengthens the child's self-concept and
provides the child with experiences that can become incorporated into a
changed perceptual view of himself. Tis is a growth process that will
enable the child to respond emotionally to future problems and
situations in a more efective way. Terefore, the therapist refuses to
accept responsibility for making decisions for the child, no matter how
insignifcant the decision may seem.

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

To the child's question, "What color is the moon?" the therapist
replies, "Te moon can be any color you want the moon to be." Tus, the
child is encouraged to accept responsibility for herself, and, in the
process, discovers personal strengths. Te process of choosing helps the
child to feel in control of her life. Children cannot discover and
develop their inner resources and, in the process, experience the power
of their potential unless opportunities to do so exist. Responsibility
for self cannot be taught; responsibility can only be learned through
experiencing. When therapists make decisions for children that deprive
them of the opportunity for potential use of their own creativity, they
interfere with the development of responsibility. Most play therapists
would readily state the development of children's selfresponsibility as
one of their major objectives in therapy but, in reality, many limit
children's opportunities to assume responsibility by making decisions
for children that foster dependence. Tis does not happen in some major,
catastrophic way but, rather, in little, almost imperceptible parts of
their interactions with children by giving answers, making choices for
children, helping when help is not needed, and leading children when
children should be allowed to lead. RULE OF THUMB: When you do for a
child what she can do for herself, you teach the child she is weak. Te
following interactions return responsibility to the child, facilitate
decision making, and allow the child's creativity to come forth:
Gabriel: I want to play in the sand. Will you take my shoes of?
Terapist: You have decided to play in the sand and want your shoes of
frst. You can take your shoes of if you want them of. ••• Althea:
(Without trying to open the bottle of glue) Will you open this for me?

251

252

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Terapist: In here that's something you can do. (Of course, the therapist
would only return responsibility if it is determined that the child is
capable of the action.) ••• Janet: I'm going to paint a picture of a
fsh. What color are fsh? Terapist: You can decide what color you want
the fsh to be. ••• Timothy: I like to draw pictures. What pictures do
other kids draw? Terapist: Oh, so you like drawing pictures. Well, in
here, the important thing is the kind of picture you like to draw. •••
Keysha: I don't know what to do. What do you want me to play with frst?
Terapist: Sometimes it's hard to decide. What you play with frst is for
you to decide. Te ease with which the therapist can create dependence is
recognized by a therapist who wrote, Tere were other times that my
responses slipped into my old ways of making children dependent. April
asked if she could play with a baby doll, and before my brain had turned
on, I realized I had answered "Sure." I must eliminate that word from my
vocabulary. Tis session again reinforced the need for constant
connectedness with the child. A split second can mean the diference
between a therapeutic response and one that encourages dependence.

Terapeutically facilitative responses return responsibility to children,
thus helping children to feel in control and to become intrinsically
motivated. Te child centered therapist believes in the child, is willing
to allow the child to make decisions, and is committed to providing
opportunities for self-direction by avoiding interfering with the
process. What is being described here is the therapist's understanding
of self and a deep, abiding attitude that becomes a way of being with
children. A play therapist described this process as

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

I am beginning to grasp in a very small way that giving responsibility
isn't something one does verbally, although responsibility may be
facilitated in that manner. I think giving responsibility must also have
to do with freeing myself from responsibility. Te session certainly
would have been diferent if I had not been so concerned with putting
Nina at ease and with things being done right. I mean, who am I? What
makes me so special that I can "fx it" for her? And to what end? Whose
needs would that satisfy? Who does that make feel adequate?

At the beginning of the frst play therapy session, a child will ofen ask
the therapist to identify what the therapist wants the child to do frst,
what things are used for, and for help with simple tasks such as how to
take lids of items. Te child may hold up a toy that she obviously knows
the name for and ask, "What's this?" Tis is a moment when the therapist
does not know for sure the motivation behind the question. To name the
item may inhibit the child's creativity, structure the child's
expression, or keep responsibility in the hands of the therapist.
Responsibility could be returned to the child by responding, "Tat can be
whatever you want it to be." Similar responses, depending on the child's
request, might be, "You can decide," or "Tat's something you can do."
Tese responses allow a child to assume responsibility and to make a
decision. Typically, the result of therapist's responses returning
responsibility is that by the end of the frst session the child is
stating what things are without asking for the therapist's decision.
(picked up the dart gun and dart) Put the dart in the gun for me.
Terapist: In here that's something you can do. Hector: (smiled) I knew
you were going to say that (successfully put the dart in the gun on the
third try). WOW!!! I am good at it! Hector:

If a 3-year-old child picks up the can of playdough, looks at the lid,
and asks, "Will you take this lid of for me?" the therapist can respond,
"Show me what you want me to do." Tere is a huge gulf between this
response and responding to the request with, "Tell me what you want me
to do." Tis latter response places the focus

253

254

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

on the therapist and implies that if the child will tell the therapist
what he wants done, the therapist will then do it. Te response "Show me
what you want me to do" keeps the focus on the child, allows the child
to assume responsibility, and keeps the child in the lead. In the
process of showing the therapist how to do what he wants done, the child
ofen will complete the task. Te therapist can then make a
self-esteem-building response, "Tere, you fgured it out" or "Tere, you
did it." If the child tries to take the lid of following the "show me"
response and has difculty and asks for help again, the play therapist
can assist by responding, "Looks like you know your fnger goes here,"
placing the end of her fnger under the lid next to the child's and
lifing up slightly, allowing the child to complete the task, and then
making a self-esteembuilding response. Returning responsibility keeps
children in the lead and empowers children as can be seen in the
following two play therapy segments. Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L: Kate:

Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.:

(Stands right in front of me and shows me two puppets as she puts them
on her hands.) I'll be right back. Tere goes your hand, right in there.
(She turns toward the puppet theater and eagerly says) Ok, I'll be right
back. You'll be right back. Looks like you're going right over there
now. (Walks behind the puppet theater, pushes the curtains open, looks
at me with a big smile and without intending to, bumps into the puppet
theater and it goes crashing to the foor. She has a startled and
surprised look on her face.) Ooops! Sometimes things fall in here. Yeah.
Tat was an accident. Sometimes accidents happen in our playroom. (Stands
up.) I think you need to put it back up. (I stand up and move toward the
theater.) Well, let's see. Show me how you want to put this thing back
up. (I move to one side of the puppet theater and crouch down.)

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.:

Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L: Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.: Kate: Dr. L.

(Kate has already moved to the other side and begins to lif up one side
of the theater.) Let's see. Oh, like that. OK. (I begin to lif up the
other end in unison with her.) Tis goes up like this. (I match her
movements.) (She pushes a folded panel inward to make it stand in
place.) Closed up. (In response, I push the end panel in on my side.)
Oh, and you want this closed like that. Yup. So you know how it goes
back together. (I stand up and lean over the side of the puppet theater
so I can see her.) (She puts into place one end of the rod that holds
the back curtain. She points to the other end.) Get that side. And that
goes right there. (I point to the other end and she puts it into place.)
Like that. Uh hum. You got it back just like it was. You knew how to do
that. (I turn around and walk back to my chair and sit down.) Yup. I'll
be right there. (She speaks from behind the closed front curtain.)
You'll be right there and I'll be over here. Pushes the front curtains
open and smiles. I see you in there. Tere you are again. (Te rod that
holds the back curtain falls.) Uh Oh. Well, that thing fell again. Yeah,
I don't think we need that. So you don't need that. Do some kids need
it? Some children need it and some don't. You just decided you don't
need that right now for what you want to do.

When accidents happen in the playroom, a child's immediate response is
"I've done something bad or wrong." A play therapist's

255

256

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

very best response is to quickly respond with, "Tat was an accident.
Sometimes accidents happen in our playroom." Te play therapist must
resist the urge to rescue the child by fxing the problem. Kate was able
to fx the puppet theater with me assisting by following her lead. In the
next play therapy segment, Tanisha wants me to take over and fx the
problem. Tanisha: Dr. L: Tanisha: Dr. L. Tanisha:

Dr. L.:

Tanisha: Dr. L: Tanisha: Dr. L.: Tanisha: Dr. L.: Tanisha:

Is this Barbie's? (she picked up the medical mask on a shelf and turned
to walk toward me.) Can be if you want it to be. I want it to be. (Walks
closer to me. Lays the mask on the table right in front of me.) It's
gonna be a cookin! Uh hum. (Leaning forward.) (Walks closer to me as she
unfolds the medical mask, picks up the Barbie doll and wraps the mask
around the doll sort of like a dress. Attempts to tie the medical mask
ties but struggles with the task. Looks at me.) Will you tie this up?
Huh? (Hands the Barbie doll to me.) Oh, I guess what you're saying is
that you want me to put that around Barbie. (I put my hand on the doll.
She continues to hold the doll.) You can show me how you want it. (I'm
leaning forward, our foreheads almost touching as we both look at the
doll.) (She adjusts the mask around Barbie and says,) Like that! Like
this! Now. Wait a minute. Like this. OK? (She adjusts the medical mask
around Barbie.) And now what? Tied. Oh, you want this part tied. Like
uh, like uh shoe. Oh, you want it tied like a shoe. (She leaves the doll
in my hands and turns away quickly, puts her hand on the stethoscope on
the table. It's obvious she intends for me to tie the mask around
Barbie.)

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Dr. L.:

Tanisha: Dr. L.: Tanisha: Dr. L.: Tanisha:

(I stick the doll out toward her.) You can help. (She returns to the
doll.) Let's see. You can pull this one. (I recognize that she doesn't
know how to tie a knot. I start the knot and indicate which tie to pull.
She takes it. I let go.) (Pulls the two mask ties together, making a
knot.) Aha! Tere, you're pulling it together! Like that. Tere you got
it! Uh hum. (Places the Barbie doll on the table.) Now she takes her
sunglasses of so she can go to sleep. (Turns and chooses another toy to
play with.)

If Tanisha had started playing with some other toy afer she handed the
doll to me, I would have continued to hold the doll, without tying the
mask ties together, for the rest of the session if necessary. My
objective is that Tanisha will discover she is capable. A play
therapist's self-critique of her play therapy session described the
process of returning responsibility this way: Troughout the session,
Megan wanted me to give everything a name in the playroom. For example,
she held up a Barbie doll hairpiece and asked, "What's this?" Ten she
repeated this question with a Barbie doll dress, a compact, and an empty
container. She wanted me to give each item a name. I responded by
stating, "Tat can be whatever you would like it to be," and "You can
decide what that is for." Each time she readily made her own decision.
Te hairpiece was a crown, the compact was something you put paints into,
the Barbie dress was a dancing dress, and the small container was a
holder for Barbie's hair rollers. If I had answered for her, I would
have fostered dependence, and she could not have discovered the answers
for herself. Tis approach to returning responsibility seems to be a real
self-esteem booster. By the end of the frst session, Megan asked very
few questions and made very decisive statements and actions. Her
independence was showing, and she seemed self-assured. I think this was
a direct result of redirecting the responsibility to her instead of the
focus being on me being the answer source.

257

258

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

RULE OF THUMB: Grant responsibility commensurate with the child's
ability to respond responsibly. When responsibility is returned to
children, they will think of creative solutions that might never occur
to the therapist. When 5-year-old Bret asked the therapist, "What do you
want me to fx you for lunch?" the therapist responded, "In here you can
decide what you would like to fx." Bret chose "smushed spider pie."
Later Bret held up a plastic round bracelet and asked, "Hey, what is
this?" Te therapist responded, "Tat can be whatever you want it to be."
Bret decided it was a handcuf. Children ofen will answer many of their
own questions if the therapist simply will not be so quick to reply. A
thoughtful "Hmmm" by the therapist may be all that is needed.
Four-yearold Zack picked up the airplane and asked, "Why does it have
two doors?" Te therapist responded, "Hmmm ..." and Zack promptly stated,
"Because if children bought it, more people could get out. Tat's maybe
it." Maria sat down by the paints and made a comment about painting. Te
lids were on the paint canisters (the lids should have been removed
prior to the session), and the therapist started to take the lids of,
but then checked herself and waited. Maria easily removed the lids. Te
therapist can so easily take responsibility away from the child.
Responsibility also can be granted to nonverbal requests, as in the
following play therapist's account: Since Samantha talked so little, I
couldn't be sure when she was looking for direction or help. When she
was sitting next to the dollhouse, walking the teddy bear around the
house, she took a piece of furniture from the box and put the bear and
the piece of furniture into the house. Ten she took both items out and
gave me a quick look. I said, "You can decide what goes in the
dollhouse." Samantha then proceeded to pile all the furniture into the
house.

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Case of Dependent Darrell In thinking about the issue of returning
responsibility to a child, I have a question for you to think about. Who
is Clark Kent? ... What is the name of the newspaper Clark Kent works
for? Yes, you are correct. Clark Kent is a reporter for the Daily
Planet. Te editor of the newspaper always gives Clark routine
insignifcant reporting assignments because he thinks Clark is incapable
of dealing with important news events. But when a disaster or perilous
event is about to happen, Clark Kent dashes into a telephone booth,
becomes Superman and "saves the day!" I have ofen thought play
therapists should be to children what the telephone booth was to Clark
Kent. Te telephone booth never asked Clark Kent, "Do you know why you
are here?" Never said, "I think you should reconsider where you are
headed." Never said, "Don't throw your clothes on the foor." Now, I have
a deeper question for you to ponder. When did Clark Kent become capable
of becoming Superman? ... Stop reading here and give yourself a few
minutes to ponder this question ... If you are unable to determine the
answer to this question, you will realize what the answer is before you
fnish reading this section on Returning Responsibility. Te following
case of Dependent Darrell will help you see what the process of
returning responsibility looks like. Five-yearold Darrell was referred
to the Center for Play Terapy at the University of North Texas because
both parents were irritated, frustrated, and angry at Darrell because of
his extreme dependent behavior. Darrell was assigned to a doctoral
student I was supervising. I had the opportunity to observe her sessions
in one of our play therapy rooms with a two-way mirror. Terapist: (In
the frst session, the play therapist walked into the room with Darrell
and introduced him to the play therapy room.) Darrell, this is our
playroom. Tis is a place where you can play with the toys in a lot of
the ways you would like to. (Ten she sat down. At that moment, this
activity is a visible picture of her returning responsibility to
Darrell.)

259

260

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

(Walked into the center of the play room, pointed to the sandbox, and in
a whiney little voice, said,) Is that a sandbox? Terapist: Must look
like a sandbox to you, Darrell. Darrell: (walked over to the sandbox,
started to step into the sandbox, realized he had shoes on, stepped
back, turned to the play therapist and in a whiny little voice asked,)
Would you please take my shoes of so I can play in your sandbox?
Terapist: Darrell, in here, if you want your shoes of, you can take your
shoes of. Darrell: (Sat down and took his shoes of. It wasn't that he
didn't know how to take his shoes of. He was fve years old. He stood up,
stepped into the sandbox and just stood there looking down at the sand.
Afer several seconds, he turned to the play therapist and asked in a
whiny little voice,) Is it OK if I sit in your sandbox? Terapist:
Darrell, if you want to sit in the sandbox, that's for you to decide.
Darrell: (He sat down in the sand looked around at the sand and then
asked in a whiny little voice,) Is it OK if I dig holes in your sand?
Terapist: Sounds like you've got something in mind, Darrell. In here
that's for you to decide if you dig holes in the sand or not. Darrell:
(Looked around at the sand again, picked up the sand scoop, but quickly
dropped it, turned to the play therapist and in a whiny little voice
asked,) Is it OK if I dig holes with your sand scoop? Terapist: Te sand
scoop is there for you to use if you want to use it. Tat's for you to
decide. Darrell: (Picked up the sand scoop and dug several big holes in
the sand around him. At that point he looked at the shelf of toys close
to the sandbox, pointed at a blue car, looked at the play therapist
seated on the other side of the sandbox and said in a whiny little
voice,) Would you please hand me the blue car so I can play with it?
Darrell:

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Terapist: Darrell, in here if you want the blue car, you can get the
blue car. Darrell: (Reached out, picked up the blue car, because it was
close right there, and started playing with it. He played with the car
for several minutes in the sand and then he turned to the play therapist
and said in a whiny voice,) I think I'm through playing in your sandbox.
Is it OK if I don't play in your sandbox anymore? Terapist: Sounds like
you have something else in mind you'd like to do, Darrell. Tat's
something you can decide. Darrell: (He got up, stepped out of the
sandbox, walked over to the table that had art supplies on it, picked up
a red crayon, quickly dropped it, turned to the play therapist and
asked,) Is it OK if I play with your crayons? Terapist: Te crayons are
there for you to use if you want to use them. Darrell: (Picked up the
red crayon again, turned to the play therapist and said in a whiny
little voice,) I think I want to draw a picture of an apple tree. What
color are apple trees? Terapist: Darrell, in here apple trees can be any
color you want apple trees to be. Whiny dependent behavior continued for
the rest of the 45-minute session. I was back the next week because I
wanted to see what happens to Dependent Darrell. Te second session
followed the pattern of the frst session with Darrell exhibiting whiny
dependent behavior. He just seemed unable to make the simplest of
decisions such as selecting a toy and playing with it without checking
with the play therapist and asking her permission. I did count two times
that Darrell spontaneously picked up a toy and played with it without
asking the play therapist's permission. In session 3, Darrell continued
the dependency pattern of behavior, but I did count 12 times Darrell
spontaneously made his own decision and carried through in playing with
the toy he had selected.

261

262

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

In session 4, there was a dramatic decrease in the number of times
Darrell asked the play therapist for direction or for permission to do
something. It seemed about 50% of the time he was asking permission and
the rest of the time he was making his own decisions and carrying
through. I arrived in the observation room a few minutes early for
session 5. As I sat there looking through the two-way mirror, Darrell
walked into the play room with assurance preceding the play therapist.
He looked diferent. With no hesitation, he walked quickly to the center
of the playroom, stood there, looked around the room, made his decision
and with no hesitation, he began collecting all the plastic food that
would be found in a fully equipped playroom: hamburger bun, banana,
orange, apple, fried egg, and other food items. Darrell searched the
room thoroughly and piled all of the food items in the middle of a table
in the playroom. When he had fnished collecting all of the food items,
he stepped back, put his hands on his hips, and surveyed what he had
created. Terapist: Tere Darrell, you did it all by yourself. Darrell:
(Jerked around, looked at her and said,) Hell, yes, lady, I don't need
no help! Te deeper issue at this point is "When did Darrell become
capable of that kind of self-assured behavior?" If you look deeper into
this issue you come to the conclusion that Darrell was always capable of
that kind of self-assured behavior. RULE OF THUMB: Children are capable
of more than they seem to be. What the play therapist did was help free
Darrell to move in a direction he was already capable of. Terefore, as
play therapists, we can't take any credit for what the child becomes. Te
child was already capable of being that way before the child ever came
into the playroom. Darrell's change in behavior in only fve sessions

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

was remarkable and demonstrates how quickly some children are able to
progress in child-centered play therapy.

Purpose in Returning Responsibility Keeps child in the lead Facilitates
child's creativity Encourages choice making Helps child feel in control
Encourages self-control and self-direction Promotes independence
Decreases dependency on adults Facilitates decision making Allows child
to learn what making decisions feels like Allows child to learn what
responsibility feels like Allows child to learn to trust herself
Empowers child to solve his own problems Builds child's self-esteem and
character

Responses Are Personalized Responses should always be personalized and
address the presence of the child. Responding to Jayden who is busy
banging on Bobo by saying, "Jayden really likes hitting that Bobo"
denies the presence of the child, and causes him to feel talked about as
a nonperson. "You really like hitting that Bobo" addresses the child
personally. Michael paints a picture, and the therapist responds,
"Michael painted a picture," as though someone else is in the playroom.
"You" gives the child credit and recognizes ownership. Some therapists
are prone to inappropriately include themselves in the interaction. Beth
talks about playing soccer and how much she wanted to win, but her team
lost. Te therapist responds with, "Sometimes it feels bad when we lose
and want to win." Te therapist was not a part of the happening, and the
use of "we" shifs the focus away from the child. Ling says, "Last year
these people came to our house ... Uh, I forgot their name," and the
therapist inappropriately responds, "Sometimes we do forget people's
names if

263

264

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

they are hard names for us." Again, the therapist should use "you" to
recognize the person of the child.

Responses Avoid Labeling Toys Toys in the playroom are not identifed or
labeled until the child has verbalized an identifying label for the toy.
What may be obvious to the therapist (a truck) may not be at all what
the child had in mind (an ambulance). A child will not feel understood
by the therapist if a toy is incorrectly labeled. Labeling a toy anchors
the child to the therapist's reality and interferes with the child's
creativity and fantasy. Once the therapist has identifed the item as a
truck, it can no longer be a school bus, the family car, a tank, or an
ambulance. Referring to a toy in nondescriptive ways as "it," "that,"
"them," or "those" allows the child to decide what he wants the toy to
be. A car is not a car until the child labels it as a car. When the
child picks up the car and puts it into the sand, the therapist
responds, "You just put that right in there." Te child is now free to
continue with her unverbalized intent that the car is a giant bug. Tis
response also communicates to the child a Being With quality. When
responding, the therapist stays within the metaphor. "Tat one knocked
that one over," not, "You knocked that one over." If there is no story
line or metaphor, and the child hits the Bobo, the response can be
personalized. "You just hit that." Avoiding labeling toys helps create a
more permissive relationship in which children feel safe enough to
explore using the toys in nonconventional ways.

Reponses Are Nonevaluative and Do Not Praise Most relationships are for
children places of evaluation: home, school, games, playgrounds, sports
activities. Te play therapy relationship must be a place of acceptance
where children feel safe, safe enough to explore, safe enough to risk,
safe enough to be themselves, safe enough to be creative, safe enough to
try new behaviors. Terefore, there is no place for any form of

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

evaluation in the play therapy relationship because children do not feel
safe when they are being evaluated. Evaluation is based on judgment
about what is right or wrong, correct or incorrect, pretty or ugly,
adequate or inadequate. It is not possible to be evaluative and
communicate acceptance. Te play therapist strictly avoids even the
simplest kinds of evaluation. Evaluative statements deprive the child of
inner motivation. Seven-year-old Haley paints a picture, turns to the
play therapist with a big smile on her face and asks, "Do you think my
picture is pretty?" Te play therapist responds, "Oh, it's beautiful."
Praise statements are based on an external evaluation, result in
children seeking external reinforcement, and encourage development of
external motivation rather than internal motivation in children.
Evaluation is a double-edged sword that cuts both ways. If the therapist
has the power to evaluate a picture as being beautiful, then she also
has the power to evaluate the picture as being ugly. Haley's fear may be
that next time the therapist will think her picture is ugly, so now she
does not feel free or creative. She feels inhibited. Judgment about
Haley's painting should be lef to Haley. Te response, "Oh, it's
beautiful" ignores the child and praises the painting. Praise increases
children's dependency, fosters development of external motivation,
inhibits creativity, and results in lower self-esteem. Te response, "Oh,
it's beautiful" ignores what Haley is communicating with her facial
expression. Te therapist can keep the focus on the child by responding
to what she hears with her eyes, "You're proud of your picture," or "You
like your picture." Tis response refects Haley's feeling, helps Haley to
trust her own internal reactions, and facilitates development of her
intrinsic motivation. If the child's face reveals no afect, the
therapist can respond by prizing with her tone of voice what she sees as
she describes, "You put lots of colors on your painting, and that color
goes all the way up there," as the therapist points and traces the
painting in the air with her fnger. Focusing on the child's afect,
prizing what has been produced, and describing what is seen afrms the
child and bolsters the child's self-esteem.

265

266

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Facilitative Responses Te importance of making facilitative responses
cannot be overemphasized. Just because a therapist is trying to be
helpful to a child does not ensure that he or she will be, as can be
seen in the following responses made by inexperienced play therapists
when asked to respond to the same play therapy episodes. Directions
Micah, a 7-year-old boy, won the second-grade spelling bee in his school
but exhibits socially maladaptive behavior. In his frst play therapy
session, Micah writes "skool" on the chalkboard and asks, "Is this the
right spelling?" Write the response you would make to Micah.
Responses 1. You wonder if this is the right spelling. (A delaying
tactic. Yes, that is exactly what the words say, but it probably is not
what the child is wondering.) 2. You would like me to tell you how to
spell, but I know you can spell "school." (Refects the child's obvious
request, places emphasis on the therapist, and puts pressure on the
child.) 3. Sounds like you would like me to tell you if that is right or
wrong. In here you can spell that word any way you would like to. (First
sentence indicates the therapist is not sure of the request, restates
the obvious, and makes the response too long.) 4. You can spell any way
you like in this room. (Very specifc, to the point, and grants the child
freedom.) Te frst few responses seem to disregard the fact that Micah
won the spelling bee in his school and thus probably knows how to spell
school. Another consideration is that the way he has spelled skool is
correct if he is thinking about the way he has seen the word spelled on
some toys by the Play Skool Company. An objective in play therapy is to
grant children the opportunity to set their own direction. Children do
not need the therapist to be their spelling

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

teacher or their math teacher. Must things always be the way the
therapist thinks they should be? Directions Shaun, an 8-year-old boy in
his second play therapy session, picks up two large throwing darts with
rubber suction cups and asks, "What do you do with these?" Write the
response you would make to Shaun. Responses 1. Tose are for throwing at
the dartboard or the wall but not at me or the mirror. (Response
potentially structures and limits the child's activity and inhibits
creativity. Te therapist's anxiety results in premature limit setting.
Tere is no indication the child was even thinking about throwing darts
at the therapist or mirror.) 2. You would like me to tell you what to do
with those. In here, you can decide. (Te frst sentence is not
facilitative. Te second sentence is freeing and allows the child to be
creative.) 3. You may do anything you want with those in here. (Te
therapist is trying to make a freeing response, but this is not a true
statement. Tere are limitations. Te child cannot smash the therapist in
the face with the darts.) 4. In here, that's something you can decide.
(A response that allows the child to be creative and to experience
making a decision.) Te therapist's response should not bind the child to
the therapist's world of reality. Te child might want to pretend the
darts are rocketships, people, or bombs. Tey can be whatever he wants
them to be to express himself at that moment. Directions Connie, 7 years
old and in her second play therapy session, walks into the playroom,
looks around the room, and asks, "Is this room really for me?" Write the
response you would make to Connie.

267

268

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Responses 1. You can use this room during the 45 minutes each Tuesday we
meet. (Does not respond to the child's emphasis on herself.) 2. Some
other children come here to play just like you. But right now this room
is for you. You can play with the toys in a lot of the ways you like.
(Attempts to provide too much information and does not respond to the
child's potential feelings.) 3. Tis room is for you to use during our
time together. (Response focus is on activity and ignores the child's
potential feelings.) 4. It's just kind of hard for you to believe this
is all just for you. (Response shows understanding of the child's
feelings.) Facilitative responses touch on feelings whenever possible.
In this way, the therapist shows an understanding of the inner child and
avoids answering questions that have not been asked. Te focus is on what
the child is trying to say rather than on what the child is asking.
Directions Kathy, 8 years old and in her second play therapy session,
says, "Today is my birthday ... but ... my mother said ... she said I
been too mean to my little brother ... so ... she's not going to bake me
a birthday cake." Kathy looks very sad, tears begin to form in her eyes,
her head drops, and she stares at the foor. Write the response you would
make to Kathy. Responses 1. You feel sad and wish you could have a
birthday cake from your mother. You're so worried that your mother
doesn't love you anymore because you've been so mean to your little
brother. (First sentence is appropriate. Second sentence is too
interpretative. Response confrms the child has been mean when that fact
is not known and, besides, that is not the issue. How the child feels at
this moment is what is important.) 2. Sounds like you're pretty sad that
your mom won't bake you a cake. Sounds like you're angry with her.
(Inappropriate

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

use of the common counseling phrase "sounds like." No, the child doesn't
sound like she is sad and hurting. She is experiencing and demonstrating
sadness and hurt at that moment. Tere is no indication the child is
angry. Tat is a projection by the therapist.) 3. You're sad that your
mother isn't going to bake you a cake for your birthday, because she
thinks you have been too mean to your little brother. (Tis is better,
but still does not capture the feeling of the child. No need to stick in
the part about being mean, because that detracts from the main focus of
the child's feelings.) 4. You're really sad about a birthday and no
birthday cake. You just feel like crying. (Short, shows understanding by
touching the child's feelings.) Children do not need explanations or
lengthy discourses about their experiences. Te most important part of
the relationship is what the child feels and experiences in the
relationship. An interesting point to note is that only the last
response gave recognition to the child's tears, which were the most
obvious part of the child's feelings. Te absence of the therapist's
verbal recognition of obvious feelings may be interpreted by the child
to mean such feelings or expressions are not acceptable.

Typical Nonfacilitative Responses Te following excerpts from play
therapy sessions are examples of typical responses that are not
facilitative. How the therapist responds, the words used, can make a
signifcant diference in whether or not a child feels understood,
accepted, or restricted. Te suggested responses are just that,
suggestions, and are not intended to imply that these are the only
responses that can be helpful. Te objective here is to help you become
aware of your own response patterns to children.

Missed Feelings Child:

Do people come here lots? (Excited voice, eagerness in face.)

269

270

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Terapist: Sometimes. (Child is not asking for an answer.) Suggested: You
really like coming here. (Recognizes feelings indicated.) ••• Child: My
puppy got killed, and I cried. Terapist: I'm sorry your puppy got
killed. (Te therapist's focus is on his own reaction, ignores child's
feelings, does not allow the child to explore her feelings further.)
Suggested: You were so sad about your puppy dying. You just felt like
crying. (Touches feelings and shows understanding.) ••• Child: (Terapist
had just explained that the recording was for her and the child to hear,
and no one else.) I know what you're gonna' do! You're gonna' give it to
my mother! Terapist: Te recording will not go to your mother. It's just
for me to hear, and I'll let you hear it if you want to. Afer that I
will erase it. (Te therapist is a bit defensive. Te child needs to know
he has been understood.) Suggested: I know you're really concerned. You
don't want your mother to hear the recording. It is just for you and me
to hear and no one else (Recognizes feeling and reassures
confdentiality.) ••• Child: (What he is working on keeps coming apart.)
No, it's not working right! (He sounds angry.) Terapist: Does that make
you feel mad? (Te therapist asks a question for which the answer is
already known, and thus sounds like she does not understand the child's
feeling.) Child: Yeah! What do you think it does! (Te child does not
feel understood and is justifably angry at the therapist.) Suggested:
Just makes you angry when you can't make that stay fxed. (Recognizes
feeling.) •••

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

My dog died, and we buried him right in our backyard. It was amazing! He
died right by his old doghouse. (No observable afect about dog's death.)
Terapist: He died right by his old doghouse, and you buried him in the
backyard? (Simple refection of words and voice tone at end turns the
statement into a question of what child has just said.) Suggested: Tat
was really surprising that he died right by his doghouse. (Shows
understanding of feeling.) Child:

Labeling Objects Ahead of the Child Child: Vrrooom. Vrrooom. (Pushing
block along on foor.) Terapist: You are having fun with the car. (Te
child has not identifed the block as a car. Te therapist projects an
assumption.) Child: Tat's not a car. Tat's a boat. Suggested: Tat's sure
making lots of noise. (Avoids labeling block and says, "I'm with you.")
••• Child: (Places alligator puppet on her hand.) Terapist: Now you have
the alligator. (Child has not identifed puppet. By naming the puppet,
the therapist limits the child's creativity and structures possible play
activity.) Suggested: Now you put that one on. (Allows the child to
continue to lead and identify the puppet.) ••• Child: (Had been
examining the spaceship, but did not identify it. Ten he picked up two
male fgures from the doll family on the table.) Terapist: Looks like you
picked out two things to go in your spaceship. (Te therapist takes the
lead and labels the spaceship. Te child had not indicated what he
intended to do with the two male fgures. Tis directs the child's play.)
Suggested: Looks like you have something in mind for those.
(Communicates involvement in what the child is doing

271

272

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

and allows the child freedom to continue to direct his own play.) •••
Child: (Uses crayons and draws a picture of a cat.) Tis is my kitty.
(Draws legs and puts several points on the end of each leg.) Terapist: I
see you are putting toenails on the kitten. (Te child had not identifed
them as such, so the therapist is leading.) Child: No. (Proceeds to
color over the cat. Te child had been drawing toes on the cat, not
toenails. Te child felt she had done something wrong.) Suggested: Now
you're putting some of those on your kitty right there. (Response
conveys that the therapist is noticing what the child is doing, conveys
interest, and allows the child to identify what she is drawing.)

Evaluation and Praise (Te child fnds a comb, and combs the hair of two
dolls.) Terapist: You're making them so pretty. (Since children want to
please, the child may continue the activity to get more praise.)
Suggested: You know just how to comb their hair. (Tis refects the
child's ability rather than making a judgment as to how the results turn
out.) ••• Child: Maybe I'll paint afer I fnish this. Terapist: Tat
sounds like a good idea. (Te child may now think painting is what the
therapist wants him to do. Te child is no longer free to change his
mind.) Suggested: You're thinking you might like to paint next. (Shows
understanding; the child is free to decide.) ••• Child: I made an
airplane. (She then fies the airplane around the room.) Child:

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Terapist: Oh, you made an airplane! Tat's a nice-looking airplane. (Te
therapist's excitement exceeds the child's level of feeling; this is a
value judgment.) Suggested: And you can make it fy around. (Avoids
simple word refection and gives the child credit.) ••• Child: (Pretends
to cook eggs, gives them to therapist on a plate.) How do they taste?
Terapist: Tese eggs sure do taste good! (Evaluates and encourages
external motivation.) Suggested: You worked hard cooking these eggs just
for me. (Recognizes efort, encourages internal motivation.)

Inappropriate Questions Me and Courtney played house and (goes into long
discourse about activities, keeps mentioning Courtney). Terapist: Is
Courtney one of your friends? (Question meets the therapist's need.
Whether or not Courtney is a friend is irrelevant.) Suggested: Sounds
like you and Courtney did lots of things together. (Tis shows
understanding of content, and keeps the focus on the child.) ••• Child:
(Routinely hits on Bobo but with some vigor; no afect observable.)
Terapist: How does it make you feel to hit Bobo? (Inappropriate because
no afect is observable. Tis implies to the child she should be feeling
something.) Suggested: (A response is not needed to everything a child
does in the playroom.) ••• Child: (Tells about his baseball team and
excitedly says) I know we're going to win this afernoon! Terapist: Do
you like to win? (Asks a question for which the answer is obvious.
Conveys a lack of understanding.) Child:

273

274

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Suggested: You really have fun winning. (Shows understanding.) •••
Child: (Finds a small container.) Where's the stuf that goes in here?
(Ten places Barbie's shoes into the container.) Terapist: Do you think
those go in there? (Questions the child's decision, causes her to doubt
herself; this does not communicate understanding.) Suggested: You
decided those go in there. (Gives the child credit for making a
decision.)

Statements Turned Into Questions Child: Te lightning's scary. Terapist:
Te lightning is a little scary? (Use of the word "little" underplays the
child's feeling, and the question at the end conveys that the therapist
does not understand the child's feeling and has to check.) Suggested: It
scares you when there's lightning. (Communicates understanding of
feeling.) ••• Child: I'm going to cook supper now. Terapist: You've
decided it's suppertime? (Questions imply a lack of understanding.)
Suggested: You've decided it's suppertime. (Avoiding voice infection at
the end communicates understanding and gives the child credit for making
a decision.) ••• Child: I like puppet shows. Do you like puppet shows?
Terapist: You like playing with all the puppets? (Voice tone at the end
of the statement turns the statement into a question and calls for a
yes-or-no answer.) Suggested: You have fun with puppet shows. ••• Child:
(Playing with several toys.) Terapist: Wesley, we have 5 more minutes in
the playroom, okay? (Te last word implies the child has a choice when no
choice is intended.) Suggested: (Same response, just take out the last
word.)

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Leading the Child (Uses a plastic knife to scrape paint of a jar lid.
Works hard to scrape the paint of.) Terapist: Even though things are
hard, you don't give up. (Te child will now have great difculty in
stopping, even if some of the paint is hard to get of, because she may
fear the therapist will think she is giving up and will be disappointed
in her.) Suggested: You're working hard to get that of. (Acknowledges
the child's efort.) ••• Child: Tis house is for you. What color do you
want it to be? Terapist: I like houses made out of red brick. (Te
child's focus will now be on trying to please the therapist. Te child
may think he is supposed to draw a whole house covered with individual
bricks and so spend an excessive amount of time drawing hundreds of
individual bricks. What will happen if the child has difculty drawing
bricks?) Suggested: A special house for me. You can choose what color
you want it to be. (Tis allows the child to make the decision and to
lead and keeps the focus on the child. Total design of the house can be
the responsibility of the child.) ••• Child: (Plays in the kitchen area
with the baby and the pots and pans. She picks up the cofee pot.)
Terapist: Are you going to have some cofee? (Te therapist inserts his
own reality and interferes with the child's creativity and direction.
What if the child was planning something else? Could she be about to
pour orange juice or a glass of milk for the baby?) Suggested: Now
you're going to use that. (Shows attentiveness of the therapist, avoids
labeling, and allows the child to continue to lead.) ••• Child: What can
I make for us to eat? Child:

275

276

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Terapist: Oh, there are lots of diferent things you could make. (Implies
the therapist knows what the child could make and will result in the
child waiting for the therapist to tell.) Suggested: You can decide.
(Grants the child freedom and allows him to assume responsibility for
deciding.) Tis new language of empathic responding requires efort and
commitment on the part of the therapist and a sincere desire to
understand and to be fully with a child in nonobtrusive ways that
sufciently allow the child the freedom to be completely the person he is
at that moment.

Cindy---A Manipulative Child Mrs. M described her 5-year-old daughter
Cindy thus: She is careful to take care of her toys and things, always
puts things back, and cleans up her room when I ask her to. She's a good
child, but I don't know ... (long pause). I'm always angry at her, and I
don't know why. I know it's not good for me to be so angry at her, but I
am. (Pause.) Tat's hard for me to admit, but it's true. I don't know
what could be wrong. I'm just angry at her a lot. She's not a problem or
anything at home, but she is bossy and has difculty getting along with
other children. We do have a confict when I have to discipline her. She
tells me I'm stupid. She seems to say that a lot. She wants her way all
the time.

An exploratory play therapy session with Cindy seemed warranted to
formulate a picture of Cindy on her own terms and to decide whether or
not play therapy was needed, so an appointment was scheduled for the
next week in a play therapy room in the Center for Play Terapy. During
the session, Cindy attempted to manipulate and control me (Landreth),
insisting that I get items for her even though they were within her
reach, as seen in the following brief interaction. Cindy:

(Seated at the table painting.) Get those paints and bring them over
here. I want to use them. (Cindy is actually much closer to the paints.)

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L: Cindy: Dr. L.:

You want me to get the paints for you. In here you can get the paints if
you want them. But I'm busy. Can't you see that? You're just so busy
that you want me to get them for you. Yes! Now would you just get the
paints! You're angry at me because I won't get the paints for you, but
that's something you can do if you want the paints. (Cindy gets up,
retrieves the paints, and proceeds to paint.)

In this frst play therapy session, Cindy was not able to tolerate even
the slightest mistake in her paintings, and kept saying, "I can do one
better" as she wadded the paintings up and threw them into the trash
can. When I announced the 5-minute caution, Cindy said, "I don't care.
I'm not leaving." At the end of the session, I indicated the time was up
as I stood up, and Cindy said, "I told you I'm not leaving. I'm going to
do some, uh, art." She quickly moved over to the art materials and began
painting. I responded, "You would like to be the one who decides just
how long you stay, but our time is up. It's time to go to the waiting
room where your mother is." I took a couple of steps toward the door.
Cindy continued to paint and to verbalize her resistance. I continued to
refect her wants and to set the limit on ending the session. My patience
paid of when Cindy voluntarily walked out under her own steam afer 5
minutes. Cindy exhibited so much manipulative behavior that it was
strongly suspected this was typical of her behavior at home. An
interview with Mom confrmed that Cindy was doing a lot of subtle
manipulative things of which Mom was unaware, and that this was the
basic reason for her anger toward Cindy. Additional sessions were
scheduled with Cindy. Her second play therapy session was very revealing
of manipulative behavior and her eforts to build a relationship with me.

Second Play Therapy Session Cindy:

(Cindy enters the playroom, goes directly to the sandbox, and begins
playing. Sitting on the side of the

277

278

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.:

sandbox, sifing sand, Cindy talks about the new house her family has
moved into.) I know how long ... a, uh, long time ... more weeks ... uh,
I just don't know how many days that has been. You can remember how long
you've been there. You just don't know how many weeks that makes.
(Continues playing with the sand.) I kind of like you better today. You
like me better than last time. Yes. (Moves from the sandbox to the table
where the paints are.) Come on let's paint ... . You may help me if you
want, or you may watch if you like. What do you want to do, watch? I'll
watch. (Goes into the bathroom, begins washing brushes and the paint jar
in the sink.) A black sink. You made the sink black? Yes, with black
water. Oh. (Continues mixing water with paints.) You hear that water? Uh
hum. I can hear it all the way in here. Well, here it goes again. Better
watch out. (Turns the water on full force. Stays in the bathroom running
the water for several minutes. Comes from the bathroom and gets a large
piece of paper.) Watch what I'm going to put on this. You're really
going to work on that. First thing I was going to do was paint. I did,
right? You decided that before you came. Yes, I did. It was yesterday.
My birthday was day before yesterday. (Selects playdough can.) Is it
alright to put ... I'm going to put water in this so I can rinse this
out. (Goes into the bathroom. Her sandals slip on sand on the foor and
make a scraping noise.) Tese are slippery sandals. Tey look slippery.

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.:

Tey are slippery. (Comes back and starts painting. I am sitting directly
across the table from Cindy.) Are you interested in art? I like art, and
it looks like you like art. I like to make it. Yesterday, I think I made
... uh, yeah, I made a tree with some fowers with a kitten in it and,
uh, a fountain in it by the kitten. So you put lots of things in that
picture. And some birds and a sky ... some white birds and a blue sky
and some leaves ... and ... grass and then I hung it on the bulletin
board I got for my birthday. It was on the fourth of July. So that made
it a real special birthday. When the people celebrated. I was a
frecracker. Lots of things happened on your birthday. Uh hum ... and the
reason was the police were out and they were looking for people who were
doing frecrackers. Hmmm. (Cindy continued before I could respond.) Maybe
they were afer people, because you aren't supposed to do that. You get
hurt. So they were trying to keep people from getting hurt. Uh huh.
(Continues to paint. As she moves the brush from the painting to dip
into a paint jar, I turned my head to follow the brush.) Without moving
your head, you can watch me paint at the same time. Sometimes some of
the things I do bother you. Yes. (Moves the paintbrush back and forth
rapidly in front of the Dr. L.'s face, with a taunting look on her face.
Giggles.) I guess you were wondering then if I would play a game with
you. Uh huh. And I just decided I would watch you. (Sticks the
paintbrush toward my face and giggles.) I fooled you, didn't I? You
thought I was going to paint on you. You like to fool me sometimes.

279

280

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:
Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.:
Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Yes, I just like to fool you. Oh, you just like to fool me. Right. I
can't fool Debbie. She's my cousin, because she don't like it. She
doesn't like for you to play games with her. No. Uh, see, she don't like
me playing tricks on her. Uh hum. But Robin don't mind. So with some
people it's okay, and with some other people it's not. Uh huh. Robin's
my favorite because Janie won't let me do that. You really like the
people who will let you play tricks on them. Uh huh. Robin's my best one
because anyway she was ... (Continues to paint.) Blue and red (as she
draws house with blue and red windows). A blue window and a red window.
And a purple house with a black door. You used lots of colors. Is time
almost up? We have 30 more minutes today. (She is painting a black door
on the house and the black runs into the other colors.) Good. I can mess
my picture up. Next time I won't splash it. I can make something better.
I can make ... a little something ... better. (Said thoughtfully.) You
think you can make one better than that. I can! I just ... I can. (Wads
the wet picture up into a ball and throws it into the trash can.) You
just know you can. (She discovers fnger paints and decides to fnger
paint.) Tese smell like fnger paints don't they? You've played with
fnger paints before. Yes, in Sunday school. Do you water fnger paints?
In here you can choose what you want to do. (Goes into the bathroom,
puts water into the fnger paints, returns, and begins to paint carefully
with a

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

brush. It is obvious she doesn't want to get paint on her hands. She
uses the brush to paint with the fnger paints for a while, then dips the
brush into the fnger paints and starts to transfer the brush to her
other hand, but notices paint on the brush handle just as her fngers are
about to close around the brush and quickly moves her hand away.) Just
not sure whether or not to put your fngers into that. Yes I can. It's
fnger paints. (She goes into the bathroom and washes the brush, comes
out, and continues to use a brush to paint fnger paints, using all the
colors to paint circles. She goes back to the bathroom, washes the
brush, and comes out, leaving the water running. Ten she mixes several
colors of fngerpaint on her painting.) Now it has lots of colors all
mixed up. Would you be quiet so I can do this? When I talk that bothers
you. Yeah. You just don't like for people to bother you when you are
doing things. It's all right except for the talking, because I don't
want, like to be bothered when I'm doing art. Rhonda's all right because
she's just a baby, and she don't know better, but you do! And you better
be quiet! I should know better. Yes. And I should do what you tell me to
do. Right. (She continues painting and then goes into the bathroom,
washes her hands, comes out, and begins to paint with just the tip of
one fnger; draws a tree.) Tere. A tree. I can do a better tree than
that. A lot of times it just seems to you like you could do it better.
Well, I can. You keep telling yourself, "I can do one better." Well, I
can.

281

282

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Cindy:
Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.:

Uh hmm, and you just know you can. Tat's right. I know. Now would you
please be quiet? Remember what I said? And you'd like for me to do what
you tell me to. Well. I sure do. (Continues painting, hums a tune while
painting vigorously using both hands---really leans into the activity of
swirling her hands around on the paper.) I'm going to put a little glue
in there. Okay? ... Okay? You're wondering, "Can I use that glue?" Uh
huh. May I? You're just not sure whether you should or not. Can I?
(Talks about Bobo the punching toy and goes into the bathroom, washes
her hands. Returns and begins mixing paste with her fnger painting. Gets
double handfuls of paste from the quart jar.) You got just as much as
you wanted. (Gets a huge handful of paste.) It looks like ice cream.
Just reminds you of ice cream. Yes. It's going to be purple ice cream.
So you know just how you want it to look. Purple is a pretty color.
Tat's a color you really like. Uh huh, it's my favorite. (Gets more
large scoops of paste and mixes with fnger paint on the paper.) Are you
Mister Rogers? (Giggles.) I guess I remind you of somebody else. Yes,
you do ... He likes art. I like him, too. So you like both of us. Yes, I
do. Now I've got purple hands. Uh hum. (Goes to the bathroom, washes her
hands for a long time, comes out, and says) One more time of it and then
I will be through. But frst I'm going to use a little teensy bit of sand
in it. So you know just how you want it to look, and you know just what
you want in it.

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.:
Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.:

(Gets a little bit of sand, adds it to her painting, and announces)
Tat's not enough. (Goes back to the sandbox and gets two huge handfuls
of sand and dumps it onto the picture, glances up at me to check my
reaction.) You got just as much as you wanted. (Smooths the sand out,
adds more paste to the sand, mixes it up, and says) Tis will stick on.
You kind of know how that will turn out. Yeah. (Mixes more paste; has
paste and sand all over her hands and arms.) It's some kind of an art
... that I made up ... just for you. (Adds more sand.) So you made it up
just for me. And you may have it if you want it. Do you want it? If you
want to leave it for me, that will be fne. You made it just for me.
(Shows prizing in tone of voice.) You can take it home with you. You
would just like for me to have it. Uh hum. (Goes to the bathroom and
washes her hands.) Cindy, we have 5 more minutes in the playroom today
and then it will be time to go to the waiting room where your mother is.
(Gets a pan full of sand from the sandbox and adds it to her art
project, pats it down, begins to add fnger paint to the sand-and-paste
art project, and says) I'll have to use all of the blue. Okay? You just
decided you are going to use every bit of it. I'll need to. (Empties all
the blue fnger paint and mixes with sand. Trows the empty paint
container in the trash, goes to the bathroom and washes her hands,
leaves the water running, comes out, and says) I've been painting all
day haven't I? Seems to you you've been painting a long time. (Continues
to stir and mix all the colors of fnger paints into the sand project,
then announces) I'm fnally through. Finished.

283

284

Characteristics of Facilitative Responses

Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy:

Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.: Cindy: Dr. L.:

For the day. (She goes to the bathroom, washes her hands, and turns the
water of.) Now it's going to be a taco. (Folds the sheet of newsprint
over smears paste on the edge of the paper to stick the edges together.)
Just like a big taco. (Tries to lif the "taco" up by holding the edges
of the paper. Te sand-paste-paint mixture is too heavy, and the paper
tears.) Oops! I thought I needed a lot. Looks like we're gonna have to
do it like this. (Folds the ends of the paper over.) Have to do it a
diferent way. Yes. It's like a sandwich. (Looked like one.) Uh hum. A
big sandwich. Uh huh. Finished for the day. Tere we go. Tere's your ...
art. (Hands "art" to me.) You may have it. You made it just for me.
(Shows prizing and appreciation in the tone of voice. Gently takes the
"art" and carefully places it on the table.) Cindy, our time is up for
today.

In this second session, Cindy made an immediate move to make amends for
the difcult time she had given me in the frst session by saying, "I like
you better today." Her motivation seems obvious in view of the fact that
this statement was made in the frst couple of minutes of the session,
hardly enough time for me to demonstrate I was diferent in any way.
Cindy continued, however, to test my patience and acceptance of her by
insisting that I not move my head and that I stop talking. Her anxiety
and need to do things just right were expressed in her destruction of
her frst painting. Cindy's increasing inner freedom was evident as she
became more involved, free, and expressive with the fnger paints and
then was able to cope and adjust when her taco art project ripped apart.
Te making of an art project for me was Cindy's way of building the
relationship. By the end of this second session, Cindy was more
self-assured, able to tolerate a mess, expressed herself more
creatively, and no longer needed to try to manipulate me.

Chapter

13

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning Each play therapy
session is alive with potential meaning that is waiting to be discovered
and known but ofen is not discovered because the play therapist doesn't
understand the unspoken messages, the meaning that is waiting to be
seen, heard, sensed, or felt. Te child is waiting to be known, and day
afer day the child taps out her message. Hey, up there! Do you see me?
Do you hear me? Do you know I'm here? Do you know I'm hurting? Do you
know I'm confused? Do you know I feel lost? Do you care about me? Play
therapy is a process of seeing what can't be seen in a child and hearing
what has not been heard in the child by anyone else. In this discovery
process, the play therapist responds to the meaning that is seen, heard,
sensed, and felt. Tis process creates a play therapy relationship that
doesn't require answers, a process of learning to perceive what facts
don't tell you about a child, a process of discovering meaning.

Silence in Play Therapy Has Meaning Te primary way children communicate
is through their play. If a child is playing, would the child be
described as not communicating? I hope not. Te rationale for using play
therapy is because

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-13

285

286

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

play is a child's natural means of communication just as talking is an
adolescent's or adult's natural means of communication. As I pointed out
earlier in Chapter 2, children's play is meaningful and signifcant to
them, for through their play they extend themselves into areas they have
difculty entering verbally. Children are able to use toys to say what
they cannot say, do things they would feel uncomfortable doing, and
express feelings they might be reprimanded for verbalizing. When a child
is playing, the child is not being silent. Play is the child's symbolic
language of self-expression. When a play therapist describes a child as
"being silent," what is ofen "seen" is a child who has stopped talking
and is quiet. Tis behavior may then be interpreted by the therapist as
the child refusing to talk or refusing to reply. Being silent doesn't
mean a child is silent. It only means the child isn't talking. Use of
the term "being silent" focuses on what the child isn't doing and
directs attention away from what the child may be experiencing. Silence
is viewed by the child centered play therapist as the child's way of
expressing or declaring himself. Tere are always possibilities in
silence. RULE OF THUMB: Silence is not silent. Listen to the meaning in
the silence. A child is always communicating something about herself.
Silences that occur in play therapy can "speak loudly" about what a
child is experiencing. A tear is not silent. A tear speaks loudly of
emotion. Silence is alive with unspoken words, gestures, facial
expressions, darting glances, blank stares, shifing posture, nervous
grins, avoidance of eye contact, fngers twisting hair or a shirt, hands
that squeeze each other, feelings that scream to be noticed. Te silence
of a child that occurs afer an outburst of anger is certainly not
silent. Te atmosphere in the playroom is charged with emotion. How can
we say the child is silent when the atmosphere in the playroom crackles
with feeling and emotion that can be felt? Tese silent messages can only
be heard with your eyes. In play therapy, silence is a part of the
relationship.

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Sometimes, silence may convey satisfaction with a painting or completed
project. Silence may mean the child is being thoughtful. Silence may be
the child's way of declaring himself. If you listen, silence speaks
loudly. It just may be that not talking only means the child isn't
communicating the way the play therapist expects or would like the child
to communicate. Children can communicate volumes without speaking. Te
child-centered play therapist doesn't "try to get a child to open up."
Te therapist believes the child is capable and trusts the child will
take the relationship to where the child needs to be.

Responding to Silence in Play Therapy Tere is no single way for the play
therapist to respond to silence. Each child communicates diferently
through silence. Terefore, the play therapist must be sensitive to the
nonverbal communication of each child. Perhaps the most helpful thing
the play therapist can do is examine her own feelings about the child's
silence and try to resolve any anxieties that would interfere with
sensitivity to the meaning of the child's silence. Tis could enable the
play therapist to be more facilitative by responding to the meaning
rather than to the silence. If the play therapist feels uncomfortable or
inadequate when a child is silent, the child will sense the play
therapist's reaction and may internalize the play therapist's reaction
as rejection or meaning the child has done something wrong. Te play
therapist's acceptance of a child should not be dependent on a child's
play activity, amount of verbalization, absence of verbalized feeling at
the moment, or expression of the feeling. Acceptance is not conditional.
Tere are no "ifs" in acceptance. Te child centered play therapist's
acceptance is unconditional. When I am supervising a play therapy
session and a child suddenly stops talking or playing, I always stop the
video to focus the play therapist's attention on exploring Why did the
child stop at that moment? What is the child feeling? What happened just
before the child stopped talking?

287

288

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Ofen the child is reacting to something the play therapist just did.
Perhaps the play therapist's response was way of base by responding to
the therapist's need to know causes or facts rather than responding to
the child's feeling at the moment. Or perhaps something just happened in
the child's play sequence and the child has experienced an emotional
block and can't go on with her play sequence. Foremost in the child
centered play therapist's approach to a child who isn't talking is
always a focus on what the child is experiencing internally, what the
child is feeling at this moment. Tere are a multitude of possible
feelings the child may be experiencing. Te child may be afraid, angry,
anxious, confused, embarrassed, frightened/scared, overwhelmed, sad,
threatened (especially if the play therapist has just asked a complex
question), or unsafe. Play therapists may fnd the acronym FOCUS helpful
in remembering some key feelings that may be experienced by a child who
is silent: Frightened Overwhelmed Confused Unsafe/threatened Sad/angry
Te child centered play therapist doesn't view the child as "silent," but
rather as always communicating something about what she is experiencing,
the person she is, or her needs. Terefore, there is always something
within a child to respond to with understanding and acceptance. Silence
is accepted as a natural part of the play therapy process. Silence may
be a result of the child experiencing an emotional block. Te child may
not feel safe or emotionally capable of continuing in the initial
direction that they started with their story. Silence may be the child's
response to a question the therapist has asked. Children do not have
well developed defense mechanisms as do adolescents and adults.
Terefore, their emotional blocks must be respected. Developmentally,
young children are not able to tell the therapist, "I'm not ready to go
into that or talk about that," as an adult or adolescent might.
Questions put the therapist in the lead and are not facilitative of
interaction or exploration by

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

a child. I am so immersed in the moment with a child that it does not
occur to me to ask the child a question. Asking a silent child a
question is a mistake. I do feel comfortable asking questions when a
child has involved me in a role-playing situation and I need to know
what the child wants me to do next. In this case, I would ask, "What
should I do next?" I should make it clear that in role-playing, I will
never pretend to do anything that violates my value system or pretends
to do harm to a child. (For a more complete discussion of avoiding the
use of questions see Chapter 12 section on Avoiding Questions. Te issue
of limitations on role playing is discussed fully in Chapter 11 in the
section Limitations on Role Playing with Children.) Suggested responses
to silence in play therapy: • A child's silence is as much a part of the
child as any other part and should be appreciated and accepted as such.
• Empathically refect what the child is experiencing/feeling while the
child is silent. • Keep your focus on the person of the child rather
than on the problem of not talking or being silent. • Children do not
have well-developed emotional defense mechanisms. Teir silence should be
respected and accepted.

Child's Silence: Possible Meanings • Child is frightened or anxious
because the play therapy experience is so diferent and the therapist
seems strange, "talks weird" • Child is inwardly moving to a deeper,
more meaningful emotional level • Child is showing awkwardness and
apprehension • Absence of structure may result in child feeling confused
and anxious. Child is waiting to be told what to do as the child's
teacher does in school • Child may be thoughtfully planning what to do
next • Child is showing resistance • Child is overwhelmed by having to
make choices • Child might be afraid she will do something wrong

289

290

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

• Child is feeling insecure, unsafe, or dependent • Child is feeling a
deep sense of satisfaction and accomplishment • Child senses something
meaningful has happened and sits in silence • Child is testing
boundaries/limits • Child is experiencing a time of transition before
moving to another expression • Child is rejecting the therapist and/or
the experience • Child is living out fantasy in his mind • Child is
experiencing a "what now?" feeling following an angry outburst by the
child

Therapist Silence: Possible Meanings • Silence can be a mark of growth.
Times of silence become more acceptable and comfortable when the
therapist experiences a growing sense of adequacy. (Also true for a
child.) • Silence by the therapist can convey acceptance or support for
a child who is having difculty expressing feelings or thoughts • Silence
shows the therapist doesn't trust herself/himself • Silence represents
support by the therapist when words seem inadequate • Terapist is at a
loss for words, but knows the feeling • Terapist feels confused/unsure •
Terapist is preoccupied with personal experiences • Silence can convey
"being with" • When a child is silent, therapist silence can communicate
understanding and acceptance • Terapist silence can communicate respect
for a child's privacy

Transcript of a Play Therapy Session: A Silent Beginning Tis is
4½-year-old Bria's frst play therapy session. Te transcript provides an
opportunity to experience what can occur in

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

the relationship afer a period of silence is worked through and a child
feels more comfortable with the play therapist. Dr. L.: Bria:

Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria:

Dr. L.:

Bria and Dr. L. walk into the playroom. Bria, this is our special
playroom and this is a place where you can play with the toys in a lot
of the ways you would like to. (I sit down.) Silence (stands facing me,
almost close enough to touch, her body is rigid, hands clutched in front
of her, her whole body is tense. She glances at part of the room.) I see
you looking over there. (Gestures with hand.) Silence (looks at two-way
mirror and smiles, clutches her hands again.) I saw you see yourself in
the mirror there. You can see yourself in that big ol' mirror. (Glances
at the mirror.) Silence (smiles, her whole body is rigid; drops her
hands but immediately clutches them again in front of her). (When Bria
drops her hands, I lean forward in response, resting my elbows on knees,
also smiling.) Silence (continues to stand rigidly with her feet frmly
in place, facing me and hands clutched in front of her.) I guess
sometimes it's hard to decide what to do frst -- but this is a place (I
point into the room and Bria turns her head to look into that part of
the room) where you can play with any of the toys you want to play with.
(Time seems to move slowly.) Silence (lengthy pause; she looks out into
room, turns her head back to face me. She looks tense, opens her mouth
wide and closes it as though trying to swallow to relieve the tension.
Raises her hands up to her face and puts her fngers together picking at
a fnger nail. She looks intently at fngernail.) Hmmm, you've got
something right there on your fngernail. (I continue to lean forward and
point to her fnger.) Hmmm. Looks like you're trying to pick something of
your fngernail.

291

292

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria:

Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:

(Raises her hands slightly up then a little higher, fngers still
together, studying her fngers.) No, it's thread! I picked the other one
of. Oh, you've already picked one of. At school! At school you did it.
So now you're going to do this one. (Points to her fnger.) (Continues to
stand in the same spot near me. Her body is now obviously more relaxed.
She begins to chew on her fngernail.) I see something right there that I
guess came from school too. (I saw a tiny bit of yellow substance caught
in the edge of her fngernail and reached out to point at her fnger but
did not touch her.) No! Playdough that came from Jessica's house that I
played with. (Stayed in the same spot near me but turns sideways. Her
face is pleasant and her hands are not clasped as tightly together.) Oh,
so that's where the yellow playdough was, at Jessica's house. Hmm,
sounds like you had a lot of fun with playdough. (Bria smiles and nods
her head up and down. She looks out into the room. What follows develops
very, very slowly.) At school too. (Steps in closer to me.) Oh, so you
have fun at school, too. We don't walk home. Daddy picks us up. (Said
with glee. She gives a tiny jump and steps even closer to me.) Ohhh, so
your daddy picks you up and takes you home. ( Bria takes another step
closer, reaches up and touches my forehead with her fnger.) Uh humm, and
you don't have to walk. (Bria shakes her head up and down in agreement.)
Just big kids. (She brings her clutched hands up to her mouth and begins
to nibble at a fnger or fngernail.) Te little kids get to ride? (I
continue to lean forward with elbows on knees.) Te little kids.

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Dr. L.: Bria:

Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:
Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:

Te little kids get to ride. And the big kids get to go home by
themselves. (Bria nibbles at the end of her fnger and pulls something
loose, perhaps a little bit of fngernail or skin. Takes fnger out of her
mouth, laughs, looks surprised and makes several gulping sounds with her
tongue while she examines the bit of what she has pulled loose.) You
pulled it up, you sure did. Tere it is right there. (Dusts her hands
together expressively and looks out into the room.) Tat surprised you
that it was sticking up right there. Yep. (Continues to stand about a
foot away from my face.) Yeah (said with feeling.) Indistinguishable
word (Leans head forward and whispers) I didn't hear what you said.
(Leans forward, places her hands over her mouth, giggles, and speaks
through her hands.) Surprise! (I nod my head several times). Oooh,
surprise, yeah it was a surprise! But I had a sore on my leg. (Continues
to talk through her fngers.) Mmmm, a sore on your leg. (Nods her head.)
Where I fell. So you fell on something and made a sore right on your
leg. (I nod again.) I guess that must have hurt. (shakes her head) No!
(Shakes head) Didn't hurt. Just a little. (Puts her hands almost
together to indicate a little and looks out into room.) Just hurt a
little and made a sore. (Looks out into the room for several seconds.) I
can see you see all the toys (gestures out into the room with hand) all
the way over there. What? I can see that you're looking at all the toys
over there. What? I didn't hear you. (Grins)

293

294

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:
Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:
Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

(Smiles) Oooh. Now you're saying what I said. What? Tat you were
looking. (I point into the room) I saw you looking at all the toys. (She
turns sideways to me and looks more into the room.) Over there?
(pointing.) Yes. At all the toys. And there (pointing.) Uh humm. And
there (voice becomes screechy and excited as she points.) Uh humm. And
there (pointing to diferent parts of the room.) Yep. Over there (touches
me on the nose.) (I smile) Yep. Just all around. Sounds like you like to
do funny things sometimes. (Shakes her head.) Nope. (Continues to have
both hands at her mouth nibbling on her fngers.) No. Not at school. Oh!
Not at school. Te teacher will get me. Oh, so at school you're not
supposed to do funny things. (Bria shakes her head.) Te teacher won't
like that. Uh huh. Hmm. No, she won't like it. She won't like it so you
have to do funny things other places. (Still has her hands at her mouth
and continues to stand right in front of me separated by only 10 or 12
inches.) At your home -- or your Daddy tells you to do something. Oooh!
You do it! So, if your dad says do it, then you have to do it.

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:
Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:

Dr. L.:

Bria:

Or your mom. Or your mom might say do it, too, sometimes. (Bria takes
two or three steps backing away from me. Her hands are still at her
mouth. She is still obviously anxious. She still has not touched a toy.
Play does not occur in the midst of anxiety.) I know. (She steps back
closer to me.) I eat catfsh. And if you bring some toys to school, the
teacher puts it in the ofce and don't let you take it home. Oooh, so
then you don't get to keep it at school. It goes in the ofce. Umm. And
it's going to belong to somebody else. So, it wouldn't even be yours any
more. Somebody else will get to keep it. Cause, they'll take care of the
toys and never bring anything to school. Humm. So I, I get to bring, the
kids get to bring -- our kids -- my class gets to bring toys! Uh humm.
So, your whole class gets to bring toys to school. Yes, not the little
toys -- not the little class. Oh! Not the little class. No. Just your
class. Uhm, yeah. (Turns away from facing me, takes two steps and
touches the toy cash register that is on a small table near me.) See (as
she pushes a key down on the toy cash register) if the number fve comes
up there will be number two next. (I make a slight turn in the direction
of the cash register and lean over toward Bria with my arms resting on
my knees.) I see you made a fve come up and you made a two come up.
Five! (Steps back, puts her hand to her mouth and gives an excited
squeal. Bria looks and sounds more relaxed. Playing with the cash
register helps her feel more in control because she is in control of the
cash register.)

295

296

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:
Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.:

And a fve! You're excited about that. Sounds like you know the numbers,
Bria. Down! (She takes both hands and pulls the cash register closer to
her. At this point, as she bends over the cash register, her head is
within inches of my face. Now, you made that one go down and you made it
come up. Oh! And you made that come open. (Bria giggles.) Looks like you
know how to make that thing work. And fve? A fve, you made a fve again.
Two. And a two. Tis? And that number? Tat number can be whatever you
want it to be. Plus. And a plus. Hmmm. You just made lots of things come
up there. Watch (pushes several keys down), did I push this one? Humm,
wonder if you did push that one. (Pushes key again and nothing happens.)
Looks like you did. (Steps back, covers her mouth with both hands and
squeals, then continues pushing keys.) You really like doing that! Tere,
you found the one that was down. You made them all come up. (Pushes
another key and makes all the keys go down, looks surprised.) You made
them all go down. Tat kind of surprised you to have them all go down!
(Pushes three keys.) Humm. Tree at a time.

At the beginning of our relationship I could see, hear, sense, and feel
Bria's anxiety. She was tense, anxious, unsure of what to do,
bewildered, and perhaps felt unsafe. I resonated deeply with her feeling
and felt comfortable. I did not expect her to do

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

anything. I understood and accepted what she was feeling. I had no
thoughts about what might happen next. I was just living out the moment
with her, fully immersed in what we were experiencing together. My
empathic responses noting the specifcs of what she was doing such as "I
see you see yourself in that big mirror" gave meaning and importance to
what she was doing, verifed her existence, and helped her relax
emotionally. I did not refect the emotions she was experiencing because
that would have called attention to her anxiety and magnifed her
anxiety. Later in our relationship, I would readily refect such emotions
because they would not threaten her. With older children, I would not
hesitate to refect emotions because older children can understand
emotional words. If she had continued to feel anxious and had stayed
rooted to the spot right in front of me for the entire session, I would
have been just as comfortable with that and would have continued to live
out the moment with her, with no expectations. I waited patiently as
Bria moved closer and closer to me and she felt safe enough to reach up
and touch my forehead. I think this was a signifcant turning point in
our relationship. I was accepting and patient with what Bria was
experiencing. I did not think about why she was anxious. Toughts about
what she was experiencing would interfere with my Being With her. Tis is
not a time for thinking. Tis is a time for feeling and experiencing and
responding. Tis is not a time to be nonverbal. Tat would have increased
Bria's anxiety and "feeling on the spot" and not knowing what to do. Tis
point was experienced by a beginning play therapist: "I learned that I
can inhibit a child by my silence, my facial expression, and my size and
that I can free a child in purposive ways having to do with acceptance,
permissiveness, and feelings. I must be careful how I use myself.
Children can be more easily injured by me than I by them." I had
confdence in Bria's ability to cope with whatever emerged in our
relationship together. My empathic responses helped her to feel safe
enough to touch something that was frightening to her, but I don't know
what that was. I was accepting of

297

298

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

that and did not push for more. I believe children will go to where they
need to be when they are ready.

Seemingly Insignificant Happenings Are Not Insignificant Axline's book
Dibs is not a fctional story. Dibs is about a child's real struggle with
life. Dibs' mother described him as "either mentally retarded or
brain-damaged." Dibs was 5, and almost 2 years earlier had entered a
very exclusive private school for advanced children. His mother had
bribed the staf to accept Dibs. Every morning Dibs resisted going into
the school and had to be led into the room by his mother or carried by
the unyielding chaufeur and deposited just inside the door. Dibs
demonstrates there is always potential in seemingly insignifcant
happenings in play therapy. Evidence of this conclusion is seen in the
last few pages of chapter 2, at the end of Axline's frst play therapy
session with Dibs in the school he was attending. "When we were half-way
down the hall and the door of his classroom was in view, I asked him if
he thought he could go the rest of the way to his room alone." (Stop
reading for a minute and ponder the following questions. Why did Axline
stop in the middle of the hall? ... Allow your feelings to sense, "feel"
what is there. Does this draw you emotionally closer to Dibs? Axline
believed that Dibs was capable of going on by himself and she responded
immediately to what she sensed.) "'Tat's right,' he said. He dropped my
hand and walked down the hall to the door of his room by himself ... He
opened the door of his room, then looked back. I waved. Te expression on
his face was interesting. He looked surprised---almost pleased. He
walked into his room and closed the door frmly behind him. It was the
frst time Dibs had ever gone any place alone" (Axline, 1964, pp. 16--17)
including his classroom. When Dibs walked into his classroom by himself,
that seemed to be a very ordinary happening. Opening a door doesn't seem
very signifcant, but for Dibs it was a magnifcent display of how far he
had come in his frst play therapy session. And this was only the
beginning for Dibs!

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

RULE OF THUMB: Tere are no insignifcant happenings in play therapy. Te
relationship that Axline built with Dibs in play therapy sessions is
graphically portrayed in this little book and confrms the signifcance of
play as the universal language of expression for children. It is only
through this natural play language that play therapists can make
meaningful contact with the world of children in ways that facilitate
children playing out experiences, reactions to those experiences, and
resolutions to complex and potentially devastating problems. Axline
believed Dibs was capable of more than he seemed to be and responded to
him in ways that lived out her belief. In the playroom, Dibs experienced
acceptance and understanding of the person he was. He felt safe enough
to explore his boundaries, safe enough to admit Axline into his world,
safe enough to perceive himself the way Axline perceived him to be. As
his perception of himself changed, his perception of his world began to
change. His classroom was no longer a place to fear because he felt
capable. Seemingly insignifcant happenings in play therapy may not be
ordinary. All happenings and behaviors in play therapy potentially have
signifcance, but may get overlooked because they seem to be
insignifcant. Noticing seemingly insignifcant happenings is the result
of an attitude, sort of like the attitude of a miner looking for gold.
He "knows" there is gold here somewhere in this stream; so, he is
constantly looking for it. He notices every tiny speck of fashing light
in the stream because he is looking for the possible presence of gold.
Te child centered play therapist approaches each play therapy session
with the attitude that there is always potential.

Discovering Emotional Blocks in Play Therapy Emotional blocks are
seldom, if ever, mentioned in play therapy literature or training
workshops. Yet they are experienced by

299

300

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

children in play therapy, as exhibited by 4-year-old Bria in her frst
play therapy session. Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:
Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:
Dr. L.: Bria: Dr. L Bria: Dr. L. Bria:

Dr. L.

Do we have any chalk? Tere's chalk over here. (I point to chalkboard.)
(Walks over to chalkboard.) I'm going to draw a house, a red house. (She
begins to draw on the chalkboard.) Gonna draw a red house -- right
there. Tat's just the instrument of the house. Uh humm. Te house is
supposed to be a triangle. Uh humm, so you know what it's supposed to
look like. Tis, uh, I want some -- I want some dark. Ohh, you want a
diferent color. I want dark chalk -- chalk, oh -- this has to be that
color. (Draws vigorously with the chalk.) Uh humm. Tat's all -- where
the light is. Tat's where the light is. But a new color for the light.
Tis is just the terminal of the light. See -- . Ahh hum. And we need a
good door. And that's the door you're making right there. Tat's the
knock knock and this is where you open the door. So it has a knock knock
right there. And that's the scribble that somebody scratched on. (Makes
scribble mark back and forth on the door with the chalk.) Oh, so
somebody scratched on the door. Yeah! (Begins to move quickly. Tosses
chalk with a thud into tray at the bottom of the board. Turns quickly,
takes three quick steps to the Bobo and hugs Bobo.) Yeah! Tat's just
where they scratched on the door. Hmmm.

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Bria:

(Leaves Bobo and kneels down beside the dollhouse.) OK! You ready? (Said
in deep gruf voice. Moves pieces of furniture from one room to another
room in the dollhouse.) (Session continues)

In your mind, see Bria at the chalk board -- turned quickly away, tossed
chalk into tray ... what just happened? ... go back to beginning, reread
this episode and try to go beyond the words you read, try to visualize
what is happening as you read ... You will hear the meaning with your
eyes. Bria could not go on with her play, her drawing, her story. Listen
to the little happenings as you reread. Allow yourself to take in more
fully what is there. What did you see and hear this time? When Bria
stopped drawing, was it because she had fnished drawing the house? Ask
yourself, "Why didn't I see more completely the frst time?" Could it be
that you were not looking/listening with intent to take it all in? Tis
second emotional block occurred about 15 minutes afer the frst emotional
block described above. Bria:

Dr. L: Bria: Dr. L. Bria: Dr. L:

(Sitting on the toy ATV, pushing herself across the room. She stops in
front of the toy shelves, reaches out and touches a large airplane and
says:) Airport. I don't know what an airport looks like. (She gets of
the ATV, walks over to the sink, picks up a cup and runs water into it.)
Wonder how airplanes fy -- like -- like a ship does. Ohh, you're just
wondering how that happens. How do they do that. (Continues sipping from
the cup of water, hugs Bobo and says:) Because I know they are just
pushing air of earth, then the devil comes and gets them. Oh, so if they
push that (I make pushing motion in the air with my hand) then the devil
will come and get them. Hum. (Drops the cup into the trash can.) He'll
eat the ship up with the people in it. Hmm.

301

302

Discovering Meaning When There Seems to Be No Meaning

Bria:

Dr. L: Bria: Dr. L.: Bria:

(Turns and quickly clasps Bobo with both hands, then gives Bobo a big
hug, looks down at the dollhouse, looks at me and says in an excited
voice.) Hey, they're gonna wake up. A man is gonna go to work with his
clothes of. (Kneels down beside dollhouse.) Ah, so he's going to go to
work and won't have his clothes on. No, cause the work doesn't want him.
He doesn't get cold. Te work doesn't want him to get of. OK? OK, sounds
like you've decided. Time to wake up. Hmm, he said "no." It's not time
to wake up. (Session continues)

What just happened? ... go back to the beginning of this second episode,
reread this episode and try to hear and see with intent what Bria was
feeling ... Why couldn't Bria go on with her story? What did you see and
hear this time? Listen to the little happenings. Te child centered play
therapist is always listening for meaning -- hearing, feeling what he is
sensing. Tere is potential meaning in seemingly insignifcant happenings.
Did you notice Bria's emotional comfort sequence afer each emotional
block? Each time she hugged Bobo and then bent down to play with the
dollhouse. A few more words about emotional blocks. Always respect a
child's emotional blocks. Young children don't have emotional defense
mechanisms that give them the ability to tell the play therapist, "I'm
not ready to talk about that." I don't ask questions about frightening
or scary happenings. I trust the child will take me into those areas
when the child is ready to go there.

Chapter

14

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Limit setting is one of the most important components of play therapy
and seems to be the most problematic area for play therapists. Te
inexperienced therapist ofen feels insecure and is slow to apply limits.
Sometimes the therapist is reluctant to set limits because of a desire
to be liked by the child. Te problem may be a result of the therapist's
lack of trust in the child. Or the therapist may not understand the
essential importance of limit setting in the therapeutic process. Limits
provide structure for the development of the therapeutic relationship
and help to make the experience a real-life relationship. Without
limits, a relationship would have little value. Emotional and social
growth is not likely to occur in disorganized, chaotic relationships,
and according to Moustakas (1959), therapy cannot occur without limits.

Basic Guidelines in Limit Setting Permissiveness in the child-centered
play therapy approach does not mean the acceptance of all behaviors.
Terapy is a learning experience, and limits provide children with an
opportunity to learn self-control, that they have choices, what making
choices feels like, and how responsibility feels. When limits should be
set and are not, children are deprived of an opportunity to learn
something important about themselves. In therapeutic limit DOI:
10.4324/9781003255796-14

303

304

Therapeutic Limit Setting

setting, children are given the opportunity to choose. Terefore, they
experience a life lesson in being responsible for themselves and their
own wellbeing. Te child centered play therapist's belief that children
will choose positive cooperative behavior is a signifcant and impactful
variable in the therapeutic process. Children are more likely to comply
with limits when they experience respect for themselves and acceptance
for their feelings, both positive and negative. Terefore, the therapist
focuses on the child's unexpressed need for defance, for example, while
continuing to express fundamental understanding, support, valuing of the
child, and a genuine belief in the child. Limits in the playroom should
be minimal and enforceable. Children cannot learn about themselves and
cannot adequately express themselves in the face of a multitude of
limits. Unenforceable limits do great harm to the therapeutic
relationship by interfering with the development of trust. Te
establishment of total limits rather than conditional limits is more
efective. Total limits are less confusing to children and help the
therapist to feel more secure. "You may pinch me, but you may not hurt
me" leaves the issue wide open as to how much pinching is hurtful. "You
may put a little water in the sand" would likewise not be acceptable.
How does a child know what is expected if the therapist says, "You
probably shouldn't smear so much glue on the Bobo." Conditional limits
become the basis for arguments. A total limit would be, "I'm not for
pinching." Te child now knows exactly what is not permissible.
Conditional limits---"You can't kick the door hard"---can become the
basis for arguments. What the therapist thinks is hard may not be
perceived by the child as hard, so the child may attempt to convince the
therapist. Te therapist should never engage in an argument with a child.
Te best procedure is to simply restate the original limit or issue and
then refect the child's feelings or desire. "You would like to convince
me that you didn't shoot the mirror, but the mirror is not for
shooting." Limits should be stated in a calm, patient, matter-of-fact,
and frm way. Limits that are rushed or stated quickly reveal the
therapist's anxiety and lack of trust in the child. If the therapist's
attitude

Therapeutic Limit Setting

really is one of trust and a belief that the child will respond
responsibly, then the therapist will respond accordingly with calmness.
Te fact of the matter is that if a child is standing 10 feet away from
the therapist threatening to shoot the therapist with the dart gun, the
therapist cannot move fast enough to get across the room and stop the
child before the trigger is pulled. Terefore, the therapist may as well
sit there with calmness and trust that if she responds appropriately,
the child will respond responsibly. If the therapist were to jump out of
her chair and attempt to grab the gun, her behavior would communicate a
message of, "I don't trust you." Te child is then lef to carry out the
original intent because, "She really expects me to." Such moments of
intense interaction can be anxiety provoking for the therapist and
quickly reveal deeper attitudes, beliefs, and motivation. Inexperienced
play therapists may experience some anxiety or perhaps even a bit of
rejection of a child who persists in pushing the limit, threatening to
do what necessitated the limit, or actually breaking the limit. Tere is
only one way the therapist can learn that children really can be trusted
in such situations and that is to "weather the storm" and in the process
discover children really can and will control their behavior if
responded to appropriately. For this reason, supervised experience is a
must in helping therapists process their own deeper levels of feelings
and attitudes. In therapeutic limit setting, the focus and emphasis are
always on the child, in order to clearly convey where the responsibility
lies. A response such as, "In here we don't take our pants of" is
inappropriate because the therapist has not the least inclination to
undress. Yet the use of "we" and "our" implies the therapist is a part
of the process. Children should be allowed to be separate. Te response,
"In here we don't throw paint on the foor," does not focus on the child
and so dilutes the impact of the limit. Te therapist's inclusion of
himself or herself in such responses is probably a function of cultural
response habits but also may reveal a need and attitude of which the
therapist is unaware.

When to Present Limits A common question among play therapists is when
to set limits. Should limits be set as a part of the general
introduction to the

305

306

Therapeutic Limit Setting

playroom at the beginning of the frst session, or should the therapist
wait until the occasion calls for the setting of limits? Providing a
long list of limits at the beginning of the frst session is not
necessary. Tis tends to set a negative tone and interferes with the
therapeutic objective of establishing a climate of freedom and
permissiveness. In play therapy, the therapist is always concerned with
the attitude that is being projected about the child and the
relationship. For some children, a listing of limits would only serve to
give them ideas. For cautious ("shy") and fearful children, the early
introduction of limits only serves to inhibit them more. Some children
never need limits set on their behavior. Because play therapy is a
learning experience for children, the best time to learn is when the
limit issue arises. Emotional learning is then possible at the point of
need for a limit. RULE OF THUMB: Limits are not needed until they are
needed. Self-control cannot be learned until an opportunity to exercise
self-control occurs. Terefore, a limitation on the child leaving the
playroom is unnecessary until the child starts to leave the playroom. At
that moment, responding with, "I know you want to leave the playroom,
but (therapist glances at watch) we have 20 more minutes in the
playroom, and then it will be time to leave," allows the child to
struggle with the responsibility of following or not following the
limit. In this case, the therapist uses "we" to emphasize the
relationship, and the reality is that the therapist also will be leaving
the playroom.

Rationale for Therapeutic Limits Play therapists ofen experience
difculty applying limits because they do not have a rationale for
setting limits, and consequently they are inconsistent, sometimes
allowing a behavior and at other times setting a limit on the same
behavior. Knowing the purpose of setting limits and when limits should
be set can provide consistency in applying limits. At the moment a limit
is needed in the

Therapeutic Limit Setting

playroom is not the time to begin thinking about whether or not a limit
is needed on a specifc behavior. Terapeutic limit setting is based on
sound principles and a well-thought-out formulation of general areas in
which intervention through limit setting will probably be needed. Limit
setting should not occur at the sporadic, insecure whims of the
therapist. Limits are based on clear and defnable criteria supported by
a clearly thought-out rationale with the furtherance of the therapeutic
relationship in mind. Limits are not set simply for the sake of limiting
behavior. Limits are applied because they are recognized as facilitating
the attainment of accepted psychological principles of growth. Although
it may seem strange to say so and even more difcult to appreciate in the
midst of confrontation with an aggressive, angry child, the freedom to
express a need is more important than the resulting behavioral
expression. Te child's desire to break a limit has therapeutic
signifcance even if there is no expressed behavior. For here we are
dealing with intrinsic variables related to motivation, perception of
self, independence, need for acceptance, and the working out of a
relationship with a signifcant person. Although the behavior being
expressed is really secondary, the child's behavior too ofen captivates
the unskilled therapist's attention and energy in an attempt to stop it.
Te skilled play therapist begins the process of therapeutic limit
setting just as soon as it becomes apparent that limit setting is
needed, as in the case of a child who grabs the toy truck and says, "I'm
going to stomp this truck." Te therapist doesn't wait until the truck
has been destroyed. All feelings, desires, and wishes of the child are
accepted, but not all behaviors are accepted. "You would like to stomp
that truck, but that truck is not for stomping. Te egg carton is for
stomping." In this process, the feeling or need is accepted, the limit
is set and an acceptable alternative is presented, so the child
experiences the freedom of the relationship to act. Destructive
behaviors cannot be accepted, but the child can be granted permission to
express himself or herself symbolically without fear of reprimand or
rejection. Te rationale for therapeutic limits is contained in the
following seven principles and accompanying discussions.

307

308

Therapeutic Limit Setting

1.  Limits Provide Physical and Emotional Security and Safety for
    Children Although the atmosphere in the playroom is conducive to a
    greater feeling of permissiveness than usually exists in a child's
    relationships outside the playroom, basic common-sense health and
    safety limits prevail in the playroom. Setting limits on the child's
    behavior demonstrates the therapist's respect and caring for the
    child and intent to provide physical and psychological safety for
    the child. Te result is a relationship and an atmosphere in which
    the child feels safe. A child may not shoot a pencil in the dart gun
    because of the sharp point, drink water from a rusty can, or cut
    himself or herself with the scissors. A session in which the
    therapist is on edge because the child is engaging in potentially
    harmful activities would seem to have very little therapeutic value.
    A child should never be allowed to stick objects in electrical wall
    outlets. As a precaution, outlets should be covered. At times the
    child may need to be protected from potential guilt, as in the case
    of a child who wants to hit the therapist or smash the therapist
    over the head with a toy. Te child may later worry about what was
    done to the therapist and become quite anxious, fearing the
    therapist was hurt or that the therapist would not like the child
    anymore. Similar feelings and reactions can result if the child is
    allowed to paint the therapist's face, pour paint on the therapist's
    clothes, or shoot the therapist with the dart gun. A child should
    not be allowed to hit, kick, scratch, or bite the therapist.
    Although a child may express a desire to hit the therapist, paint on
    the walls, or break equipment, such behaviors are limited in order
    to prevent accompanying feelings of guilt or anxiety. In responding
    to situations described here, the therapist always maintains an
    accepting attitude of the child's feelings and desires. Te growth
    potential in children cannot be maximized in settings where children
    feel insecure. When no boundaries and no limitations on behavior
    exist, children feel insecure and usually experience anxiety. Limits
    provide structure to the environment and the relationship, so
    children can feel secure. Some children have difculty controlling
    their own impulsiveness and need the security of experiencing limits
    being set in a way that provides

Therapeutic Limit Setting

them with an opportunity to gain control of their own behavior. Limits,
therefore, help to assure the emotional security of children. When
children discover where the boundaries are in the play therapy
relationship and experience those boundaries being adhered to
consistently, they feel secure because there is predictability in the
relationship and setting. Limits defne the boundaries of the therapeutic
relationship.

2.  Limits Protect the Physical Well-Being of the Therapist and
    Facilitate Acceptance of the Child Te therapist's physical safety as
    well as emotional and physical comfort are important dimensions in
    the therapeutic process. A therapist who is being bombarded with
    blocks of wood thrown by a child from across the room will
    experience great difculty trying to focus on understanding the
    underlying reason for the attack, or what the child is feeling at
    the moment. Te therapist who can sit through sand being poured over
    her head or watch patiently as the child cuts tassels of her new
    shoes and still concentrate on the needs of the child is rare
    indeed. Physical comfort and safety are basic needs for everyone and
    will be attended to by the individual either consciously or
    unconsciously. Terapist selfawareness is essential to the
    appropriate handling and resolution of this issue. Te inherent
    growth potential in children is facilitated by the therapist's
    acceptance and warm caring, and it is limit setting which allows the
    therapist to remain empathic and accepting of the child throughout
    the therapy process. Limits are set on children's behaviors that
    hinder the therapist's acceptance. For the therapist to maintain a
    warm, caring, accepting attitude toward a child who is hitting him
    on the knee with a hammer is virtually impossible. In this
    situation, the therapist likely will experience feelings of
    resentment and rejection, which in turn will be communicated to the
    child at some level. A child should not be allowed to pull the
    therapist's hair, throw sand on the therapist, paint the therapist's
    shoes, or hit the therapist in any way. Any

309

310

Therapeutic Limit Setting

form of direct aggressive physical acting out or attack on the therapist
should be prohibited. Such behaviors are not to be tolerated under any
circumstances, because they will interfere with the therapist's empathic
acceptance, respect for the child, and objectivity in relating to the
child. Limits may be needed to help the therapist maintain a high level
of acceptance of the child. Play therapists are not "super persons." Tey
are subject to experiencing normal, sometimes uncontrollable emotional
reactions, and once reactions of anger or rejection have been
experienced, they will be sensed by the child. Terefore, appropriate
timing in setting limits is crucial to maintaining an attitude of
acceptance and positive regard for the child. Activities that are likely
to arouse feelings of anger or anxiety in the therapist generally should
be limited. However, some therapists experience anxiety and anger over
what would be described as minor messiness by the child, and in such
cases, it is strongly recommended that therapists carefully examine
their own motivations. Are the limits being set to facilitate the
therapeutic relationship, or to accommodate a therapist's rigid code of
neatness?

3.  Limits Facilitate the Development of Decision Making, Self-Control,
    and Self-Responsibility of Children One of the things children learn
    in play therapy is that their feelings, whether positive or
    negative, are accepted. Terefore, rejection or denial of one's
    feelings is not necessary. In the playroom, acceptable ways are
    available for the expression of all feelings. Before children can
    resist following through and expressing feelings in ways dictated by
    frst impulses, they must have an awareness of their behavior, have a
    feeling of responsibility, and exercise self-control. In the midst
    of experiencing the welling up of intense emotion, children ofen are
    unaware of their behavior and so are equally devoid of feelings of
    responsibility. Limit setting addresses the immediate reality of the
    situation and indirectly calls attention to the child's behavior
    through statements such as, "Te wall is not for painting on."

Therapeutic Limit Setting

How can children develop a feeling of responsibility if they are unaware
of what they are doing? And how can they experience a feeling of
self-control if they are too defensive to change their behavior?
Terapeutic limit setting does not stir up feelings of defensiveness that
ofen accompany attempts to stop a behavior, because the child's behavior
is not the focus. What is focused on are the child's feelings or desires
and the recipient or object of the behavior. Tis can be seen clearly in
the statement, "You would like to paint on the wall, but the wall is not
for painting," as opposed to, "Don't paint on that wall." Te child's
need to paint on the wall, to be messy, to break the limit is accepted
and communicated to the child in very specifc and concrete ways by
providing acceptable alternatives: "You would like to paint on the wall.
Te wall is not for painting. Te paper on the easel is for painting." No
attempt is made to stop the expression of the feeling or the need. Such
a statement clearly indicates to the child a permissible way to express
herself. Now the child is confronted with a choice: to act on the
original impulse or to express herself through the alternative behavior.
Te choice is the child's, and the therapist allows the child to choose.
Te decision is the child's, and responsibility accompanies decision
making. If the child chooses to paint on the easel paper, it will be
because the child decided to and exercised self-control, not because the
therapist made her.

4.  Limits Anchor the Session to Reality and Emphasize the Here and Now
    Some children become caught up in fantasy play in the playroom and
    could spend the entire time absorbed in the enactment of fantasy
    scenes, thus efectively avoiding any personal responsibility for
    actions or behaviors that may be socially unacceptable or
    destructive. When the therapist verbalizes a limit, the experience
    is quickly changed from fantasy to the reality of a relationship
    with an adult in which certain behaviors are unacceptable, as is
    true in the world outside the playroom, except that in the playroom
    substantially fewer limitations are established on behavior. When
    the therapist interjects, "You would really like

311

312

Therapeutic Limit Setting

to dump that paint on the foor, but the paint is not for pouring on the
foor. Te sink is for pouring paint into," the child is confronted with
the reality of having crossed an unacceptable boundary, has been
presented the opportunity to choose what will be done next, and
experiences the accompanying responsibility. Te child can no longer live
in the enactment of fantasy, because the therapist refuses to be ignored
once the limit is set. Te child must now focus on the reality of making
a decision in relation to the playroom and the therapist. Limits, then,
assure the play therapy experience will have a real-life quality. Te
therapeutic experience should not be so unlike life outside the playroom
that no transfer of experiences and learning will occur. Limits exist in
every relationship that has any signifcance. A relationship without any
limits surely would have little value to the participants. When the
therapist states a limit to protect herself from harm, the therapist's
personhood and respect for herself are declared. At that moment, the
experience with the child truly becomes a living relationship anchored
in the dynamics of the process of the reality of the moment.

5.  Limits Promote Consistency in the Playroom Environment Children ofen
    come from homes and classroom settings characterized by
    inconsistency in behavior on the part of adults who have difculty
    maintaining rules. In these settings, what was prohibited today may
    or may not be prohibited tomorrow. What was allowed today may or may
    not be allowed tomorrow. An accepting attitude on the part of the
    adult this morning may or may not be evident this afernoon.
    Consequently, children in such environments are never quite sure
    just what to expect and ofen attempt to cope accordingly by being
    very cautious or by overtly acting out in an attempt to fnd out just
    where the boundaries are. Children need to experience consistency in
    their lives if they are ever to achieve some degree of emotional
    balance. Consistency of attitude and behavior on the part of the
    therapist helps children to feel secure, and this inner security
    enables them to move toward being the persons they are capable of
    being.

Therapeutic Limit Setting

One of the ways the play therapist establishes a consistent environment
is through the introduction and use of consistent limits. Limits are
presented in a consistently nonthreatening manner, and the therapist is
consistent in seeing that the limits are adhered to---not in a rigid
manner, but in a consistent manner. Rigid could perhaps imply punishment
and the absence of an understanding and accepting attitude. On the other
hand, understanding and acceptance do not imply license, unwillingness
to follow through, or a "wishy-washy," anything-goes attitude. Te
therapist can be patiently understanding and accepting of the child's
wish or desire and still not accept the behavior. Limits, therefore,
help to provide the structure for a consistent environment. Te therapist
does not allow a child to break a toy in one session, no matter how many
similar toys are in the storage closet, and then set a limit on breaking
the same kind of toy in the next session. What was prohibited in the
last session is prohibited in this session, and what was allowed in the
last session is allowed in this session. Tus, the sessions have
consistency and predictability. Tese are therapeutic dimensions. Without
consistency, there can be no predictability, and without predictability
there can be no security. Consistent limits unwaveringly enforced help
to make the play therapy relationship predictable and thus increase the
child's feeling of security. Consistency in limit setting is a function
of the therapist's attitude and is a tangible demonstration of the
therapist's commitment to the welfare and acceptance of the child.
Consistent limit setting is a concrete manifestation of the therapist's
willingness to put energy into the relationship with the child. By being
consistent in such a tangible way, the therapist assures the child of
the realness of the therapist's feelings and attitudes in other, less
tangible areas, such as acceptance.

6.  Limits Preserve the Professional, Ethical, and Socially Acceptable
    Relationship Te very nature of the play therapy setting and age of
    the clientele are potentially more likely to result in uninhibited
    or acting-out behaviors than other therapeutic settings. Although it

313

314

Therapeutic Limit Setting

is inconceivable for an adult or adolescent client to want to take their
clothes of in the therapist's ofce, fondle the therapist, or urinate on
the foor, such behaviors may not be uncommon in the playroom. Te nature
of the freedom, permissiveness, and structure of the playroom is more
conducive to these behaviors than is the typical ofce. Sometimes a
logical sequence to these behaviors occurs. First the child takes shoes
and socks of to get into the sandbox, and later the child takes the rest
of his clothes of to play in the sandbox or to pretend to be a baby.
Allowing a child to remove shoes and socks to play in the sandbox is
appropriate. Afer all, this is a common practice on the school ground,
in the park, and at the beach. Taking trousers and underwear of is
neither common nor socially acceptable at these same places, and it is
unacceptable in the play therapy experience. Urinating on the foor also
is socially unacceptable and should be responded to with frm, consistent
limit setting. Some sexually abused children may attempt to act out on
the therapist sexual or erotic behaviors they have been taught by
perpetrating adults, because the children feel safe in the playroom or
in an attempt to perhaps unconsciously communicate to the therapist what
they have experienced. Te child should not be allowed to fondle the
therapist or engage in other seductive behaviors. Limits should be set
on such behaviors. Any form of sexual contact between the therapist and
the child is inappropriate, unprofessional, unethical, and a violation
of laws. As with many other acting-out behaviors, therapeutic limit
setting enables the child to express the behavior and accompanying
feelings symbolically and allows the therapist to be an objective but
involved participant, thus preserving the professional and ethical
therapeutic relationship. Tese same limitations would apply to the group
play therapy experience. Children should not be allowed to engage in
these behaviors with one another.

7.  Limits Protect the Play Therapy Materials and Room Most play therapy
    programs are not blessed with unlimited budgets for keeping the
    playroom supplied with toys and materials.

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Allowing random destruction of toys could become an expensive process,
and at the same time would not be helpful to the emotional growth of the
child. Most play therapists cannot aford to frequently replace the
triple-thick, heavy-gauge vinyl, canvasenclosed Bobo punching toy, which
costs over \$150. Terefore, "Bobo is for hitting, not stabbing with the
scissors." Although it might be great fun for the child to jump on the
wood dollhouse and smash it to pieces, it probably would not be
repairable and should be protected with, "The dollhouse is not for
jumping on." Less expensive items also are not for breaking or smashing.
Likewise, the room is not for destroying. The child is not allowed to
knock holes in the walls or floor with the wood blocks. These are
opportunities for limit setting and thus opportunities for the child to
learn something valuable: how to bring himself under control. The
playroom is not a place of limitless freedom, where the child can do
just anything. There are limits, and they are part of the therapeutic
process. An important consideration, however, is that children have an
opportunity to appropriately express their feelings through acceptable
items. Simply limiting the behavior is not sufcient. Terefore, every
playroom should have some items that are for smashing, breaking, or
throwing. Egg cartons seem to ft this purpose quite well. Tey can be
stacked and kicked over, jumped on and smashed, ripped apart, thrown,
and painted. Playdough can be suggested as an acceptable substitute for
smashing or throwing on the foor. Actually, the number of limits set in
play therapy is minimal and involves behaviors in the following areas:
(a) harmful or dangerous behavior to the child and therapist; (b)
behavior that disrupts the therapeutic routine or process (continually
leaving the playroom, wanting to play afer time is up); (c) destruction
of the room or materials; (d) taking toys from the playroom; (e)
socially unacceptable behavior; and (f) inappropriate displays of
afection.

315

316

Therapeutic Limit Setting

NATURE OF LIMIT SETTING Play therapist should be Reasonable Rational
Consistent Unconditionally accepting Comfortable and Firm While setting
Minimal Realistic Neutral and Necessary Limits

Procedures in Therapeutic Limit Setting Setting limits is a carefully
thought-out procedure designed to convey understanding, acceptance, and
responsibility to the child. Te objective of the therapist is not to
stop the behavior but, rather, to facilitate the expression of the
motivating feeling, want, or need in a more acceptable manner. Te play
therapist is a facilitator of expression rather than a prohibitor of
action. Terefore, the objective is to facilitate the child's expression
through actions and behaviors that are more socially acceptable. In this
process of facilitating expression of feelings in appropriate ways, the
child learns to control initial behaviors, to say "no" to self. As will
quickly be recognized, some actions in the playroom must be limited. Te
attitude and objective of the therapist at these times will largely
determine the impact of the therapist's approach to limit setting. If
the therapist is determined to stop the objectionable behavior, the
approach to limit setting likely will be a demanding statement such as,
"Don't do that." Te child then will feel rejected or that the therapist
does not understand. If the therapist lacks confdence and is unsure of
the limit-setting procedure, that too will be conveyed in statements
such as, "I don't think you should do that."

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Te child may then either feel insecure or continue the behavior because
there is no good reason not to. Many practicing play therapists will
readily recognize that some children who persist in a behavior the
therapist is seeking to limit do so because they pick up on the
therapist's uncertainty or insecurity. When confronted with a demanding
or authoritarian attitude and approach, "I've told you before you can't
do that," children seem to feel they must protect themselves by
persisting in their original behavior. In such instances, to change
would almost be a loss of self. Te result then is likely to be a power
struggle. Rather than attempting to stop behaviors, the therapist's
objective is to respond to the child in such a way that the child is lef
with the responsibility for changing his behavior. If the therapist
tells the child what to do, then the therapist is responsible. When the
therapist trusts the child's capacity to respond responsibly and
communicates, "Te mirror is not for throwing at. Te sandbox is for
throwing at," the child is free to decide what to do next and is thus
responsible. Te play therapist is encouraged to carefully examine her
attitude and intent when faced with the need to set limits and to give
thoughtful consideration as to how best to communicate the actual limit.
A diferent message is obviously communicated in each of the following
statements to a child who is about to paint the wall: "It's probably not
a good idea to paint the wall." "We can't paint walls in here." "You
shouldn't paint the wall." "I can't let you paint the wall." "Maybe you
could paint something else, other than the wall." "Te rule is you can't
paint the wall." "Te wall is not for painting on."

Steps in the Therapeutic Limit-Setting Process Several specifc steps may
be used in the therapeutic limit-setting process. Tey are implemented to
facilitate the process of communicating understanding and acceptance of
the child's motives, to

317

318

Therapeutic Limit Setting

make the limit clear, and to provide acceptable alternative actions and
behaviors.

Step 1: Acknowledge the Child's Feelings, Wishes, and Wants Verbalizing
understanding of the child's feeling or want conveys acceptance of the
child's motivation. Tis is an important step, because it recognizes the
child has feelings that are being expressed in the play activity, and
these feelings are acceptable. Simply setting the limit without
acknowledging the feeling might indicate to the child that his emotions
are not important. Verbalizing an empathic understanding of the feeling
ofen helps to defuse its intensity. Tis is especially true in the case
of anger and is ofen all that is needed for the child to begin modifying
his personal behavior. Acceptance of the motivation seems to be
satisfying to the child, and a need for the act no longer exits.
Feelings should he refected just as soon as they are recognized. "You're
angry at me." Once the block of wood is in fight across the room,
acceptance of the feeling can no longer be a deterrent.

Step 2: Communicate the Limit Limits should be specifc, rather than
general, and should clearly delineate exactly what is being limited.
Limits that are general are confusing and problematic and interfere with
the development of security for children. When limits are set, there
should be no doubt in the child's mind as to what is appropriate and
what is inappropriate, or what is acceptable and what is unacceptable.
Limits that are fuzzy or unclear interfere with the child's ability to
accept responsibility and to act responsibly. Terefore, a therapist's
statement, "You can't put very much paint on the wall," would be
inappropriate. Such a statement is not explicit and is certainly
unclear, especially to children who perceive themselves as always doing
only a "little bit" of anything. Te therapist may not always be able to
follow these steps in sequence. Te urgency of the situation---the child
is about to throw the truck at the window---may necessitate stating the

Therapeutic Limit Setting

limit frst, "Te window is not for hitting," and then refect, "You want
to throw the truck at the window but the window is not for hitting." In
this example, no feelings are evident, so the child's desire is
refected.

Step 3: Target Acceptable Alternatives Te child may not be aware of any
other way to express what she is feeling. At that moment, the child can
only think of one way to express herself. At this step in the process of
limit setting, the therapist provides alternatives to the child for the
expression of the action. Tis can involve pointing out a variety of
diferent alternatives to the child. A more durable or appropriate object
may need to be selected for the expression: "Te dollhouse is not for
standing on. Te chair or the table is for standing on." A diferent
surface may be needed to paint on: "Te wall is not for painting on. Te
easel paper or the block of wood is for painting on." A substitute may
need to be selected to replace the therapist as the recipient of
aggressive behavior: "Ellen, I'm not for hitting. Te Bobo is for
hitting." A nonverbal cue, pointing toward the alternative(s), in
conjunction with the verbalized alternatives is especially helpful in
diverting a child's attention from the original source of focus and
facilitating the process of choice making. Using the child's name helps
to get the child's attention. When limit setting is needed, the
therapist can remember to ACT in instituting the steps in the process
sequence. A---Acknowledge the child's feelings, wishes, and wants.
C---Communicate the limit. T---Target acceptable alternatives. In
keeping with the focus of child-centered play therapy, it is more
therapeutic and facilitative to the developing relationship for the
therapist to act rather than react in response to behaviors requiring a
limit. Te following interaction shows how the steps are applied when
6-year-old Kumail is just as angry as he can be at the play therapist.
He picks up the dart gun, and glares at the therapist as he begins to
load the dart gun:

319

320

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Terapist: You're really angry at me. Kumail: Yes! And I'm going to shoot
you good! Terapist: You are just so angry at me you would like to shoot
me. (Kumail now has the gun loaded and begins to take aim at the
therapist.) But I'm not for shooting. (Kumail interrupts before the
therapist can go on with the limit.) Kumail: You can't stop me. Nobody
can! (He points the gun at the therapist.) Terapist: You're so powerful
no one can stop you. But I'm not for shooting. You can pretend the Bobo
is me (therapist points toward the Bobo) and shoot the Bobo. Kumail:
(Swings the gun around, takes aim at the Bobo, and yells.) Take that!
(He shoots the Bobo.) Te important consideration here is that the
feeling is expressed and the child has assumed responsibility for both
feelings and controlling behavior (Figure 14.1). Tis is a signifcant
step in the therapeutic process of learning self-control and
self-direction,

FIGURE 14.1 The ACT model of limit setting facilitates development of
self-control and self-responsibility.

Therapeutic Limit Setting

and that feelings are acceptable. Limits allow the child to express
negative feelings without causing harm, and the subsequent fear of
retaliation. At this point some of you who are reading this book are
thinking, "Yes, Garry, but what if the child does shoot you?" I believe
the child will not shoot me. I believe the child will bring himself
under control. Te important therapeutic dimension here is an attitude
and belief in the child. Have I ever been shot by a dart gun? Yes, many
times, but I still believe the child will not shoot me again. Te child's
behavior does not cause me to change my belief in the child. I still
believe the child is capable of bringing himself under control and
deciding not to shoot me. How can a child believe in himself if no one
believes in him? Tis attitudinal belief in the child is unwavering and
is central to the childcentered play therapy theory and approach.

When Limits Are Broken A broken limit can mean anything from mild
testing behavior to a battle of wills. Breaking limits ofen is a cry for
help from a child with low self-esteem who really does want the security
of knowing defnite boundaries do exist. Terefore, at this time perhaps
more than at any other time, the child needs understanding and
acceptance. Te therapist should stay right with the child with refection
of feelings and desires while stating with frmness the established
limit. Debates and lengthy explanations should be avoided. Treatening
the child with what may happen if a limit is broken is never acceptable.
Limits are never used as a way to punish a child. Tis is a time for
exercising patience, calmness, and frmness. Even though the limit has
been broken, the therapist is still accepting of the child. Te
efectiveness of ACT is put to the test in the following transcript of a
play session of a mom trained in Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT)
with her 2½-year-old daughter. Two-year-olds are not noted for their
self-control. Kristin: Mom:

(gets a cup from the kitchen and walks to the sink.) Kristin, we have
fve more minutes of playtime today and then it will be time to go.

321

322

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom:

Kristin: Mom:

Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin

(flls the cup with water from the sink faucet.) Five? We have fve more
minutes, and then it will be time to go. (walks to sandbox and pours
water from the cup into the sand.) (While child is pouring water in the
sandbox) One cup of water ... (walks back to sink and flls cup with
water, walks to sandbox and pours water in the box) Two ... Two ...
you're counting ... You poured that slowly. I heard it make a noise.
(goes back to sink again and flls cup a third time, then walks back to
sandbox and pours water into sandbox. She looks very absorbed in her
play.) Tree ... you poured three cups of water in the sand. Just one
more ... (Child walks back to sink and flls cup with water.) (said with
empathy) I know you would like to pour more water in the sandbox, but
you have already put three in and that is all. (Tis is a standard rule
in the playroom: only three containers of water allowed to be poured in
the sandbox.) (walks to sandbox with a cup full of water and very slowly
starts to pour water in the sandbox.) Kristin, in here the sandbox can
only have three cups of water, and you have already put three. No more
water can go into the sandbox. (Mother leans toward the child and shows
"three" with her fngers. She gives lots of nonverbal signs to Kristin.
Her voice is frmer. Child stands in front of sandbox. She is about to
pour more water, but listens to her mother.) I know you really want to
put more water in. OK (long pause as she thinks about the decision and
stops.) You can pour that water into the sink. Tat water can't go in the
sandbox because you already put three in. You can pour that water into
the sink. (seems to be struggling with the idea of pouring more water in
the sandbox. She tilts the cup a little bit, trying to pour water in the
sandbox)

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Mom:

Kristin

Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom: Kristin: Mom:
Kristin: Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom:
Kristin

Kristin, I know you really want to pour that water in the sandbox, but
it is not for pouring in the sandbox. You may pour that water into the
sink. You already put three cups of water, and that's all the sand can
have. (looks up at her mom and down at the sand, up at her mom and down
at the sand. Struggling, her whole being wants to pour one more cup of
water. She tilts the cup forward more and some water dribbles into the
sandbox.) I see you pouring water. (Child pours a bit more.) Kristin,
that water is not for pouring into the sandbox (said in a patient, but
frm tone). I just put little bit ... I know you just really want to put
a little bit in the sandbox. (walks back to sink and dumps rest of water
into sink.) Now, you poured it into the sink. No more ... Te sink is the
place where you can pour that water. (plays with water in sink) I just
pour out ... cup ... so I can ... put this in it. So you are getting
more water in the cup and pouring it in the sink. Right there!!! Right
there!!! (continues playing at the sink with water running) Look at me.
(She turns to her mother.) I heard that! It went right down that drain.
(flls another cup full of water and carefully pours the water into the
drain) Oh ... you're being careful ... put it right in the drain ...
Some of it out. Some of it out. Tat's where you want it to go. Two ...
Mm hmmm. Tree ... Tree ... Four ... Five!

323

324

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Mom: Kristin

Mom: Kristin Mom:

Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom: Kristin Mom:

You counted to fve! I want to put sand in it ... (stated in an unclear
way. Child walks to sandbox and looks at mother to tell what she wants.)
I want to put sand in ... the sink ... (points toward sink.) You want to
do what? Put sand in the sink. (Child begins to scoop sand into cup.)
Oh, you want to put the sand in the sink. Te sand is not for putting in
the sink. Te sand is for staying in the sandbox. You can play with the
sand in the sandbox. You can put it in the pail. (grabs two hands full
of sand and heads for the sink.) I know you really want to put the sand
in the sink, but it's not for putting in the sink. I only ... (mumbling
... child turns, walks to sandbox and puts sand back into sandbox.) You
put the sand back into the sandbox. (Mother stands up to give a sign of
ending the session and says) Our time is up for today. I wash my hands
... You decided to wash your hands.

Tis child's entire emotional system struggled with wanting to pour water
into the sand, but hearing and experiencing mom's patience, calm
statements, and empathic responses indicating the rule of three
containers of water in the sandbox, she made a decision to follow the
rule. Tis 2-year-old's struggle demonstrates the efectiveness of the ACT
model of therapeutic limit setting in returning responsibility to the
child to bring self under control. Yes, the child did dribble a bit of
extra water into the sand, but did control her inner urge, walked to the
sink and poured the remaining water into the sink. A few seconds later
she exhibited similar self-control, this time more quickly, when she
wanted to put sand into the sink. Yes, a two-year-old is quite capable
of self-control. Tis mom's calm, patient approach is commendable. When a
child is reluctant to abide by the limit and pushes the boundary, the
therapist does not threaten the child or extend a

Therapeutic Limit Setting

consequence to the next session, as seen in the case of Eric, who
continued to play in the sandbox afer the therapist stated for the
fourth time that time was up in the session. Te therapist's statement,
"If you choose to continue to play, you choose to have less time in the
playroom next week," was inappropriate. Choices and consequences apply
only to the current session. Next week Eric will be at a diferent place
in his life. Each session should be an opportunity for a new beginning
for a child. When a child persists in expressing or pursuing the
original behavior and continues to break an established limit,
verbalizing an additional step to the limit-setting sequence may be
necessary. Before explaining this step, a caution is in order. Too ofen
therapists become overly involved in trying to force the acceptance of
the limit and move much too quickly to implement this fnal step.
Patience is the rule of the day. In most instances, the frst three steps
should be gone through in sequence at least three times before
verbalizing the fnal step. Tis fnal step should rarely be used.

Step 4: State Final Choice Afer going through ACT a minimum of three
times, ofen more, an ultimate limit or fnal choice is presented to the
child. Te therapist either indicates the child can choose by his
behavior to have the item placed of-limits for the rest of the session
or, in very rare instances, presents leaving the room as the ultimate
choice. (Let me hasten to point out that leaving the playroom should
only be used as an absolutely last resort. Tis option is so rarely
appropriate that perhaps I shouldn't even have mentioned it.) Leaving
the playroom is not needed as an option unless the child is painting on
a wall, banging on the two-way mirror, or similar destructive behavior.
Te therapist's selection of which fnal condition to present will depend
on the situation, the child, and the therapist's tolerance. Leaving the
playroom should not be presented as a choice to a child who is
manipulative and already wants to leave. Tis fourth step must be
carefully stated so the child clearly understands he has a choice and
that whatever happens will be the

325

326

Therapeutic Limit Setting

result of his choice. "If you choose to shoot me again, you choose not
to play with the gun anymore today. If you choose not to shoot me, you
choose to get to play with the gun for the rest of our time in the
playroom today." Notice the word "choose" was used four times. Tis
statement makes it very clear the choice/ responsibility and positive or
negative consequences reside with the child. Limits presented in this
manner are neither punishment nor rejection of the child. If the child
shoots the therapist one more time, the child has clearly indicated by
action the choice to stop playing with the gun. Te child has chosen not
to play with the dart gun. Te choice does not belong to the therapist.
Terefore, the child is not rejected. If the child chooses to shoot the
therapist, the therapist calmly responds, "I see you have chosen not to
play with the gun for the rest of our time together in the playroom. You
can choose to put the gun on the table beside me or on the shelf over
there (pointing)." At this point some children will begin a bargaining
process. "I promise I won't shoot you anymore. Please let me play with
the gun some more." Tis approach to limit setting is a learning
experience and children learn what the process of choice making and
accompanying results feel like. Terefore, once a child has made a
choice, the therapist does not under any circumstances undo a child's
choice. Te therapist follows through to see that the child's choice is
carried out if the child continues to play with the gun. Tis does not
mean the therapist leaps out of his chair and wrestles the child for the
gun. Tis is a time for persistent patience with the process and
understanding of the child's desire while continuing to verbalize, "You
would really like to continue to play with the gun, but when you chose
to shoot me again, you chose not to play with the gun for the rest of
our time in the playroom." Tis response may need to be repeated several
times, always with caring and understanding, and the therapist may begin
to think "I sound like a broken record," but the message eventually gets
through to the child. Other considerations are that every possible efort
should be made to protect the child and therapist from harm or to keep
valuable property from being broken. Te therapist would not stay

Therapeutic Limit Setting

seated and go through the limit-setting steps two or three times while
the child banged on the observation mirror with a truck. Te shattered
glass could severely injure the child. In this case, afer presenting ACT
once, the ultimate limit is presented when the child hits the mirror a
second time. "If you choose to hit the mirror with the truck again, you
choose to leave the playroom for today. If you choose not to hit the
mirror again with the truck, you choose to get to stay in the playroom
for the rest of our time today." Te therapist could tolerate being shot
with the vinyl dart while going through the limit-setting sequence three
times in order to give the child an opportunity to assume responsibility
for herself and to limit her own behavior. Assumption of responsibility
for self is a major objective, and the opportunity to exercise that
responsibility may be more important than the therapist being shot one
more time with a dart---but it is not more important than the
possibility of personal injury.

Tentativeness in Limit Setting When setting limits, the therapist should
be matter-of-fact and speak with sureness and conviction that come from
having already determined what limits are needed. Te following examples
are from supervision experiences with play therapists who were being
tentative: (Starting to leave the room with 30 minutes lef in the
session.) Terapist: Let's stay in here for the rest of the time rather
than going in and out, okay? (Te therapist sounds unsure and asks for
the child's agreement.) Suggested: Jason, our time in the playroom is
not up for today. We have 30 more minutes, and then you can leave. (Sets
a defnite limit and indicates when the child will get to leave.) •••
Child: I want to go out there. (Points to the ofces.) Child:

327

328

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Terapist: Let's wait a little longer before we leave.(Attempts to coax
the child into staying, hoping the child will forget she wants to
leave.) Suggested: You want to go out where the other people are, but
our time in the playroom is not fnished for 10 more minutes; then you
can go out there. (Shows understanding of what the child wants, sets a
frm limit, and communicates what can be done later.) ••• Child: Can I
put water in here? (Holds up the gun.) Terapist: You would like to put
water in there, but we won't do that now. (Does not set a defnite limit,
indicates there is the possibility of putting water in the gun later.
Inclusion of "we" implies the therapist will assist in putting water in
the gun.) Suggested: You would like to put water in that, but that's not
for putting water into. Te pan is for putting water in. (Acknowledges
the child's want, sets a frm limit, and communicates an acceptable
alternative.) ••• Child: I think I'll throw this truck right through
that window. Terapist: Could you maybe do something else with it?
(Implies that the original plan is acceptable if the child can't think
of anything else.) Suggested: You would like to throw that truck at the
window, but the window is not for throwing at. Te truck is for playing
with on the foor. (Recognizes the child's want, sets a frm limit, and
states an acceptable use of the truck.)

Situational Limits Taking Toys or Materials from the Playroom Tis
experience can really tug at the therapist's emotions when a child begs
ever so pitifully, "Can I please just take this little car home to play
with? I don't have any cars to play with, and this is my most special
one." Te therapist's frst reaction may be, "Sure,

Therapeutic Limit Setting

why not? Tere are lots of other toys here and even another one just like
that one." Tere are four basic reasons for not allowing toys to be taken
home. First, play therapy is based on an emotional relationship, and
what the child takes away internally is more signifcant than what is
carried away externally. In far too many homes, children have been
taught by parental behavior that sharing of material possessions is more
important than emotional sharing. Gifs are given as substitutes for the
sharing of self, and children have learned, inappropriately, that
tangible items express a relationship. Second, equally important is the
fact of budget considerations. Most playrooms operate on very limited
budgets. A third factor involves consideration for other children, and
the basic rationale for selecting the toys and materials in the frst
place: Toys are the child's words, and play is the child's language.
Toys are the child's means for self-expression. Allowing toys to be
removed from the playroom can interfere with other children's freedom of
expression. Terefore, toys also should not be taken to the waiting room
by other staf members for babysitting purposes. Te fact that other
children use the playroom should not be mentioned, as in the case of a
therapist who stated, "Toys are for staying in the playroom because
other children use the toys." At that moment the child probably does not
care about the other children. Also, the focus now is on other children.
Te child's internalized message may be, "Other children are more
important than I am." A fourth factor is the issue of what to do if the
child is allowed to take a toy home and does not bring it back. Te
therapist would then be placed in a diferent role of trying to get the
toy back. To a child's request to take a toy home, the therapist could
respond, "Having that car to play with at home would be fun, but the
toys are for staying in the playroom so they will be here when you come
back next time." Tis response generalizes to all the toys, thus
preventing the necessity for restating the limit on the next 10 items
the child wants to take home, and shows great respect for the child
with, "so they will be here when you come back next time." If a child
wants to show a parent a special item in the playroom, the child can
invite the parent to the playroom to see the item

329

330

Therapeutic Limit Setting

afer the session is concluded. Children are allowed to take their
paintings home, but the therapist does not suggest they do so. If the
therapist wants a record of the child's paintings, he could ask the
child's permission to keep the painting until the next session and
during the intervening time take a picture of the painting. Do not take
a picture of the child's painting in the child's presence. Tat will
reinforce the painting of more pictures. Terapists have reported that
some children seem to paint pictures just to take home as gifs to
parents and siblings. In these cases, the therapists felt little, if
any, exploration or self-expression was evident in the activity, so they
requested the child leave all paintings until the last session and then
take them all home. Fewer paintings were produced afer the limit was
set, which seemed to confrm the therapists' hypothesis. Limits may or
may not need to be set on taking home items created with the playdough,
depending on the budget. Most play therapists will probably need to set
a limit with the playdough, and that can be perfectly acceptable.

Leaving the Playroom Allowing a child to go in and out of the playroom
at random during the session is not advisable, because that severely
restricts the development of the relationship and prevents follow
through and completion of some interactions, especially when a limit has
been set or the child has just expressed some angry or frightening
feelings. Children need to learn that they cannot run away from the
responsibility of seeing things through, that commitment to a
relationship means staying and working things out. Allowing children to
leave the room and return at will can turn the experience into little
more than a game. Te therapist may want to inform some children that, if
they choose to leave, they choose not to come back to the playroom for
that day. In most cases, the preferable procedure is not to allow
children to leave the playroom until the scheduled time is up, except to
get a drink or to go to the bathroom. Usually, a rule of one trip out
for a drink and one trip out to the bathroom is sufcient. However, this
cannot be adhered to rigidly because some children may genuinely need to
go to the bathroom more than once, as

Therapeutic Limit Setting

many inexperienced therapists have discovered when a puddle suddenly
appeared on the foor---and then the child felt awkward and embarrassed.
To help avoid this problem, parents can be given the responsibility of
taking the child to the bathroom prior to each session. Two of the
playrooms in our Center for Play Terapy have a small bathroom that opens
into the playrooms, thus eliminating these problems. On rare occasions,
a highly anxious child's request to go check to fnd out if a parent is
still in the waiting room might be granted and the therapist would
accompany the child. Te following interaction in the playroom
illustrates the process of setting limits about leaving the playroom: I
don't like any of your stuf in here. I'm leaving. (Moves quickly toward
door.) Terapist: Zoe, our time is not up in the playroom. You just don't
like anything here and want to leave, but our time is not up. (Terapist
glances at his watch.) We have 15 more minutes, and then it will be time
to leave. Zoe:

As pointed out earlier, the therapist uses "our" and "we" because the
therapist and the child are both a part of the relationship, and both
will be leaving the room. Adding the last part of the statement, "and
then it will be time to leave," conveys to the child that she will
eventually get to leave. Otherwise, the child, especially a very young
child, may be afraid she will never get to leave, and "Mommy and Daddy
will never see me again."

Time Limits A 45-minute session is sufcient, and the 15 minutes between
sessions ofen is needed to get the room ready on time for the next
child. In some settings, such as elementary schools or women's shelters,
where the counselor is burdened with huge caseloads, 30-minute sessions
may be quite sufcient. Whatever time span has been communicated to the
child should be adhered to. Te therapist should remind the child when 5
minutes are lef in the session. Young children, who do not have a clear
concept of time,

331

332

Therapeutic Limit Setting

and children who are completely immersed in their play may need an
additional 1-minute time "caution." Tese reminders help children to get
ready to end the experience and give them an opportunity to complete the
task at hand or to move quickly to something else they had planned to
do. Tis latter behavior is typical of many children and speaks of their
planning ahead in their play, or even before they come to the session,
as shown in Paul's comment, "I was gonna play with that truck before I
came, right?" Another possible explanation for children moving quickly
to some other play activity is that they know they will soon leave the
playroom and so feel safe to engage in play activities that touch more
directly on their basic difculties. Tis process is not unlike what is
experienced with adults who sometimes wait until the last few minutes of
a therapy session to discuss signifcant problems. Te objective is not to
get the child out of the room but, rather, to provide the child with an
opportunity to assume responsibility for leaving the room. Terefore, the
therapist's patience and understanding are continued with the ending of
the session. Te therapist experiences no feeling of being rushed to get
the child out of the room. When the therapist announces, "Our time is up
for today. It's time to go to the waiting room where your mother is,"
the therapist stands up to give a visual cue and respects the child's
need to fnish a task by waiting the necessary few seconds or minute. Te
attitude of returning responsibility to the child is continued by
allowing the child to precede the therapist out the door.

Limiting Noise Generally, all noise in a playroom is acceptable.
Children may yell, scream, or bang the blocks of wood together as loud
as they wish and as long as they want. Noise level may have to be
limited in some clinics and schools, however, where people and
activities in adjoining rooms and ofces will be interrupted. Tis is
certainly situational and, although not desirable to have to do so, is
necessitated by practicality. Noise level in play therapy can be a major
problem in elementary schools, because the counselor's ofce is usually
located near the administrative ofces. In that

Therapeutic Limit Setting

case, limiting the noise level would be far better than to have an
administrator prohibit the use of play therapy.

Personal Items Are Not for Playing Prohibiting a child's play with the
therapist's watch, glasses, appointment book in a shirt pocket, and
other personal possessions will signifcantly increase the therapist's
comfort level and acceptance of the child. Allowing a child to try on
and wear the therapist's glasses can lead to disaster and feelings of
anger and rejection toward the child. A simple "My glasses are for me to
wear" is sufcient. If the child persists, the therapist can add, "My
glasses are not for playing with." When a session is to be videoed,
place the cell phone, laptop, or tablet near the therapist's chair, in
an inconspicuous place, out of normal reach of the child, and turn it on
with the display screen turned of prior to bringing the child into the
room. Tis will avoid calling attention to the videoing. If the child
begins to try to play with the laptop or other electronic device, the
therapist can say, "Te laptop is not one of the toys for playing with."

Limiting Water in the Sandbox Children delight in pouring water into the
sandbox and can get caught up in pouring bucket afer bucket of water
until the sand is soupy. Even though the therapist may be comfortable
with soupy sand, several points may need to be considered. Te next child
in the playroom may have been planning to play in the sandbox but does
not because the sand is too wet, thus limiting the second child's
expression. Soupy sand may take days to dry out and, if the sandbox is
made of wood, will quickly rot the bottom. It seems best to limit the
amount of water to a specifc number of containers rather than trying to
limit a certain volume of water. "James, the rule is three containers of
water in the sandbox," should be stated as the child heads back to the
sink for the fourth pan full of water. Tis rule is adhered to regardless
of the size of container chosen by the child, thus avoiding arguments
about the amount of water.

333

334

Therapeutic Limit Setting

Urinating in the Playroom Allowing a child to urinate in the sandbox or
on the playroom foor is highly questionable and shows little regard for
other children who will play in the sandbox, unless the therapist plans
to empty the sandbox each time and put in fresh sand. Children need to
learn to control such acting-out behaviors. Likewise, children should
not be allowed to urinate in the nursing bottle and then drink the
urine.

Beginning Play Therapists' Reactions to Setting Limits Joanna I was very
apprehensive about being able to handle unexpected situations in the
playroom. In the frst play therapy session, the child put his hand on
the door knob as if to open the door and leave. I surprised myself by
responding, "I know you would like to go now, but our time is not up." I
did not become overanxious as I expected. In the second session, the
child obviously did not want to leave the playroom at the end of the
time. I was able to remain patient and calm and to follow through in
getting the child to leave. In both instances the children followed my
expectations without direct instruction.

Carmen When Laura ran for the recorder, I overreacted. Instead of
stating a limit and allowing her to decide, I pulled her hand away.
However, in another session, when Sarah saw the microphone, I did not
touch her. I simply said it was a microphone and not a toy. She accepted
this easily. I guess I learned more from Laura and Sarah than I could
have learned from a book or journal article.

Reference Moustakas, C. (1959). Psychotherapy with children: Te living
relationship. Harper & Row.

Chapter

15

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ... The relationship
with a child in the playroom is always new, creative, exciting, and
diferent with each child. Terefore, predicting what an individual child
will do in a given session is not possible. Trying to anticipate some of
the things children might do and formulating a response ahead of time
can be helpful, however, to the inexperienced therapist. Knowing how to
respond when confronted with an unexpected occurrence can help the
therapist to remain calm and accepting of the child. Planning what needs
to be done and how to respond ahead of time should not diminish the
therapist's creative and spontaneous use of self. No matter how ofen
certain responses, verbal and otherwise, are used, they should never
become perfunctory or routine. Te therapist should always be responding
with compassion, understanding, and the utmost concern for the child's
feelings. With that in mind, the following common problems in the
playroom and possible responses are presented for the therapist to
consider.

What to Do If the Child Is Silent Te child who is silent presents an
interesting paradox for the play therapist and a perplexing problem. Te
therapist uses play therapy because children communicate through play,
and yet when confronted with a child who is verbally silent, may
experience DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-15

335

336

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

thoughts and feelings that the child should talk. Terapists who feel
awkward with children's silence or secretly wish children would talk
should examine their own value systems, their expectations of children,
and their willingness to allow children to be children. Is there ever a
time when a child is not communicating? Must a child verbalize for
communication to occur? Whose needs are being met by trying to get a
child to talk? An honest answer to this last question requires courage
on the part of the therapist to look deep within herself. Does the child
need to talk to complete what the child wants to accomplish? How
accepting is the therapist who wants the child to talk? A reasonable
assumption is that a therapist who feels uncomfortable with a child's
silence is not very accepting of the child. Children are remarkably
sensitive to these inner feelings and attitudes of the therapist and
ofen resist being verbal because they sense being nonverbal is
unacceptable to the therapist, and so they feel rejected. Acceptance
means accepting the child as she is---being silent. Acceptance that is
contingent on the child's talking is not acceptance. Acceptance is not
conditional---there is no "if." In play therapy, the child is
continually sending messages, whether they are verbalized or not (Figure
15.1). Terefore, the therapist must maintain an attitude of
responsiveness that communicates verbally and nonverbally acceptance of
the child's silence. Te therapist must listen carefully to the child,
whether the child speaks or not. Te key to establishing contact with the
silent child is to respond verbally to what the child is doing at the
moment or to what is sensed within the child at the moment. A responsive
attitude is not dependent on the child talking. Te facilitative quality
of this kind of responsiveness can be seen in the following interaction
with a child who was verbally silent: Shun-yin: (Sat in sandbox
methodically spooning sand on his shoes.) Terapist: You're putting lots
of sand right on top of your shoes. Shun-yin: (No response, does not
even look up; continues to spoon sand and concentrates on completely
covering one shoe.)

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

FIGURE 15.1 In the playroom, children can recreate scenes they have
experienced, and words are not necessary for communication to occur.

Terapist: Tere. You got that one completely covered up. Tat one can't be
seen. Shun-yin: (Shifs activity to carefully spooning sand on top of his
lef hand, which is resting on the side of the sandbox. Spills a little
sand on the foor and glances at the therapist.) Terapist: Looks like you
are wondering what I might think about your spilling sand on the foor.
Sometimes accidents happen in here. Shun-yin: (Returns to covering his
other shoe with sand; completes the task.) Terapist: Now they are both
covered up and can't be seen. Shun-yin: (Whispers.) Nobody likes them,
so they are hiding. Shun-yin had been referred for play therapy because
he was completely lef out of activities on the playground and seemed to

337

338

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

have no friends in his second grade. Other children did not seek him out
in the classroom. As this episode demonstrates, the therapist proceeds
at the child's pace, allowing the child to continue to provide direction
for the interaction. Patience is the rule of the day. Te therapist must
be careful to avoid trying to respond to every single thing the child
does. Tat can be very irritating to the child and can also result in the
child feeling self-conscious. Te therapist needs to avoid any behavior
that might result in any pressure for the child to talk. Afer enduring a
long silence, the uncomfortable therapist might ask, "Do you know why
you are here?" in a not-sosubtle attempt to get the child to say
something. Also, the question implies the child has problems and needs
to get on with the business of working on those problems. Such eforts
only serve to alienate the child. (See Chapter 13 for a more complete
description of relating to a child who is silent in the playroom.)

What to Do If the Child Wants to Bring Toys or Food to the Playroom
Sometimes children bring a favorite toy or doll with them to the frst
session, and this may indicate the presence of some anxiety. Terefore,
the child's desire to take a special doll to the playroom would be
recognized and accepted. If the child cradles a special truck under one
arm and accompanies the therapist down the hall toward the playroom,
this would be permissible and could be used as a point of contact with
the child as they walk down the hall. "Brian, I see you brought
something with you to take to the playroom. Tat must be a special toy.
It's all green with big black wheels." Tis response accepts the child's
desire to take the truck to the playroom, implies permission, recognizes
the importance of the truck, and shows appreciation or prizing of the
truck. Does this mean that all items that are special to children are
allowed in the playroom? Absolutely not. Te general rule is to allow
only those items that approximate what would normally be selected for
the playroom. Remote-control toys, mechanical

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

toys, wind-up and watch games, cell phones, glass items, and the like do
not facilitate interaction with children or children's expressions, and
therefore would not be allowed. Favorite books also are not allowed in
the playroom because defensive, cautious, or withdrawn children can
retreat into the book and spend the entire time avoiding interacting
with the new environment or the therapist. Books seldom facilitate
building a relationship with a child in the playroom. Children may come
to the waiting room munching on all sorts of snacks. Excluding food from
the playroom is generally best, because of the distraction precipitated
by eating. Munching on chips is not conducive to involved or intensive
play and also presents problems when children ofer the therapist some of
the food. If the therapist does not take a drink of the child's soda,
will the child feel rejected? Allowing food in the playroom usually
results in the child later insisting that the therapist go get drinks or
snacks. If the child shows up with a half-eaten ice cream bar, the
therapist can show compassion and understanding by allowing the child to
fnish eating before going to the playroom. Te same suggestion does not
apply to waiting for a child to drink all 12 ounces of a can of soda.
Have you ever watched a 4-year-old drink a can of soda? Tat may take
hours! In responding to a forbidden item, the therapist should be
sensitive to the child's feelings. "I know you would like to take that
game with you to the playroom, but the game is for staying here in the
waiting room. It will be here when you come back from the playroom." Te
therapist is then responsible for helping the child to remember 45
minutes later that the item is in the waiting room. Likewise, children
are prone to forget they brought a special item into the playroom, so
the therapist will need to remember at the end of the session.

What to Do If the Child Persists in Seeking Praise As in all
interactions with children, when confronted with a child who persists in
wanting the therapist's evaluation or judgment,

339

340

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

the therapist should be sensitive to the child's feelings and perception
of self. Is the child's persistent demand to know if the therapist likes
the child's picture an indication of insecurity and poor self-esteem, or
a need to control the interaction? Dealing with a child who angrily
demands a specifc answer can severely test the therapist's feelings of
adequacy and acceptance of the child. When confronted with, "Just tell
me. I want to know. Do you think my picture is pretty or not?" the
therapist may have a tremendous temptation to stall by giving the
question back to the child in order to buy time to think of a good
response. A faltering, "You're wondering if I think your picture is
pretty," has little or no facilitative value in such situations and
usually only frustrates or confuses the child, who is lef to wonder if
he is being understood and so insists all the more for an answer.
Children also will sense the therapist's hesitating, tentative quality
and try even harder to force a direct answer. Although it might seem to
be a simple matter of just giving the child an answer, such as "I think
your picture is very pretty," praise directs children's behavior,
restricts their freedom, creates dependency, and fosters external
motivation. In child-centered play therapy, the objective is to free
children to evaluate their own behavior, to appreciate their own
creative beauty, and to develop an internal system of reward and
satisfaction. Praise does not contribute to the development of a
therapeutic relationship and usually indicates that the therapist is not
in touch with the inner dynamics of the child, due to the therapist's
need to have the child feel good. In this situation, the therapist's
response should either clarify the relationship in the playroom or
facilitate the child's prizing of the picture, as in the following
excerpt: (Shows the therapist a picture he has painted.) Do you think my
picture of a house is pretty? Terapist: (Pointing to the picture.) You
painted a red house right there, and hmmm (thoughtfully studying the
picture), you put three windows right there (pointing to the windows)
and, oh, you made this whole top blue all the way across here. And I see
you painted a whole bunch Martin:

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

of orange in this corner. (Said with genuine interest and a real prizing
shown in tone of voice.) When the child's productions are responded to
in this nonevaluative, careful attention to detail, esteeming manner,
the child tends to forget the original question asked and begins to
study her work, getting caught up in noticing what the therapist
notices, and feeling good about what has been produced. Ofen the child
will take over the therapist's role of prizing and will begin to make
comments like, "And up here I painted a big yellow sun, and these birds
right here were kinda hard to make," to which the therapist could
respond, "Yes, I see that big yellow sun, and those do look like birds
alright. Tey were hard to make, but you made them." Te child is now free
to evaluate and appreciate her own work. When the therapist judges or
evaluates something the child has done or created and pronounces it
pretty or makes some other praise response, the therapist also
communicates that he has the power to judge something to be ugly or
negative. Terefore, evaluative responses are avoided. Some children will
persist in their demand for the therapist to say whether or not the
picture is pretty. When this occurs, the therapist can clarify the
relationship in the playroom by saying, "In here the important thing is
not whether or not I think your picture is pretty, but what you think
about your picture." Tis response is too long for some children, and the
therapist may want to say, "What is important is what you think about
your picture." Te child is now free to say whether or not she thinks the
picture is pretty. Evaluation belongs to the child. Terefore, the
therapist returns the power of judgment back to the child. Although the
above example deals with cognitive evaluation, the same approach is used
when feelings about a picture or some other object are the focus: Safa:
See what I am doing? Terapist: You are playing with the clay. Safa: What
should I make? Terapist: In here, you can decide what you want to make.
Safa: All right. I'll make a hippopotamus. Terapist: You have decided to
make a hippopotamus.

341

342

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

(Shapes the clay with much care and holds up a form that somewhat
resembles an animal.) What is it? Do you like it? Terapist: You worked
hard on that. It can be whatever you want it to be. (Said because once
into the actual construction or shaping of an object, children sometimes
change their mind about what they have created.) Safa: But do you like
it? ... Do you think it is good? Terapist: Te most important thing is do
YOU like what you made? Safa:

What to Do If the Child Says You Talk Weird Tat the therapist does not
ask questions, ofer suggestions, or tell them what to do may seem
strange to a child. In some ways, the therapist may sound to the child
as though the therapist is speaking a foreign language, because the
child is not accustomed to hearing her expressed thoughts and feelings
verbalized by anyone. At other times, when a child says, "You talk
funny," she may be referring to the fact that the therapist's responses
or manner of responding do not sound natural. Ofen a stilted or rote
quality is evident, and the interaction doesn't sound at all like a
conversation. When the therapist merely parrots the child's words or
verbally tracks the child's play activity in a perfunctory, reporting
way, the child has good reason to take notice and to be irritated. He
may feel the therapist is just telling, reporting what is being done,
which is an insult because the child already knows what is being done.
Te objective is to be with the child and to convey understanding, not to
report what is seen or heard. "Now the car is on top of the table" and
"You put that car---just---as---close---to the edge as you could get it"
convey entirely diferent messages. Te frst response is objective, takes
note of the facts; the other communicates a feeling of Being With. A
statement of "You talk strange" should be accepted and could be
responded to with, "Oh, so I sound diferent than other people

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

to you." Or the therapist could respond with an explanation: "I'm just
trying to let you know I'm interested in you and what you are doing. I
guess maybe what I say does sound diferent." Sometimes the statement
"You talk weird" is the child's negative "put down" of the therapist or
an expression of resistance; then it could be responded to with, "You
don't like the way I talk," or "Sounds like you might want me to stop
talking." How to respond would depend on the child's meaning, as sensed
by the therapist.

What to Do If the Child Asks for Expressions of Affection Some children
in play therapy may have experienced very little direct expression of
afection and ofen are emotionally needy. Tey may be unsure of just where
they stand in the relationship and may need reassurance that the
therapist does indeed care for them. When a child asks, "Do you like
me?" is no time to refect with, "You're wondering if I like you." Yes,
that is exactly what the child is wondering and is exactly what was
asked. Terefore, telling the child what was just asked is not necessary.
Tis is a time for sharing on the part of the therapist in the developing
of a personal relationship. In the following interaction, the therapist
avoided the child's emotional need and the child quickly changed the
focus of the interaction. Tis was 8-year-old Kyle's sixth session:
(Sitting in the sandbox.) I want to tell you something but ... (Sits
silently for a moment, sifing sand through his fngers.) Terapist: You
have something to tell me, but you're not sure if you want to say it.
Kyle: Yeah. It might hurt your feelings, and you might cry. (Buries his
fngers in the sand and looks down.) Terapist: You don't want to hurt my
feelings. Kyle: Yeah, and ... (Avoids eye contact and digs his hands
deeper into the sand; sits silently for a time then glances at the
therapist.) It's about your children. Terapist: So it's something about
my children. Kyle:

343

344

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

Yeah, and ... Well ... (then quickly, breathlessly) It's ... do you love
me? Terapist: You're wondering how I feel about you. Kyle: Yeah ...
well, do you? Terapist: It's important to you to know how I feel about
you, if I love you or not. Kyle: (Continues to sit in the sand, eyes
averted, hands deep in the sand, his fngers touch something.) Hey,
what's this? (Pulls a toy soldier out of the sand.)

Kyle:

Tis emotional moment with Kyle is lost for now. Te opportunity to
respond to his emotional needs will probably come up again, because such
issues are so important to children. But this particular moment is gone
forever. Te therapist always hopes that her genuine caring for and
prizing of the child will be received and felt by the child. Some
children, though, may need more concrete verifcation and may ask, "Do
you like me?" At such moments, the therapist needs to be very warm,
caring, and personally responsive, because the child's feelings of
self-esteem are vulnerable. If the therapist really does care for and
values the child, expressing that would be appropriate. In our society,
the words "like" and "love" are tossed around like confetti, ofen with
little meaning or signifcance. Terefore, in responding to the child, the
therapist may want to convey her feelings with, "You are special to me,
and this is a special time together." Te same response would be
appropriate if the child asked, "Do you love me?"

What to Do If the Child Wants to Hug or Sit in the Therapist's Lap
Requests for hugs, to sit in the therapist's lap, and so on should be
responded to with caution about the underlying motive. Of course, if the
child hugged the therapist, it would be inappropriate for the therapist
to sit there rigid as a board. Te therapist would want to return the
hug, but there is a need to be cautious. Is this a sexually abused
child? Has the child been taught that if you like or love someone you
will show the person sexually? Does liking to the

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

child mean seductive behavior expressed by touching, fondling, and
rubbing? What if a girl suddenly hops onto the male therapist's lap and
begins to wriggle playfully? Surely the therapist would be aware of the
possibilities of such behavior and would respond accordingly with, "I
know that's fun for you, but I know you like me without your sitting on
my lap," as he gently lifs the child of his lap. For some children, the
most natural thing is to lean against the therapist's leg as they take
in scenes in the playroom. Tey are comfortable, and this is an
unconscious behavior. Tey are just being spontaneous and free. If the
therapist reached out and hugged the child, then one could ask whose
needs are being met. Te therapist would then be taking over the
direction of the relationship and the session. Another child might get
the nursing bottle, begin sucking on it, crawl onto the therapist's lap,
and want to be held like a baby. Te therapist's own comfort level here
may best determine the appropriate response. If the therapist senses
that this is an innocent request, no subtle underlying motive, simply a
child acting out a sequence or reexperiencing feelings of being a baby,
a natural response might be to hold the child for a few minutes. Te
therapist must be prepared, however, for additional requests to sing,
rock, and change the baby's diaper. At some point, a limit will need to
be set on the role the therapist is asked to play. Tis situation can be
an awkward time in the therapeutic process. If the therapist does not
allow the child to crawl onto her lap, the child may feel rejected. Will
cradling a child on her lap stimulate parental feelings of rocking her
own children and thus interfere with the therapist's acceptance of the
child's separateness? Physical and sexual abuse have reached such
epidemic proportions and have become such emotionally charged issues in
our society that no longer can a clear suggestion be given as to the
appropriate response, except to be very cautious. If in doubt about the
child's needs or intent, perhaps a response could be, "I know you want
to pretend to be a baby and suck on the bottle. You can do that in the
baby bed there." Tis response is included here with much reservation,
because it may be misunderstood. However, such a response also may be
necessary in order for the therapist to maintain the conditions
necessary for growth by the child. Just

345

346

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

because cuddling a child feels natural for the therapist, it may not
justify the behavior if the therapist has not carefully examined her own
needs in this area. In most cases, cradling and rocking a child at the
child's request would be very natural and appropriate. As a protection
for the play therapist in such experiences, video recording of sessions
is highly recommended.

What to Do If the Child Tries to Steal a Toy Kasem is 5 years old, and
this is his second time to be in the wonderful playroom. Te playroom
contains more toys than he has ever seen in any place, except where you
buy them. He can't remember the last time his parents bought him a toy,
but now here is all this neat stuf with no price tags. He pretends to
play with the truck while he crams a small car into his pocket with the
other hand, making sure the therapist cannot see what he is doing. But
she does see the car being shoved into his pocket. Kasem continues to
play with the truck until the therapist announces time is up. Now, what
is the therapist to do? Wait for Kasem to be honest and confess? Allow
him to take the car, and hope he will bring it back? Use this as an
opportunity to teach him about honesty? Don't worry about the car
because it cost less than a dollar anyway? None of the above! We must be
concerned about the potential guilt Kasem might feel afer taking the car
home. Te value of the car is immaterial. Te child's behavior and
feelings are what we are concerned about, not the cost. Te playroom is a
place where values are learned by the child, not taught by the
therapist. Some inexperienced therapists might ask, "Kasem, have you
forgotten anything?" Tey might respond with, "Kasem, can you think of
one more thing you need to do before you leave today?" Some might ask,
"Did you take the car?" Questioning of this nature presents a mixed
message to Kasem, because he senses by the insistence that the therapist
knows, but the question implies that the therapist does not know. Could
it be that in such cases the therapist is really being dishonest? Tis
does seem to be the case. Questions about what is already known are
seldom helpful.

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

RULE OF THUMB: Don't ask questions when you already know the answer.
Make statements. Tis is a time to be straightforward, understanding, and
frm. Terapist: I know you would like to take the car with you, but the
car in your pocket (points to pocket) stays here so it will be here for
you to play with next time. Kasem: What car? I don't have any car. (Pats
an empty pocket.) Terapist: You would like to pretend you don't know
where the car is, but the car in that pocket (points to pocket) stays in
the playroom. Kasem: (Puts his hand into his pocket and retrieves the
car.) Questioning Kasem about why he wanted to take the car, moralizing
with, "You know you shouldn't take things that don't belong to you," or
trying to get him to discuss related happenings by asking, "Wonder what
happens when you take things at school?" increases the intensity of the
episode and the possibility of guilt feelings. Tese responses also take
responsibility for leadership and direction away from the child and put
the therapist in charge of deciding what is important. In addition,
asking a child to verbally engage in insightful comparisons ignores the
developmental reasons for placing children in play therapy. Te child's
play in play therapy is not merely preparation for the presumed more
signifcant activity of verbal exploration.

What to Do If the Child Refuses to Leave the Playroom Some children may
express their resistance or need to test limits by refusing to leave the
playroom at the end of the session. Te child's reluctance to leave may
be manipulation, to see how far the time limits and the patience of the
therapist can be stretched. An indication of possible manipulation is
that usually when the child is being manipulative, the child tends to
observe the therapist's

347

348

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

reactions. Te child's facial expression lacks intensity and her body
language indicates an incomplete and superfcial involvement. Other
children may want to stay longer because they are having so much fun. In
this instance, the importance of the project to the child is conveyed in
intensity and sincerity of facial expression as the child concentrates
on the project. Regardless of the reason, sessions should not be
prolonged. A part of the therapeutic process for the child is developing
enough self-control to stop, to say no to her own wishes or desires.
Terefore, the following procedure is recommended for ending a session
with a child who is reluctant to leave. Terapist: Our time in the
playroom is up for today. (Terapist stands up.) It's time to go to the
waiting room where your mother is. Jessica: But I haven't played in the
sandbox yet. (She runs over and begins to play in the sand.) Terapist:
You would like to stay longer to play in the sand, but Jessica, time is
up for today. (Takes two steps toward door, while continuing to look at
Jessica.) Jessica: (Big smile.) Tis is neat stuf. Can't I just stay a
little longer? (Begins to pour sand through the funnel.) Terapist:
(Takes two more steps toward the door.) Tat's really a lot of fun for
you, but it's time to leave. Jessica: You don't like me. If you really
liked me, you would let me stay. (Continues pouring sand.) Terapist: Oh,
so you think if I liked you I would let you stay. I know you really want
to stay longer, but it's time to leave the playroom. (Takes two more
steps, reaches out and turns the doorknob, and pushes the door open a
couple of inches.) Jessica: (Looks up and sees the therapist holding the
door open.) I'm almost through. Just one more minute. Terapist: (Opens
the door wider.) Jessica, I know you want to stay for as long as you
decide, but time is up. (Takes a step through the door while looking
expectantly at Jessica.) Jessica: (Slowly stands up, drops the funnel,
and shufes toward the open door.)

Typical Problems in Play Therapy and What to Do If ...

Tis episode took approximately 4 minutes, which can seem like 40 if the
therapist gets caught up in the pressure of trying to make the child
leave. Even if Jessica had taken 5 or 6 minutes to leave the room, the
most important consideration is that she took herself out of the
playroom even though she wanted to stay, and in the process her dignity
as a person and her self-respect as an individual were not only
preserved but enhanced.

What to Do If the Therapist Unexpectedly Cannot Keep an Appointment
Children deserve just as much consideration and courtesy as adults with
respect to making, keeping, and informing about the canceling of
appointments. Preferably the therapist would inform the child at the
beginning of the session prior to the anticipated absence, followed by a
reminder at the end of the session, with a clear statement that the
child will get to come back to the playroom in 2 weeks or whenever the
next regular appointment time would be. Te anticipated coming absence
should be mentioned at the beginning of the session so the child will
not think the absence is some kind of punishment for something he just
did in the playroom. A general statement about the reason for the
absence, "I'm going to be in another town at a meeting," also helps the
child to understand that the reason for the absence is not something he
has done. If an unexpected occurrence between sessions prevents the
keeping of the next appointment, a text message, e-mail, or phone call
informing the parent and asking the parent to inform the child about the
absence would be a warm expression of the importance of the
relationship. In those rare instances when an emergency prevents the
keeping of an appointment, and notifying the child prior to the
appointment time is not possible, the therapist could leave a personal
phone message for the child or a printed note for the child to read or
to be read to the child. Concern for the child's feelings is always the
rule of the day.

349

Chapter

16

Issues in Play Therapy

The therapeutic relationship in play therapy probably raises more
questions about procedures and process than any other relationship in
the helping professions. Although the play therapist could not possibly
anticipate all of the issues that may arise in the playroom, thinking
through issues prior to beginning relationships with children can help
the therapist to react with assurance to avoid confusing children by
being indecisive. Te issues discussed in this chapter can provide a
starting point for that kind of selfexploration. Te therapist will need
to ask the what and why of her positions on these issues.

Confidentiality Very young children typically are not concerned about
the issue of confdentiality, and yet they need to be informed that this
is a safe, confdential time. Older children are more perceptive and
socially aware, and thus are more likely to wonder who the therapist
might tell and what the therapist might tell, as they have heard parents
tell specifcs of their behavior to friends and relatives. Caution must
be exercised in how the child is informed, lest the child feel this is a
secretive time and feel guilty about keeping it from her parents. Tis is
an especially sensitive area when dealing with sexually abused children
who have been emotionally DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-16

351

352

Issues in Play Therapy

seduced or frightened into secrecy. It should be sufcient to say to most
children, "In this special time, what you say or do is private. I will
not tell your parents or teacher or anyone unless it is necessary to
keep you safe. If you want them to know what you do here, you can tell
them. Tat will be fne. You can decide." Children's artwork should not be
displayed on the playroom wall or in the hallway, because this would be
a violation of their privacy. A transcript of a counseling session with
an adult would not be hung on the wall or displayed in the hallway.
Children's artwork is their way of communicating and should not be shown
to teachers or parents unless a child decides to do so. Displaying
children's artwork on a playroom wall can infuence and structure the
activities of other children who enter the playroom, see the artwork on
the wall, and assume that is what they are supposed to do. Also,
children invariably feel in competition with displayed artwork. A
general guideline when working with children in play therapy is never to
reveal the specifcs of what a child has said or done in the playroom
unless permitted to do so by a professional code of ethics. A child's
exact comments and specifc play behavior are for the therapist's eyes
and ears only and for professional colleagues who are in a consultative
role. What, then, can be shared with parents? Te therapist must use
discretion in trying to assess just how parents will react to or use
such information. Generally, when the issue of confdentiality is
involved, the best procedure is to err on the side of caution. Te
therapist's impressions of the child and the behavior must be conveyed
to the parent without violating the strict rules of confdentiality.
Showing understanding in the face of a parent's desire to know some
confdential information can help to avoid the parent feeling "put of"
and resentful or angry. Conveying only general information to parents
without them feeling put of requires great skill by the therapist. A
general rule is to discuss general observations and avoid revealing
specifc behaviors, as in the following interaction with a parent: "Chris
seems to be angry. How is his anger expressed at home?" It would be
inappropriate to say, "Chris is really angry. He spent 15 minutes
beating on the Bobo so hard I thought he would break it."

Issues in Play Therapy

Confdentiality is a difcult issue when working with children. Te parents
are, afer all, legally responsible for the child, and they may genuinely
want to know how they can be helpful. Tey also pay the bills for therapy
and may feel they have a right to know what they are paying for and what
is going on in the sessions. Where does the parent's right to know end
and the child's right to privacy begin? Tis is a difcult question to
answer, and the decision is always dependent on the parent's ability to
use the information appropriately, the content of the information, the
emotional vulnerability of the child, and the physical safety of all
parties involved. Children must always be protected from potential
physical harm from themselves and others, as in the case of threatened
suicide or a threat to run away. Parents must be informed, and the
therapist will need to be well versed in taking parents through
precautionary steps to help ensure children's safety when suicide is a
possibility. As a part of the procedure, parents need to be cautioned to
hide medications, weapons, kitchen agents for clogged drains, caustic
cleaners, and so on.

Participation in Child's Play Whether or not to participate in
children's play is an important decision the therapist must make prior
to the onset of therapy, and although it is largely a function of the
therapist's personality, it should be based on a rationale consistent
with the therapist's objectives. Te child centered play therapist is
committed to a belief in the child's capacity for self-direction and
avoids intrusion of her personality into the child's play. Tis is the
child's special time to direct his own life, to make decisions, to play
without unnecessary interference, to bring forth in play whatever is
yearning to be expressed. Te session belongs to the child, and the
therapist's needs and directions are to be kept out. Tis is not a social
time, and the child does not need a playmate. Te therapist is there to
help the child hear herself, see herself, understand herself, and be
herself in the safety of an accepting relationship. Although the child
invites the therapist to play, the child may not particularly want a
playmate. Some children feel obligated to

353

354

Issues in Play Therapy

invite the therapist to participate. Te child may be asking for the
therapist's participation because of a belief that doing so is what is
expected or because the child wants to be liked by the therapist. An
invitation to play could mean the child is looking for approval or for
the security of having someone else determine the direction of the play
(Figure 16.1). Such a request could be the child's way of testing the
therapist's level of permissiveness. Te therapist must struggle with the
question of what is the objective of participation and what will be
accomplished. Is the real motivation to make contact with the child or
to meet the therapist's need to be included? When faced with a nonverbal
child who stands in the middle of the playroom, an anxious therapist
might pick up a doll, begin to straighten the doll's clothes, and put a
shoe on the doll's foot hoping the child will follow his lead and begin
to play. Is the therapist's motivation to free the child or to have the
child do something so the therapist will feel comfortable?

FIGURE 16.1 The therapist relies on the child for direction when
participating in the child's play, thus keeping the child in the lead.

Issues in Play Therapy

Participation in a child's play does not guarantee the child will feel
more included, nor does it assure emotional involvement with the child.
Te attitude of the therapist is the crucial variable, not the actual
play participation. When the therapist is Being With, is fully involved
and experiencing with the child, and is successfully communicating that
involvement to the child, the child seldom asks the therapist to overtly
participate. When the therapist is asked to participate, sometimes an
underlying message is present. Te child's message could be, "I don't
feel I have your attention. You don't seem to be involved with me or
interested in what I am doing." Perhaps the central issue is whether or
not the child feels the therapist is participating. Te therapist can be
actively involved with the child without playing. Te attitude of the
therapist is more important than the participation. Choosing not to be
directly involved in the child's play does not necessarily predispose
the therapist to be a passive observer, as some writers have claimed. A
nonplaying emotionally involved relationship with the child in which the
therapist indirectly participates in the child's play mentally and
emotionally is quite possible. Just as words are sometimes not necessary
for two people to be emotionally involved with each other, so too,
participation in a child's play is not necessary for involvement. Te
therapist's genuine involvement and feeling of being with the child will
be sensed by the child, just as a lack of involvement and interest will
be sensed and felt by the child. Although the therapist must guard
against intruding in the child's play or inhibiting the child,
participation in the child's play does not automatically impede the
therapeutic process. Some experienced play therapists do an artful job
of participating in an unobtrusive way. If the therapist chooses to
participate in the child's play, the therapist must (a) keep the child
in the lead, (b) keep the child in view, (c) maintain an
adult--therapeutic role (the therapist is not the child's playmate), and
(d) maintain appropriate boundaries through limit setting. If the
therapist chooses to participate in the child's play, that would be done
as a following participant, taking cues from the child. Asking the child
to defne the role or activity of the therapist allows the child to lead
the way.

355

356

Issues in Play Therapy

Following the child's lead does not imply doing just anything the child
directs the therapist to do. Te therapist would not drink the red
tempera paint, spank the child, yell obscenities at the child, allow the
child to pour sand or water inside the therapist's blouse, and so on
just because the child directed that. I once consulted on a court case
involving an episode in which the "play therapist" (I use the term
loosely here), at the direction of a 5-year-old child who was pretending
to be a baby, pulled the child's underwear of and used tissue to wipe
the child's penis. Te "therapist" justifed this behavior on the basis
that she was following the child's lead, as was recommended in play
therapy literature. Obviously, this "play therapist" did not understand
the concept of following the child's lead and had limited understanding
of boundary issues and ethical behavior. Te therapist's participation in
the child's play can facilitate the therapeutic relationship only if the
therapist's participation facilitates and promotes independence and not
dependence in the child. Even when following the child's directions for
play, an everpresent possibility is that of infuencing or inhibiting the
child's play. When Susie tells the therapist to draw a picture of birds,
sits watching, and then tries to copy the therapist's drawing, the needs
of the therapist seem to be being met, rather than the therapist
facilitating opportunities for the child's positive growth. Confrmation
for this conclusion comes from Susie's statement later in the waiting
room, "She (the therapist) draws better pictures than I do." Te
therapist must be sensitive to her own potential feelings that may be
aroused as a result of playing. Chasing and retrieving darts for 20
minutes may result in the therapist feeling irritated, frustrated, or
even angry toward the child. Terefore, the skilled therapist would stop
long before negative feelings emerged or would not participate in such a
game altogether by returning responsibility to the child by responding,
"If you want the dart, you can get the dart." Attempting to respond with
understanding while running around the room can be very difcult.
Participation in a child's play may be most efective when the
therapist's participation is limited in a controlled manner---allowing
herself to be

Issues in Play Therapy

handcufed, for example, but not to be led endlessly around the room. Te
skilled therapist who is ever mindful of the risks of infuencing the
child or of being manipulated is not likely to compromise therapeutic
efectiveness by limited participation in the child's play. However,
reservations about the subtle infuence of the presence of the therapist
in the play still hold. Te question of whether or not to participate in
a child's play depends on the child, the situation, and the therapist. A
nonplaying or limited play relationship may be the most efective way to
assure nonstructuring and that the time together belongs to the child.
If the therapist chooses not to play, the suggestion can be made for the
child to act out the therapist's part.

Accepting Gifts From Children in Play Therapy What an awkward situation
this can be. In many homes, children have been taught by their parents'
behavior that love, afection, and appreciation are expressed by giving
presents. Parents returning from a trip bring gifs home for the
children. Special toys are purchased by parents as a way of asking
forgiveness or to try to restore a damaged relationship. Consequently,
children learn to express feelings through gif giving. Te natural result
is that they may sometimes bring the therapist a gif to express their
liking for this special person in their life or to try to win the
therapist back afer giving him a particularly difcult time in the
playroom. Timing of the gif, then, is an important consideration in
determining whether or not to accept a gif. Did the child break several
limits in the previous session and is now using a gif to make amends for
giving the therapist a hard time? If that is the case, acceptance of the
gif sends the wrong message about how to appropriately restore a
relationship. Cost of the gif is also a factor. Acceptance of expensive
gifs can obligate the therapist or cause the therapist to lose his
objectivity. Additionally, the code of ethics of some professional
organizations sets a dollar limit on receiving gifs. Tis factor is
generally

357

358

Issues in Play Therapy

a lesser concern because the dollar amount is ofen much higher than a
child's gif might typically be. When a child appears with a present in
hand, the therapist will very likely experience an emotional tug to
accept the present. Afer all, the therapist does not want to disappoint
the child. But what are the potential consequences of accepting a gif?
"If I do this, what will the child learn? Will this help to strengthen
our relationship? Will this facilitate the child's inner growth as a
person? Will this help the child to become more independent?" Tese are
important questions the therapist examines in relation to his own
behavior. Accepting gifs may help perpetuate a kind of external giving
that is separate from self. Te play therapy relationship is an emotional
relationship, and what is shared emotionally is more signifcant than
what could be shared in some tangible way. In play therapy, children
learn to share themselves emotionally. Sharing a gif may blur the
signifcance of emotional sharing. Emotional gifs are more powerful and
more satisfying than tangible gifs. An important factor afecting the
decision to accept a gif is the kind of gif presented by the child.
Artwork or something created by the child is an extension of the child
and therefore, can be viewed as an extension of emotional giving because
it is a part of the child, what the child has created. Accepting
nonpurchased items would be acceptable in most cases, such as a fower
picked by the child or a drawing. Te therapist receives such gifs with
warm appreciation, prizing with tone of voice, commenting on details,
but, as in the playroom, avoiding overt expressions of praise. "Oh, what
a beautiful picture," would be unacceptable. Prizing and appreciation
can be shown by reaching out and gently, tenderly taking the object,
commenting on it, and carefully placing the object on a nearby table or
shelf. Gifs that are accepted should not be displayed, because this
might foster competition or encourage other children to bring gifs. Tese
special items should be kept in a special place until termination of
play therapy. Tey can be a great source of satisfaction if the child
asks to see the item later. Some children will hand the therapist a
painting and state, "You can hang this on

Issues in Play Therapy

your wall," to which the therapist can respond. "I have a place in my
ofce where I keep special things like this so they will be safe."
Accepting purchased items, even though they may be inexpensive, such as
a candy bar, can restrict the possibility of emotional sharing by the
child and may subtly obligate the therapist in some unconscious way. A
determining factor is whether or not the purchased item is given as a
preplanned present or is spontaneously shared, as in the case of
unwrapping a stick of gum, breaking it in two pieces, and sharing
one-half. Among my prized possessions are two tiny, little, round pieces
of pink and yellow candy spontaneously shared in the waiting room by a
3-year-old child from a batch clutched in her fst just before she popped
the rest into her mouth. Te issue of accepting a gif could perhaps most
easily be dealt with by a blanket rule of no gifs that were purchased,
regardless of cost. However, I feel very awkward about that. So much
depends on the child's intent and the spontaneity of the moment.
Declining a gif can be a very awkward and trying moment for the
therapist, but it is so important for children to learn they can give of
themselves and that presents are not necessary to express emotional
meanings. At such moments, the therapist will want to convey sensitive
understanding and appreciation. In declining the gif, the therapist can
respond with, "You bought this just for me. Tat says you were thinking
about me. I really appreciate that, but here you don't have to give a
gif to say you like me. I would like for you to have this." Or, if the
item is a present purchased at the store just for the therapist, "I
would like for you to take this and get something for yourself." In
elementary schools where giving gifs to teachers at Christmas time is a
common practice, declining a Christmas gif might be confusing to a
child. No hard and fast rule prevails in regard to the issue of gif
giving. A sensitive, empathic therapist should be able to handle the
situation with a minimum of frustration by using the best judgment in
considering (a) the timing of the gif giving, (b) the nature of the gif,
(c) the cost of the gif, and (d) the implications of accepting or not
accepting the gif.

359

360

Issues in Play Therapy

Giving the Child a Reward at the End of Sessions or a Memento at
Termination Te practice of giving a child a piece of candy or a happy
face sticker, stamping a picture on the back of the child's hand, and so
on at the end of each play therapy session is not conducive to
therapeutic growth and is inconsistent with the rationale for using play
therapy. Children have already learned in other experiences that the
purpose of such gifs is to reward "good" behavior, and they know how to
obtain them. Terefore, such rewards inhibit children's behaviors in the
play therapy experience. Children who receive such rewards are not as
likely to express aggressive behaviors in the playroom, try to shoot the
play therapist with the dart gun, make a mess, tell the play therapist
they hate her, or reveal personal issues. Play experiences for children
are intrinsically rewarding. Tey do not need a reward for playing.
Terefore, whose needs are being met by the giving of a gif? A related
issue is that of giving the child a memento at termination of the play
therapy relationship, "so the child will have something by which to
remember the therapist and the experience." Tis has been an emotional
relationship, and cannot possibly be adequately represented by a
tangible item. What a child carries away in his heart is infnitely more
important than anything the child can hold in his hand. What is held in
the hand can be lost. What is held in the heart can never be lost. Does
the therapist need to be remembered? If so, why? Te therapist must be
willing to turn loose of the child, to no longer be needed by the child.
Tis turning loose process begins in the frst encounter with the child
and is a continual process of returning responsibility to the child, a
continual process of empowering the child. If the therapist is never
remembered by the child, that should be okay. Te therapist's
responsibility is to help the child grow strong enough to no longer need
him.

Asking the Child to Clean Up Some children seem to need to be messy to
fully express themselves. Tey play with toys and quickly move on to
other toys

Issues in Play Therapy

without putting the frst items back on the shelf. Some children may be
like Carlos, whose home situation was chaotic; his play expressed what
his life was like, disorganized and messy. At the end of the sessions,
toys were all over the foor. A messy playroom could represent a chaotic
home. Should Carlos be asked to clean up? What are the implications of
such a request? Whose needs are being met by asking the child to clean
up? Some play therapists feel they are "letting a child get away with
something" if the child walks out of the playroom leaving a mess. Some
therapists may ask the child to clean up because they are irritated or
angry at the child for being so messy, and they personalize the child's
behavior, feeling the behavior is an act against them. Some therapists
rationalize that if the child is to be helped to function outside the
playroom, then the child must learn there are consequences associated
with her behavior in the playroom. Terefore, the child must be made to
clean up. If the therapist is doing an adequate job of setting
therapeutic limits when they are appropriate in other areas of play,
then the question of learning to control self should not be an issue. In
examining this issue, the therapist should reexamine the rationale for
placing children in play therapy. Children need the toys and materials
to fully express themselves and the totality of their life experiences.
Toys are children's words, and play is their language. If that is the
case, then a request that the child clean up is a request to clean up
their "language"---what has been expressed. Would a therapist with adult
clients ever ask them to clean up their language or talk less
graphically about a topic? Probably not. What therapist would ever ask
an adult client to dispose of the Styrofoam cofee cup or sweep up the
mud tracked on the carpet, or ask an emotional client to gather up the
tear-soiled tissues before leaving? When this kind of comparison is made
with adults, it becomes clear we are saying children are less respected
than adults if we ask them to clean up. Afer all, if learning the
consequences of one's behavior really is the issue, is it not also
important that adults learn the consequences of their behavior? Afer
observing a play therapy session, a graduate student wrote,

361

362

Issues in Play Therapy

I wonder at what point it becomes appropriate to help James recognize
the consequences of his messy behavior. Granted, he didn't break things,
but the room was in total disarray when he lef. Is there a point in the
therapy where this freedom and release of energy needs to be modifed?
Perhaps the play therapist should say, "James, you can decide what you
want to do in here, but at the end of our time we will put everything
back the way it was."

Would such a statement ever be made to an adult who was being verbally
aggressive, distraught, and loud? If play is the child's language, why
can't the play language be accepted? Another graduate student wrote, "I
have made a few attempts at involving the child in the clean-up process.
Twice this has been with a very messy child. I suspect my motive was
more for punishment than therapy." Tis student's honesty is a good
reminder of the importance of asking whose needs are being met by asking
the child to clean up. In the play therapy relationship, what is
expressed and experienced in play is much more signifcant in the
therapeutic process than learning how to clean up. Requiring a child to
clean up or beginning to clean up in an efort to model for the child
will inhibit the child's expression in the next session, because the
message most likely to be internalized by the child is that making a
mess really is not permissible. Also, the child may feel punished for
having made a mess. Te therapist is also faced with a dilemma if the
child refuses to clean up. What is the therapist to do now, engage in a
physical battle to make the child clean up or allow the request to be
ignored? Neither option is acceptable. What choice can be presented to
the child: no session next week, or place all the toys that are lef on
the foor of limits for the next session? What if all of the toys in the
room are lef in the middle of the foor? Tese options are just not
acceptable. Trying to get the child to clean up takes the therapist out
of the role of acceptance and understanding she has worked hard to try
to communicate throughout the session. Te therapist also should avoid
trying to encourage a child to clean up with responses such as, "Boy,
you remembered just where to put that back on the shelf," or "You do
such a good job of cleaning up."

Issues in Play Therapy

Because cleaning up is not the responsibility of the child, that leaves
the therapist or some other adult to do the job. Te proposed solution by
some authors of having a neutral third party or a maid clean up is
fnancially unrealistic. I know of no play therapy room anywhere in the
United States that has a maid or neutral third party who cleans up afer
each session. Tat leaves the therapist to clean up, and although not
ideal, that is workable. A child who is being messy can severely test
the limits of the therapist's acceptance as the therapist watches Tinker
Toys being spilled all over the foor, the dollhouse furniture dumped,
and all the toy soldiers lef scattered in and around the sandbox. As the
therapist will need time to put the room in order for the next child,
the 15 minutes following a 45-minute session is generally sufcient. If a
child is especially messy and additional time is needed to return the
room to order, the session can be shortened by a few minutes without
announcing the time change to the child. To announce the change would
cause the child to feel punished for being messy. An additional
consideration is the playroom must be made ready for the next child to
begin on time.

Informing Children of the Reason They Are in Play Therapy Some play
therapists inform children of the specifc reason they are in play
therapy, believing the child's knowing is necessary for behavior change
to occur. Te child then is expected to work on the identifed problem,
and the therapist assists by structuring to keep the session content
focused on the problem. Tis poses the problem of placing the therapist
in the lead and the sessions becoming problem focused rather than child
focused. Tis approach also assumes that the identifed problem is indeed
the dynamic to be dealt with and overlooks the possibility of other or
deeper issues that may concern the child. Te position of child-centered
play therapy is that the focus of the therapist should always be on the
child and that informing children of the specifc reason they are coming
to the playroom is not necessary for change and growth to occur.
Children's

363

364

Issues in Play Therapy

behavior can and does change without them knowing what they are working
on or, indeed, without working on trying to change anything. If an
understanding of the reason for coming to the playroom was necessary
before change could occur, how could a depressed 4-year-old or a
manipulative 3-year-old or a 2-year-old who tries to injure her baby
brother ever be helped to change? What would 7-year-old Ryan, who had
terminal cancer, have been told he needed to work on? Should he have
been told, "You are coming to the playroom because you are dying, and
you need to accept death?" Certainly not! Ryan focused on issues of
living, just like the rest of us. Impending death was only a part of his
living. What therapist is omnipotent enough to know what a dying child
should work on in therapy? Tis may be viewed as an extreme example, but
perhaps an extreme example is necessary to force us to examine the
essence of an issue. If a requirement for behavioral change is really
necessary for change, then it should be necessary in all cases,
irrespective of age or presenting problem. To volunteer a reason why
children are coming to the playroom is to imply that something about
them is unacceptable. Te child-centered therapist avoids any implication
that something is wrong with children or that they need to correct or
change their behavior or themselves. Acceptance by the therapist
promotes self-acceptance by children, and both are prerequisites to
change and growth. Te specifcs of some reasons for referral would be
much too punishing to a child. Providing a general reason is best when a
child is curious. If a child asks, "Why am I coming to the playroom?"
the therapist can respond, "Your parents are concerned because sometimes
things don't seem to go very well for you at home, and they thought you
would like to have a special time in the playroom each Tuesday just for
you."

Bringing a Friend to the Playroom Prohibiting the bringing of a friend
to the playroom is practiced by play therapists, although not
universally, from all theoretical approaches (Ginott & Lebo, 1961).
Within the child-centered

Issues in Play Therapy

approach, diferences in approach to this question range from Ginott's
(1994) serious reservations about allowing children to select their own
group members for play therapy to Axline's (1969) conclusion that, "If
the therapy is truly child-centered, the child-chosen group should be
more valuable to the child choosing the group than a group chosen by the
therapist" (p. 41). According to Dorfman (1951), If therapy can be
efective when it is not solely a relationship between two people, as in
group therapy, then perhaps allowing a child to bring a friend to an
individual therapy session need not hinder the process. ... Surely, it
cannot always be a mere accident that a child brings one person rather
than another to his play contact. Sometimes a child may bring in, one by
one, those people who represent his areas of difculty, and then dismiss
each one as his need disappears. (p. 263)

Allowing a child to bring a friend to the playroom would be
contraindicated for children who need the therapist's total attention
and acceptance, and for those who are sensitive to comparisons with
other children. Children who have been sexually abused and those who are
overly aggressive may perpetrate sexual or aggressive behaviors on other
children in the playroom and should be in individual play therapy.
Traumatized children usually are very needy and require all of the
therapist's attention. When another child is present, the therapist must
be extra careful not to imply by her response that what one child is
doing or has accomplished is better. If a cautious child brings a friend
who is more active, the therapist may unintentionally respond verbally
more to the active child simply because more observable activity is
present. Responding to one child more than another also can be perceived
as comparative and critical. "Jennifer, you stacked those blocks just
like you wanted them to be" is a natural tracking response, but what
kind of response is likely to be made to a child who is sitting holding
a doll or sitting in the sandbox sifing sand through her fngers? Will
the absence of a similar response imply that what the active child is
doing is better? Perhaps it would be best for this kind of child to
bring a friend at a later date, when the

365

366

Issues in Play Therapy

relationship with the therapist is well-established and can weather some
storms. Consideration also must be given to the timing of the child's
request to bring a friend. Does the request follow a particularly
difcult session in which numerous limits were set? Does the child fear
he is no longer liked? Will the presence of another child interfere with
the rebuilding of the relationship? Has the child just revealed
something he feels awkward about, is embarrassed over, or is afraid
should not have been revealed? Te presence of another child changes the
dynamics of the relationship rather dramatically. Some children may be
reluctant to share very personal material about themselves or their
family with an invited friend present who has not been a part of the
developing relationship, as in group play therapy. Children may compete
with one another for the therapist's attention, or one child may spend
most of the session showing toys to the therapist, piling things in the
therapist's lap to capture attention, or standing near the therapist
trying to keep attention through conversation. Te skill of the therapist
is a major consideration in determining whether or not to allow a child
to invite friends, because the dynamics of the interaction increase
geometrically with the addition of another child. Everything is
potentially intensifed. Te situation is not simply the addition of one
more child. Children stimulate each other, challenge each other, and
activities requiring limit setting are exacerbated. Unique skills and
training are required to be efective in group play therapy. Inviting
friends is not a typical request and, when allowed afer consideration of
the needs of the child and the therapist, can be benefcial to children.
If group play therapy is determined to be the most efective way to meet
a child's needs, then compassionate concern for all children who hurt
would dictate that those children in need of therapy should be given
priority in the forming of a group. For children who have not been
sexually abused and children who are not overly aggressive, the
therapist must consider that there may be a valid reason for a child's
request to bring a friend. Te child's lead may need to be followed here.

Issues in Play Therapy

Inviting Parents or Siblings to the Playroom Te playroom usually is such
an exciting place to children that they may want to show their parents
or siblings this special place. However, the request to do so may come
in the middle of a session. Just what the child has in mind should be
determined before allowing a parent or sibling to join the session.
Generally, parents are not allowed in sessions. Usually, allowing a
child to show parents and siblings the playroom afer a session has ended
is suffcient. If the child requests again at a later time and the
request is not associated with wanting to show something that has been
made or manipulation to get Mom into the playroom, then the child may
want to communicate some important message to the parent. Te concerns
related to inviting a friend also hold true for inviting parents. Te
presence of a parent in the playroom can severely restrict the
development of the relationship between the therapist and the child. Te
presence of a parent in a play therapy session should be a rare
occasion. Once in the playroom, an anxious child's request to go get a
parent would be denied with careful attention to responding to feelings.
On the other hand, an overly anxious child's request for Mother would be
allowed, lest the child's anxiety level become debilitating. If siblings
are invited in at the end of a session to see the room, care must be
taken to see that they do not use this as a play time. Te playroom is a
special place for building relationships, and what goes on in the
playroom is always consistent. If at a later time the sibling needed
play therapy, a new kind of relationship would need to be established.

References Axline, V. (1969). Play therapy. Ballantine. Dorfman, E.
(1951). Play therapy. In C. R. Rogers (Ed.), Client-centered therapy
(pp. 235--277). Houghton Mifin. Ginott, H. (1994). Group psychotherapy
with children: Te theory and practice of play therapy. McGraw-Hill.
Ginott, H., & Lebo, D. (1961). Play therapy limits and theoretical
orientation. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 25, 337--340.

367

Chapter

17

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

The therapeutic process of children's growth in play therapy sessions
and assessing children's readiness for ending play therapy sessions have
received little attention in the literature. Perhaps these topics have
not been dealt with because the answers are not easily determined. Te
void also may exist because play therapists have difculty dealing with
the ending of relationships. Typically, therapists do not enter into
relationships with a conscious goal to move toward ending them. Afer
all, we are in the business of building and facilitating relationships.
Te ending of the therapeutic relationship, however, is just as important
as the beginning of the relationship and should be dealt with openly. Te
issue of ongoing change or progress is actually more signifcant to the
therapist than to the child and is a result of the therapist's need to
know rather than a prerequisite for the child's growth. Seldom do
children wonder if they are making progress. Tey are simply and
completely engaged in the continual process of the unfolding of the
wonder of living. Te child centered play therapist appreciates this
process with children. But, at the same time, practical issues must be
dealt with, such as the therapist's own feelings about needing to know
that change is indeed occurring and the reality of not keeping children
in therapy forever. At some point in time, decisions must be made. It is
hoped that children will always be a part of these decisions. DOI:
10.4324/9781003255796-17

369

370

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Determining Therapeutic Movement Within Sessions During the process of
play therapy, changes within children are not always easily determined
or observable in the context of their expressions in the playroom.
Children may demonstrate similar kinds of play behavior session afer
session, with no immediately observable change in pattern or content of
play. At the same time, changes in children's behavior outside the
playroom may indeed be observable. Tis can be accounted for by
recognizing that, as children's needs to express themselves in negative
ways are met in the playroom, they have less need to express those needs
in inappropriate ways outside the playroom. Tese negative behaviors can
be discarded and creative energy focused on more positive behaviors. At
the same time, children may continue to express similar previously
exhibited behaviors in the playroom because this is a safe place to do
so, and also because the need to express and examine those feelings has
not been completely met. When children continue to demonstrate the same
behaviors session afer session, the therapist may begin to experience
some anxiety because of her need to have things happen more quickly and
the need to see observable change. Te therapist may begin to experience
some doubt about her own adequacy and the adequacy of the approach. We
all want to know we are doing well, that we are being helpful to
children. When there is a lack of concrete observable change in
children's playroom behavior, the therapist may experience doubt about
herself as a therapist, begin to lose faith in the process, and decide
that a more directive approach is needed. Terapists need to be aware
that this is usually a move to meet their own needs to feel more
adequate and is not really an attempt to meet children's needs. Te
responsibility of children in play therapy does not include satisfying
the therapist's schedule for change in behavior. Children have their own
inner-developed schedules, and the therapist must wait patiently for the
self of each child to emerge. Seldom do children make gigantic,
insightful breakthroughs in play therapy. Growth is a slow process and
so is change in behavior. Te therapist must be patient with the process.
Te therapist who expects momentous and dramatic changes by

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

children will probably be disappointed and, if unaware of this need,
very likely will become inconsistent in his approach by trying frst one
technique and then another in an efort to bring about more rapid change.
When the therapist is feeling the greatest urge to do something diferent
may well be the time when the therapist needs to be most consistent,
patient, and understanding. To do otherwise may result in the child
feeling rejected and wanting to please the therapist. Children's
nonverbal behavior can provide signifcant cues to understanding the
totality of their way of behaving or functioning and useful information
in understanding the therapeutic process in play therapy. Change is
occurring in hundreds of little ways, and the therapist just has to look
for those indications of the process of change.

Dimensions of Change Firsts (First-Time Behaviors) Tat movement in the
therapeutic process is occurring can be determined by carefully noting
in each session those behaviors that the therapist can recall as having
occurred for the frst time in the relationship with the child. For
example, this may be the frst time in the initial fve sessions that
Jason has played near the therapist, or perhaps Jason played very near
the therapist and this is the frst time he has ventured to play in
another part of the room away from the therapist. Perhaps Kathy has
painted pictures at the easel every session, and in this session she
does not paint. Te therapist needs to recognize that a reason does exist
for Kathy's not painting in this session. Something is diferent. An
emotional change has occurred. Tis may be the frst session in which the
therapist has had to set a limit on Kathy's behavior, or the frst
session in which limits have not had to be set. Such changes in behavior
signal emotional changes within the child. Tis may be the frst time in
six sessions a child has played in the sandbox or the frst time in six
sessions a child has not played in the sandbox. Tese seemingly
insignifcant happenings are signifcant.

371

372

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

RULE OF THUMB: Look for frsts. A dramatic frst in one of my play therapy
sessions with 5-yearold Jaxson---an extremely withdrawn, cautious child
("shy" is avoided in references to children because it carries a
negative connotation)---occurred in our fourth session together, when he
handed me the alligator puppet to hold for him while he went looking for
something else. For some observers, the signifcance of this behavior
might go unnoticed. For Jaxson to approach me in this way for the frst
time indicated an emotional change in how he felt about our
relationship. Tis happening seemed to indicate he now felt more
comfortable in the relationship and safe enough to approach me directly.
Handing me the alligator puppet was also his way of including me in his
play for the frst time. To approach me in this way required courage on
his part and a feeling that he could direct his own play. Could this be
the beginning of becoming self-directing, of taking care of himself?
Change for children begins in little ways like this, not with some
magnifcently insightful, verbalized pronouncement of a decision to
forevermore be independent and self-directing. Perhaps such meaningful
change begins with Ali going through an entire sixth session without
once asking the therapist for help or trying to get the therapist to
make a decision for her, as she had done in the previous fve sessions.
Could signifcant meaning be associated with the fact that Brent plays
out elaborate scenes of cooking food and feeding every single doll in
every session, and now he does not cook or feed any dolls in this
session? I think so, just as there is signifcance in the fact that this
is the frst time Tammy has played in the sandbox in the frst six
sessions. A careful examination of such frsts across sessions can help
the therapist become aware of signifcant movement in the therapeutic
process.

Themes in Play Behavior A second dimension that can provide insight into
the inner emotional dynamics of the child is the development of themes
that

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

occur in the child's play. Emotional experiences and happenings that are
important or have in some way signifcantly impacted children will ofen
show up as repeated behaviors in their play. A theme is the recurrence
of certain events or topics in a child's play, either within a session
or across several sessions. A key point here is the recurrence of the
play afer some lapse of time or an intervening period of play in which
the theme is not played out. For several minutes, Haley repeatedly
buries a dinosaur in the sandbox, digs it up, and buries the dinosaur
again. Ten she goes over to the easel and paints pictures, returns to
the sandbox and repeats the burying behavior. She then plays with the
medical kit for a few minutes and returns to the sandbox to continue
burying the dinosaur. Tis repeated play behavior during one play therapy
session, with breaks between the repeated play, may indicate the
development of a theme. Shawn's play with the rubber snake for 20
minutes in our frst play therapy session would not be considered a
theme, even though that would be considered an unusually long time for a
4-yearold to engage in such play. Although the play may be signifcant
and an important occurrence in the developing relationship, the
expression must occur more than once or twice to be considered a theme.
When Shawn came to the playroom for his second session and again played
out the same scene of the rubber snake crawling around the dollhouse,
sticking its head into each window and door, and then slowly and
deliberately crawling around the top of the dollhouse, I suspected a
theme. Tis suspicion was confrmed when Shawn repeated the same play in
the third session. At this point, I learned that Shawn's home had been
burglarized twice just a few weeks prior to his frst play therapy
session. In play therapy sessions three through eight, 8-year-old Jacob
played out a scene involving the horses, corral, and barn. He pretended
to put a bridle on the horse and commented, "It doesn't hurt his mouth."
Ten he took the horse to the barn and said, "When the horse kicks the
stall, a light comes on over here in the house where the man stays who
takes care of the horses so he will know the horse needs help." Te
signifcance of this play is evident when it is known that Jacob was
receiving electrical stimulation twice a week to strengthen the muscles
in his jaws as a part of

373

374

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

his speech therapy program. Small electrodes were placed inside his
mouth and the procedure was generally painless. However, sometimes the
muscles got tense from the stimulation, and Jacob would let the speech
therapist know he was experiencing some discomfort by pressing a button
to make a light come on. Frequency of repetition of play behaviors can
indicate emotional issues the child is playing out. Te intensity and
emotional energy, not physical energy but emotional energy, expended by
a child when repeating play behaviors is another factor that may
identify a theme. When the play therapist is experiencing Being With a
child, this intensity is sensed and felt by the therapist. Tere is a
feeling of knowing something important is being experienced. When the
theme is no longer observable that can be an indication the child has
been able to emotionally move toward resolution and adjustment. Te
purpose for clarifying themes is to help the therapist understand what a
child is exploring, experiencing, and working on in the play therapy
process. Tis increased awareness and understanding can help the
therapist to be more sensitive and responsive to a child's internal
struggle. Te purpose is not to provide information for the child or to
facilitate insight to meet an objective of promoting change in a child.
Determining what a child's symbolic play behavior means is a challenge
and ofen at best an educated guess on the part of the therapist and
could be wrong. Tere is also the factor of perception and the
possibility that the therapist is seeing in the child's play only what
the therapist is looking for. (You may want to read again about the
child in the section on Background Information in Chapter 9.) Te play
therapist who is well aware of these cautions can have some assurance of
accuracy when the play behaviors or events closely approximate a known
signifcant event in a child's life, as in the case of the child's home
that had been burglarized or the child in speech therapy. Te following
transcript of Paul, a fearful, acting-out child in play therapy,
contains several themes. Te theme may not always be readily
recognizable, because what is being played, the activity, or the toys
being played with may be diferent each time, but the theme of the play
or the underlying meaning of the play is

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

the same. Tis can be seen in the transcript of Paul's play therapy
session. A theme of reluctance to leave the security of home was evident
in the scenes he played out involving the airplane trip in which he
announced, "Tey're going on a trip to New York," loaded the doll family
into the airplane, and then promptly announced, "Tey're back!" without
the people ever having fown away from the dollhouse. A second scene
involved a family trip in which Paul loaded the family into a truck,
drove the truck within inches around the dollhouse, and quickly
announced, "Tey're back." Te third scene consisted of him announcing,
"Tey're going to move," loading all the dollhouse furniture and fxtures
into a truck, and then quickly saying "Tey decided to live here again,"
as he unloaded and replaced the furniture in the dollhouse. Paul
experienced tremendous fear of abandonment. Such repeated play behaviors
can indicate emotional issues the child is playing out. Paul had a very
close relationship with his grandfather. Tey went just about everywhere
together in an old pickup truck. When Paul was 4 years old, his
grandfather died, and although Grandfather's death did not seem to be a
traumatic experience for Paul, he did miss his grandfather. Two months
afer Grandfather's death, Paul insisted that Mother take him to the
cemetery to visit PawPaw. At the cemetery, Paul ran over to the
gravesite, got down on his hands and knees, and began to talk to PawPaw
through a hole in the fat headstone. Evidently the hole was intended for
a fower vase. Afer talking to PawPaw for several minutes, Paul insisted
mother talk to PawPaw and then he was ready to go home. Tis was the only
time he asked mother to talk to PawPaw. Two weeks later, Paul insisted
Mother take him to the cemetery again to talk to PawPaw. Tis became the
pattern for the next 2 years; every other week they took an hour-long
drive to the cemetery to talk to PawPaw. During the following 2 years,
Paul developed an obsessive fear of death. As a 6-year-old in frst
grade, Paul was not learning to read, was very aggressive with other
children on the playground, and was fearful. Paul was referred to the
Center for Play Terapy by his mother. Te following transcript is from my
second play therapy session with Paul.

375

376

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.:

(Paul opened the door to the playroom, walked into the room, and
immediately began hitting the bop bag---a punching-return toy.) What was
that? Bam! (Hits the bop bag again.) You really whammed him one. I'm the
policeman. I'm the policeman now. You're the policeman for a while. Ah
huh. (Hits bop bag.) God! Did you see that? You made him spin all the
way around. I, you know who I really am? Te police. No. I'm gonna play
with the home (dollhouse) for a while. Tey're gonna take a trip. Tey've
got to get on. (Gets a large Fisher Price airplane and begins to put the
family dolls in the airplane.) Tey're going to fy somewhere. Do you know
where they are going really? Tey're going to ... (Pretends to turn of a
cartoon.) And now it's time to go to New York. A long way away. I'll bet
it's fast. Wonder what the kids think of fying. Tey are going to be
happy, aren't they? Aren't they? So they will really like that. I know
cuz they are going on a plane trip. I'm going to make them sit down,
right? You're going to put them in there just right. If they don't sit
down and put on their seatbelts, you know what's going to happen? Tey're
gonna have to stay home. Tey won't get to go on a plane trip, right? So
they have to do just what they are supposed to, or they won't get to go.
Right. Te baby won't cry cuz she is going to be happy too, I bet. Te
mother's gonna ... (Laughing.) Te mother and family is too big for the
plane, ain't they? (Said even though all the doll family members were
inside the plane.) Tey're back. (Plane never lef original spot.) Tey
parked right by their home, didn't they? So they're just real close to
their house.

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

(Removes dolls from plane. Returns to dollhouse.) God! Tat was pretty
fast. Guess what? You know what the Daddy's gonna do? Buy a new truck.
So he's going to buy a new truck. Yeah. Tey got two of them. Tey might
move in this truck. Tey're getting ready to move. (Playing with dolls in
the dollhouse.) And they could move in their truck. Tey might. Tey might
move. Te kids are watching cartoons. Te baby's, the baby's playing. Know
what? Afer cartoons they get to go outside. So they are going to watch
TV and then go outside. Te Daddy's gonna get a new truck. So she's (mom)
staying here cooking supper. Daddy couldn't fnd a new truck. (Gets
another truck, returns to the dollhouse.) Here's one. He's gonna buy
this one. (Moves the truck around.) Golly, that's a big truck, ain't it?
He might not buy that truck. Oh. Ahhh. Look now. Look at this now.
Daddy's at work. He can't buy a truck. He didn't fnd one. He didn't fnd
one he liked. (Going to sandbox.) He's going to fnd something he likes
someday, ain't he? Do you have another truck? Now stay tuned for Batman.
(Runs over to bop bag, punches bop bag fercely nine times in the face,
wrestles him, and pushes him down.) He's down for a little while. I'm
gonna put him on this chair. (Puts Batman bop bag on a chair.) He's
gonna ... I'm gonna shoot him. I got these many guns. I'm gonna shoot at
him. (Picks up guns and a small plastic TV.) Ooooo! Tis can be a
diferent TV. Uh huh. (Paul puts the TV in the dollhouse.) I guess that's
Daddy's TV. So he's going to have a special one. Yeah. (Picks up a rife
that shoots ping-pong balls.) Hey, where's those round balls? (Picks up
a ping-pong

377

378

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul:

ball.) I'm gonna shoot him (Batman) for good, ain't I? Ain't I? So you
know just what you're going to do. You've got it planned. Look! Ready
for Batman? Batman's gonna be in big trouble, ain't he? (Shoots.) I got
him, didn't I? You got him the frst shot. I'm gonna kill him more.
(Aims, shoots, and misses.) Hmmm, better try another gun. (Tries a dart
pistol.) Tere's another. I got it. (Shoots to the side of the bop bag.)
I missed him, didn't I? It went right past him. (Shoots again to the
side of the bop bag.) It's a hard shot, ain't it? It's hard to hit it
from way over there. (Shoots again and misses.) I missed him a bunch,
didn't I? (Picks up the darts.) When I get him, guess what I'm gonna do?
I'm gonna tie him up and kill him. I'm gonna cut him up. You're really
going to kill him. (Shoots and misses again. Shoots the bop bag again.)
Got him! (Runs over and puts the bop bag on the foor, its head under a
chair so that the bop bag is horizontal.) Supposed to be dead for a
little while. You know what I'm gonna do to Batman? Ahhh. (Gets a rubber
knife and cuts the middle of Bobo. Goes to the kitchen and looks through
the dishes.) You know what I'm gonna do? You've got something planned
now. I'm not gonna poison him. (He cooked poison last session and fed it
to Batman.) You know what I am going to do this time? Nah. I'm not going
to. I'm gonna kill him again. I'm gonna poison him. Tat's what I was
gonna do. Let's see. (Picks up a handgun, walks over to Batman, aims the
gun right next to Batman's face, and shoots.) Haha. (Goes to the
sandbox, stands in the middle, and flls a bucket with sand.) Guess what
I'm gonna do?

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.:

Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

You can tell me what you're going to do. Well, I'm gonna put Batman in
this. (Drops the bucket, starts sweeping in the sandbox and outside the
sandbox.) Sweep the blood of. Haha. Sweep the blood. Batman's gonna be
really dead this time cuz I'll really kill him. Tis time you'll make
sure you kill him. You're right. Tis time I'm going to make sure you're
gonna get killed. Oh, I'm going to get it too. I know. You're Robin.
You're going to kill both of us. Bet you're right. Hope I don't miss ya.
(Said with a lilt to his voice and a big grin.) I'm not for shooting.
(Paul aims way over my head and shoots the wall.) I know you would like
to shoot me. You can pretend the Batman is me (points to Batman) and
shoot Batman. (Paul again shoots over my head. It is obvious he does not
intend to shoot me.) Ohhh. I missed you. (Shoots again.) Ahhhhh, gosh.
(Begins to play with the phone.) You know who I'm gonna call? Mmm ammm.
(Gets another phone and dials.) Yeah, Batman's dead. Hum, okay. (Leaves
the phone and goes across the room.) Hey, I'm gonna make a little song
to wake Batman up, ain't I? (Plays a xylophone and looks expectantly at
Batman.) He's almost woke up. (Walks over to Batman.) Chop his neck of,
ain't I? (Hits Batman.) Now he's dead. Now I'm going to play with Dad
again, Mr. old Dad. (Plays in the dollhouse and with the scooter truck.)
Here's his new truck. Tat's gonna work better. He bought a new
television, didn't he? So now they have two televisions. Right. Hey,
does this work? You put it in there? (Examines the TV and fgures out
where a piece goes.) Tere, you fgured it out. Does it move? (Tries to
make the picture screen move.)

379

380

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:
Dr. L.: Paul:

I guess you're wondering, does this thing really work like a real one?
It didn't move. Daddy bought a new television didn't he? Mr. Dad, for
them. Dad brought it home for them. To watch ... to watch. Te kids saw
the new truck Daddy bought. Daddy. Te kids didn't know it yet. Tey start
running. Oh, he sort of surprised them. Te kids didn't see nothing like
it, didn't they? So it was a special surprise. Dad's gonna, he's gonna
have to take it back someday. So Dad can't keep it. (Puts the dolls in
the truck.) Tey're gonna have a ride. Where's the baby? Oh. Get in
there. (Puts the doll family in the scooter truck.) Tey're gonna have
fun, aren't they? So they're all going together in that new truck and
have fun. (Paul pushes the truck slowly around the dollhouse, makes
motor noise, stays very close to the dollhouse.) Tey're almost home,
aren't they? Tey're coming back. Time for them to get out. (Takes the
dolls out and puts them in the house.) Oh, the kids say, Oowh! Oowh! Tey
didn't want to. Tey didn't want to go home. Tey liked their ride, didn't
they? Tey were having lots of fun. Guess what? He might buy a tractor.
He gets to go to work. So, he bought a TV, and then a truck, and he
might even buy a tractor. Tey might move. Hmmm. Tey might move. Yeah,
they're gonna miss cartoons in a little while, aren't they? Daddy has to
go. Mamma has to put baby

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.:

in bed, don't she? (Picks up the baby.) I bet this baby's gonna be
baldheaded, don't you? No hair on his head. I know. Tat means he's gonna
be baldheaded someday. Hmmm. Tis baby sure is, ain't it? We don't want
no baby to be baldheaded. It's like a little boy being baldheaded.
Tey're gonna do something. Daddy has to go to work. He might move
something. He might get a new tractor. I bet he is. He needs one. Ten he
might move. Ahh oh! Here they come! Here comes the new tractor. (Plays
with a tractor.) I think the kids are gonna be happy with the tractor.
Oh, God! It's too big with the steering wheel. (Tries to put the tractor
inside the scooter car.) It won't quite ft in there. I guess he has to
buy another tractor. I got it. Turn it over. Nah. (Can't make it go
inside the truck.) Do it backwards? Nah. I guess he can't buy one today.
Here's a tractor for him. (Finds another that fts.) Watch the tractor.
Here's the tractor now. Let's get going. Te cartoons are over. Tey got
to watch it, didn't they? (Said with glee.) Tat made them happy to get
to watch cartoons. (Begins loading furniture into the scooter car.)
Yeah, but poor Mom can't cook anymore (as he loads kitchen stove). She
was hungry. Te dad was hungry. You know something, they can move that
bathroom. Uh huh. Tey can move just about everything in that house. In
the truck. Oh God! And they moved, didn't they? Moved everything out of
the house. Yeah. Tey decided to live here again. (Puts the furniture
back in the dollhouse.) So they moved out and then decided to move back
in. Know why? Tey were missing some more cartoons. So they wanted to get
back and watch some.

381

382

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.:
Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:
Dr. L.: Paul:

Know what Dad has to do? (Moves to the sandbox with the father doll.)
You can tell me what he's gonna do. Okay. He's gonna ... he died. Oh,
Daddy died. Yeah. So they're gonna bury him in the sand. (Scoops out a
hole in the sand and begins to bury the father doll.) He died and now
he's getting buried right there. I know. I guess they have to have a new
Daddy, right? (Continues covering the doll with sand.) So if that daddy
died, they'll need to get another one. Ooooh. He's all buried. Now he
can't be seen. Tere's where he's at. (Places a funnel upside down on top
of the grave with the spout pointing up.) Te kids came to see him. Te
baby's still asleep. (Goes to the dollhouse and gets the boy and girl
dolls.) Hmm, so they're going to go and see where he is buried. (Placed
the boy doll's head at the funnel end.) Tey heard something. Uhhhhhh.
(Sound coming from the grave.) Tey heard something where Daddy is
buried. Yeah. And guess what. Tey are going to unbury him. (Pulls the
doll out of the sand.) Oh, God! He's alive! So he really wasn't dead.
Now he's alive. Tey were surprised at him. (Sounds really excited and
glad.) Tey were surprised but happy. Oh my God, look! Tey're having a
tornado in this area by their home. Tey better hurry home, right?
Tornados are dangerous. I know. It can blow houses down. One of them's,
one of them's in the graveyard. Tat's the girl. (Buries a doll in the
sand. I can't see the doll being buried.) So the girl got lef in the
graveyard. Uh uh, she's buried.

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:

Oh, she's buried in the graveyard. She does not want ... She does not
want the tornado to get her. So the tornado can't get her there. Te
tornado's past. Oooh. Look what happened! (Knocks over toys near the
dollhouse.) God! Te tornado wrecked some things. Yeah, some, but it
didn't wreck this. (Points to the scooter truck.) All the kids have to
get in the house fast, lay down and rest. So they're hoping they'll be
safe in the house. And she told her to get in and rest, too, while Daddy
got the pickup truck over. (Pulls the truck over.) Ah, oh. Te tornado's
out. Guess what. Daddy's gonna be surprising. Guess what. Stay tuned for
Batman! Now it's time for Batman again. (Goes over to Batman and
attempts to put handcufs on himself.) Uh, oh, they caught me, didn't
they? You got caught by somebody. Te police. (Continues trying to
handcuf his hands behind his back.) Oh, the police caught you. Hmm. For
killing Batman. So you killed Batman, and then the policeman caught you.
Yeah. Batman is alive now. Ouch. No wonder I can't put these on when I
have my hands behind my back. Here. (Brings handcufs to me for aid; I
fasten them behind his back.) Okay, I'm in jail. So the policeman
handcufed you and took you to jail. I know. First he has to do
something. He can't kill nobody. Te police surrounded him, and he has to
put this (knife) back. So they fxed him up so he can't kill anyone.
Yeah. Tey have to put the knife back. Te Batman's alive. Better get him
up. (Stands Batman up.)

383

384

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Dr. L.: Paul:

Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:
Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul: Dr. L.: Paul:
Dr. L.: Paul:

So he's okay now. But frst wait. (Moves Batman around.) Tere. Uh oh, I'm
out of jail now. Help me. (Tries to take the handcufs of.) Ouch, ouch.
(Te handcufs pinch his wrists.) Sometimes those things pinch. Yeah.
(Takes the handcufs of.) But you got them of. Guess what. I'm the police
now. I'm going to get to be a police, didn't I? So now you're going to
be the one with the handcufs. I'm the police now. I'm Batman and I'll
bring you in jail, okay? You can pretend that someone is doing that, and
I'll watch. Okay. Tat Mr. Policeman is having trouble, ain't he? (Trying
to hook the handcufs together.) Looks like he's having a hard time
getting those on there just right. Oh, no. He got it. Now he don't have
trouble. You fgured it out. Uh huh, I found the way. (Hooks the handcufs
on his pocket.) Hmmm. You found a way to do it. Paul, we have 5 more
minutes in the playroom today. Oooh. (Doesn't want to end. Makes a
shooting noise, runs over, and dives on the foor. Pretends to wrestle
someone.) Got him, didn't I? You caught him right there. (Wrestles the
imaginary person for several minutes.) You're really working hard. Yeah,
I know. He's a tough one. He's really tough but you're wrestling him. I
got him down. You won. Paul, our time is up for today. It's time to go
to the waiting room where your mom is (stands up). AAAAh! Okay. (Walks
to the door and opens it.)

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

As is ofen true in play therapy, several themes were evident in this
second session. Television seemed to be very important to Paul, as noted
in his numerous references to TV. A theme of moving and leaving the
security of home was evident in the scenes involving the airplane trip
in which the people didn't fy away, the auto trip in which Paul stayed
very close to the dollhouse, and his announcing the family was going to
move, followed by loading all the furniture and fxtures into the truck
and promptly stating, "Tey decided to live here again." Perhaps you
noticed the number of times Paul played out getting something new.
"Daddy's gonna buy a new truck. He didn't fnd one he liked. Gonna fnd
one he likes someday." Another theme was Paul's play and statements
indicating his perception that death is not permanent. "Gonna tie Batman
(bop bag) up, kill him, cut him up, shoots Batman." "He's supposed to be
dead for a little while." "Paul pretends sand on foor is Batman's blood,
sweeps sand of foor." "Batman's gonna be really dead this time." Te
culmination of this theme was the burial of the father doll in the
sandbox. Paul then placed a small funnel upside down over the grave, and
the boy doll fgure talking to the buried father doll through the spout
of the funnel. Paul, "Oh My Gosh! Tey heard something! Paul quickly dug
the father doll up and said he really wasn't dead!" Tis scene was
dramatically similar to Paul's trips to the cemetery to "talk" to his
grandfather through the hole for a fower vase in the headstone. Afer
this second session, Paul asked only one time to go to the cemetery,
indicating a signifcant change in him. In the ffh session, Paul
announced, "My PawPaw died you know." Tis was the frst clear indication
of his acceptance of the death of his grandfather. Understanding themes
can help the therapist better understand a child's internal process.
Emotional growth, resolution of specifc problems, or working through and
being able to leave an issue can sometimes be observed in changes in the
way a child plays out a theme. Changes might be observed in frequency of
theme play or changes in the sequencing of events that are played out.
Te therapist may note a decrease in the child's intensity, or perhaps
there is now an absence of intensity. While playing out the theme, there
may be a change in the

385

386

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

child's physical activity, less agitated, less rushed; the play or
verbalization of the theme no longer seems pushed from deep inside the
child. Afer several sessions of theme play, playing out the theme may
stop completely indicating the child has achieved resolution, played out
what was inside, set that problem aside, and moved on to adjustment.
Calling attention to or identifying themes in a child's play for the
beneft of the child is interpretative, structuring, distracting to a
child, interferes with the process of the child's play, and places the
therapist in the lead in the relationship. Te therapist's need to
educate or inform a child or stimulate insight in the child places the
focus on the therapist, and the therapist is no longer being with the
child. Pointing out themes is a cognitive process. It is not possible to
work on informing a child about themes and at the same time to be in
touch with the emotional person of the child. Te relationship with the
child is more important than what the therapist knows about the meaning
of the child's play.

The Meaning of Termination Termination is a harsh-sounding term and
seems so fnal that it does not at all convey what I would like to
communicate about discontinuing regular contacts with children. Te words
"concluding" or "ending" could be used, but again these seem so fnal, as
though the relationship is completely severed and will in no way
continue to exist. Nothing could be further from the truth. Child and
therapist have shared---sometimes tentatively, sometimes painfully,
sometimes eagerly, and sometimes in rocky ways---in developing and
building a meaningful, sensitively caring relationship. Tender moments
have occurred, times of great excitement, joy that could almost not be
contained, periods of anger and frustration screamed out at the world,
points of grand discovery, intervals of quiet being together when words
or sounds were not necessary, and a season of shared understanding and
acceptance. Such a relationship can never be terminated, for it goes on
and on as a part of those persons who have shared in it. Such important
experiences live on in the persons who have experienced them

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

and do not end just because someone decides not to meet on a regular
basis again. Te leaving of the old and the beginning of the new
constitute the ever-recurring shifing of the scenes in human
development. Te old is terminated with full regard for the values and
satisfactions that have accrued from it. If these values must, however,
be measured and felt only in the circumstances in which they were
experienced originally, then they cease to be growth-inducing infuences
and lose their positive meaning. Values from any life experience retain
their positive meaning only as the individual is free to use them in the
ever-recurring newness of living. Tis is not forgetting and repressing
the old, but it is using the old to provide the structure of the new.
(Allen, 1942, p. 293)

A single word seems so inadequate in attempting to describe accurately
this part of the process, which the therapist has been moving toward
since the initial contact with the child. Te therapist's purpose in
being in the relationship has been to contribute to the child's
development of self-responsibility, enhancement of self, and unfolding
of self-directed change. Tat the child would no longer need the
immediacy of this kind of relationship is a natural development in the
process of growth---not an ending, but rather an extending. If the
therapist has been successful in truly making contact with the child on
a signifcant emotional level, leading to the sharing of the inner self
of the child and the therapist, then a signifcant relationship has been
established---and the ending of personal relationships can be difcult.

Reference Points for Determining Termination Because the child centered
play therapist has no predetermined, individually tailored, specifc
goals for children in play therapy, the question of when to terminate is
not always easily answered, as might be the case when in the judgment of
the therapist a specifc behavioral problem has been ameliorated. No
specifc goals have been established to point to as having been achieved,
thus

387

388

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

indicating readiness for termination. Te therapeutic relationship has
focused on the child rather than on a specifc problem. Terefore, no
empirical checkpoints exist to use as reference points of success.
Haworth (1994) suggested the following questions as guides for
determining a child's readiness for termination: 1. Is there less
dependence on the therapist? 2. Is there less concern about other
children using the room or seeing his therapist? 3. Can the child now
see and accept both good and bad in the same person? 4. Have there been
changes in the child's attitude toward time, in terms of awareness,
interest, or acceptance? 5. Has there been a change in the child's
reactions to cleaning up the room: less concern if he formerly had been
meticulous or interest in cleaning up as contrasted to earlier
messiness? 6. Does the child now accept self? 7. Are there evidences of
insight and self-evaluation; does the child compare her former actions
or feelings with those of the present? 8. Is there a change in the
quality or amount of verbalization? 9. Is there less aggression toward,
or with, toys? 10. Does the child accept limits more readily? 11. Have
his forms of art expression changed? 12. Is there less need to engage in
infantile (e.g., bottle) or regressive (e.g., water) play? 13. Is there
less fantasy and symbolic play and more creative constructive play? 14.
Has there been a diminution in the number and intensity of fears?
(p. 416) Change is best viewed in terms of a global nature, and these
questions help the therapist to focus on the process of change rather
than on the attainment of some specifc objective that has been
predetermined. Any attempt to determine whether or not sufcient change
has taken place to merit consideration of discontinuing play therapy
should focus primarily on examining changes in children. Te play
therapist can give consideration to the

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

following areas of self-initiated change within children as a basis for
possible discontinuation of play therapy. 1. Child is less dependent. 2.
Child is less confused. 3. Child expresses needs openly. 4. Child is
able to focus on self. 5. Child accepts responsibility for his own
actions and feelings. 6. Child limits her own behavior appropriately. 7.
Child is more inner-directed. 8. Child is more fexible. 9. Child is more
tolerant of happenings. 10. Child initiates activities with assurance.
11. Child is cooperative but not conforming. 12. Child expresses anger
appropriately. 13. Child has moved from negative--sad afect to
happy--pleased. 14. Child is more accepting of himself. 15. Child is
able to play out story sequences; her play has direction. Children will
give cues in a general way about their readiness to bring the
relationship to a close. Some children may begin to stand around in the
playroom, no longer as interested in the toys. Tey may seem listless,
uninvolved, and almost as though they are playing in slow motion.
Children ofen express a general complaint of having nothing to do; they
seem bored and wander around the room. At such times, some children will
announce, "I don't think I need to come anymore." Such a statement is a
declaration of the child's wholeness and ability to separate from the
therapist and to rely fully upon self. Tis is a very positive afrmation
of self. Sometimes children will compare present behaviors or reactions
with their earlier, diferent reactions, thus noting the changes in self.
Te therapist may note a general change in the feeling-tone of the time
together in the playroom. Te time together just doesn't "feel" the same.
Changes described by parents and teachers also should be considered as
part of the whole in a decision to end the play therapy relationship.

389

390

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Procedures for Ending the Relationship Te age of the child and thus the
child's developmental concept of the future, as well as the child's
ability to comprehend and efectively participate in the verbal pursuit
of abstractions imposed by words, will determine to a considerable
degree the approach taken by the therapist to initiate the process of
concluding the play therapy experience. In keeping with the
child-centered philosophy, the child should be included in the planning
necessary for ending this signifcant relationship. When the therapist
determines the child no longer needs the play therapy experience or
becomes aware of the child's readiness to discontinue the relationship,
this should be responded to in the session with the same degree of
sensitivity as would any other feeling or decision by the child.
Sometimes the child can be included in the decision regarding bringing
the relationship to a close and the date for the last session by the
therapist asking how many more times the child feels she needs to come
to the playroom. In school settings and some agencies, the end of the
school year will dictate the ending of the relationship, at least for a
3-month period, even though the child may not be ready to terminate.
With the exception of deciding how many more sessions are needed, the
other termination procedures would still be utilized. Discontinuing the
relationship should be a smooth process, not abrupt, and should be
accomplished with great sensitivity to the feelings of children. If
termination of the play therapy experience is not handled properly,
children may feel rejected, punished, or a sense of loss. Actually, no
guarantee can be given that the child will not experience some of these
feelings, no matter how well the ending is handled. Tat children may
feel anxious about separation from this meaningful relationship and this
now signifcant person in their life is understandable. Tese feelings are
accepted, and no efort is made to try to make a child "feel better"
about leaving. To do so would discount the child's feelings of anxiety,
hurt, anger, or whatever else the child experiences about leaving the
relationship. Leaving the door open for children to return if they feel
the need to do so by informing them that they can come back, sometimes
helps children with the turning loose process.

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Children will need time in the playroom to live out the ending of this
important relationship, just as they have lived out other signifcant
parts of their lives. Terefore, the process for actual termination will
need to be started two or three sessions prior to the fnal session. In
the beginning of this relationship, the child needed time to discover
and develop a way of being in the relationship. Now the child will need
time to work through emerging feelings about ending this meaningful part
of life and to explore feelings about no longer having this area of
support. Trough participating in the planning for ending the
relationship, the child has the opportunity to discover what the ending
of a meaningful relationship feels like. During the process of preparing
for ending, some children may regress temporarily for part of a session
and demonstrate behaviors observed in earlier sessions. Tis may be the
child's way of revisiting old behaviors and experiencing the
satisfaction of being able to compare the present with the past. A child
may mess up a picture being painted and then say, "Used to, that would
have made me mad." Another possibility is that the child's playing out
of earlier behaviors could be a belated attempt to say, "I don't want to
leave. Please let me continue to come here." With some children, the
therapist may want to consider a tapering of process for termination by
moving from a once-aweek schedule to once every other week for the fnal
two sessions. Another variation would be to schedule one last follow-up
session a month afer the last regular weekly contact. Tis determination
should be based on the child's needs, not the therapist's need to know
how things are going or the therapist's reluctance to turn loose. Once
the process for ending the relationship has begun, children need to be
reminded of how many more times they will have in the playroom at the
beginning and at the end of the remaining two or three sessions. For
some children, a week is a long time to remember how many more times
they will get to come to the playroom. At the beginning of the third to
last play therapy session, the therapist might say, "Kara, I want to
remind you that you will be in the playroom today and two more times
afer today, and that will be all for now." Te "for now" leaves the door
open if the child should need to return at some later date.

391

392

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

Tis statement is repeated at the end of the session, and the process is
repeated in the next session and at the beginning of the last session.

Children's Reactions to the Last Session Trying to predict how a child
will react in the fnal session usually is not possible. Some children
approach the fnal session in a rather matter-of-fact way. Tey may not
even make a comment about this being the last time they will be in the
playroom. Te therapist should suppress any urge to make a big deal out
of the last session, either through conversation or through lingering
goodbye hugs. If initiated by the child, that would be appropriate.
Otherwise, such activity should be recognized as the therapist's need
and dealt with accordingly. Te therapist avoids such comments as "I'm
going to miss you" or "I have really enjoyed our time together," because
these comments could cause the child to feel guilty if she had not
already had such a thought. Even the last minute is still the child's
time, a time for the child's needs to be expressed and responded to by
the therapist. Some children may indicate their reluctance to end the
relationship by lingering at the door on their way out, commenting about
the room, or thinking of a variety of things they want to tell the
therapist. Some children may be very angry about ending the
relationship, as was the case with 7-year-old Brad. We had experienced
12 wonderful times together, during which Brad had never been overly
messy or aggressive. He had played very actively but in careful ways. In
our last session, Brad entered the playroom, made a comment about,
"Yeah, this is our last one," and began to pull toys of the shelves and
dump them in the middle of the foor. Although he said not one word
during this process, he was obviously angry. He did not stop until he
had emptied all the shelves. What a mess! With hardly a glance to take
in the mess he had made, Brad began to replace the toys on the shelves
and did not stop until the job was completed. Tat was quite a task and
occupied most of the time lef in the session. With 10 minutes remaining,
he prepared the

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

most delightful and elaborate meal for both of us, commenting about what
he was cooking and foods he liked. Time was then up, and he walked out
of the playroom without a goodbye or any verbal reference to that being
the last time together in the playroom. Brad had eloquently communicated
his mixed feelings about the ending of our relationship. Some children
are very open in sharing their feelings about ending the relationship,
as was the case with 7-year-old Lori, who graphically expressed the
importance of the relationship with the therapist in the following
conversation, which occurred in the fnal session: (While flling pots and
pans with sand.) I have lots of friends. Tey'll be my friends forever!
(Looking sideways at the therapist.) You're one of my friends. Terapist:
Sounds like you think we'll always be friends. Lori: (With an intense,
afrmative head nod.) Uh, huh! Even when you're not here. Terapist: So,
we'll still be friends even when I'm gone. Lori: You can just talk to
Jesus about me. Terapist: Seems like it's real important for me to
always remember you. Lori: We'll have a secret code. (Writes her phone
number on a piece of paper, and puts four stickers on another paper.)
Here. Tis is my number if you have an emergency. And, you can look at
these pictures and say "Jesus" or "God," whatever you want, and we'll be
connected. Terapist: So, you fgured out a way for us to always be
connected---and friends. Lori: Yup (afrmative head nod), always
connected. Lori:

Premature Termination Sometimes a parent will stop bringing a child to
play therapy without notifying the therapist, and so there is no
opportunity for the therapist to prepare the child for termination. Tis
process is usually abrupt and disconcerting to the child and ofen occurs
at

393

394

Determining Therapeutic Process and Termination

the most inopportune time (i.e., the child has just shared something
dramatic or personal with the therapist, tested or broke limits for the
frst time, or in the last session made a signifcant change in assuming
responsibility). If the child does not get to come back to the playroom,
the child may internalize the experience as punishment for what occurred
in the last session. When a parent unexpectedly discontinues therapy,
the therapist should contact the parent and explain the importance of a
termination session. A fnal session allows children to experience a
positive end to a relationship that has been important to them.

References Allen, F. (1942). Psychotherapy with children. Norton.
Haworth, M. (1994). Child psychotherapy: Practice and theory. Aronson.

Chapter

18

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

Play therapy is not necessarily a long-term process requiring many
months or even years of therapy. Many behavioral problems and
experiences of children can be dealt with efectively in a relatively
short period of time, when the inner dynamic natural creative resources
of a child emerge in the facilitative safety of the childcentered play
therapy relationship. A child's natural developmental state consists of
a continual process of movement toward the solution of problems.
Terefore, there is no need for the therapist to impose predetermined
solutions on the child in order to hurry up the process of growth.

Intensive Child-Centered Play Therapy Child-centered play therapy (CCPT)
provides the relationship necessary for children to develop adaptive
coping mechanisms on their own terms and at their own emotional pace. We
do not look at a developing toddler and say, "You aren't changing fast
enough." We are patient and trust the natural process of development.
Tis same logic can be applied to children in play therapy. When provided
with the kind of relationship described in this book, children are
capable of changing at a remarkable pace. I do

DOI: 10.4324/9781003255796-18

395

396

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

not mean to imply, however, that all children's problems can be dealt
with in a few sessions of play therapy. Rather than focusing on the
number of play therapy sessions, perhaps what is more important is that
the scheduled frequency of sessions be examined. Te traditional method
of scheduling play therapy sessions once a week does not always match
the emotional needs of children or the dynamic developmental growth of
children. A week between sessions can be a very long time in the life of
a child, especially when the child has been sexually abused, is
experiencing the trauma of divorce, or is facing some equally
debilitating crisis. Play therapists are encouraged to consider the
possibility of condensing the time between sessions for some children.
We simply do not know what the human organism is capable of
assimilating, nor the amount of time needed by children between play
therapy sessions to process changes facilitated during the play therapy
sessions. Te traditional scheduling of sessions once a week is designed
to meet the needs of the therapist and may not necessarily meet the
emotional needs of the child. When a child has experienced a crisis or
trauma, the play therapist should consider intensive play therapy in
which the child is scheduled for play therapy sessions two or more times
a week for the frst 2 weeks or perhaps for the duration of therapy in
order to meet the child's emotional needs and to speed up the
therapeutic process. Intensive play therapy also is recommended for a
child who is already being seen in play therapy and has such an
experience. If there has been a death in the family, major car accident,
sexual or physical abuse, domestic violence, attack by an animal,
bombing, or other stressful life event, a week between sessions can be
an eternity for a child. In some cases of psychic trauma, a child may
need to be scheduled for play therapy 5 or 6 days a week for the frst
week or two. Te natural response of children is to re-enact or play out
traumatic happenings in an unconscious efort to comprehend, overcome,
develop a sense of control, or assimilate the experience. Because
children's signifcant emotional experiences are expressed symbolically
as they play out happenings in their lives, there is an emotional
distancing from the actual event that

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

protects children from feeling overwhelmed. It is the dynamic of this
distancing from the actual experience through play that enables children
to deal with and assimilate intense emotional experiences when sessions
are scheduled more closely together. Tis process allows children to work
through traumatic experiences without having to identify and label the
events as their own or deal with them directly, as is required when
children must verbally identify and label frightening or painful
experiences at the direction of the therapist. Te child centered play
therapist establishes the kind of child-paced therapeutic environment in
which children feel accepted, understood, respected, and safe enough to
deal with threatening feelings. Te play therapist does not push,
encourage, or direct the child's play in any way. Terefore, the child
explores areas she feels safe enough to express and at a pace she feels
adequate to cope with at any given time. When sessions are not
structured by the therapist, the child is allowed to pace her
exploration as fast or as slow as needed to accommodate her level of
functioning. Te trusting of this intuitive knowing on the part of the
child is crucial in intensive play therapy experiences, which reduce the
time between sessions. Directing or structuring a child to play out
traumatic experiences could retraumatize a child if he is not
emotionally ready to confront the event. Te child-centered play
therapist trusts the child's inner direction, allows the child to lead
in all areas of the relationship, and resists any urge to direct the
child's play or conversation. Te child leads the relationship and the
direction of the play. When a catastrophic disaster occurs, all routines
are disrupted for thousands of families and children no longer feel
secure. A 30-minute or 15-minute play therapy experience several times a
week could become the one predictable routine in their lives, a place to
play out pent up fears in the safety of symbolism, a place to regain a
sense of control, a place to experience tranquility as needed, an oasis
in the midst of chaos. Victims of disasters need immediate help and
cannot aford the luxury of once-a-week play therapy sessions. Tey must
have intensive scheduling. Webb (2001) reported the efective use of one
to three play therapy sessions as a part of a crisis team response to
the Oklahoma City

397

398

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

bombing. Using her tote bag of play materials, Webb converted space in a
small storage room in an elementary school near the bomb site and had
30-minute play therapy sessions with children referred by teachers in
the building. In 2011 Dr. Yumiko Ogawa, a professor at New Jersey City
University, responded to the tsunami that struck Japan by teaching a
two-day workshop, hosted by the Japan Association for Play Terapy
(JAPT), on disaster response and child-centered play therapy skills to
train therapists to work with children who were impacted by the
disaster. Other members of the JAPT went to ground zero areas to work
with adult and child survivors and to provide play therapy training in
cooperation with Japan UNICEF for local child therapists. Several
variations of intensive play therapy have been used in the Center for
Play Terapy at the University of North Texas. One unique model has been
the scheduling of some carefully selected children for three 30-minute
play therapy sessions each day for 3 days, with 30-minute breaks between
sessions for bathroom breaks, snacks, and time in the waiting room. An
interesting observation is that the play therapy process for each of
these sessions appears to be similar to the process that occurs in
once-aweek sessions. For example, the process of exploration described
by play therapists for a typical third session is similar to what occurs
in session three of three sessions scheduled in a single day. Parents
have reported positive behavioral changes for children in these
experiences.

Research on Intensive Child-Centered Play Therapy I have for a long time
been fascinated by the limitless possibilities of what children are able
to accomplish in emotional growth when they are presented the
opportunities to do so. Tis sort of thinking has inspired and given
direction to most of my writing and research in play therapy. One of my
most exciting research projects emerged from pondering the possibilities
of collapsing the time between play therapy sessions. Tat thought really

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

challenged my imagination and deepened my belief about children. Te
result was the designing of a comparative research study involving three
approaches to the structuring of child-centered play therapy: intensive
and short-term individual play therapy, group play therapy, and training
parents to become therapeutic agents in special play sessions
(Child-Parent Relationship Terapy \[CPRT\]), all in the context of very
difcult circumstances/settings. Domestic violence shelters with their
typical 3-week stay for mothers and their children met my requirements.
Te following three research studies are unique in the feld of play
therapy. Kot et al. (1998) used an intensive model of short-term CCPT
with children who had witnessed domestic violence and were residing in a
domestic violence shelter with their mothers. Te 11 children in the
experimental group received 12 45-minute individual play therapy
sessions in a period of 12 days to 3 weeks. Child witnesses in the
experimental group demonstrated a statistically signifcant increase in
self-concept and a statistically signifcant reduction in externalizing
behavior problems, and total behavior problems, as compared to the
control group. Te shortterm intensive model fts particularly well with
the unstable and transient life situations of families residing in
domestic violence shelters. Tyndall-Lind et al. (2001) conducted a
comparative analysis of intensive short-term individual CCPT and
intensive short-term sibling group CCPT with child witnesses of domestic
violence residing in a domestic violence shelter with their mothers. Te
10 children in sibling group play therapy received 12 45-minute
sessions, one each day in a 2-week period. Te comparison group of
individual play therapy and the control group were obtained from the Kot
et al. (1998) study. Child witnesses in sibling group play therapy
(Figure 18.1) demonstrated a statistically signifcant increase in
self-concept; a statistically signifcant decrease in externalizing
behavior, internalizing behavior, and overall behavior problems; and
statistically signifcant decreases in aggression, anxiety, and
depression, as compared to the control group. Intensive short-term
sibling group play therapy and intensive short-term individual play
therapy were found to be equally efective with children who witnessed
family violence.

399

400

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

FIGURE 18.1 The presence of several children in the playroom facilitates
the reluctant child's discovery that the therapist is a safe person by
observing other children.

Smith and Landreth (2003) investigated the efects of an intensive format
of CPRT---12 parent training sessions (1.5 h) in 3 weeks---with parents
residing in a domestic violence shelter. Parents conducted seven (30
min) therapeutic play sessions with their children in a 2-week period.
Children demonstrated a statistically signifcant increase in
self-concept; a statistically signifcant decrease in externalizing
behavior, internalizing behavior and overall behavior problems; and
statistically signifcant decreases in aggression, anxiety, and
depression, as compared to the control group. CPRT parents also
demonstrated a statistically signifcant increase in their empathic
interactions with their children (direct observation by blinded raters).
Tere were no statistically signifcant diferences between the treatment
groups of individual CCPT (Kot et al., 1998), sibling group CCPT
(Tyndall-Lind et al., 2001), and CPRT. Te results of this study are
especially noteworthy: CPRT-trained parents can be just as
therapeutically efective

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

with some emotional and trauma problems of their children as doctoral
level professional counselors. Te experimental research studies included
in the following summary are intensive CCPT individual and CCPT group
play therapy experiences with a variety of intensive schedules. Children
aged 5--9 from Title I elementary schools who were experiencing
depressive symptoms and received 16 individual CCPT sessions over 8
weeks (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant decreases in
their overall depression and behavior problems (Burgin & Ray, 2022).
African American children aged 5--10 who received 8--16 individual CCPT
sessions over 8 weeks (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically
signifcant improvement in social-emotional competence (Taylor & Ray,
2021). Children who received 16 individual CCPT sessions over 8 weeks
(2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant increases in
empathy, social competence, and self-regulation/responsibility and
statistically signifcant decreases in total behavior problems (Ray et
al., 2021). Academically at-risk elementary school children, average age
7.6 years, who received 16 individual CCPT sessions over 8 weeks (2/wk,
30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement in reading,
mathematics, and language usage (Perryman et al., 2020). Children aged
4--10 who were diagnosed with ASD and received 24 individual CCPT
sessions (4/wk, 30 min) demonstrated a statistically signifcant decrease
in ASD core symptoms and behavioral symptoms and demonstrated a large
treatment efect on social responsiveness, externalizing problems,
attention problems, and aggression (Schottelkorb et al., 2020).
Elementary school children who received 16 sessions of individual or
group CCPT (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant
improvement in overall social-emotional competence and
self-regulation/responsibility (Blalock et al., 2019). Academically
at-risk kindergarten children aged 5--6 who received 12 sessions of CCPT
over 6 weeks (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated a statistically signifcant
increase on the Early Achievement

401

402

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

Composite of the Young Children's Achievement Test (Blanco et al.,
2019). Children aged 5--10 from Title I schools who exhibited highly
aggressive behaviors and received 8--16 individual CCPT sessions
demonstrated statistically signifcant decreases in aggression and
increased self-regulation and increased empathy (Wilson & Ray, 2018).
Children aged 6--9 who received 20 individual CCPT sessions (2/day 10
days, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant decreases in
externalizing behavior, aggressive behavior, and rulebreaking behavior
(Ritzi et al., 2017). Children aged 5--11 in high-poverty schools who
exhibited highly disruptive behavior and received 9--22 individual CCPT
sessions (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant
improvement in total problems, externalizing problems, attention
problems, and self-efcacy (Cochran & Cochran, 2017). Kindergarten
children aged 5--6 who exhibited social/emotional defcits and received
15--16 group CCPT sessions (in either two-member or three-member groups;
2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement in
social competence and empathy (Cheng & Ray, 2016). Children aged 6--8
who exhibited anxiety and received an average of 15 individual CCPT
sessions (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated a statistically signifcant decrease
in overall levels of anxiety and worry (Stulmaker & Ray, 2015). At-risk,
Head Start children aged 3--4 who received 20 individual CCPT sessions
(2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement in
disruptive behaviors, attention problems, and aggression (Batton et al.,
2013). Children aged 5--8 who were considered to be clinically impaired
and received 12--16 CCPT sessions (2/wk, 30 min) demonstrated
statistically signifcant improvement in functional impairment (Ray et
al., 2013). Refugee children aged 6--13 who exhibited trauma symptoms
and received 17 individual CCPT sessions (2/wk 30 min) demonstrated a
statistically signifcant reduction in post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) symptom severity (Schottelkorb et al., 2012).

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

Te results of these studies are extraordinary and demonstrate children's
ability to adjust to and proft from intensive CCPT experiences.

Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy For the purposes of this
discussion, short-term play therapy is considered to be 10--12 sessions
or fewer. Short-term play therapy would not be appropriate for all
children needing play therapy. Children who have experienced prolonged
sexual or physical abuse or trauma and those who have severe emotional
problems would certainly need longer-term therapy. Short-term
child-centered play therapy has been found to be efective with
developmental issues; with a wide variety of childhood problems, such as
chronic illness, school-related learning problems, behavioral problems,
emotional adjustment, and self-concept problems; and with child victims
of domestic violence. Remarkable progress is possible when children
experience a warm, caring, empathic, understanding, and accepting
relationship characteristic of childcentered play therapy and are
allowed to set the direction and pace of the experience.

Research on Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy Te focus of the
following review is on the efectiveness of shortterm child-centered play
therapy as reported in the literature. Head Start students who presented
with emotional or behavioral problems and participated in six individual
play sessions (1/ wk, 30 min) facilitated by CTRT-trained teachers,
receiving 5--6 hours of individual exposure to the teachers' use of CTRT
skills, demonstrated statistically signifcant decreases in total problem
behaviors with a moderate-to-large treatment efect (Coggins &
Carnes-Holt, 2021). Academically at-risk Head Start students, average
age 3.63 years, who participated in seven individual play sessions
(1/wk,

403

404

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

30 min) and ten in-class small group play sessions (3/wk, 30 min)
facilitated by CTRT-trained teachers demonstrated statistically
signifcant decreases in disruptive behavior with a large treatment efect
(Gonzales-Ball & Bratton, 2019). Adopted children ages 2.5--8 who
participated in seven play sessions facilitated by CPRT-trained parents
(1/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant results with large
treatment efects in reduction in global behavior problems. Parents who
facilitated the play sessions demonstrated statistically signifcant
decreases in parent--child relationship stress and increases in empathic
behaviors (Opiola & Bratton, 2018). Adopted children ages 2.5--10 who
participated in seven play sessions facilitated by CPRT-trained parents
(1/wk, 30 min) demonstrated statistically signifcant results with large
treatment efects in decreasing externalized behaviors and global
behavior problems. Parents who facilitated the play sessions
demonstrated statistically signifcant increases in parental empathy
(CarnesHolt & Bratton, 2014). Young children with behavioral adjustment
difculties who participated in between seven and ten CCPT sessions
demonstrated statistically signifcant positive changes on internalizing
behaviors (withdrawn behavior, somatic complaints, and anxiety/
depression) in comparison to a matched control group. Although not
signifcant, parents of children who received play therapy reported a
remarkably larger decrease in parenting stress as compared to the
control group over time (Brandt, 2001). At-risk children who
participated in four child-centered play therapy sessions maintained the
same level of self-esteem and internal locus of control, while children
in the control group dropped to a statistically signifcant lower level
(Post, 1999). Children identifed as having an emotional or physical
disorder that afected learning in the school setting participated in six
CCPT sessions. Researcher observations, teacher reports, and parent
reports confrmed a reduction in the children's impulsive behavior,
increased control of their environment, and increased ability to express
emotions (Johnson, McLeod, and Fall (1997).

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

First-grade elementary school children who had been retained because of
poor reading performance and received ten weekly 30-minute individual
CCPT sessions conducted in an elementary school demonstrated
statistically signifcant positive changes in self-concept and
improvement in locus of control (Crow, 1990).

Short-Term Child-Parent Relationship Therapy (CPRT) Te ten-session
Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT) model I developed is, by the
very nature of the structure of the model, a short-term child-centered
play therapy intervention. Parents receive ten sessions of training in
basic child-centered play therapy principles and skills, and the actual
number of play sessions children have with their parents is seven, due
to the fact that parents do not start play sessions with their children
until afer the third flial training session. CPRT is a well-researched
modality with more than 55 controlled-outcome research studies involving
over 1,500 paraprofessionals (primarily parents). Collectively, the body
of research on the efectiveness of CPRT is compelling. Tat improvements
have been achieved in both parents and children demonstrates the
robustness of this approach. Te efcacy of this model in so few sessions
is especially noteworthy. Bratton, Landreth, and Lin (2010) further
analyzed the meta-analytic data gathered by Bratton et al. (2005) to
determine the overall treatment efect of CPRT methodology. Statistical
analysis yielded an overall ES of 1.25 for CPRT studies and an even
stronger ES of 1.30 for parentonly CPRT (omitting teachers and student
mentors). Only those CPRT studies in which the individual researchers
were trained and supervised directly by Bratton or Landreth were
included in the analysis to ensure adherence to the treatment protocol.
CPRT research studies have demonstrated signifcantly positive results
with a variety of issues and populations, including sexually abused
children, children living in domestic violence shelters, children whose
mothers or fathers were incarcerated, children

405

406

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

experiencing adjustment difculties at home and school, and children
diagnosed with learning diferences, pervasive developmental disorders,
chronic illness, and a broad range of internalized and externalized
behavior problems. CPRT has been conducted in a variety of settings,
including hospitals, churches, shelters, a Native American reservation,
prison, county jail, Head Start programs, public and private schools,
and community agencies, with signifcantly positive results. Te efects of
CPRT have also been investigated with diverse populations of parents,
including immigrant Latino, African American, Native American, Israeli,
immigrant Chinese, Korean, and immigrant Korean with signifcantly
positive results in the areas of parental stress, parental empathy,
parental acceptance, and family environment. One of the most exciting
projects in CPRT has been the innovative work of Dr. Iris Chau in Hong
Kong. During the early stages of the Covid pandemic in 2020, Dr. Chau
launched her vision of providing CPRT training for all parents in Hong
Kong. Tis was a courageous undertaking because she had no funds and only
a small close-knit group of play therapists she was supervising. She
advertised her vision and selected 40 play therapists from the group of
volunteers. Iris adapted the CPRT program to six training sessions,
translated the material to Chinese, and began training the group of
volunteers. With the help of leadership from several schools, 200
parents were recruited and 21 groups received CPRT training via Zoom in
the following two months. Feedback from parents was very positive and
the CPRT leadership group decided to continue. Funds to continue were
received from several sources. Trainers could now be paid, Zoom accounts
paid, and toy kits purchased. A year and a half later, 71 CPRT groups, a
total of 850 parents, have been trained, and the training continues. A
remarkable accomplishment! Research with 158 parents with low incomes
trained in CPRT demonstrated a statistically signifcant increase in the
Porter Parental Acceptance Scale Total Score and Respects Feelings and
Autonomy subscales. Te reader is referred to Chapter 19, which provides
specifc research data on the CPRT research studies referred to in this
section.

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

Summary Although many adults typically require sufcient time between
appointments to process information or insights obtained during a
therapy session, children do not appear to have the same need. Te
objective of experimenting with the play therapy schedule is to provide
an opportunity for children to make sense of their world through play as
quickly and efciently as possible. Some children apparently can beneft
from several play therapy sessions clustered together. Positive results
from a variety of studies support deviating from the traditional
one-session-per-week schedule and consideration of the condensing of the
time between sessions. Te use of 12 or fewer play therapy sessions and a
format of scheduling play therapy sessions every day for selected
populations of children have proven to be efective. Te results of
research studies suggest that even as few as two or three sessions of
play therapy can help children to cope and to develop skills that will
enable them to work through emotions and to move on to more adjusted
behavior. Tat children can begin sorting through issues and resolving
them when provided with just a few sessions of play therapy is a tribute
to the power of the play therapy relationship in the lives of children.

References Blalock, S. M., Lindo, N., & Ray, D. C. (2019). Individual
and group child‐centered play therapy: Impact on social‐emotional
competencies. Journal of Counseling & Development, 97(3), 238--249.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad .12264 Blanco, P. J., Holliman, R. P.,
Ceballos, P. L., & Farnam, J. L. (2019). Exploring the impact of
child-centered play therapy on academic achievement of at-risk
kindergarten students. International Journal of Play Terapy, 28(3),
133--143. https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000086 Brandt, M. A. (2001). An
investigation of the efcacy of play therapy with young children.
Dissertation Abstracts International: Section A. Humanities and Social
Science, 61(07), 2603. Bratton, S. C., Ray, D., Rhine, T., & Jones, L.
(2005). Te efcacy of play therapy with children: A meta-analytic review
of treatment outcomes. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice,
36(4), 376--390. Bratton, S. C., Landreth, G., & Lin, Y. (2010). Child
parent relationship therapy: A review of controlled-outcome research. In
J. Baggerly, D. Ray, &

407

408

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

S. Bratton (Eds.), Child-centered play therapy research: Evidence base
for efective practice (pp. 267--293). Wiley. Bratton, S. C., Ceballos,
P. L., Sheely-Moore, A. I., Meany-Walen, K., Pronchenko, Y., & Jones, L.
D. (2013). Head Start early mental health intervention: Efects of
child-centered play therapy on disruptive behaviors. International
Journal of Play Terapy, 22(1), 28--42. Burgin, E. & Ray, D. C. (2022).
Child-centered play therapy and childhood depression: An efectiveness
study in schools. Journal of Child and Family Studies. Advance online
publication. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s10826-021-02198-6 Carnes‐Holt,
K., & Bratton, S. C. (2014). Te efcacy of child parent relationship
therapy for adopted children with attachment disruptions. Journal of
Counseling & Development, 92(3), 328--337. https://doi.org/10.1002/j
.1556-6676.2014.00160.x Cheng, Y. & Ray, D.C. (2016). Child-centered
group play therapy: Impact on social-emotional assets of kindergarten
children. Te Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 41(3),
209--237.https://doi.org/10.1080 /01933922.2016.1197350 Cochran, J. L.,
& Cochran, N. H. (2017). Efects of child-centered play therapy for
students with highly-disruptive behavior in high-poverty schools.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 26(2), 59--72. https://doi.org/10
.1037/pla0000052 Coggins, K., & Carnes-Holt, K. (2021). Te efcacy of
child-teacher relationship training as an early childhood mental health
intervention in Head Start programs. International Journal of Play
Terapy, 30(2), 112--124. https://doi-org/10.1037/pla0000154 Crow, J.
(1990). Play therapy with low achievers in reading (Doctoral
dissertation, University of North Texas). Dissertation Abstracts
International, 50(9), B2789. Gonzales-Ball, T. L., & Bratton, S. C.
(2019). Child-teacher relationship training as a Head Start early mental
health intervention for children exhibiting disruptive behavior.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 28(1), 44--56.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000081 Johnson, L., McLeod, E., & Fall, M.
(1997). Play therapy with labeled children in the schools. Professional
School Counseling, 1(1), 31--34. Kot, S., Landreth, G. L., & Giordano,
M. (1998). Intensive child-centered play therapy with child witnesses of
domestic violence. International Journal of Play Terapy, 7(2), 17--36.
Opiola, K. K., & Bratton, S. C. (2018). Te efcacy of child parent
relationship therapy for adoptive families: A replication study. Journal
of Counseling & Development, 96(2), 155--166.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12189 Perryman, K. L., Robinson, S.,
Bowers, L., & Massengale, B. (2020). Childcentered play therapy and
academic achievement: A prevention-based

Intensive and Short-Term Child-Centered Play Therapy

model. International Journal of Play Terapy, 29(2), 104--117.
https://doi .org/10.1037/pla0000117 Post, P. (1999). Impact of
child-centered play therapy on the self-esteem locus of control, and
anxiety of at-risk 4th, 5th, and 6th grade students. International
Journal of Play Terapy, 8(2), 53--74. Ray, D. C., Stulmaker, H. L., Lee,
K. R., & Silverman, W. (2013). Child-centered play therapy and
impairment: Exploring relationships and constructs. International
Journal of Play Terapy, 22(1), 13--27. Ray, D. C., Burgin, E.,
Gutierrez, D., Ceballos, P., & Lindo, N. (2021). Childcentered play
therapy and adverse childhood experience: A randomized controlled trial.
Journal of Counseling & Development, 1--12. https://doi
.org/10.1002/jcad.12412 Ritzi, R. M., Ray, D. C., & Schumann, B. R.
(2017). Intensive short-term child-centered play therapy and
externalizing behaviors in children. International Journal of Play
Terapy, 26(1), 33--46. https://doi.org/10 .1037/pla0000035 Schottelkorb,
A. A., Doumas, D. M., & Garcia, R. (2012). Treatment for childhood
refugee trauma: A randomized, controlled trial. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 21(2), 53--73. Schottelkorb, A. A., Swan, K. L., & Ogawa,
Y. (2020). Intensive child‐centered play therapy for children on the
autism spectrum: A pilot study. Journal of Counseling & Development,
98(1), 63--73. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad .12300 Smith, N., &
Landreth, G. (2003). Intensive flial therapy with child witnesses of
domestic violence. A comparison with individual and sibling group play
therapy. International Journal of Play Terapy, 12(1), 67--88. Stulmaker,
H. L., & Ray, D. C. (2015). Child-centered play therapy with young
children who are anxious: A controlled trial. Children and Youth
Services Review, 57, 127--133.
http://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2015.08.005 Taylor, L., & Ray, D. C.
(2021). Child-centered play therapy and social--emotional competencies
of African American children: A randomized controlled trial.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 30(2), 74--85. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pla0000152 Tyndall-Lind, A., Landreth, G., & Giordano,
M. (2001). Intensive group play therapy with child witnesses of domestic
violence. International Journal of Play Terapy, 10(1), 53--83. Webb, P.
(2001). Play therapy with traumatized children. In G. Landreth (Ed.),
Innovations in play therapy: Issues, process, and special populations
(pp. 289--302). Philadelphia: Brunner-Routledge. Wilson, B. J., & Ray,
D. (2018). Child‐centered play therapy: Aggression, empathy, and
self‐regulation. Journal of Counseling & Development, 96(4), 399--409.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12222

409

Chapter

19

Research Evidence for CCPT Sue C. Bratton and Alyssa Swan

Play therapists are ethically bound to deliver interventions that are
proven effective. The current focus on children's escalating mental
health needs post-pandemic (American Psychological Association, 2022;
APA, 2022; Centers for Disease Control and Prevention: CDC, 2022; U.S.
News & World Report, March 14, 2022) has resulted in a parallel
heightened emphasis on the use of empirically supported treatments to
best meet this growing demand for appropriate child mental health
services. Childcentered play therapy (CCPT) is the most well-researched
intervention in the field of play therapy (evi​denc​ebas​edch​ildt​hera​py​
.com) and is particularly well suited to the developmental needs of
children (Landreth, 2012). CCPT interventions, e.g., Individual CCPT,
Group CCPT, and Child-Parent Relationship Therapy (CPRT; Landreth &
Bratton, 2020), are identified as evidence-based practices by several
national entities, including the California Evidence-Base Clearinghouse
for Child Welfare (CEBC; www​ .cebc4cw​.org) as well as the Results First
Clearinghouse Database (www​.pewtrusts​.org). The Results First
Clearinghouse Database summarizes the evidence ratings for CCPT and CPRT
previously determined by the National Registry of Evidence-Based
Programs and Practices (NREPP), a federal database that is no longer
available online. An outgrowth of national recognition of CCPT and CPRT
as evidence-based practices has been the development of DOI:
10.4324/9781003255796-19

411

412

Research Evidence for CCPT﻿

certification programs to ensure that practitioners who use CCPT and
CPRT adhere to the respective protocols (www​.cpt​.unt​.edu). This chapter
aims to present an up-to-date comprehensive review and synthesis of
contemporary CCPT research with a focus on individual studies employing
randomized control group designs in order to provide play therapy
practitioners and researchers with a guide to understanding and
utilizing the substantial research base for CCPT.

Status of CCPT Research Research in CCPT spans over 8 decades, with the
first identified study conducted by Dulsky in 1942. Since then, hundreds
of studies have confirmed the beneficial effects of CCPT interventions
conducted by play therapy professionals and as well as CCPTtrained
paraprofessionals supervised by play therapists, e.g., CPRT/filial
therapy. A review of literature showed an increase in the number of CCPT
studies from the mid-1990s to the present as well as increased adherence
to accepted research design, methodology, and reporting of findings. A
review of studies from 1942 to 1990 revealed that less than 20 studies
employed experimental design. While findings from early studies were
promising, lack of scientific rigor resulted in a major limitation. To
assess the status of contemporary CCPT research, we reviewed and
summarized individual studies published since 1995 that employed
stringent research methodologies. Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
are generally considered the gold standard to determine treatment
efficacy (Rubin & Bellamy, 2012). Thus, we decided to only review
studies that used randomization to assign participants to treatment
groups. Omitted studies used designs generally considered less rigorous,
including nonrandomized control groups, repeated measure single group,
and single case designs. Findings from the 40 included studies (Table
19.1.) provide strong support for the effectiveness of CCPT, whether
delivered by mental health professionals or delivered by parents and
teachers/mentors trained in CCPT methodology under the direct
supervision of a play therapist trained in CCPT and in CPRT/filial
therapy. Consistent with most outcome research in the field

N = 36 kindergarten students identifed as academically at-risk Age:
5--6; no average age reported No gender/sex data reported 8.3% AfAm;
5.5% Asian; 44.4% Cauc; 30.5% Lat; 5.5% Native American; 2.78% Biracial
N = 41 academically at-risk 1st graders Age: M = 6.4 63% male; 37%
female 46% Cauc; 34% Lat; 17% AfAm

CCPT/ WC 12 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CCPT / WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

Blanco et al. (2019)

Blanco & Ray (2011)

3

4

N = 59 1st graders identifed as academically at-risk Age: 6--7; M = 6.5
53% male; 47% female 69% Cauc; 17% Lat; 7% AfAm; 2% Asian; 5% other

CCPT / WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

Blanco et al. (2015)

2

N = 56 elementary age children Age: 5--10; M = 7.1 82% male; 18% female
38% Hispanic; 30% Cauc; 14% multiracial; 2% Asian; 16% no ethnic data
reported

CCPT/ Group CCPT/ WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

Blalock et al. (2019)

Sample Age Sex Ethnicity

Intervention Model/ Control Group Type \# Sessions Frequency; Length
Setting \*Treatment provider

continued

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement on a standardized
achievement test which indicated an increase in children's overall
academic abilities with a medium effect size. Post hoc analysis showed
that both groups demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement from
pre- to posttest; however, the treatment effect for the CCPT group was
twice as large as the control group.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement on early achievement scores
(moderate effect size), general information subscale scores (moderate
effect size), and writing subscale scores (large effect size).
Between-group differences for reading, mathematics, and spoken language
subscales scores were not statistically signifcant.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcantly greater improvement on early achievement
scores (YCAT) and anxiety. No statistically signifcant between group
differences were found for achievement test scores (WJIII ACH).

According to parent report, compared to the waitlist control over time,
the Individual CCPT and Group CCPT groups demonstrated statistically
signifcantly greater improvement on overall social emotional
competencies (medium effect size). Teacher data did not reveal
statistically signifcant between groups differences over time.

Findings

CHILD-CENTERED PLAY THERAPY RESEARCH---RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDIES
(1995--2022)

1

Study

TABLE 19.1

Research Evidence for CCPT 413

Sample Age Sex Ethnicity

N = 43 children of single parents Age: 3--7; M = 4.7 56% male; 44%
female No ethnic data reported N = 54 at-risk, low-income Pre-K students
Age: 3--4; M = 4.1 67% male; 33% female 42% AfAm; 39% Lat; 18% Cauc

N = 71 children referred for depression Age: 5--9; M = 6.21 69% male;
31% female 19.7% AfAm; 4.2% Asian; 21.1% Biracial; 26.8% Cauc; 28.2% Lat
N = 61 adoptees Age: 2.5--10; M = 5.7 55% male; 45% female 47% Cauc; 15%
Lat; 9% AfAm; 18% other

Intervention Model/ Control Group Type \# Sessions Frequency; Length
Setting \*Treatment provider

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

CCPT / AC 20 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CCPT/ WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

Bratton & Landreth (1995)

Bratton et al. (2013)

Burgin & Ray (2022)

Carnes-Holt & Bratton (2014)

5

6

7

8

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in externalized behaviors,
global behavior problems, and parent's empathic behavior as measured by
objective raters blinded to the study.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in depressive symptoms and
total behavior problems. Repeated measures ANOVA on DOF Total Problems
indicated that children in CCPT statistically signifcantly decreased
their demonstration of overall problem behaviors as rated by blind
observers.

According to teachers who were blinded to treatment groups, when
compared to the active control (Mentoring) over time, the CCPT group
demonstrated statistically signifcant greater improvement with large
treatment effects on disruptive behaviors, attention problems, and
aggression. Of children in CCPT, 78% moved from clinical levels of
concern to more normative functioning following treatment in one or more
areas of concern.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in children's behavior
problems, parent--child relationship stress, parental acceptance, and
parents' empathic behavior as measured by objective raters blinded to
the study.

Findings

CHILD-CENTERED PLAY THERAPY RESEARCH---RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDIES
(1995--2022)

Study

TABLE 19.1

414 Research Evidence for CCPT

N = 48 at-risk, low-income PreK students Age: 3--4; M = 4.3 56% male;
44% female 100% Lat N = 43 kindergarten children Age: 5--6; M = 5.1 70%
male; 30% female 44% Lat; 33% Cauc; 23% AfAm N = 32 Chinese children
Age: 2--9; M = 5.1 50% male; 50% female 100% Chinese N = 29 children
attending Headstart schools Age: 3--4; M = 3.92 66% male; 34% female
86.2% Cauc; 13.8% Lat N = 22 children with history of sexual abuse Age:
4--10; M = 6.4 32% male; 68% female No ethnic data reported

Group CCPT / WC 15--16 play sessions 2wk; 30 min

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

Modifed CPRT / AC 6 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained teachers

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

10 Cheng & Ray (2016)

11 Chau & Landreth (1997)

12 Coggins & CarnesHolt (2021)

13 Costas & Landreth (1999)

Ceballos & Bratton (2010)

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

9

continued

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in parent--child
relationship stress, parental acceptance, and parent's empathic
behaviors as rated by objective raters. Although not statistically
signifcant, within-group analysis showed that CPRTtrained parents
reported a marked improvement in their children's behavior problems,
anxiety, emotional adjustment, and self-concept. Although between-group
differences were not statistically signifcant, positive trends were
noted for decreased anxiety levels, increase in self-esteem, and
increased emotional adjustment in the CPRT group.

Compared to the active control (Conscious Discipline®) over time, the
modifed CPRT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
improvement in total problem behaviors. Between-group differences for
externalizing problems and internalizing problems were not statistically
signifcant. All child participants exhibited improvements in targeted
behaviors with small-to-moderate treatment effects.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in parental acceptance,
parent--child relationship stress, and parent's empathic behaviors as
directly observed in play sessions by independent raters.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, children in CCPT group
demonstrated statistically signifcant greater improvement with medium
effect size on parent reported total social-emotional functioning,
social competence, and empathy. Teacher reports did not reveal
statistically signifcant differences between groups.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement with large treatment
effects on externalized behavior problems, internalized behavior
problems, and parent--child relationship stress. Of children in the CPRT
group, 85% moved from clinical levels of concern to more normative
functioning. Cultural considerations discussed.

Research Evidence for CCPT 415

N = 21 speech-delayed Pre-K students Age: 4--6; M = 4.9 86% male; 14%
female 81% Cauc; 19% Lat N = 62 children Age: 5--9, M = 7.5 50% male;
50% female 97% Cauc; 2% Asian; 2% AfAm

N = 29 behaviorally at-risk students Age: 5--11; M = 7.4 59% male; 41%
female 100% Lat

N = 20 at-risk, Head Start students Age M = 3.63 75% male; 25% female
30% AfAm; 10% European American; 60% Lat/Hispanic

Group CCPT / AC (groups of 2) 25 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min

CCPT / WC 6 play sessions 1wk; 30 min

CCPT / COMP 15 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min

CPRT/ AC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained teachers

14 Danger & Landreth (2005)

15 Fall et al. (1999)

16 Garza & Bratton (2005)

17 Gonzales-Ball & Bratton (2019)

Study

Sample Age Sex Ethnicity

Compared to the active control (Conscious Discipline Training) over
time, the modifed CPRT group demonstrated statistically signifcant
greater improvement with a large treatment effect on disruptive
behavior. Of children in the modifed CPRT group, 63.6% improved from
clinical or borderline levels of disruptive behavior problems to more
normative levels of functioning; only 22.2% of children in the active
control group improved and 66.7% worsened.

According to parents who were blinded to children's treatment group,
compared to the comparison treatment (curriculum-based small groups)
over time, the CCPT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
improvement with a large treatment effect on externalizing behavior
problems. Although not statistically signifcant, CCPT demonstrated a
medium treatment effect on children's internalizing problems. Cultural
considerations discussed.

Although not statically signifcant, the CCPT group demonstrated
improvement in self-effcacy, while the waitlist control slightly
worsened. Teachers reported improvement in classroom behavior for both
groups, especially greater improvement in the CCPT group. The classroom
observations by research assistants did not support teachers' reports.

Although not statistically signifcant, compared to the active control
group (speech therapy) over time, the CCPT group who also received
speech therapy demonstrated improvement from pre- to posttest with large
treatment effects on receptive and expressive language and a small
treatment effect on anxiety.

Findings

CHILD-CENTERED PLAY THERAPY RESEARCH---RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDIES
(1995--2022)

Intervention Model/ Control Group Type \# Sessions Frequency; Length
Setting \*Treatment provider

TABLE 19.1

416 Research Evidence for CCPT

N = 22 children of mothers in prison Age: 3--10; M = 5 53% male; 47%
female No ethnic data reported N = 30 insulin-dependent children Age:
7--11; M = 9.4 57% male; 43% female 87% Cauc; 3% AfAm; 7% Lat

N = 26 behaviorally at-risk Pre-K to K Age: 4--6; M = 5.4 57% male; 43%
female 96% Cauc

N = 22 children identifed with learning diffculties Age: 3--10; M = 6.5
No gender/sex data reported No ethnicity data reported N = 22 children
living in a domestic violence shelter Age: 4--10; M = 6.4 41% male; 59%
female 50% AfAm; 32% Cauc; 18% Lat

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

CCPT / AC 12 play sessions 3/wk; 30 min

Modifed CPRT/ COMP 20 play sessions 1/wk; 20 min \*11th--12th grade
CPRT-trained mentors

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

CCPT / WC 12 play sessions 6/wk; 45 min \*CPRT-trained parents

18 Harris & Landreth (1997)

19 Jones & Landreth (2002)

20 Jones, Rhine, & Bratton (2002)

21 Kale & Landreth (1999)

22 Kot, Landreth, & Giordano (1998)

continued

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in self-concept,
externalizing behavior problems, total behavior problems, and physical
proximity. No statistically signifcant between-group differences for
internalizing behavior problems were found.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement on parental acceptance and
parent--child relationship stress measures. While not statistically
signifcant, parents trained in CPRT reported greater improvement in
child behavior problems compared to the control group.

According to parents who were blinded to children's treatment group,
compared to the comparison treatment (PALS®) over time, the modifed CPRT
group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater improvement in
internalizing behavior problems, total behavior problems, and mentor's
empathic behaviors.

Compared to the active control (Diabetic camp activities) over time, the
CCPT group demonstrated a statistically signifcant greater improvement
on parent-reported measure of diabetes adaptation. Both groups
demonstrated decreased anxiety and improvement in behavior problems pre
to post. The CCPT group continued to show greater improvement at 3 month
follow up, although between-group differences were not statistically
signifcant.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in child behavior problems,
parental acceptance, and parent's empathic behaviors as directly
observed by independent raters.

Research Evidence for CCPT 417

N = 52 at-risk, low-income Pre-K students Age: 3--4; M = 3.9 58% male;
42% female 56% Lat; 31% AfAm; 13% Cauc N = 60 Ugandan orphans Age:
10--12; M = 11.2 50% male; 50% female 100% African

Compared to the active control (treatment as usual) over time, the N =
49 adoptees CPRT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
Age: 2.5--9, M = 5.5 improvement with large treatment effects on
children's global 51% male; 49% female 35% Cauc; 10% AfAm; 12% Lat; 22%
behavior problems, parent--child relationship stress, and parent's
empathic behaviors as measured by objective raters blinded to the Asian;
16% Biracial; 4% African study. Findings of this replication study
confrmed Carnes-Holt and Bratton's (2014) results.

Modifed CPRT / AC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained teachers

Group CCPT / AC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CPRT/ AC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min. \*CPRT-trained parents

24 Morrison & Bratton (2010)

25 Ojiambo & Bratton (2014)

26 Opiola & Bratton (2018)

According to teachers and housemothers who were blinded to treatment
groups, when compared to the active control (Mentoring) over time, the
Group CCPT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
improvement with moderate to large treatment effects on children's
internalizing and externalizing behavior problems. Most children
participating in CCPT moved from clinical concern to normal functioning
following treatment.

Compared to the active control (Conscious Discipline®) over time, the
modifed CPRT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
improvement in externalizing behavior problems (large treatment effect)
and internalizing problems (moderate treatment effect). Of the modifed
CPRT group children, 84% moved from clinical to normal functioning.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in parental acceptance,
parent--child relationship stress, and self-concept.

N = 32 children of fathers in prison Age: 4--9; M = 6.2 41% male, 59%
female No ethnic data reported

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

Findings

23 Landreth & Lobaugh (1998)

Study

Sample Age Sex Ethnicity

CHILD-CENTERED PLAY THERAPY RESEARCH---RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDIES
(1995--2022)

Intervention Model/ Control Group Type \# Sessions Frequency; Length
Setting \*Treatment provider

TABLE 19.1

418 Research Evidence for CCPT

N = 24 students diagnosed with LD Age: 10--12; M = 11.4 75% male; 25%
female 92% Cauc; 4% Lat; 4% AfAm

N = 37 clinically impaired children Age: 5--8; M = 6.3 78% male; 22%
female 38% Lat; 32% AfAm; 30% Cauc

N = 112 children with 2+ ACEs Age: 5--9; M = 6.34 75% male; 25% female
23% AfAm; 20% Lat; 15.8% Multiracial; 40% Cauc; .8% Asian N = 60
students with ADHD symptoms Age: 5--11; M = 7.5 80% male; 20% female 35%
Lat; 17% AfAm; 45% Cauc

Group CCPT / WC (groups of 3) 12 play sessions 1/wk; 1 hr

CCPT / WC 12--16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CCPT/ WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min.

CCPT / AC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

27 Packman & Bratton (2003)

28 Ray et al. (2013)

29 Ray et al. (2022)

30 Ray, Schottelkorb, & Tsai (2007)

continued

According to teacher report, when compared to the active control
(Mentoring) over time, the CCPT group demonstrated statistically
signifcant greater improvement in student characteristics, emotional
lability, and anxiety/withdrawal (moderate effect sizes; Index of
Teaching Stress). Between-group differences over time for ITS ADHD
domain score, learning disability subscale scores, aggressive/ conduct
disorder subscale scores, and Conner's ADHD index scores were not
statistically signifcant. Post-hoc within-group analysis revealed that
both groups demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement in ADHD,
student characteristics, anxiety, and learning disability pre- to
posttest.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement with moderate to large
effect sizes on empathy subscale scores, self-regulation/responsibility
subscale scores, social competence subscale scores, and total
social-emotional competencies scores.

Phase I: The CCPT group demonstrated a medium treatment effect on
children's functional impairment when compared to the waitlist control,
although between-group differences were not statistically signifcant.
Phase II (both groups received CCPT): Within-group differences indicated
that children in both groups showed statistically signifcant improvement
in overall impairment, academic progress, peer relationships, and
classroom problems subscales (large effect sizes).

According to parent report, when compared to the waitlist control over
time, the Group CCPT group demonstrated statistically signifcant greater
improvement with medium to large treatment effects on internalizing
problems and overall behavioral functioning. No statistically signifcant
between group differences for externalizing behaviors were found.

Research Evidence for CCPT 419

N = 23 children diagnosed with ASD Age: 4--10; no average age reported
83% male; 17% female 4.3% AfAm; 95.7% Cauc N = 23 at-risk, low-income
Pre-K students Age: 3--5; M = 4.2 62% male; 38% female 100% AfrAm

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group N = 30
children at-risk for maladjustment following earthquake demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement on overall anxiety,
physiological anxiety, worry/oversensitivity, and suicide risk. Age:
8--12; M= 9.2 Within-group analysis showed that CCPT demonstrated large
47% male; 53% female treatment effects on anxiety, worry, and
oversensitivity and a small to 100% Taiwanese medium effect on reducing
suicide risk.

CCPT/ WC 24 play sessions 4/wk; 30 min.

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

Group CCPT / WC 10 play sessions 2--3/wk; 40 min

33 Schottelkorb et al. (2020)

34 Sheely-Moore & Bratton (2010)

35 Shen (2002)

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement with large treatment
effects on children's global behavior problems and parent--child
relationship stress. Cultural considerations discussed.

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement with large treatment effect
sizes on social responsiveness, attention problems, aggressive behavior,
and externalizing problems.

Although between-group differences were not statistically signifcant,
within-group analyses indicated that both interventions, CCPT and
comparison group (TF-CBT), demonstrated statistically signifcant
reductions in PTSD symptom severity in a subset of study children who
met stringent criteria for PTSD. Findings indicate both treatments were
equally effective for this population.

N = 31 refugees with trauma symptoms Age: 6--13; M=9.2 55% male; 45%
female 67.7% AfrAm; 16.1% Middle Eastern; 9.7% Asian; 6.5% Other

CCPT / COMP 17 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min.

Findings

32 Schottelkorb et al. (2012)

Sample Age Sex Ethnicity

According to parent report, compared to the waitlist control over time,
N = 24 children with behavioral CCPT/ WC the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater concerns 20 play sessions improvement
in externalizing behavior scores, aggressive behavior 2/day for 10 days;
30 Age: 6--9; M = 7 subscale scores, and rule-breaking behavior subscale
scores, all with 75% male; 25% female mins 71% Aus Cauc; 13% Lat; 8%
Biracial; large effect sizes. According to teacher report, compared to
the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically 4% Eng Cauc; 4% Asian signifcant greater improvement in
externalizing problems scores and aggressive behavior subscale scores
with large effect sizes.

Intervention Model/ Control Group Type \# Sessions Frequency; Length
Setting \*Treatment provider

CHILD-CENTERED PLAY THERAPY RESEARCH---RANDOMIZED CONTROLLED STUDIES
(1995--2022)

31 Ritzi et al. (2017)

Study

TABLE 19.1

420 Research Evidence for CCPT

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CCPT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in overall
social--emotional competence scores.

N = 37 children K-4th grade Age: 5--10; M = 6.68 78% male; 22% female
100% AfAm N = 71 elementary children Age: 5--10; M = 6.87 83% male; 17%
female 52.1% AfAm; 21.1% Lat; 19.7% Cauc; 7% Multiracial N = 35
behaviorally at-risk immigrants Age: 3--10; M = 6.4 54% male; 45% female
100% Chinese Canadians

CCPT/ WC 16 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

CCPT/ WC 8--16 play sessions over 10 weeks; M = 13.97 2/wk; 30 mins

CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained parents

38 Taylor & Ray (2021)

39 Wilson & Ray (2018)

40 Yuen, Landreth, & Baggerly (2002)

Note: Inter vention Model: CCPT = Child Centered Play Therapy, CPRT =
Child-Parent Relationship Therapy, Modified CPRT = Modified CPRT for
Teachers and Mentors Control Group Type: WC = waitlist control, AC =
active control, COMP = comparison group Ethnicity: AfAm = African
American; Lat = Latino/x; Cauc = Caucasian

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the CPRT group demonstrated
statistically signifcant greater improvement in child behavior problems,
parent--child relationship stress, parental acceptance, and parental
empathy according to raters blinded to treatment groups. Within-group
analysis showed that the CPRT group reported greater gains in perceived
competence and social acceptance.

Parents reported statistically signifcant decreases in aggression,
increased self-regulation, and increased empathy after participation in
CCPT, compared to the waitlist control. Teacher-reported data revealed
no statistically signifcant results.

N = 53 children who exhibited clinical Compared to the active control
(activity groups) over time, the CCPT group demonstrated statistically
signifcant greater improvement in or borderline levels of anxiety
overall anxiety scores and worry subscale (RCMAS-2); treatment Age:
6--8; M = 6.5 effects were large. Children in active control group
increased their 68% male; 32% female 45% Cauc; 21% AfAm; 19% Lat; 13%
levels of anxiety and worry. Between-group differences over time for
physiological anxiety and social anxiety subscales were not Biracial; 2%
Asian statistically signifcant.

CCPT / AC 15 play sessions 2/wk; 30 min

37 Stulmaker & Ray (2015)

Compared to the waitlist control over time, the modifed CPRT group
demonstrated statistically signifcant greater improvement in behavior
problems, social-emotional functioning, and teachers' empathic
interactions with students according to direct observation by
independent raters.

N = 24 deaf and hard of hearing Pre-K children Age: 2--6; M = 4.1 54%
male; 46% female 33% Cauc; 42% Lat; 25% AfAm

Modifed CPRT / WC 7 play sessions 1/wk; 30 min \*CPRT-trained teachers

36 Smith & Landreth (2004)

Research Evidence for CCPT 421

422

Research Evidence for CCPT

of psychotherapy, CCPT research is limited by generally small sample
sizes that restrict the generalization of fndings. Metaanalysis makes it
possible to overcome this limitation by combining research fndings
across studies to determine an overall treatment efect. During this
millennium, researchers conducted several meta-analyses and systemic
reviews of CCPT research that provide additional support for the efcacy
of CCPT.

CCPT Meta-Analyses and Systematic Reviews Studies by LeBlanc and Ritchie
(2001) and Bratton et al. (2005) were the frst meta-analyses to focus
exclusively on play therapy. In both studies, researchers coded the vast
majority of studies as using CCPT intervention conducted either by a
mental health professional or by a paraprofessional, e.g., parent,
teacher, or mentor, trained and supervised by a play therapist trained
in CCPT and CPRT/flial therapy. Meta-analytic fndings supported play
therapy, particularly CCPT interventions, as a viable treatment for
children. LeBlanc and Ritchie (2001) reviewed 42 outcome studies on the
efects of play therapy and reported a moderate treatment efect (.66).
Shortly afer, Bratton et al. (2005) conducted the largest metaanalysis
of play therapy research to date, which include a total of 93 controlled
outcome studies across play therapy approaches. Bratton and colleagues
reported that play therapy interventions demonstrated a large overall
treatment efect (.80). Tey further analyzed studies coded as humanistic,
primarily defned as CCPT or nondirective play therapy conducted by
professionals or supervised paraprofessionals and found a large
treatment efect (.92). Bratton and colleagues also reported moderate to
large treatment efects across child presenting concerns and outcome
variables. Results were interpreted with acknowledgement that older play
therapy studies demonstrated less scientifc rigor compared to
contemporary research studies. Bratton et al. suggested that future
research adhere to stringent research designs and reporting guidelines.
Findings of both Bratton et al. (2005) and LeBlanc

Research Evidence for CCPT

and Ritchie (2001) demonstrated that parental involvement and duration
of treatment were signifcant predictors of children's benefcial
treatment outcomes. In 2015, two meta-analyses (Lin & Bratton, 2015; Ray
et al., 2015) were published to analyze the efcacy of CCPT approaches
specifcally. Utilizing rigorous hierarchical liner modeling (HLM)
methods, Lin and Bratton (2015) calculated the treatment efect of CCPT,
including CPRT/flial therapy studies, among a total of 52 controlled
outcome studies published between 1995 and 2010. Tey reported
statistically signifcant overall treatment efect size of .47, indicating
a moderate treatment efect for CCPT intervention over control or
comparison groups. Analysis of treatment efect by outcome variables
revealed that CCPT had a moderate treatment efect for caregiver--child
relationship stress (.60), self-efcacy (.53), and global behavior
problems (.53), and a small treatment efect on internalizing problems
(.37) and externalizing problems (.34). Te researchers cautioned that
although their fndings appear discrepant from the earlier meta-analyses,
results must be interpreted in light of several factors: more stringent
study inclusion criteria, more rigorous efect size calculation formula,
and the use of HLM statistical analysis. Ray et al. (2015) conducted a
meta-analysis on the efects of CCPT conducted in elementary schools
among a total of 23 controlled outcome studies published between 1975
and 2011. Results demonstrated statistically signifcant efect sizes for
outcome variables, including externalizing problems (d = 0.34),
internalizing problems (d =0.21), total problems (d = 0.34), self-efcacy
(d = 0.29), and academic progress (d = 0.36). Most recently, Parker et
al. (2021) conducted a meta-analysis of 23 controlled outcome studies on
the efects of CCPT for children referred to services for disruptive
behavior. Te primary fnding of this meta-analysis was that CCPT
intervention demonstrated moderate treatment efects for reducing
externalizing and overall problem behaviors, over waitlist control, or
comparison treatment groups. In addition to the evidence provided by the
above meta-analyses, CCPT research has been summarized in several
comprehensive systematic reviews. Below, we overview reviews published
since 2010. In 2010, Bratton reviewed 51 school-based play

423

424

Research Evidence for CCPT

therapy intervention outcome studies published from 1990 to 2009, 34 of
which used CCPT intervention provided by a professional or supervised
paraprofessional. Te researcher concluded that school-based play therapy
demonstrated benefcial efects for a range of childhood disorders.
Bratton reported that 75% of the investigations reviewed were conducted
since 2000, which indicated a 100% increase compared to the previous 5
decades of research published on school-based play therapy. Ray and
Bratton (2010) reviewed 25 experimental and quasi-experimental CCPT
studies published from 2000 to 2009 investigating the impact of CCPT
provided by mental health professionals. Ray and Bratton concluded that
methodological rigor and research productivity made considerable
increases during the 21st century. Bratton (2015) conducted a systematic
review, limited to randomized controlled trials (RCTs) in play therapy,
and found 24 RCTs, 22 of which used CCPT intervention, published since
2000 that met stringent inclusion criteria. Bratton ofered a thorough
review of strengths and limitations of the research base for play
therapy. Ray and McCullough (2015), in service of the Association for
Play Terapy (APT), published an evidence-based practice statement on
play therapy, providing a comprehensive review of play therapy research
from 2000 to 2015. Ray and McCullough reviewed 25 randomized controlled
studies, of which 18 studies tested the efects of CCPT intervention
conducted by a mental health professional. In 2017, Bratton and Swan
provided an update on the status of play therapy research in a
systematic review of 26 randomized controlled trials published afer the
year 2000, comprising a total of 1,087 child participants. A majority of
included studies (n = 24) tested the efects of CCPT interventions
conducted by professionals or paraprofessionals under the supervision of
a CCPT therapist. Te main fnding of their review echoed previous reviews
of play therapy research: child-centered play therapy was shown to be an
efective intervention for children across cultures, settings, and length
of treatment. Five additional reviews published since 2010 provided
narrowed systematic literature search to focus on a CCPT approach to
play therapy specifcally. Landreth (2012) and Ray (2011) provided

Research Evidence for CCPT

comprehensive research reviews of published and unpublished studies in
their respective textbooks focused exclusively on CCPT approaches,
independently concluding that CCPT research demonstrates sound evidence
for its efectiveness across presenting concerns of child participants.
Landreth (2012) included 53 CCPT and CPRT studies from 1995 to 2010 and
Ray (2011) included 62 CCPT studies conducted by a professional and
published from 1947 to 2010. Bratton et al. (2010) focused on CPRT
studies in a comprehensive literature review of 32 controlled outcome
studies published from 1995 to 2009. Ray and Bratton (2015) conducted a
systematic review of 13 school-based CCPT studies that met stringent
criteria for experimental research design. Te most recent systematic
review of CCPT research was published in 2021 (Parker et al.). Parker
and colleagues published a systematic review of 32 CCPT studies that
focused on outcomes related to childhood trauma. Teir review included
published (n = 23) and unpublished (n = 9) control group studies in
which participants were children who experienced events consistent with
criteria for adverse childhood experiences (ACEs). Twenty studies used
random assignment to groups; 12 used nonrandomized groups. Parker et
al. (2021) aggregated study fndings relevant to childhood trauma and
reported methodological considerations respective to CCPT research on
ACEs. Results from these meta-analyses and systematic reviews support
CCPT as an efective intervention for a range of childhood disorders in
real-world settings, particularly in schools. CCPT demonstrates
benefcial outcomes in relatively few sessions whether conducted by a
mental health professional trained in CCPT or by a paraprofessional,
e.g., parent or teacher/mentor under the direct supervision of CCPT/CPRT
therapist. All authors reported notable improvements to contemporary
research methods including increase in use of random assignment to
groups, larger sample sizes, manualized treatment protocols, and
procedures to ensure treatment fdelity. Authors unanimously recommended
that CCPT research continue its current trajectory of increased
methodological rigor in order to further elevate the credibility of CCPT
research and provide an even stronger basis for CCPT's recognition as an
evidence-based treatment.

425

426

Research Evidence for CCPT

CCPT Individual Outcome Studies Tis section provides an up-to-date
overview of CCPT individual outcome research studies. To be included in
the current review, studies met the following inclusion criteria: a)
intervention was clearly defned as theoretically consistent use of CCPT
principles, attitudes, and skills, e.g. Individual CCPT, Group CCPT, or
CPRT/ flial therapy; b) child participants were between the ages of 2
and 13 years old; c) studies were published between 1995 and 2022; d)
studies were published in English in an international or national
refereed journal; e) studies reported child outcome variables and used
standardized assessment; f) studies included descriptive information
about CCPT intervention procedures and participants; and g) studies
utilized a randomized control group design and clearly described
research methodology and procedures. CCPT intervention was provided by
mental health professionals following CCPT protocol (Ray, 2011) or
provided by parents and teachers/mentors who were trained in CCPT
attitudes and skills and directly supervised by CCPT and CPRT/flial
therapy trained mental health professionals, following the CPRT protocol
(Bratton & Landreth, 2020). Initially, more than 100 CCPT quantitative
studies were identifed that described pretest--posttest outcomes, a
majority of which can be found at evidencebas edchildtherapy.com. Of
those, 40 met inclusion criteria for the present review. An overview of
study characteristics and fndings is provided in Table 19.1. A total of
40 CCPT randomized controlled studies (N = 1,626 child participants)
published between the years 1995 and 2022 are included in the following
review of CCPT individual outcome studies. Te number of included studies
by decade demonstrates greater than 100% increase during 2010--2022 over
the number of studies published in the two decades prior: 1990--1999 (n
= 8), 2000--2009 (n = 9), 2010--2019 (n = 18), and 2020--2022 (n = 5).
When categorized by type of CCPT treatment approach, 24 studies examined
the efects of CCPT delivered by a mental health professional: Individual
CCPT (n = 18), Group CCPT (n = 5), or both Individual CCPT and Group
CCPT (n = 1), and 16 studies were on the efects of CCPT delivered by
paraprofessionals trained

Research Evidence for CCPT

and supervised in CCPT: CPRT (n = 12) or Modifed CPRT/CTRT (n = 4). In
all studies, participants were randomized into treatment groups. Te
efects of CCPT intervention were compared to waitlist control (n = 26),
active control (n = 11), and comparison treatment (n = 3) groups. Across
the 40 studies, sample sizes ranged from 20 to 112 child participants. A
study published in 2022 by Ray and colleagues contained the largest
sample size (n = 112 children) to date among all CCPT randomized
controlled studies. Eleven additional studies reported fnal sample sizes
of more than 50 child participants (Blalock et al., 2019; Blanco et al.,
2015; Bratton et al., 2013; Burgin & Ray, 2022; Carnes-Holt & Bratton,
2014; Fall et al., 1999; Morrison & Bratton, 2010; Ojiambo & Bratton,
2014; Ray et al., 2007; Stulmaker & Ray, 2015; Wilson & Ray, 2018). One
study was identifed as a replication study; Opiola & Bratton (2018)
replicated Carnes-Holt & Bratton (2014)'s randomized controlled study of
the efects of CPRT with adoptive families, with the addition of an
active control group to increase rigor. Only one CCPT study included
data collection beyond posttest (end of intervention period); Jones and
Landreth (2002) collected 3-week follow-up data. No long-term follow-up
RCTs have been conducted on the efects of CCPT interventions. Among the
1,626 child participants, children's ages ranged from 2 to 13, with an
overall average age of 6.0 years old. Te mean age was 7.2 for Individual
CCPT and Group CCPT studies. Te mean age was 5.01 for CPRT and Modifed
CPRT studies. Two studies only reported age range of child participants
with no average age, so they were excluded from calculation of this
overall average age (Blanco et al., 2019; Schottelkorb et al., 2020).
Except for two studies that did not report gender of child participants
(Blanco et al., 2019; Kale & Landreth, 1999), gender of 1,568 child
participants (in the remaining 38 studies) were 61.3% male and 38.7%
female. Five studies did not report ethnicity or race of child
participants. In 25 of the 35 studies that did report ethnicity or race
of child participants, the samples of child participants were comprised
of less than 50% Caucasian/White participants. Eight studies reported
samples in which all (100%) participants identifed with the same
racial/ethnic background: Latino (Ceballos & Bratton, 2010; Garza &
Bratton, 2005), Ugandan African (Ojiambo

427

428

Research Evidence for CCPT

& Bratton, 2014), African American (Sheely-Moore & Bratton, 2010; Taylor
& Ray, 2021), Taiwanese (Shen, 2002), Chinese (Chau & Landreth, 1997),
and Chinese Canadian (Yuen et al., 2002). Te considerable attention to
multiculturalism in CCPT research is noteworthy and may be a function of
the inclusion of a majority of studies that were conducted in schools
and other real-world settings described below. CCPT intervention among
the 40 studies was delivered in 6--25 sessions; the fewest number of
CCPT sessions (6) in a study was reported by Fall et al. (1999) and the
greatest number of sessions (25) was reported by Danger and Landreth
(2005). Mean number of play sessions was 15.4 for Individual CCPT and
Group CCPT studies. Mean number of play sessions was 7.75 for CPRT and
Modifed CPRT studies. In all but one CPRT study that was modifed for
year-long mentors (Jones et al., 2002), parents and teachers conducted
seven play sessions over the course of the study, per the traditional
CPRT protocol. In studies on the efects of Individual and Group CCPT,
intervention was most delivered as 30-minute sessions conducted twice
per week to conform to the needs of the school setting. Most CCPT
studies (n = 30) were conducted in a school setting. Ten CCPT studies
included in this review were not conducted in a school setting; these
studies were conducted in the following settings: diabetic summer camp
(Jones & Landreth, 2002), prison (Harris & Landreth, 1997; Landreth &
Lobaugh, 1998), domestic violence shelter (Kot et al., 1998), and
community settings with CPRT-trained parents (e.g., Carnes-Holt &
Bratton, 2014; Opiola & Bratton, 2018). In 35 of the 40 studies, CCPT
intervention demonstrated statistically signifcant improvement on at
least one child outcome variable compared to control or comparison
groups, with moderate to large treatment efects. Child outcome variables
included child behavior (e.g., Bratton et al., 2013; Ceballos & Bratton,
2010; Ritzi et al., 2017), academic achievement (e.g., Blanco et al.,
2015; Blanco et al., 2019), attachment difculties (Carnes-Holt &
Bratton, 2014; Opiola & Bratton, 2018), social-emotional competence
(e.g., Blalock et al., 2019; Cheng & Ray, 2016; Ray et al., 2022; Taylor
& Ray, 2021), functional impairment (Ray et al., 2013), ADHD (Ray et
al., 2007), PTSD (Schottelkorb et al., 2012), Autism Spectrum

Research Evidence for CCPT

Disorder (ASD; Schottelkorb et al., 2020), depression (Burgin & Ray,
2022), anxiety (Stulmaker & Ray, 2015), and aggression (Wilson & Ray,
2018). Table 19.2 provides a comprehensive list of target outcome
variables by study. No studies indicated worsening of symptoms during
CCPT intervention.

Culturally Relevant CCPT Research CCPT research has been conducted with
child participants representative of various cultural backgrounds with
regards to race/ethnicity, nationality, poverty, linguistic or hearing
abilities, trauma, medical conditions, etc. Although CCPT research can
certainly continue to beneft from sustained attention among researchers
with regards to recruiting culturally diverse samples in outcomebased
play therapy research, CCPT's attention to multiculturism in studies
over the past 3 decades represents a strength of CCPT research and shows
the generalizability of CCPT to child clients crossculturally in a
variety of practice settings. Te majority of CCPT studies have been
conducted in the United States. Some studies on the impact of CCPT have
been conducted outside of the United States, such as in Australia (Ritzi
et al., 2017; Wicks et al., 2018), Taiwan (Shen, 2002), Canada (Yuen et
al., 2002), and Uganda (Ojiambo & Bratton, 2014). Several CCPT research
studies focused specifcally on the impact of CCPT with samples of
racially and ethnically diverse individuals. Both Ceballos and Bratton
(2010) and Garza and Bratton (2005) conducted randomized controlled
studies on the efect of CPRT and Individual CCPT interventions,
respectively, for Latino children, reporting statistically signifcant
improvements in child behavior with large treatment efects in favor of
CCPT intervention over control groups in both studies. In an unpublished
dissertation study, not included in the review of individual outcome
studies above, Barcenas Jaimez (2017) investigated the impact of CCPT
for Latino children when delivered by Latino Spanishspeaking play
therapists and White English-speaking play therapists. Results indicated
statistically signifcant improvement in

429

430

Research Evidence for CCPT

Table 19.2 Cross-Reference of Table 1 Studies by Target Outcome
Variables Child Outcome Variable/ Target Problem

Studies

Internalized problems including anxiety, depression

Blanco et al., 2015; Burgin & Ray, 2022; Ceballos & Bratton, 2010; Garza
& Bratton, 2005; Jones et al., 2002; Morrison & Bratton, 2010; Ojiambo &
Bratton, 2014; Packman & Bratton, 2003; Jones & Landreth, 2002; Shen,
2002; Stulmaker & Ray, 2015

Externalized problems including disruptive behaviors, aggression, ADHD

Ojiambo & Bratton, 2014; Bratton et al., 2013; Carnes-Holt & Bratton,
2014; Ceballos & Bratton, 2010; Garza & Bratton, 2005; Gonzales-Ball &
Bratton, 2019; Kot et al., 1998; Morrison & Bratton, 2010; Ojiambo &
Bratton, 2014; Ray et al., 2007; Ritzi et al., 2017; Schottelkorb et
al., 2020; Wilson & Ray, 2018

Comorbid/global behavior problems including functional impairment

Bratton & Landreth, 1995; Burgin & Ray, 2022; Carnes-Holt & Bratton,
2014; Coggins & CarnesHolt, 2021; Harris & Landreth, 1997; Jones et al.,
2002; Kot et al., 1998; Opiola & Bratton, 2018; Packman & Bratton, 2003;
Ray et al., 2013; Sheely-Moore & Bratton, 2010; Yuen et al., 2002

Trauma/attachment/PTSD

Carnes-Holt & Bratton, 2014; Schottelkorb et al., 2012

Academic achievement/ speech disorder

Blanco et al., 2015; Blanco et al., 2019; Blanco & Ray, 2011; Danger &
Landreth, 2005; Smith & Landreth, 2004

Social-emotional functioning, Blalock et al., 2019; Cheng & Ray, 2016;
Ray et al., 2022; Schottelkorb et al., 2020; Smith & Landreth, including
social 2004; Taylor & Ray, 2021; Wilson & Ray, 2018 responsiveness,
self-regulation Self-concept/competence

Kot et al., 1998; Landreth & Lobaugh, 1998; Ray et al., 2022; Yuen et
al., 2002

Diabetes adaptation

Jones & Landreth, 2002

Other Target Outcome Variables

Studies

Caregiver--child relationship stress

Bratton & Landreth, 1995; Ceballos & Bratton, 2010; Chau & Landreth,
1997; Costas & Landreth, 1999; Harris & Landreth, 1997; Kale & Landreth,
1999; Landreth & Lobaugh, 1998; Opiola & Bratton, 2018; Ray et al.,
2007; Sheely-Moore & Bratton, 2010; Yuen et al., 2002

Caregiver empathy, including parental acceptance

Bratton & Landreth, 1995; Carnes-Holt & Bratton, 2014; Chau & Landreth,
1997; Costas & Landreth, 1999; Harris & Landreth, 1997; Jones et al.,
2002; Kale & Landreth, 1999; Landreth & Lobaugh, 1998; Opiola & Bratton,
2018; Smith & Landreth, 2004; Yuen et al., 2002

Research Evidence for CCPT

child outcomes among both bilingual and monolingual CCPT intervention
groups, compared to the bilingual mentoring control group. In all other
studies, the CCPT intervention was delivered in the child's or parent's
spoken language. Taylor and Ray (2021) constructed a randomized
controlled study to test the efcacy of CCPT with a sample of 37 Black
American elementary school children and reported statistically and
practically signifcant improvement in social-emotional competence
outcomes among children who received CCPT, compared to the waitlist
control group. Sheely-Moore and Bratton (2010) tested the outcomes of
CPRT with 23 Black American parent--child dyads and reported
statistically signifcant improvements in child behavior and parenting
stress with large treatment efects, over the waitlist control group.
Recent CCPT studies have been conducted to investigate the impact of
CCPT for children impacted by trauma in the form of adverse childhood
experiences (ACEs). Ray et al. (2022) conducted a randomized controlled
study of the impact of CCPT, in which all child participants had
histories of 2+ ACEs, reporting that children who received CCPT
intervention showed statistically signifcant increases in
social-emotional competence and decreases in behavior problems, compared
to the waitlist control group. Haas and Ray (2020) conducted a single
case research design (SCRD) study on the impact of CCPT intervention for
children with reported ACEs. Patterson et al. (2018) reported results of
a single group research study on the impact of Individual and Group CCPT
with African American children. Both Carnes-Holt and Bratton (2014) and
Opiola and Bratton (2018) investigated the impact of CPRT among children
with parent-reported concerns related to attachment trauma; both studies
resulted in statistically signifcant improvements in parent and child
outcomes with large treatment efects, compared to the respective control
groups. Many studies on the efect of CCPT on child functioning were
conducted with participants of low-income families attending Head Start
schools (e.g., Bratton et al., 2013; Ceballos & Bratton, 2010; Coggins &
Carnes-Holt, 2021; Gonzales-Ball & Bratton, 2019; Jones et al., 2002;
Morrison & Bratton, 2010; Sheely-Moore & Bratton, 2010). Additional CCPT
studies have focused specifc

431

432

Research Evidence for CCPT

concerns of homogeneous groups of children who presented with diverse
identities with regard to diabetes (Jones & Landreth, 2002), linguistic
ability (Danger & Landreth, 2005), hearing ability/deafness (Smith &
Landreth, 2004), and learning ability (Packman & Bratton, 2003).

Strengths and Limitations of CCPT Research Te review of included CCPT
research revealed strengths and limitations to CCPT's evidentiary
support. Te increase in research production and rigor since 1995 is
illustrated through the studies included in Table 19.2 and represents a
signifcant advance in developing a sound scientifc foundation for the
efcacy of CCPT interventions. Yet, researchers must continue to build an
even stronger evidence base using large sample sizes and meeting current
criteria for research designs and methods that will further CCPT's
recognition as an evidence- based treatment for specifc childhood
disorders. Major strengths of CCPT research include use of published
protocols (Bratton & Landreth, 2020; Ray, 2011) and implementation
guides (Ray & Cheng, 2018) to ensure treatment adherence, and published
procedures and checklists to examine treatment and research integrity
(Bratton & Landreth, 2020; Ray et al., 2017). Additionally, the Center
for Play Terapy (CPT) at the University of North Texas ofers stringent
CCPT and CPRT certifcation programs for treatment providers to ensure
adherence to protocols. While meta-analyses indicate that caregiver
involvement in CCPT is a signifcant predictor of positive outcomes for
children, the majority of CCPT research studies did not report parent or
teacher involvement in intervention (e.g., Individual or Group CCPT),
demonstrating that children are capable of signifcant improvement in
functioning without systemic infuence. Findings from CCPT research
indicate that CCPT can be efective and suitable when delivered in school
settings, when children may otherwise not receive intervention, and/or
when caregiver and teacher involvement in therapy is limited. Additional
CCPT research studies conducted in practice/clinical settings outside of
schools

Research Evidence for CCPT

can strengthen the evidence base and generalizability to CCPT delivered
in clinical settings. Evidence-based programs and practices registries,
such as the California Evidence-Based Clearinghouse for Child Welfare
(CEBC), give highest ratings of efectiveness to interventions with
outcomes studies that demonstrate sustained efects between 6 months and
1 year follow up. To date, no follow-up studies exist on the efects of
play therapy, nor of CCPT specifcally. CCPT research can be advanced by
adding follow-up assessments between CCPT and control groups. Because
CCPT research is conducted with children, considered a vulnerable
population, researchers must be deliberate in how they will protect the
wellbeing of all participants while awaiting follow-up assessment
without compromising methodological rigor of research. Tis is a
practical and clinical challenge related to conducting follow-up CCPT
studies, as children assigned to the control group could be delayed in
receiving services (CCPT intervention) during the follow-up period. One
example of a longitudinal CCPT study, although not a randomized control
group design, is a single group study conducted by Massengale and
Perryman (2021). CCPT researchers have published numerous
methodologically reputable single group and single case research designs
using repeated measurements to demonstrate the efects of CCPT with
smaller sample sizes and lack of control groups
(evidencebasedchildtherapy.com). In 2019, Pester et al. conducted a
meta-analysis of 11 CCPT singlecase research design studies. Across 65
total efect sizes, CCPT demonstrated a moderate treatment efect on
improving internalizing symptoms, externalizing behavior, and social
skills. In addition to demonstrating sustained efects, replication
studies are recognized as stronger evidence of intervention efectiveness
than any single study. Opiola and Bratton (2018) advanced CCPT research
by publishing the frst CCPT replication study when they replicated
Carnes-Holt and Bratton (2014)'s study on the efects of CPRT
intervention with adoptive families. Another methodological
consideration of CCPT research is sample size. Only one CCPT study (Ray
et al., 2022) included more than 100 child participants. Most CCPT
outcome studies reported sample sizes of less than 50 participants.
Although the sample sizes were adequate to meet

433

434

Research Evidence for CCPT

the assumptions of the chosen statistical analyses, larger sample sizes
are associated with increased power, improved representation of target
population, and generalizability of fndings (Sink & Mvududu, 2010). In
response to the need for increased sample sizes, 11 CCPT outcome studies
published since 2000 included samples of more than 50 participants.
Conducting multisite studies within diferent geographic locations in the
U.S. would also address the generalizability of CCPT research fndings
and advance methodological integrity and implementation consistency.
CCPT research studies have included samples of children from diverse
racial/ethnic backgrounds. CCPT researchers can continue to strengthen
CCPT research with intentional sampling and recruitment strategies that
focus on ensuring representative and inclusive samples. Diversity among
participants can improve generalizability of CCPT research outcomes to
more children and families. Limited CCPT research has been conducted
outside of the United States. CCPT researchers in the U.S. can form
collaborations with researchers outside of the United States to examine
the transportability of CCPT's efectiveness beyond U.S. borders.

Resources for CCPT Research As research methodologies and play therapy
practices continue to advance and adapt to the needs of contemporary
matters, play therapists need to be able to locate and utilize
up-to-date and reliable resources for child-centered play therapy
research. One contemporary resource for CCPT practitioners and
researchers is the searchable, online play therapy outcome research
database accessible at https://evidencebasedchildtherapy.com/.
Originally developed by Bratton et al. (2015), the online play therapy
research database is a living database, updated by CPT, that provides an
up-to-date reference to study characteristics and summary of fndings of
play therapy outcome research studies. Not limited exclusively to CCPT
intervention nor randomized controlled trial research designs, it allows
researchers to search and review summaries of all play therapy outcome
studies published or translated in English since 1995 based on
publication year, presenting concern, setting, treatment modality,
research design, etc.

Research Evidence for CCPT

To conduct rigorous CCPT research, it is important for researchers to
demonstrate that the CCPT intervention used in outcome research studies
is delivered similarly and with integrity across studies and treatment
providers. As aforementioned, play therapy practitioners and researchers
can become trained and certifed in CCPT and CPRT through the UNT Center
for Play Terapy to bolster treatment integrity among CCPT research
studies. Information about CCPT and CPRT training and certifcation is
available at https://cpt.unt.edu/. Now in its fourth edition, this
textbook (Landreth, 1991, 2002, 2012) remains a seminal training
resource for CCPT practitioners and university play therapy training
programs, and is available in at least six different languages: English,
Chinese, Japanese, Korean, Mandarin, and Russian. As mentioned
previously, the Child-Centered Play Terapy Protocol (Ray, 2011), the
Group Child-Centered Play Terapy Implementation Guide (Ray & Cheng,
2018), and the updated Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT) textbook
(Landreth & Bratton, 2020) and treatment manual (Bratton & Landreth,
2020) are available and contribute further to the integrity of CCPT
practice. Te updated version of the CPRT treatment manual includes
adapted protocol for specialized groups (e.g., toddlers, teachers,
preadolescents, those with attachment/ trauma issues, etc.) and includes
a Treatment Integrity Checklist for Researchers. Additionally, Ray et
al. (2017) published the CCPT Research Treatment Integrity Checklist.
Tese protocolized treatment manuals and supplemental research resources
were published to provide CCPT researchers assistance in assessing
treatment integrity and evaluating intervention consistency across CCPT
research studies. In recent years, play therapy researchers have
published supplemental resources specifc to conducting CCPT research
with diverse populations of participants (e.g., Burgin & Prosek, 2021;
Ceballos et al., 2020; Tapia-Fuselier & Ray, 2019). For example,
Ceballos et al. (2020) provided considerations for play therapy research
with Latinx participants, including guidance related to recruitment,
level of acculturation and language barriers, set up of the playroom,
and advocacy eforts. Burgin and Prosek (2021) provided recommendations
for play therapy research with military-involved

435

436

Research Evidence for CCPT

children and families, and Tapia-Fuselier and Ray (2019) provided
treatment recommendations for linguistically responsive CCPT with deaf
children. Play therapy researchers continue to develop resources to
advance the dissemination of research among diverse populations of
participants while continuing to enhance the rigor and research methods
used in CCPT studies.

Conclusion In today's climate of managed care and cost-control along
with the signifcant increase in children requiring mental health
services, play therapists are facing more pressure than ever to deliver
evidence-based intervention. CCPT is the most researched theoretical
model of play therapy (evidencebasedchildtherapy.com) and is categorized
as evidence-based according to national registries (CEB4CW.org;
pewtrust.org). Although limitations exist, the current status of CCPT
research demonstrated through this chapter's review of rigorous
contemporary research supports CCPT as an evidence-based treatment for
diverse populations of children throughout the span of childhood. Te
empirical support for CCPT across cultures and in real-life settings is
a particular strength and supports its transportability across practice
settings and populations of children and parents. Findings hold
implications for counselors, psychologists, and social workers, who are
accountable to show evidence for the interventions they use. It is our
hope that play therapists will use the research summaries presented in
this chapter to support and defend their practice of CCPT as well as
advocate for the profession of play therapy as they interact with adults
who make decisions regarding children's holistic wellbeing.

References American Psychological Association (2022). Children's mental
health is in crises: 2022 trends report. Retrieved from www.apa.org
Barcenas Jaimez, G. (2017). Child-centered play therapy (CCPT) with
Latina/o children exhibiting school behavior Problems: Comparative
efects of delivery by Spanish-speaking and English-speaking counselors
\[Unpublished doctoral dissertation\]. University of North Texas.

Research Evidence for CCPT

Blalock, S., Lindo, N., & Ray, D. (2019). Individual and group
child-centered play therapy: Impact on social-emotional competencies.
Journal of Counseling & Development, 97(3), 238--249.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12264 Blanco, P., & Ray, D. (2011). Play
therapy in the schools: A best practice for improving academic
achievement. Journal of Counseling and Development, 89, 235--242.
Blanco, P., Muro, J., Holliman, R., Stickley, V., & Carter, K. (2015).
Efect of child-centered play therapy on performance anxiety and academic
achievement. Journal of Child and Adolescent Counseling, 1(2), 66--80.
Blanco, P. J., Holliman, R. P., Ceballos, P. L., & Farnam, J. L. (2019).
Exploring the impact of child-centered play therapy on academic
achievement of at-risk kindergarten students. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 28(3), 133--143. https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000086
Bratton, S. C. (2010). Meeting the early mental health needs of children
through school based play therapy: A review of outcome research. In A.A.
Drewes & C.E. Schaefer (Eds.), School based play therapy (2nd ed.,
pp. 17--58). John Wiley & Sons. Bratton, S. C. (2015). Evidence base for
play therapy: Strengths and limitations. In K.J. O'Conner, C.E.
Schaefer, & L.D. Braverman (Eds.), Handbook of play therapy (2nd ed.).
John Wiley & Sons. Bratton, S. C., & Landreth, G. L. (1995). Filial
therapy with single parents: Efects on parental acceptance, empathy, and
stress. International Journal of Play Terapy, 4(1), 61--80. Bratton, S.
C., & Swan, A. (2017). Status of play therapy research. In R. L. Steen
(Ed.), Emerging research in play therapy, child counseling, and
consultation (pp. 1--19). IGI Global. Bratton, S. C., Ray, D., Rhine,
T., & Jones, L. (2005). Te efcacy of play therapy with children: A
meta-analytic review of treatment outcomes. Professional Psychology:
Research and Practice, 36(4), 376--390. Bratton, S. C., Landreth, G., &
Lin, D. (2010). Child parent relationship therapy (CPRT): A review of
controlled outcome research. In J. N. Baggerly, D. C. Ray, & S. C.
Bratton (Eds.), Child-centered play therapy research: Te evidence base
for efective practice (pp. 267--294). John Wiley & Sons. Bratton, S. C.,
Ceballos, P., Sheely-Moore, A., Meany-Walen, K., Pronchenko, Y, & Jones,
L. (2013). Head start early mental health intervention: Efects of
child-centered play therapy on disruptive behaviors. International
Journal of Play Terapy, 22(1), 28--42. Bratton, S. C., Dafoe, E., Swan,
A., Opiola, K., McClintock, D., & Barcenas, G. (2015). Play Terapy
Outcome Research Database. Retreived from http://
evidencebasedchildtherapy.com/research/ Burgin, E. & Prosek, E. (2021).
Culturally responsive play therapy with military-connected children and
families: Opportunities for rigorous research. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 30, 221--230. https://doi .org/10.1037/pla0000151

437

438

Research Evidence for CCPT

Burgin, E., & Ray, D. (2022). Child-centered play therapy and childhood
depression: An efectiveness study in schools. Journal of Child and
Family Studies 31(1), 293--307. Carnes-Holt, K., & Bratton, S. (2014).
Te efcacy of child parent relationship therapy for adopted children with
attachment disruptions. Journal for Counseling and Development, 92(3),
328--337. Ceballos, P. L., & Bratton, S. (2010). Empowering Latino
families: Efects of a culturally-responsive intervention for low-income
immigrant Latino parents on children's behaviors and parental stress.
Psychology in the Schools, 47(8), 761--775. Ceballos, P. L., Bárcenas
Jaimez, G., & Bratton, S. C. (2020). Considerations for play therapy
research with Latino populations. International Journal of Play Terapy,
29(4), 213--222. https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000122 Centers for Disease
Control. (2022). Children's mental health: Understanding an ongoing
public health concern: New report. Retrieved August 8, 2022 from
http://www.cdc.gov Chau, I., & Landreth, G. (1997). Filial therapy with
Chinese parents: Efects on parental empathic interactions, parental
acceptance of child and parental stress. International Journal of Play
Terapy, 6(2), 75--92. Cheng, Y. & Ray, D.C. (2016). Child-centered group
play therapy: Impact on social-emotional assets of kindergarten
children. Te Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 41(3), 209--237.
Coggins, K., & Carnes-Holt, K. (2021). Te efcacy of child-teacher
relationship training as an early childhood mental health intervention
in Head Start programs. International Journal of Play Terapy, 30(2),
112--124. https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000154 Costas, M., & Landreth, G.
(1999). Filial therapy with nonofending parents of children who have
been sexually abused. International Journal of Play Terapy, 8(1),
43--66. Danger, S. & Landreth, G. (2005). Child-centered group play
therapy with children with speech difculties. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 14(1), 81--102. Fall, M., Balvanz, J., Johnson, L., &
Nelson, L. (1999). A play therapy intervention and its relationship to
self-efcacy and learning behaviors. Professional School Counseling,
2(3), 194--204 Garza, Y., & Bratton, S. C. (2005). School-based
child-centered play therapy with hispanic children: Outcomes and
cultural consideration. International Journal of Play Terapy, 14(1),
51--80. https://doi.org/10 .1037/h0088896 Gonzales-Ball, T., & Bratton,
S. (2019). Child-teacher relationship training as a head start early
mental health intervention for children exhibiting disruptive behavior.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 28, 44--56.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000081

Research Evidence for CCPT﻿

Haas, S. C., & Ray, D. C. (2020). Child-centered play therapy with
children affected by adverse childhood experiences: A single-case
design. International Journal of Play Therapy, 29(4), 223--236.
https://doi​.org​/10​.1037​/pla0000135 Harris, Z. L., & Landreth, G. (1997).
Filial therapy with incarcerated mothers: A five week model.
International Journal of Play Therapy, 6(2), 53--73. Jones, E., &
Landreth, G. L. (2002). The efficacy of intensive individual play
therapy for chronically ill children. International Journal of Play
Therapy, 11(1), 117--140. Jones, L., Rhine, T., & Bratton, S. (2002).
High school students as therapeutic agents with young children
experiencing school adjustment difficulties: The effectiveness of a
filial therapy training model. International Journal of Play Therapy,
11(2), 43--62. Kale, A. L., & Landreth, G. (1999). Filial therapy with
parents of children experiencing learning difficulties. International
Journal of Play Therapy, 8(2), 35--56. Kot, S., Landreth, G., &
Giordano, M. (1998). Intensive child-centered play therapy with child
witnesses of domestic violence. International Journal of Play Therapy,
7(2), 17--36. Landreth, G. (1991). Play therapy: The art of the
relationship (1st ed.). Accelerated Development. Landreth, G. L. (2002).
Play therapy: The art of the relationship (2nd ed.). Brunner-Routledge.
Landreth, G. (2012). Play therapy: The art of the relationship (3rd
ed.). Routledge. Landreth, G., & Bratton, S. (2020). Child-parent
relationship therapy (CPRT): An evidence-based 10-session filial therapy
model, 2nd ed. Routledge. Landreth, G., & Lobaugh, A. (1998). Filial
therapy with incarcerated fathers: Effects on parental acceptance of
child, parental stress, and child adjustment. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 76, 157--165. LeBlanc, M., & Ritchie, M. (2001). A
meta-analysis of play therapy outcomes. Counseling Psychology Quarterly,
14(2), 149--163. Lin, Y., & Bratton, S. (2015). A meta-analysis of
child-centered play therapy outcome research. Journal for Counseling and
Development, 93, 45--58. Massengale, B., & Perryman, K. (2021).
Child-centered play therapy's impact on academic achievement: A
longitudinal examination in at-risk elementary school students.
International Journal of Play Therapy, 30(2), 98--111.
https://doi​.org​/10​.1037​/pla0000129 Morrison, M., & Bratton, S. (2010).
Preliminary investigation of an early mental health intervention for
Head Start programs: Effects of childteacher relationship therapy (CTRT)
on children's behavior problems. Psychology in the Schools, 47(10),
1003--1017.

439

440

Research Evidence for CCPT﻿

Ojiambo, D., & Bratton, S. (2014). Effects of group activity play
therapy on problem behaviors of preadolescent Ugandan orphans. Journal
of Counseling and Development, 92(3), 355--365. Opiola, K. K., &
Bratton, S. C. (2018). The efficacy of child parent relationship therapy
for adoptive families: A replication study. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 96(2), 155--166. https://doi​.org​/10​.1002​/jcad​.12189
Packman, J., & Bratton, S. (2003). A school-based group play/activity
therapy intervention with learning disabled pre-adolescents exhibiting
behavior problems. International Journal of Play Therapy, 12(2), 7--29.
Parker, M. M., Hergenrather, K., Smelser, Q., & Kelly, C. T. (2021).
Exploring child-centered play therapy and trauma: A systematic review of
literature. International Journal of Play Therapy, 30(1), 2--13.
https://doi​.org​ /10​.1037​/pla0000136 Parker, M. M., Hunnicutt
Hollenbaugh, K. M., & Kelly, C. T. (2021). Exploring the impact of
child-centered play therapy for children exhibiting behavioral problems:
A meta-analysis. International Journal of Play Therapy, 30(4), 259--271.
https://doi​.org​/10​.1037​/pla0000128 Patterson, L., Stutey, D. M., &
Dorsey, B. (2018). Play therapy with African American children exposed
to adverse childhood experiences. International Journal of Play Therapy,
27(4), 215--226. https://doi​.org​/10​ .1037​/pla0000080 Pester, D., Lenz,
A. S., & Dell'Aquila, J. (2019). Meta-analysis of single-case
evaluations of child-centered play therapy for treating mental health
symptoms. International Journal of Play Therapy, 28(3), 144--156.
https:// doi​.org​/10​.1037​/pla0000098 Ray, D. (2011). Advanced play
therapy: Essential conditions, knowledge and skills for child practice.
Routledge. Ray, D., & Bratton, S. (2010). What the research shows about
play therapy: 21st century update. In J. Baggerly, D. Ray, & S. Bratton
(Eds.), Child-centered play therapy research: The evidence-base for
effective practice. John Wiley. Ray, D. & Cheng, Y. (2018). Group
child-centered play therapy implementation guide. Located on April 2022
at https://cpt​.unt​.edu​/sites​/default​/ files​/documents​/child​-centered​\_
group​\_ play​*therapy​* implementation​ \_guide​*compressed​*0​.pdf Ray, D., &
McCullough, R. (2015). Evidence-based practice statement: Play therapy.
Retrieved from http://www.a4pt.org/?page=EvidenceBased/ resmgr​/About​*
APT​/APT​* Evidence​*Based​* Statement​.pdf Ray, D., Schottelkorb, A., &
Tsai, M. (2007). Play therapy with children exhibiting symptoms of
attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. International Journal of Play
Therapy, 16(2), 95--111. Ray, D. C., Stulmaker, H. L., Lee, K. R., &
Silverman, W. K. (2013). Childcentered play therapy and impairment:
Exploring relationships and constructs. International Journal of Play
Therapy, 22(1), 13--27. https://doi​ .org​/10​.1037​/a0030403

Research Evidence for CCPT

Ray, D., Armstrong, S., Balkin, R., & Jayne, K. (2015). Child centered
play therapy in the schools: Review and meta-analysis. Psychology in the
Schools, 52(2), 107--123. Ray, D., Burgin, E., Gutierrez, D., Ceballos,
P., & Lindo, N. (2022). Childcentered play therapy and adverse childhood
experiences: A randomized controlled trial. Journal of Counseling &
Development, 100(2), 134--145. https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12412 Ray,
D. C., Purswell, K., Haas, S., & Aldrete, C. (2017). Child-centered play
therapyresearch integrity checklist: Development, reliability, and use.
International Journal of Play Terapy, 26(4), 207--217.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000046 Ritzi, R., Ray, D., & Schumann, B.
(2017). Intensive short-term child-centered play therapy and
externalizing behaviors in children. International Journal of Play
Terapy, 26, 33--46. https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000035 Rubin, A., &
Bellamy, J. (2012). Practitioners guide to using research for
evidence-based practice (2nd ed.). Wiley. Schottelkorb, A., Doumas, D.,
& Garcia, R. (2012). Treatment for childhood refugee trauma: A
randomized, controlled trial. International Journal of Play Terapy,
21(2), 57--73. Schottelkorb, A., Swan, K. L., Ogawa, Y. (2020).
Intensive child-centered play therapy for children on the autism
spectrum: A pilot study. Journal of Counseling & Development, 98,
63--73. Sheely-Moore, A., & Bratton. S. (2010). A strengths-based
parenting intervention with low-income African American families.
Professional School Counseling, 13(3), 175--183. Shen, Y. (2002).
Short-term group play therapy with Chinese earthquake victims: Efects on
anxiety, depression, and adjustment. International Journal of Play
Terapy, 11(1), 43--63. Sink, C. & Mvududu, N. (2010). Statistical power,
sampling, and efect sizes: Tree keys to research relevancy. Counseling
Outcome Research and Evaluation, 1(2) 1--18. Smith, D., & Landreth, G.
(2004). Filial therapy with teachers of deaf and hard of hearing
preschool children. International Journal of Play Terapy, 13(1), 13--33.
Stulmaker, H., & Ray, D. (2015). Child-centered play therapy with young
children who are anxious: A controlled trial. Child and Youth Services
Review, 57, 127--133. Tapia-Fuselier, Jose & Ray, Dee. (2019).
Culturally and linguistically responsive play therapy: Adapting
Child-centered play therapy for deaf children. International Journal of
Play Terapy, 28, 79--87. https://doi.org/10 .1037/pla0000091 Taylor, L.,
& Ray, D. C. (2021). Child-centered play therapy and social--emotional
competencies of African American children: A randomized controlled
trial. International Journal of Play Terapy, 30(2), 74--85. https://
doi.org/10.1037/pla0000152

441

442

Research Evidence for CCPT

U. S. News & World Report (2022). Mental health of America's children
only getting worse. Retrieved March 14, 2022 from www.usnews.com Wicks,
J. M., Cubillo, C., Moss, S. A., Skinner, T., & Schumann, B. (2018).
Intensive child-centered play therapy in a remote Australian Aboriginal
community. International Journal of Play Terapy, 27(4), 242--255.
https://doi.org/10.1037/pla0000075 Wilson, B. J., & Ray, D. (2018).
Child‐centered play therapy: Aggression, empathy, and self‐regulation.
Journal of Counseling & Development, 96(4), 399--409.
https://doi.org/10.1002/jcad.12222 Yuen, T. C., Landreth, G. L., &
Baggerly, J. (2002). Filial therapy with immigrant Chinese parents in
Canada. International Journal of Play Terapy, 11(2), 63--90.

Index

Note: Page numbers in italics indicate fgures and page numbers in bold
indicate tables

A abstract thinking/thought 16, 19 abused children: abusive play
scenarios 209; working through experiences 16; see also sexually abused
children acceptance 67--70; acknowledging feelings, wishes, and wants
318; caring 67--70, 238--9; of child 309--10; of gifs from children
357--9; learning self-acceptance 96--7; learning that feelings are
acceptable 95; making contact with the child 199; not conditional 287;
permissiveness and 238; play therapists 119--20; rationale for limit
setting 306--7; relationship objectives 197--8; silence and 335--8;
targeting alternatives 319--21 acknowledging feelings, wishes, and wants
318 acting cure 12 acting-out, aggressive-release toys 181--3 ACT model
of limit setting 319; acknowledging feelings, wishes, and wants 318;
communication of limit 318--19; targeting acceptable alternatives
319--21 adjusted children 63--6; behaviors of 23--5; see also children

adult play therapy 4, 39 adverse childhood experiences (ACEs) 425 afect
matching 247--8 aggressive behavior: acting-out aggressive-release toys
181--3; of children 15; maladjusted children and 24; play and learning
self-control 14--15, 17; release therapy 32; toys for testing limits 178
aggressive play, sessions/stages 20--3 aggressive-release toys 181--3;
see also toys and materials Alexander, E. 35 Allen, F. 33 allowing child
to lead 206--9 allowing child to leave playroom 330--1 alternative play
therapy settings 173--5 ambiguity, high tolerance for 117 ambivalent
feelings 21 anchoring reality and emphasizing here and now 311--12
animal toys 183; see also toys and materials Annual Association for Play
Terapy International Conference 36 association and journal, play therapy
36 Association for Play Terapy (APT) 36--7, 424 audio recording 227--8
avoiding asking questions 248--50 avoiding labeling toys 264 Axline, V.
16, 34, 65, 128, 365; Dibs 298 443

444

Index

B baby-like play or behavior 344--6 background information 84, 146--8
Baggerly, J. 421; Group Play Terapy: A Dynamic Approach 40 bathroom
facilities 330--1 Baum, K.: Te Wizard of Oz 78 bedwetting 157, 161 being
a play therapists 128--9 being culturally responsive 99--107; being with
cultural philosophy 104; CCPT and cultural responsiveness 100--4, 102;
CCPT research with culturally diverse populations 106--7; CPRT and
cultural responsiveness 104--6 being with 78, 81, 82, 89, 214; play
therapists 113--15; sensitive understanding 236--8 Blalock, S. 413
Blanco, P. J. 413 Bobo (bop bag) 18, 39, 181--2, 187 books 190--1, 339
Bratton, S. C. 38, 106, 144, 405, 414, 415, 416, 418, 419, 420, 422,
423, 424, 425, 427, 429, 431, 433, 434; Child-Parent Relationship Terapy
(CPRT): A 10-Session Filial Terapy Model 38, 41, 149 breaking of limits,
dealing with 321--5 brief and interactive, facilitative responses 240--1
Burgin, E. 414, 435

C cafeteria play therapy settings 174 California Evidence-Base
Clearinghouse for Child Welfare (CEBC) 411, 433 cancer patients 130--4
caring acceptance 67--70, 238--9; see also acceptance Carnes-Holt, K.
414, 415, 431, 433 case of Dependent Darrell 259--63 cash register toys
180 "catch up" to where the child is 118--19

cautious or "shy" children 372; books 190--1, 339; helpful toys for 180,
184; limit setting issues 306 Ceballos, P. 415, 429, 435 Center for Play
Terapy 4, 36--7, 152; Bobo play study 181; recommended toys and
materials 187--90 chalkboards 172, 181, 266 change, children's inner
capacity for 33, 83; therapist future-mindedness and facilitating 118
Chau, I. 406, 415 Cheng, Y. 415 child-centered frame of reference 46
child-centered play therapy (CCPT) 16, 18, 21, 34, 53--97, 197--8,
413--21; being real 66--7; Eight Basic Principles of 86--7; key concepts
61--3; objectives of 91--3; personality theory 54--5; sensitive
understanding 71--5; therapeutic conditions for growth 66; therapeutic
process stages 20--3; therapeutic relationship 75--91; warm caring and
acceptance 67--70; what children learn in play therapy 93--7; see also
play therapy, history and development of child-centered theory of
personality structure 54--5; person 55--6; phenomenal feld 56--7;
propositions regarding personality and behavior 59--61; self 57--9 child
custody issues 166 Child Life Programs 41 Child-Parent Relationship
Terapy (CPRT) 37, 38, 148; and cultural responsiveness 104--6; parent
training sessions 400; short-term 405--6; therapists' race or ethnicity
107 Child-Parent Relationship Terapy (CPRT): A 10-Session Filial

Index Terapy Model (Landreth and Bratton) 38, 41, 149 Child-Parent
Relationship Terapy Treatment Manual 38--9 children 45--51; acceptance
of gifs from 357--9; adjusted and maladjusted 23--5, 63--6; aggressive
behavior of 15; allowed to leave playroom 330--1; allowing to lead
206--9; anxieties 30; asking for expressions of afection 343--4;
attitudes of 10, 18, 21; awareness of uniqueness of play therapists
109--10; behavior change capacity 33; communication through play 9--11,
35, 154; emotions of 28; expression and exploration of emotional world
7; feelings, wishes, and wants 318; feelings of 10, 13, 15, 18, 21;
giving rewards or mementos to 360; hospital-related anxiety 41;
informing if unable to keep appointment 349; informing reason for
therapy 363--4; innate capacity of 48; learning about 45; living in the
world of the present/concrete 18; making contact with 199--201;
manipulative 276--84; no control in experiences of 15; participation in
play of 353--7; personality variability (like popcorn or molasses)
50--1; as persons not problems 47, 87; physical and emotional safety and
security 308--9; play as meaningful 13; play behavior of 15; positive
emotional attachment 30; principles for relationships with 196--7;
pushing the limit, dealing with 305; questions, responding to 221--7;
readiness for therapy termination 387--9; refusal to leave playroom
347--9; requests for physical contact 344--6; resilience 46, 47--9;
returning

responsibility to 250--8; seeking praise 339--42; silent 335--8;
stealing attempts for toys 346--7; tenets for relating to 46--7;
undressing behaviors 314; view of play therapy relationship 217--21;
weird talk of 342--3; wish to bring toys or foods into playroom 338--9
children's artwork: allowing child to bring home 329; displaying in
playroom 352; as gif for therapists 357--9 children's friends, bringing
to playroom 364--6 child's background information 84 child's inner
quietness 80--1 child's silence 289--90 child's space, respecting
212--13 child's view of the play 217--21 child witnesses of domestic
violence 399 choices: communication through play 154; learning how to
make 97 Cindy (manipulative child) 276--84; second play therapy session
277--84 classroom play therapy settings 174 cleaning the playroom 191,
360--3 client-centered therapy 34; see also person-centered theory
Coggins, K. 415 common problem situations see problem situations in play
therapy, and how to respond communication through play 9--11, 35;
hearing nonverbal expressions 212; in limit setting 318--19; toys and
12, 176; see also verbal communication confdentiality 152, 174--5;
issues in play therapy 351--3 consent 165--7 consistency in playroom
192--3, 211--12; promoting 312--13 consistency in play therapy
relationship 211--17 control: gaining through play 14--15, 17;
relationship objectives 197--8; trauma re-enactment 31; see also
self-control

445

446

Index Costas, M. 415 counseling theory 55 counseling with toys 193
Counselor Education Department 4 counselor education programs 36; see
also training courage of therapists 119; see also play therapists
creative expression toys 183--5 creative resources development 95--6
crying 157 culturally relevant research 429--32 cultural responsiveness
100--4, 102, 104--6

D Danger, S. 416, 428 dealing with breaking of limits 321--5 dealing
with child pushing the limit 305 decision making: learning how to make
choices 97; limits and facilitating development of 310--11; relationship
objectives 197--8; returning responsibility 250--8 Dependent Darrell,
case of 259--63 de Saint Exupery, A.: Te Little Prince 71, 77 diagnosis,
not necessary in play therapy 89--90 diagnostic evaluation 25 Dibs
(Axline) 298 difuse negative feelings 20 Dimick, K. 35 direct
interpretation of play 30 disaster efects 19 divorced parents 166 dolls
41, 70, 85--6, 154, 179, 183, 215 domestic violence 399 Dorfman, E. 365
dying child in play therapy 130--4; learning in 133; play therapy
130--3; relationship of therapist with 133--4

E egg cartons 132, 183, 307, 315 Eight Basic Principles (Axline) 86--7
elderly clients 39

electrical outlets 308 electronic toys or games 177 elementary schools
144, 431; counseling programs 149; counselor 174, 189; objective of 35;
play therapy in 35--6 Emile (Rousseau) 27 emotional adjustment of
parents 158 emotional blocks in play therapy 299--302 emotional changes
371 emotional energy 374 emotional experiences 396 emotional gifs 358
emotional growth 385 emotional release toys 183--5 empathy or sensitive
understanding 71--5 ending of play therapy session 229--30 enuresis 157
ethical and legal issues 165--7; accepting gifs from children 357--9;
confdentiality 152, 174--5, 351--3; consent 165--7; physical contact
344--6; preserving acceptable professional and ethical relationship
313--14; rights of minors and parents 166; see also issues in play
therapy evaluation, nonfacilitative responses 272--3 evaluative
responses and praise 339--42 evidence-based programs 433 example
scenarios, facilitative responses 266--9 expectancy, not expectation
100--1 expectancy versus expectation 78--9 explaining play therapy to
parents 153--5 expression of a wide range of feelings 177 expression of
real-life experiences 177--8 expressions of afection, asking for 343--4

F facial expressions, therapist 205 facilitative responses,
characteristics of 235--69; avoiding asking questions 248--50; avoiding

Index labeling toys 264; brief and interactive 240--1; caring acceptance
238--9 (see also acceptance); case of Dependent Darrell 259--63; common
problem situations (see problem situations in play therapy, and how to
respond); example scenarios 266--9; helping the child to go on 241--2;
matching child's level of afect 247--8; nonevaluative 264--5;
personalized responses 263--4; praise 264--5; refect content 243--4;
refect feelings 244--6; refecting feelings 215--17; refecting verbal
content 215; returning responsibility to children 250--8;
self-esteembuilding 246--7; sensitive understanding, being with 236--8;
tracking nonverbal play behavior 214--15, 242--3; see also play
therapists, therapeutic personality characteristics facilitative
responses, typical nonfacilitative responses 269--76; evaluation and
praise 272--3 (see also evaluative responses and praise); inappropriate
questions 273--4; labeling objects 271--2; leading the child 275--6;
missed feelings 269--71; statements turned into questions 274 Fall, M.
416, 428 family therapy, play therapy procedures in 39--40 feelings
expression 10, 13, 15, 18, 21; children asking for expressions of
afection 343--4; emotional gifs 358; learning responsible control 94;
learning that feelings are acceptable 95; matching child's level of
afect 247--8; refecting responses 215--17; refective responses 215--17;
relationship objectives 197--8; release therapy 32; sensitive
understanding 73; therapeutic

process stages 20--3; toy selection guidelines 175--9; of a wide range
of 177 flial therapy 37--9, 412; defnition 38 fnal session, child's
reactions 392--3 Find University Play Terapy Directory 37 frst-time
behaviors 371--2 fexibility 115--16 focusing on learning 138 follow-up
session 391 food in the playroom 338--9 four healing messages 232--3
frame of reference, child-centered 46 Frank, L. 8, 14 free association
29, 31 Freud, A. 28, 31; children's positive emotional attachment 30; on
emotional relationship between child and therapist 29; on use of play to
encourage children to express fantasies, anxieties, and defenses 29
Freud, S. 28, 31 Froebel, F. 27 future-mindedness 118 future orientation
10, 18, 19

G games 175--6 Garza, Y. 416, 429 genuineness (being real) 66--7; play
therapists 66--7, 119--20 Gibran. K.: Te Prophet 129 gifs from children
357--9; see also emotional gifs gifs or rewards for children 360 Ginott,
H. 365; Group Psychotherapy with Children: Te Teory and Practice of Play
Terapy 40 Giordano, M. 417 Glover, G. 84, 103 Golden, D. 41
Gonzales-Ball, T. 416 group counseling 40 group play therapy 40, 399;
adult therapy 39; children's friends 364--6; playroom size and 170--1

447

448

Index Group Play Terapy: A Dynamic Approach (Sweeney, Baggerly and Ray)
40 Group Psychotherapy with Children: Te Teory and Practice of Play
Terapy (Ginott) 40 Guerney, B. 38 Guerney, L. 38 guidelines for limit
setting 303--5

H Haas, S. C. 431 Hambidge, G. 33 Handbook of Group Play Terapy (Sweeney
and Homeyer) 40 Harris, Z. L. 417 Haworth, M. 388 hearing nonverbal
expressions 212 helping the child to go on 241--2 Hendricks, S. 21
hiding from the therapist 192 high tolerance for ambiguity 117 Hispanic
children 107 history information of child 84, 91, 146--8, 201 Holdin, W.
35 Homeyer, L.: Handbook of Group Play Terapy 40 hospitalization 41
hospital-related anxiety in children 41 hospitals: play therapy in 41;
setting 41 Howe, P. 24 Huf, V. 35 Hug-Hellmuth, H. 28, 31 humor,
therapists sense of 121

I inappropriate questions, nonfacilitative responses 273--4 individual
outcome studies 426--9 informed consent 166 initial encounter in waiting
room 201--5 initial parent consultation 151 initial session: initial
encounter in waiting room 201--5; introduction to playroom 205--6; play
therapists'

reactions 230--1; see also relationship building initial-session of
maladjusted and adjusted children 25 Innovations in Play Terapy: Issues,
Process, and Special Populations (Landreth) 39 insignifcant happenings
298--9 intangibles 122, 123 intensive child-centered play therapy
395--8; research on 398--403 intentionality 115 International Journal of
Play Terapy 36 interpretation of play 30; see also play introduction to
playroom 205--6; see also playroom issues in play therapy 351--67;
accepting gifs from children 357--9; allowing parents or siblings into
playroom 367; bringing friends to playroom 364--6; clean up 191, 360--3;
confdentiality 351--3 (see also confdentiality); giving child rewards or
mementos 360; informing children of reason for therapy 363--4;
participation in child's play 353--7; see also ethical and legal issues;
problem situations in play therapy, and how to respond

J Jacquot, W. 35 Jaimez, B. 429 Japan Association for Play Terapy (JAPT)
398 Japanese tsunami 398 Jones, L. 417, 427 journal, play therapy 36
journey of the relationship 89

K Kale, A. L. 417 Kanner, L. 28 Keller, H. 119--20 Kent, C. 259--63

Index Klein, M. 28, 29; signifcance of interpretation 30; technique of
play 29; in United States 31 Kot, S. 399, 417

L labeling objects, nonfacilitative responses 271--2 labeling toys,
avoiding 264 laboratory experiences 143 Landreth, G. L. 1--5, 7, 35, 38,
400, 405, 414, 415, 416, 417, 418, 421, 424, 425, 427, 428; ChildParent
Relationship Terapy (CPRT): A 10-Session Filial Terapy Model 38, 41,
149; developing relationships with children in play therapy 4;
Innovations in Play Terapy: Issues, Process, and Special Populations 39;
on life 3; not comfortable with children 2; on role-playing 4 leading
the child, nonfacilitative responses 275--6 learning: play therapy and
35, 93--7; self-acceptance 96--7; selfcontrol 14--15, 17; that feelings
are acceptable 95 LeBlanc, M. 422 legal guardian 165 lego-type
construction toys 191 Levy, D. 31, 32, 33 limitations on role playing
with a child 209--11 limiting water in sandbox 333; see also sandbox
limit setting: allowing child to leave playroom 330--1; basic guidelines
303--5; beginning play therapists' reactions to 334; child's feelings,
wishes, and wants 318; communication in 318--19; dealing with breaking
of limits 321--5; dealing with child pushing the limit 305; limiting
water in the sandbox 333; nature of

316; noise 332--3; personal items not for playing 333; procedures in
therapeutic 316--17; self-control 14--15, 17; session time limits
331--2; sexual or erotic behaviors 314; situations where unnecessary and
necessary 183; stating fnal choice 325--7; steps in the therapeutic
317--21; taking playroom toys or materials outside of playroom 328--30;
targeting acceptable alternatives 319--21; tentativeness in 327--8; toys
for reality testing 176; urinating in the playroom 334; when to present
limits 305--6 limit setting, rationale for 306--7; acceptance of the
child 309--10; anchoring reality and emphasizing here and now 311--12;
child's physical and emotional safety and security 308--9; decision
making 310--11; facilitating self-control and self-responsibility
development 310--11; preserving acceptable professional and ethical
relationship 313--14; promoting consistent environment 312--13;
protecting play therapy room and materials 314--15; therapist well-being
309--10 Lin, Y. 106, 405, 423 "Little Hans" case 28 Te Little Prince (de
Saint Exupery) 71, 77 Lobaugh, A. 418 location of playroom 169--70

M making contact with child 199--201 maladjusted children 63--6;
behaviors 23--5; see also children manipulative child 276--84, 347
Manzanita Counseling Center 2 Massengale, B. 433 matching child's level
of afect 247--8

449

450

Index McClure, J. 48--9 McCullough, R. 424 meaning 285--302; emotional
blocks in play therapy 299--302; insignifcant happenings are not
insignifcant 298--9; silence in play therapy 285--90; transcript of a
play therapy session 290--8 memento of play therapy relationship 360
messiness: cleaning up 191; parental limit setting 150 meta-analyses
422--5 missed feelings, nonfacilitative responses 269--71; see also
feelings expression Morrison, M. 418 Moustakas, C. 20, 23, 24, 61 Muro,
J. 35 Myrick, R. 35

N National Registry of Evidence-Based Programs and Practices (NREPP) 411
nature of limit setting 316 Nelson, R. 35 noise in playroom 157,
169--70, 332--3 nondirective/child-centered play therapy 34; see also
child-centered play therapy nonevaluative, facilitative responses 264--5
nonjudgmental play therapists 116 nonmechanical toys 175; see also toys
and materials nonverbal communication: child's perception of adult cues
70; play therapist responses 212 nonverbal play behavior 214--15;
tracking 214--15, 242--3 notes taking 228--9

O objectives: in child-centered play therapy 91--3; of play therapists

115--16; of the relationship 197--8, 235 observation mirror/recording
171--2, 227--8 O'Connor, K. 36 Oe, E. 25 ofce play therapy settings 174
Ogawa, Y. 398 Ojiambo, D. 418 one-way mirror 171--2; explaining to
children 227 open-mindedness 116 Opiola, K. K. 418, 427, 433 order and
consistency in the playroom 192--3

P Packman, J. 419 paints 70, 185, 191, 229, 356; permissiveness for
messy use 230 parental emotional adjustment 158 parental permissions
166--7 parent--child relationships 37 parents and play therapy 145--68;
allowing into playroom 367; allowing parents or siblings into playroom
203--4, 367; background information 146--8, 201; confdentiality issues
in sharing session information with 351--3; ethical and legal issues
165--7; explaining play therapy to parents 153--5; flial therapy 37--9;
interview 157--64; parent interview 157--64; parents as partners in play
therapy process 151--3; parents presence during therapy 148--50;
premature termination in 393--4; preparing parents for separation
156--7; psychiatric referral 167--8 parents as partners in the play
therapy process 151--3 parents presence during therapy 148--50
parent--teacher association (PTA) 189

Index parent training or therapy 38--9; see also flial therapy; parents
and play therapy Parker, M. M. 423, 425 patience of therapists 119, 238
Patterson, C. 58, 431 Peccei, A. 3 permissiveness 47, 59, 86, 94, 175,
181, 198, 216, 230, 232, 306, 308, 314, 354; acceptance and 238; limit
setting and 303 (see also limit setting); messy paint use 230 Perry, L.
24 Perryman, K. 433 persistently patient, play therapists 116--17
person, child-centered theory of personality structure 55--6 personal
courage of therapists 119 personal items not for playing 333 personality
characteristics 115--21 personality theory 54--5; see also
child-centered theory of personality structure personalized responses
263--4 personally secure therapists 120--1 person-centered theory 11
Pester, D. 433 phenomenal feld 56--7 physical contact, requests for
344--6 physically tracking the child 213--14 Piaget, J. 10, 16 play:
adjusted and maladjusted children's behaviors 23--5; being in the
present 15--16; communication through play 9--11, 35, 154; confict
resolution through 10; diagnostic evaluation 25; functions and meaning
of 7--9; gaining control through 14--15, 17; as gap between concrete
experience and abstract thought 16, 19; role in making children
physically active 9; sessions 20--3; stages in therapy process 20--3;
symbolic 11, 13, 14, 16--19, 29; themes in 372--86; therapeutic

process and 11--16; therapists participation in 353--7 playdough 57, 70,
173, 178, 183, 292, 315, 330 playing out 31 playroom 47, 169--93; adult
play therapy 39; allowing child to go in and out of 330--1; allowing
parents/ siblings during session 367; alternative settings 173--5;
bathroom facilities 330--1; bringing friends to 364--6; categories of
toys in 179--85; characteristics of 171--3; child reluctance to enter
203; children allowed to leave 330--1; children refusal to leave 347--9;
children's artwork displaying in 352; children wish to bring toys or
foods into 338--9; cleaning 191, 360--3; development of a positive
self-image 178; development of self-control 179; development of
self-understanding 178--9; initial tour 155; introduction to playroom
205--6; location 169--70; noisiness 157, 169--70; one-way mirror 171--2;
order and consistency in 192--3; other settings for play therapy 173--5;
parents/siblings allowing into 367; play therapy program in schools 193;
reality testing of limits 178; size 170--1; taking toys or materials
outside 328--30; therapist's chair 206; toys and materials for 187--90;
toys or materials outside of playroom 328--30; urinating avoiding in
334; wish to bring toys or foods into 338--9 play therapists 109--34;
adult therapy efectiveness 4; art of being fully present 114; attitudes
for facilitating child's growth 66; being a 128--9; being with 113--15;
child awareness of uniqueness of 109--10; creating

451

452

Index diferent type of relationship 110--11; dying child in play therapy
130--4; experiences of 139--42; facial expressions 205, 247; goal of 12;
indirect therapy 29; informing child if unable to keep appointment 349;
intentional about creating an atmosphere 111; intentionality 115;
intention to know child through the child's eyes 115; items not for
playing 333; limits and personal wellbeing 309--10; nonverbal cues to
children 70; participation in play 208, 353--7; perception 146;
personality characteristics 115--21; personally secure 120; reactions of
230--1; reactions to frst sessions 230--1; reactions to limit setting
334; responsibility in the relationship 232--3; self-acceptance 125--8;
self-supervision 138--9; self-understanding 67, 70, 121--4; training
(see training); use of play with children 17; verbal interchange 12 play
therapists, therapeutic personality characteristics 115--21; acceptance
119--20; being fully present (being with) 236--8; being real 119--20;
"catch up" to where the child is 118--19; future-minded 118; genuineness
(being real) 66--7; nonjudgmental 116; objective and fexible 115--16;
open-minded 116; patience 119, 238; persistently patient 116--17;
personal courage 119; personally secure 120--1; sense of humor 121;
sensitive understanding 73, 119--20; tolerance for ambiguity 117; warm
caring and acceptance 67--70, 119--20 play therapy 2--4; defned 11;
diagnosis not necessary in 89--90; dying

child in 130--4; emotional blocks in 299--302; experience 111--13;
explaining to parents 153--5; informing children of reason for referral
363--4; informing child when unable to keep 349; learning and 35;
outcome studies (see research); playroom (see playroom); premature
termination in 393--4; as process 20--3; process stages 20--3; program
in schools 193; psychoanalytic 28--31; relationship play therapy 33--4;
restricting to verbal expression 12; returning responsibility 250--8
(see also responsibility for self); room and materials 314--15;
scheduling 396; signifcant development in 33; silence in 285--90; stages
20--3; transcript of 290--8; use of toys by children to express feelings
14; what children can learn in 93--7; see also child-centered play
therapy play therapy cases: Cindy (manipulative child) 276--84; Ryan-a
dying child 130--4 play therapy, history and development of 27--41;
adult play therapy 39; association and journal 36; center for 36--7; in
elementary schools 35--6; flial therapy 37--9; group play therapy 40; in
hospitals 41; nondirective/ child-centered play therapy 34; procedures
in family therapy 39--40; psychoanalytic play therapy 28--31;
relationship play therapy 33--4; release play therapy 31--3; university
training 37 Play TerapyTM Magazine 36 play therapy session time limits
331--2; preparing to end session 229--30; responding to refusal to leave
playroom 347--9 Play Terapy Skills Checklist (PTSC) 138, 139, 140

Index play therapy transcripts 109--110, 254--255, 256--257, 259--261,
276--284, 290--296, 299--302, 321--324, 336--337, 376--385 play therapy,
trends in: adult play therapy 39; family therapy 39--40; group play
therapy 40; hospital setting 41 Porter Parental Acceptance Scale 406
positive emotional attachment 30 positive self-image, development of 178
praise: children seeking 339--42; facilitative responses 264--5;
nonfacilitative responses 272--3 predictability and safety 211 premature
termination in play therapy 393--4 preparing parents for separation
156--7 preparing to end each session 229--30 preserving acceptable
professional and ethical relationship 313--14 problem situations in play
therapy, and how to respond 335; asking for expressions of afection
343--4; informing child if unable to keep appointment 349; refusal to
leave playroom 347--9; requests for physical contact 344--6; seeking
praise 339--42; silent child 335--8; stealing attempts for toys 346--7;
therapists participation in play 353--7; weird talk 342--3; wish to
bring toys or foods into playroom 338--9; see also issues in play
therapy process of play therapy 20--3 professional standards 142; limit
setting and preserving acceptable relationship 313--14 promoting
consistent environment 312--13 Te Prophet (Gibran) 129 Prosek, E. 435
protecting play therapy room and materials 314--15 psychiatric referral
167--8 psychoanalytic play therapy 28--31

Q questioning children: avoiding 248--50; nonfacilitative responses
273--4; requesting parents to refrain from 154

R randomized controlled trials (RCTs) 412, 413--21 Rank, O. 33 Ray, D.
99, 413, 414, 415, 419, 421, 423, 424, 425, 431, 436; Group Play Terapy:
A Dynamic Approach 40 reactions to fnal session 392--3 readiness for
play therapy termination 387--9 reality, child's perception of 56
reality, limits and anchoring 311--12 reality testing of limits 178
real-life toys 180, 180--1 realness (being real) 66--7, 119--20
reference points for termination in play therapy 387--9 refect content,
facilitative responses 215, 243--4 refecting feelings 215--17;
facilitative responses 244--6 refecting verbal content 215 refective
responses: refect feelings 244--6; refecting verbal content 215;
tracking nonverbal play behavior 214--15, 242--3 refusal to leave
playroom 347--9 Reisman, J. 28 relating to children, tenets for 46--7
relationship building 195--233; allowing child to lead 206--9; child's
view of the play 217--21; consistency in play therapy relationship
211--17; creating diferent type of 110--11; dimensions of 232--3;
initial encounter in waiting room 201--5; introduction to the playroom
205--6; limitations on role playing with a child

453

454

Index 209--11; making contact with the child 199--201; objectives of
197--8, 235; observation mirror and recording 227--8; play therapists'
reactions 230--1; preparing to end each session 229--30; principles for
relationships with children 196--7; responding to children's questions
221--7; taking notes during session 228--9 relationship in play therapy:
being with 236--8; limits and boundaries 309; limit setting and
preserving acceptable relationship 313--14; procedures for ending
390--2; procedures for ending relationship 390--2; reactions to fnal
session 392--3; therapists creation of diferent type of relationship
110--11 relationships in play therapy 4, 33--4, 75--91; Axline's Eight
Basic Principles 86--7; being real 66--7, 119--20; expectancy versus
expectation 78--9; inner stillness 80--1; journey of 89; key to growth
and efective therapy 90; longing to share 81; necessary therapist
attitudes 66--75; psychoanalytic play therapy 28--31; sensitive
understanding 73; therapeutic dimensions 90--1; warm caring and
acceptance 67--70; see also therapeutic conditions for growth release
play therapy 31--3; activities in playroom 32 research 411--12; with
culturally diverse populations 106--7; culturally relevant 429--32;
individual outcome studies 426--9; meta-analyses 422--5; resources for
434--6; status of 412, 422; strengths and limitations of 432--4;
systemic reviews 422--5 Research Treatment Integrity Checklist 435

resilience 46, 47--9 resources for research 434--6 respect for children
68, 94--5; space 212--13 responding skills 138 responsibility for self
95 returning responsibility 250--8; purpose in 263; see also
responsibility for self rewards for children 360 Rhine, T. 417 Ritchie,
M. 422, 423 Ritzi, R. M. 420 Rogers, C. 34, 57, 58, 59, 60, 66, 68, 71,
83, 125 role-playing 4 Rousseau, J.: Emile 27 Rudolph, L. 166 Rule of
Tumb 45, 56, 78, 84, 87, 88, 89, 92, 116, 124, 125, 127, 176, 200, 212,
213, 221, 236, 240, 241, 248, 250, 251, 258, 262, 286, 299, 306, 347,
372 Ryan (a dying child) 130--4

S safe climate for children 94; predictability and 211; rationale for
setting limits 308--9 sandbox: limiting water in 333; urinating in 334
Schaefer, C. 36 school-based play therapy 35--6 schools: counseling and
play therapy 35--6, 149; play therapy program in 193; see also
elementary schools Schottelkorb, A. A. 419, 420 second play therapy
session 277--84 seeking praise 339--42 self 57--9; therapist dimensions
of 124 self-acceptance 96--7, 125--8 self-actualizing tendency in
children 55, 59, 61--3 self-awareness 20, 34, 100, 106, 126 self-concept
59--60, 63, 65, 66, 83, 93, 141, 250, 399, 403 self-control: child
resilience and 48; development of 179;

Index learning 14--15, 17; learning responsible control of feelings 94;
in limit setting 14--15, 17; self-responsibility development and 310--11
self-direction 34 self-esteem 246--7 self-evaluation 126 self-image,
positive 178 self-insight, supervised practice facilitates 135--8
self-supervision 138--9 self-understanding: development of 178--9; play
therapists 67, 70, 121--4 sense of humor, play therapists 121 sensitive
understanding 73; being with 236--8; play therapists 73, 119--20
sensory-motor 16 separation, preparing parents for 156--7 session time
limits 331--2 sexually abused children 351, 405; sexual or erotic
behaviors 314 sexual symbolism 29 Sheely-Moore, A. 420, 431 Shen, Y. 420
Shepherd, M. 158 short-term child-centered play therapy 403; research on
403--5 short-term child-parent relationship therapy (CPRT) 405--6
siblings of child, inviting into playroom 367 silence in play therapy
285--90 silent child 335--8 Silvern, L. 24 single case research design
(SCRD) 431 sitting in therapist's lap 344--6 size of playroom 170--1
Smith, M. 182 Smith, N. 400, 421 Smolen, E. 12 solving problems 77
statements turned into questions, nonfacilitative responses 274 stating
fnal choice 325--7 stating fnal choice, limit setting 325--7 stealing
attempts for toys 346--7 stillness 80--1 storybooks 190

Structured Doll Play 41 structured play therapy 31, 33 Stulmaker, H. 421
suicide risk 353 Summer Play Terapy Institute 36--7 supervised practice,
facilitates self-insight 135--8 supervision and play therapy training
135--44; play therapist selfsupervision 138--9; supervised practice
facilitates self-insight 135--8; training program 142--4 Sweeney, D.
165, 166; Group Play Terapy: A Dynamic Approach 40; Handbook of Group
Play Terapy 40 systemic reviews 422--5

T Taf, J. 33 talking cure 12 Tapia-Fuselier, J. 436 Taylor, L. 421, 431
technique of play 29 tempera paints 70, 191, 229, 356 tentativeness in
limit setting 327--8 terminally ill child 130--4 termination in play
therapy 369--94; described 386--7; determining child's readiness for
therapy termination 387--9; premature 393--4; procedures for ending the
relationship 390--2; reactions to fnal session 392--3; reference points
for 387--9 themes in play behavior 372--86 therapeutic conditions for
growth 66--75; being real 66--7; sensitive understanding 73; warm caring
and acceptance 67--70 therapeutic facilitative responses see
facilitative responses, characteristics of therapeutic objectives in
play therapy 91--3 therapeutic process: intentionality of therapists
115; waiting as part

455

456

Index of 80; see also relationship in play therapy therapeutic process,
determining change within sessions 370--1; determining child's readiness
for therapy termination 387--9; frst-time behaviors 371--2; themes in
play behavior 372--86 therapeutic relationships 10--11; see also
relationships in play therapy therapist silence 290 therapists
self-acceptance 96--7 therapists self-understanding 67, 70, 121--4
Tompson, C. 166 tote bag playroom 185--7 toys and materials 30;
acting-out aggressive-release toys 181--3; adult play therapy 39; books
190--1; categories of 179--85; children's communication using 176;
children stealing attempts for 346--7; for creative expression 183--5;
displaying and organizing 189--90; electronic (not recommended) 177; for
emotional release 183--5; games (not recommended) 176; labeling (not
recommended) 264; for reality testing 176; real-life toys 180--1;
recommended for the playroom 187--90; responding to stealing attempts
346--7; selection 175--7; special considerations 190--3; taking outside
of playroom 328--30; tote bag playroom 185--7 toys and materials,
rationale for selecting 175--7; expression of a wide range of feelings
177; expression of real-life experiences 177--8; positive self-image
development 178--9; reality testing of limits 178; self-control
development

179; self-understanding development 178--9 tracking nonverbal play
behavior 214--15, 242--3 tracking responses 214--15 tracking the child
213--14 training: programs 36--7, 142--4; self-evaluation 126 transcript
of play therapy 290--8 transference 29, 30 trauma 396; re-enactment 31
Treatment Integrity Checklist for Researchers 435 Tsai, M. 419
Tyndall-Lind, A. 399

U unconditional caring and acceptance 68 undressing behaviors 314
University of North Texas 35, 36; Center for Play Terapy 139, 152, 398
university training in play therapy 37 urinating in playroom, avoiding
334 urination behaviors 314; bedwetting 157, 161

V verbal communication 35, 70, 185, 205, 241, 287 verbal expression:
cultural sensitivity and 101; family therapy approaches and 39;
refective responses 244--6 verbal interchange 12 verbalization 12, 14,
39 video-recording sessions 171--2

W waiting room: initial encounter in 201--5; responding to anticipated
happenings 152 warm caring and acceptance 67--70, 69; play therapists
67--70, 119--20; see also acceptance water facilities 172

Index Waterland, J. 35 water play 183--4 Webb, P. 397--8 weird talk
342--3 when to present limits 305--6 White, R. 117 Wilson, B. J. 421
withdrawn children 372; books and 339; helpful toys for 180, 184

Withee, K. 22 Te Wizard of Oz (Baum) 78 Woltmann, A. 8 Woodman, T. 78
World Trade Center 19

Y Yuen, T. C. 421

457


