SECOND EDITION

k

The Art of Integrative Counseling Gerald Corey California State
University, Fullerton Diplomate in Counseling Psychology American Board
of Professional Psychology

AU S T R A L I A • B R A Z I L • C A N A DA • M E X I CO • S I N G A P O
R E • S PA I N U N I T E D K I N G D O M • U N I T E D S TAT E S

The Art of Integrative Counseling, Second Edition Gerald Corey Senior
Acquisitions Editor: Marquita Flemming Assistant Editor: Christina Ganim
Editorial Assistant: Ashley Cronin Technology Project Manager: Andrew
Keay Marketing Manager: Karin Sandberg Marketing Communications Manager:
Shemika Britt Project Manager, Editorial Production: Rita Jaramillo
Creative Director: Rob Hugel

Art Director: Vernon Boes Print Buyer: Linda Hsu Permissions Editor:
Deanna Ettinger Production Service: International Typesetting and
Composition Text Designer: Lisa Henry Copy Editor: Kay Mikel Cover
Designer: Lisa Henry Cover Image: Jack Foxx/Getty Images Compositor:
International Typesetting and Composition

© 2009, 2001 Thomson Brooks/Cole, a part of The Thomson Corporation.
Thomson, the Star logo, and Brooks/ Cole are trademarks used herein
under license.

Thomson Higher Education 10 Davis Drive Belmont, CA 94002-3098 USA

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright
hereon may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means---graphic,
electronic, or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping,
Web distribution, information storage and retrieval systems, or in any
other manner--- without the written permission of the publisher. Printed
in the United States of America 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 11 10 09 08 Library of
Congress Control Number: 2007904193 Student Edition: ISBN-13:
978-0-495-10214-4 ISBN-10: 0-495-10214-8

For more information about our products, contact us at: Thomson Learning
Academic Resource Center 1-800-423-0563 For permission to use material
from this text or product, submit a request online at
http://www.thomsonrights.com. Any additional questions about permissions
can be submitted by e-mail to thomsonrights@thomson.com.

For three special and signiﬁcant women in my life---Marianne Schneider
Corey, wife, valued colleague, insightful co-author, and best friend
Heidi Jo Corey, my daughter who is making a difference through her yoga
practice Cindy Corey, my daughter who is making an impact in the ﬁeld of
multicultural counseling through her practice and teaching

This page intentionally left blank

ABOUT THE AUTHOR GERALD COREY is Professor Emeritus of Human Services at
California State University at Fullerton and a licensed psychologist. He
received his doctorate in counseling from the University of Southern
California. He is a Diplomate in Counseling Psychology, American Board
of Professional Psychology; a National Certiﬁed Counselor; a Fellow of
the American Counseling Association; a Fellow of the American
Psychological Association (Counseling Psychology); and a Fellow of the
Association for Specialists in Group Work. Jerry received the
Outstanding Professor of the Year Award from California State University
at Fullerton in 1991. He teaches both undergraduate and graduate courses
in group counseling, as well as courses in experiential groups, the
theory and practice of group counseling, theories of counseling, and
professional ethics. He is the author or co-author of 15 textbooks in
counseling currently in print, 3 student videos with workbooks, and more
than 60 articles in professional publications. Theory and Practice of
Counseling and Psychotherapy has been translated into the Arabic,
Indonesian, Portuguese, Korean, Chinese, and Turkish languages. Theory
and Practice of Group Counseling has been translated into Chinese,
Korean, Russian, and Spanish. Along with his wife, Marianne Schneider
Corey, Jerry often presents workshops in group counseling. In the past
30 years, the Coreys have conducted group counseling training workshops
for mental health professionals at many universities in the United
States as well as in Mexico, Korea, China, Hong Kong, Ireland, Germany,
Belgium, Scotland, England, and Canada. The Coreys also frequently give
presentations and workshops at state and national professional
conferences. In his leisure time, Jerry likes to travel, hike and
bicycle in the mountains, and drive his 1931 Model A Ford. Other
textbooks, student manuals and workbooks, and educational videos by
Gerald Corey from Brooks/Cole include the following: • Theory and
Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy (and Student Manual) Eighth
Edition (2009) • Case Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy, Seventh
Edition (2009) • Theory and Practice of Group Counseling, Seventh
Edition (and Student Manual) (2008) • Issues and Ethics in the Helping
Professions, Seventh Edition (2007, with Marianne Schneider Corey and
Patrick Callanan) • Becoming a Helper, Fifth Edition (2007, with
Marianne Schneider Corey) • Groups: Process and Practice, Seventh
Edition (2006, with Marianne Schneider Corey) • I Never Knew I Had a
Choice, Eighth Edition (2006, with Marianne Schneider Corey) • Group
Techniques, Third Edition (2004, with Marianne Schneider Corey, Patrick
Callanan, and J. Michael Russell) • Clinical Supervision in the Helping
Professions: A Practical Guide (2003, with Robert Haynes and Patrice
Moulton) Jerry is co-author, with his daughters Cindy Corey and Heidi Jo
Corey, of an orientation-to-college book entitled Living and Learning
(1997), published by Wadsworth. He is also co-author (with Barbara
Herlihy) of Boundary Issues in Counseling: Multiple

-- v--

vi

About the Author

Roles and Responsibilities, Second Edition (2006) and ACA Ethical
Standards Casebook, Sixth Edition (2006), both published by the American
Counseling Association. He has also made four videos/CDs/DVDs on various
aspects of counseling practice: (1) CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling
(2005, with Robert Haynes); (2) Ethics in Action: CD-ROM (2003, with
Marianne Schneider Corey and Robert Haynes); (3) Groups in Action:
Evolution and Challenge---DVD and Workbook (2006, with Marianne
Schneider Corey and Robert Haynes); and (4) DVD Theory in Practice: The
Case of Stan. All of these programs are available through Brooks/Cole.

CONTENTS

PREFACE

1

xi

Beginning of Counseling

1

An Integrative Theoretical Approach: An Overview 2 Put Yourself in the
Shoes of the Client 4 The Initial Counseling Session 4 Informed Consent
5 Assessment and Diagnosis 6 Therapy Is a Time-Limited Process 7
Introduction to the Case of Ruth 8 Drawing on Theories as Applied to the
Case of Ruth 9 Concluding Comments 14

2

The Therapeutic Relationship Developing a Working Relationship 15
Becoming the Client: Sharing in a Collaborative Partnership 18 Therapy
as a Collaborative Venture 18 The Relationship During the Early Stage of
Counseling 19 Your Role as a Counselor in Creating a Working
Relationship 21 Establishing the Relationship 21 Helping Clients Gain a
Focus 22 My Integrative Approach With Ruth 23 The Relationship as the
Cornerstone of Therapy 23 Our Second Session 23 Listening to Ruth's
Story 24 Helping Ruth Externalize Her Problem 24 Concluding Comments 25
-- vii --

15

viii

3

Contents

Establishing Therapeutic Goals Becoming the Client: Establishing
Counseling Goals Various Types of Therapeutic Goals 30 Goal-Directed
Behavior and Goal Setting 32 Clarifying Counseling Goals With Ruth 33
Concluding Comments 35

4

27 28

Understanding and Addressing Diversity Multicultural Concerns 36
Diversity as Central in the Counseling Process 37 Theories Applied to
Understanding Diversity Perspectives Recognizing the Spiritual Domain 42
Assessing Your Own Spirituality 43 Understanding Ruth From a Diversity
Perspective 44 Concluding Comments 46

5

39

Understanding and Working With Resistance Understanding the Dynamics of
Resistance 48 Respecting and Reframing Resistance 49 Becoming the
Client: Experiencing Resistance in Yourself Understanding Ruth's
Resistance 55 Borrowing From a Psychoanalytic View 56 Drawing on Other
Approaches 57 Guidelines for Dealing With Resistance in Clients 58
Concluding Comments 59

6

36

Cognitive Focus in Counseling Beneﬁts and Limitations of a Cognitive
Focus 60 Becoming the Client: Experiencing Cognitive Behavioral
Techniques 62 Paying Attention to Your Thinking 62 Doing Homework
Assignments 63 Drawing on Adlerian Concepts 63 Working With Ruth From a
Cognitive Perspective 64 Concluding Comments 68

48 51

60

Contents

ix

7 Emotive Focus in Counseling

69

Beneﬁts and Limitations of an Emotive Focus 69 Becoming the Client:
Experiencing Emotionally Focused Therapy Working With an Emotive Focus
73 Working With Ruth in Identifying and Exploring Feelings 74 Concluding
Comments 76

70

8 Behavioral Focus in Counseling

78

Beneﬁts and Limitations of a Behavioral Focus 79 Understanding the Seven
Modalities of Human Functioning 80 Becoming the Client: Experiencing
Behavior-Oriented Therapy 81 Developing a Behavioral Contract 83 Working
With Ruth Using a Behavioral Focus 85 Concluding Comments 87

9 An Integrative Perspective

88

Searching for Common Denominators Across Therapy Schools 89 The
Foundation of My Integrative Approach 90 Existential Therapy as a
Philosophical Base 90 Gestalt Therapy: A Holistic Perspective 91
Psychodrama: An Integrative Approach 92 Drawing on the Action-Oriented
Therapies 93 Behavior Therapy 93 Multimodal Therapy 93 Cognitive
Behavior Therapy 94 Reality Therapy/Choice Theory 95 Solution-Focused
Brief Therapy 95 Adlerian Therapy 96 Feminist and Systemic Therapies 96
Working With Ruth in Cognitive, Emotive, and Behavioral Ways 97 Study a
Primary Theory---But Be Open to Integration 99 Beneﬁts and Limitations
of Integration 99 Concluding Comments 100

10 Working With Transference and Countertransference

102

Contrasting Views of Transference 102 The Connection Between
Transference and Countertransference

104

x

Contents Working With Transference Therapeutically 105 Addressing
Countertransference Issues 107 Self-Disclosure in the Therapeutic
Relationship 108 Working With Transference and Countertransference With
Ruth 110 Concluding Comments 111

11 Understanding How the Past Inﬂuences the Present

114

Understanding How the Past, Present, and Future Are Intertwined 114
Becoming the Client: Examining Your Past, Present, and Future 116
Working With Ruth's Past, Present, and Future 117 Dealing With the Past
in an Integrative Style 117 Dealing With the Present in an Integrative
Style 119 Dealing With the Future in an Integrative Style 120 Concluding
Comments 121

12 Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change

122

Understanding Redecision Therapy 122 Injunctions and Early Decisions 123
Understanding the Inﬂuence of Your Family 123 Applying Redecision
Therapy to Behavior Changes 124 Becoming the Client: Experiencing the
Redecision Process Working Toward Redecisions With Ruth 126 Concluding
Comments 129

13 Evaluation and Termination Guidelines for Effective Termination 130
Becoming the Client: Taking Credit for Your Changes Evaluating Ruth's
Therapy Experience 133 Concluding Comments 136 The Future of
Psychotherapy Integration 136 Designing Your Personal Integrative
Approach 136

REFERENCE S AND SUGGE STED RE ADINGS

139

125

130 132

PREFACE

k

In most of my books dealing with theory and practice of counseling, I
devote speciﬁc chapters to presenting an integrative approach to
counseling practice and a case example of the application of my
integrative perspective. The Art of Integrative Counseling is basically
an extension of these single chapters and is aimed at helping readers
conceptualize the various dimensions of an integrative perspective.

About This Book The Art of Integrative Counseling is designed as a
supplementary book for those who have had a basic course in counseling
theory and practice. Unless you have had a course in counseling theory
or have at least read a standard textbook covering the range of
counseling theories, you may have trouble understanding and applying the
ideas in this book. This book is not designed as a substitute for a text
surveying the counseling theories. Instead, it is aimed primarily for
courses in advanced counseling practice, counseling techniques, and
therapeutic procedures. I am assuming that you are familiar with the
basic concepts associated with some of the major theoretical systems
underlying counseling practice, such as psychoanalytic therapy, Adlerian
therapy, existential therapy, person-centered therapy, Gestalt therapy,
psychodrama, redecision therapy, reality therapy, behavior therapy,
cognitive behavior therapy, solution-focused brief therapy, narrative
therapy, feminist therapy, and family systems therapy. In this Second
Edition of The Art of Integrative Counseling, chapters have been revised
for increased clarity of reading. I have incorporated key ﬁndings from
recent research on topics such as the central role of the therapeutic
relationship, the role of client feedback on therapy outcomes, and the
future of psychotherapy integration. Additions to chapters include new
material on solution-focused brief therapy and narrative therapy; a
revised discussion of the history of psychotherapy integration and
survey data on therapists' theoretical orientations; an expanded
treatment of diversity issues, especially the role of spirituality in
counseling practice; new material on the importance of personal -- xi --

xii

Preface

therapy for psychotherapists; discussion of the dynamics of resistance,
along with the importance of respecting and reframing resistance;
understanding the dynamics of transference and countertransference as it
pertains to an integrative approach; and understanding the role of the
past, present, and future as it pertains to counseling individuals. All
of the chapters have been carefully reviewed to determine how the topics
ﬁt with contemporary integrative approaches, and I have given particular
attention to trends in the psychotherapy integration movement. Many new
references update the discussion of key topics and provide avenues for
further exploration. One of the trends in the counseling ﬁeld is the
move toward integration of various theoretical systems and approaches to
counseling. I believe an integrative approach is a more useful guide to
practice. In this book I strive to do several things: (1) describe the
concepts and techniques that I most draw from in my own integrative
approach to counseling practice; (2) demonstrate how concepts and
techniques can be borrowed from a variety of theoretical models and
applied to the counseling process from the initial to termination stages
through discussions of my work with a single client, "Ruth," throughout
the book, and also by asking you to imagine you are a client in
counseling with me; and (3) suggest ways for you to think about
designing your own integrative approach that will serve as a foundation
for what you do in your counseling practice. To encourage active
learning, I ask you to put yourself in the role of a therapist at times
and to assume the role of a client at other times as you confront these
topics. It is not possible for me to tell you how to develop a personal
integrative style that will ﬁt best for you. I can, however, provide
some guidelines to assist you in the task of considering which key
concepts and techniques you might incorporate in your personal
therapeutic style. In writing about my own personal synthesis, I am in
no way suggesting that there is "one right way" to formulate an
integrative perspective. Indeed, what I hope you will get from reading
and studying this book (along with using the CD-ROM for Integrative
Counseling) is a framework that will assist you in systematically
constructing an integrative counseling approach that works best for the
person you are and for the clients you will serve.

About the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling The CD-ROM for Integrative
Counseling serves as an ideal companion to this book. I strongly
recommend that you incorporate the CD-ROM into your study to receive the
maximum beneﬁt from reading and studying this book. This CD-ROM program
illustrates my integrative perspective in working with one client, Ruth.
I make many references to the CD-ROM throughout this book. In each
chapter the central case example is Ruth, which I use to illustrate the
concepts and techniques that are a part of my integrative perspective.
Along with a 2-hour CD-ROM program of my counseling Ruth, questions are
posed after each of the sessions. The program---structured within the
framework of 13 counseling sessions from the initial to termination
phase---is designed to involve you in learning about an integrative
approach through the use of interactive exercises and questions.

Preface

xiii

The format of the CD-ROM for the 13 sessions consists of a lecturette on
speciﬁc dimensions of my integrative approach, a counseling
demonstration with Ruth, and a running process commentary of Ruth's and
my work together. Viewing the counseling sessions and the process
commentaries---along with reading each of the chapters in this
book---will assist you in designing your own personal integration. Many
of my comments in this book are directed to how I would apply a range of
selected concepts and techniques in working with Ruth over the course of
short-term counseling (13 sessions). It will be important for you to
interpret and apply what I write in this book to your own client
population, as well as to the setting in which you work. Although Ruth
is the only case example I use in this book, I have included sections
where you, the reader, can place yourself in the role of the client as
well as in the role of the therapist. These "Becoming a Client" sections
are designed to involve you in an active and experiential way by
applying the various approaches to yourself personally.

About the Online and DVD Program: Theory in Practice: The Case of Stan
New to this edition is an online interactive DVD and home-study program
(also available online) in which I demonstrate counseling a client
(Stan) from various theoretical perspectives. Like the CD-ROM program in
which I counseling Ruth, the Theory in Practice: The Case of Stan
program consists of 13 sessions, each beginning with brief introductory
comments, followed by a counseling session with Stan from a speciﬁc
theoretical orientation, and ending with a process commentary. I have
tied this online/DVD program into The Art of Integrative Counseling, and
this program is available for students who are using this book.

A Complete Teaching/Learning Package Case Approach to Counseling and
Psychotherapy, Seventh Edition (Corey, 2009b) reﬂects my increasing
emphasis on the use of demonstrations and the case approach method to
bridge the gap between the theory and practice of counseling. This book
highlights a variety of contemporary counseling approaches, and
demonstrates how each of the various therapeutic approaches is applied
to the same client, Ruth, who is followed throughout this book. A
feature of the text is an assessment of Ruth's case by one or more guest
consultants from each of the various theoretical perspectives.
Twenty-six highly competent practitioners assess and treat Ruth from
their particular theoretical orientation; they also provide sample
dialogues to illustrate their style of working with Ruth. In addition,
in The Art of Integrative Counseling I make frequent reference to my
main textbook, Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy,
which is accompanied by the Student Manual for Theory and Practice of
Counseling and Psychotherapy. Whether you have used this book in a
previous course, or another theories text, I encourage you to review the
relevant chapters.

Acknowledgments I am indebted to the professors and students who
reviewed this book and provided me with constructive input: Caroline
Bailey, California State University

xiv

Preface

at Fullerton; James J. Bergin, Georgia Southern University; Adam
Blatner, Private Practice, Sun City, Georgetown, Texas; Michelle E.
Flaum Bowman, doctoral student, University of Cincinnati; Patrick
Callanan, California State University at Fullerton; Elizabeth A.
Maynard, University of St. Thomas, Houston; Michelle Muratori, Johns
Hopkins University; and Dwight Webb, University of New Hampshire. This
book is the result of a team effort, which includes the combined talents
of several people at Brooks/Cole. It continues to be a positive
experience to work with a dedicated staff of professionals who go out of
their way to give their best. These people include Marquita Flemming,
senior editor of counseling; Christina Ganim Banks and Ashley Cronin,
editorial assistants, who monitored the review process; Karin Sandberg,
senior marketing manager; and Rita Jaramillo, content project manager. I
thank Ben Kolstad of International Typesetting and Composition, who
coordinated the production of this book. Special appreciation goes to
Kay Mikel, the manuscript editor, whose sensitivity and editorial skills
contributed in important ways to the readability and interest of this
text. --- GERALD COREY

CHAPTER ONE

k

Beginning of Counseling

If you have applied to a graduate program in the helping professions,
you are certain to have been asked these questions: "What is your
approach to counseling?" "How does your theoretical orientation inﬂuence
the manner in which you practice?" You will revisit these questions
throughout your career---in job interviews and self-evaluations. This
book will assist you in conceptualizing what you do as a counseling
practitioner and help you clarify your theoretical orientation. I want
to stimulate your thinking about the importance of developing an
integrative approach to counseling practice that pays attention to what
your clients are thinking, feeling, and doing. Combining these three
dimensions is the basis for a powerful and comprehensive approach to
counseling practice. If any of these dimensions is excluded, the
therapeutic approach is incomplete because no single theoretical model
is comprehensive enough to explain all facets of the human experience. I
encourage you to examine the contemporary theories of counseling to
determine which concepts and techniques you can incorporate in your
approach to practice. Creating your own integrative stance is truly a
challenge. It is not simply picking bits and pieces from theories in a
random and fragmented manner. Each theory represents a different vantage
point from which to look at human behavior. Study all the major
theories, resist embracing too quickly any single point of view, and
look for a basis for an integrative perspective that will guide your
practice. No one theory has "the truth," but each may have something
unique to offer you. Search for an approach that ﬁts who you are and
that allows you to think in a way that addresses thinking, feeling, and
behaving. The aim of this book is to assist you in acquiring a unique
counseling approach. To develop this kind of integration, you need to be
well grounded in a number of theories, be open to the idea that some
aspects of these theories can be uniﬁed in different ways, and be
willing to continually test your hypotheses to determine how well they
are working. In developing and conceptualizing this integrative
counseling approach, you need to consider your own personality. You must
also think about what concepts and techniques work best with -- 1--

2

CHAPTER ONE

a range of clients. It requires knowledge, skill, art, and clinical
experience to be able to determine what techniques are suitable for
particular problems and different clients. It is also an art to know
when and how to use a particular therapeutic intervention. Knowledge of
theories is not enough to make you an effective counselor. It is also
essential that you be willing to take an honest look at your own life:
Are you willing to do for yourself what you challenge clients to do? It
will be hard to inspire clients to seek help when they need it if you
are not open to change in your own life. It will be difﬁcult to sell
others on that which you aren't buying yourself. Your own
self-exploration will likely be one of the most important factors in
learning how to use many of the techniques in this book. You will get
many ideas of ways to creatively intervene with your clients by
experiencing what it is like to be a client. (See Chapter 10 for more on
this topic.) As much as possible, I will ask you to put yourself in the
shoes of the client. The "Becoming a Client" sections can be useful
sources of self-exploration and can offer you strategies for intervening
with your own clients. Examples of applications of techniques are
provided in every chapter when I discuss my particular approach with a
client named "Ruth." You will get to know Ruth well in the remaining
chapters. In many of the chapters I will be speaking to you as a
therapist, especially when I discuss suggestions for developing your
integrative approach to counseling. If you have not read the preface,
let me encourage you to do so before continuing with the text. The
preface includes a number of speciﬁc suggestions on how to make the best
use of this book in conjunction with the CD-ROM for Integrative
Counseling. This program consists of 13 counseling sessions with Ruth
that parallel the 13 chapters in this book.

An Integrative Theoretical Approach: An Overview This book represents my
own integrative approach to counseling. I deﬁ ne an integrative approach
to counseling as being rooted in a theory, with techniques borrowed from
other approaches and tailored to a client's unique needs. I am not
suggesting that you adopt my conceptualization of theory applied to
practice. You will develop your own integrative style based on your
personality and the kinds of clients you expect to counsel. By
describing my personal orientation to counseling, I hope to provide a
model to assist you in designing a theoretical orientation that makes
sense to you. As a student, you can begin the process of developing a
style tailored to your own personality by familiarizing yourself with
the major approaches to therapeutic practice. Then choose one theory to
study in some depth and branch out from there in your search for an
integrative style. I recommend that you study the particular theory that
comes closest to your worldview, and use this theory as a foundation for
developing your personal orientation. Being grounded in a theory
provides an anchor for making sense of what you are doing as a
counselor. Without a theoretical foundation you are liable to ﬂounder,
and neither you nor your client are likely to experience productive
results.

Beginning of Counseling

3

Attempting to practice without having an explicit theoretical rationale
is like trying to build a house without a set of blueprints. The
foundation of a house needs to be sturdy and strong to support the
structure. If you operate in a theoretical vacuum and are unable to draw
on theory to support your interventions, your attempts to help people
change will have uncertain outcomes. Theory is not a rigid set of
structures; rather, it provides a general framework that enables you to
make sense of the many facets of the counseling processand gives
direction to what you do and say. As a counselor, you will encounter a
wide range of clients with diverse problems. No single theory has been
able to corner the market on utility, and no one approach is clinically
effective with all clients and situations (Norcross, 2005). I agree with
Preston's (1998) belief that to accurately understand clients,
therapists must be able to appreciate them from a multitude of
perspectives. Preston identiﬁes several key questions that need to be
addressed in working with each client: • What is not working in this
person's life at this time? • What are the particular problems and
causes that contribute to the client's present predicament? • What does
the client need from counseling in a general sense, and what does the
client need at this time to be helped to heal, grow, and cope more
effectively with life? I draw on concepts and techniques from most of
the contemporary counseling models. I then adapt them to a style that
ﬁts me personally, taking into account the universal thinking, feeling,
and behaving dimensions of human experience. I typically challenge
clients to think about the decisions they have made about themselves.
Some of these decisions may have been necessary for their psychological
survival as children but may now be ineffective. I encourage clients to
pay attention to their "self-talk" and to ask themselves these
questions: • How do your problems reﬂect the assumptions you make about
yourself, about others, and about life? • How do you create your
problems by the thoughts and beliefs to which you cling? • How can you
begin to free yourself by critically evaluating the statements you
repeat to yourself? These interventions help clients think about events
in their lives, how they have interpreted those events, and what they
need to do cognitively to change their belief systems. Once clients
begin thinking about their problems, they often feel stuck due to
unexpressed and unresolved emotional concerns. I encourage clients to
experience the range of their feelings and talk about how certain events
have affected them. The healing process is facilitated by using
techniques that tap feelings and allow individuals to feel listened to
and understood. Thinking and feeling are vital components in the helping
process, but eventually clients must express themselves in the behaving
or acting dimension.

4

CHAPTER ONE

Clients can spend countless hours gaining insights and venting pent-up
feelings, but at some point they need to get involved in a program of
change. Their feelings and thoughts can then be tested and adapted to
real-life situations. If the helping process includes a focus on what
people are doing, there is a greater chance that clients will also be
able to change their thinking and feeling. Using an integrative
counseling style, there is interaction among these three dimensions
throughout the counseling process. To this end, I help clients
consolidate what they are learning and apply new behaviors to situations
they encounter every day. Some strategies I use are contracts, homework
assignments, action programs, self-monitoring techniques, support
systems, and self-directed programs of change. (These strategies are
discussed in some detail in Chapters 8, 9, and 12). These approaches all
stress the role of commitment on the part of clients to practice new
behaviors, to follow through with a realistic plan for change, and to
develop practical methods of carrying out this plan in everyday life.
Ultimately, the most meaningful counseling perspective for you to use is
one that is an extension of your values and personality. As your
philosophy of life evolves, so will your philosophy of counseling.
Having a clearly deﬁ ned and articulated philosophy of counseling is
essential to your professional practice. Developing a personalized
approach that guides your practice is an ongoing process, and your model
will continuously undergo revision. Reﬂecting on your own values, life
experiences, and philosophy of life is a good starting point.

Put Yourself in the Shoes of the Client The Initial Counseling Session
One of my goals in writing this book is to include you experientially in
the process of deciding which aspects you might incorporate into your
own philosophy of counseling, based upon the existing theories. I ask
you to "become the client" and reﬂect on integration from that
perspective. Imagine that you are the client and we are about to have
our ﬁ rst session. As a therapist, I realize that the ﬁrst few minutes
are critical in setting the tone. Do you feel that way too? I begin by
explaining to you the conﬁdential nature of our work together, including
the limitations of conﬁdentiality. How does this feel to you? By
explaining a few of the basic rules of therapy, I hope to provide a
sense of safety that will encourage you to talk freely. To promote trust
and rapport, I ask you what you expected of today. To what extent does
this help you get focused? Relaxed? What I most want to be able to do is
listen to your story. How does it feel to ﬁnally share your story with
someone? Meeting and valuing you as a person is essential to positive
change. To create a working therapeutic relationship, I try to make a
good connection with you. My aim is to establish a positive relationship
by listening, responding, demonstrating respect for your capacity to
understand yourself, and exhibiting faith, hope, and caring. Here are
some questions I am likely to ask you during the ﬁrst session. Write
down your answers to these questions as you reﬂect on each one.

Beginning of Counseling

5

• What brings you here? What has been going on in your life recently
that prompted you to seek professional help at this time? • What
expectations do you have of therapy? Of me? What are your hopes, fears,
and reservations? What goals do you have for yourself through therapy? •
Could you give me a picture of some signiﬁcant turning points in your
life? Who have been the important people in your life? What signiﬁcant
decisions have you made? What are some of the struggles you've dealt
with, and what are some of the issues that are current for you? To the
extent possible, I avoid preconceived notions about what our dialogue
will consist of or how the therapy process will unfold. My hope is that
you will share your present thoughts and feelings as they arise in this
session. You may not be sure what you want from counseling, and you may
have ambivalent feelings about being with me. You may be uncertain about
how being in counseling will change your relationships at home. This
lack of certainty is a good place to begin. I want to give you a chance
to express your expectations, hopes, concerns, fears, reservations, and
doubts about making a commitment to the counseling process. This is one
way I get to know you and connect with you.

Informed Consent Educating you (the client) about the counseling
process, addressing your questions, and clarifying your expectations are
routes to ethical and effective counseling practice. The challenge is to
create a balance between giving you too much or too little information.
The main agenda is to provide you with the opportunity to talk about
what you hope to gain from being in counseling. For you to feel safe
enough to meaningfully express yourself, you need to have at least some
minimal information about the nature of the therapeutic relationship.
What do you want to know about how counseling works as you begin as my
client? What do you consider essential to know before you make a
commitment to this professional relationship? Here are some topics we
might explore during our early sessions: • Why is conﬁdentiality
essential to our work together, and what are the limits of
conﬁdentiality? • How does the therapeutic process work? • What is my
primary role as a therapist? • What is expected of you as a client, both
during the sessions and outside of sessions? • What is the approximate
length of the counseling process? How long will it take for you to begin
feeling and acting better? • How will we know when it is time to end our
work? Who has the right and the responsibility to terminate? • What are
your rights and responsibilities as the client? • What are some of the
beneﬁts and risks of therapy that you can expect? Let's assume, during
this ﬁrst session, that you say to me: "One of the troubles I have is
trusting myself. I always think about what others expect of me.

6

CHAPTER ONE

I've tried to please others for so long that I don't know who I am most
of the time." This is a good opportunity for me to brieﬂy educate you
about a key task of therapy: challenging you to begin to examine the
ways in which you think, feel, and act. I want to establish a
collaborative working relationship with you. (In Chapter 2, I discuss in
detail how I strive to create an effective therapeutic alliance.) I
spend time explaining my view of the therapy process and how it works.
By demystifying the therapeutic process, I am conveying the message that
you are largely in charge of the direction your therapy will take.
Counseling will encourage you to look within to ﬁ nd your own answers. I
won't try to provide easy solutions or answers; I will provide guidance
and support in your journey in discovering your own answers. As an
outcome of our work together, I hope to help you increase your awareness
of your choices and learn to challenge any ways that you limit or
restrict yourself. By this time, we have talked about the nature of
counseling, the purpose and limitations of conﬁdentiality, the
procedures that we may employ, and the beneﬁts and risks of the process.
What questions and reactions do you have? In later sessions we will
discuss speciﬁc therapy procedures I believe may be appropriate as we
uncover your particular problems. You will help choose the techniques
used in dealing with your problems. Informing you about the counseling
process is an important professional responsibility and an ethical
requirement of all the major mental health professions. To what extent
has this discussion helped you feel informed and a partner in the
therapeutic venture?

Assessment and Diagnosis Next, I begin the process of conducting an
assessment of your circumstances and sharing my impressions with you. I
am likely to employ an Adlerian technique as part of your assessment,
which Dreikurs (1997) called The Question: "How would your life be
different if you did not have this problem? What would you do
differently if you did not have this symptom or problem?" "How would
your life be different if you didn't have these issues, concerns, or
problems?" When the answer is: "Nothing would be different, except the
symptoms would be gone," I suspect the problem is probably physiological
or organic, even if it manifests itself as a psychological complaint.
However, if you say that "if it weren't for this depression, I would get
out more and see my friends," I would suspect that your problem serves
the purpose of helping you to avoid something you perceive as necessary,
but from which you would like to retreat. Such a statement may reveal
your concern about the possibility of being a good friend or being
welcomed by your friends. Raising such questions can be a good catalyst
to stimulate your reﬂection on what it might be like for you if you were
able to change some problematic area in your life. From my perspective,
assessment and diagnosis can help me to conceptualize a case and
implement treatment. I will develop hypotheses about you, and we can
talk about these conjectures together. Diagnosis does not have to be a
matter of categorizing you as a person. Instead, I view the process of

Beginning of Counseling

7

diagnosis more broadly, as describing behavior and thinking about its
meaning. In this way, diagnosis becomes a process of thinking about you
with you. I think of diagnosis as a general descriptive statement
identifying your style of functioning. Based on the process of
assessment over a period of time, I am able to develop hunches about
your behavioral style and may share these observations with you as part
of the therapeutic process. Accurate diagnosis is important, but it is
not the deﬁ ning point of therapy in general, nor the goal of the
initial session. I favor a collaborative approach to assessment, one
that includes you, the client, as a therapeutic partner. Assessment and
diagnosis can be linked directly to the therapeutic process, forming a
basis for developing methods of evaluating how well my interventions are
working to achieve your goals.

Therapy Is a Time-Limited Process Does your problem require short-term
counseling or longer-term counseling? If you are my client in a setting
in which brief therapy is the standard, it is especially important for
me to be clear about the number of sessions the agency allows or your
insurance will pay for. If an agency policy speciﬁes that you can be
seen for only six sessions, you have a right to know this from the
onset. If we are working from a short-term therapy approach, I will
always keep in mind the short duration of our work together. The goal is
to help you learn, as quickly and efﬁciently as possible, the coping
skills you need to live in self-directed ways. The limitation of time
can assist us in establishing short-term, realistic goals. Toward the
end of each session, I will ask you the degree to which you see yourself
reaching the goals you have established, and I will also ask you to take
a few moments to ﬁ ll out a rating scale of the session. This written
rating scale is described by Duncan, Miller, and Sparks (2004) in The
Heroic Client. I will ask you to rate four areas: Relationship: To what
degree did you feel heard, understood, and respected? Goals and topics:
To what degree did we work on and talk about what you wanted to work on
and talk about? Approach or method: To what degree is the therapist's
approach a good ﬁt for you? Overall: To what degree was the session
right for you today? By reviewing the course of treatment, you are in a
position to identify what is and is not working for you in the
counseling process. If I listen to feedback from you, together we can
modify what we are doing in our therapy sessions, making the therapeutic
process a collaborative endeavor. My overriding goal is to increase the
chances that you will not continue to need a therapist. If I do my work
well, eventually I hope to put myself out of business. Thus, I am open
to exploring termination issues with you at any point during the
counseling process. Do you want to know about these matters from the
start? To what extent do you think discussing termination early on is
helpful to you?

8

CHAPTER ONE

Introduction to the Case of Ruth See Session 1 (Beginning of Counseling)
of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. Let's switch perspectives now
and talk about how the case of Ruth can inform your process of
developing your integrative approach to therapy. Ruth's case is the
primary example throughout this book, and she is the client in the
video. She is a 39-year-old married woman with four teenagers, coming to
therapy for the ﬁrst time with some anxiety and a host of somatic
complaints. She lives with her husband (John, 45) and their children
(Rob, 19; Jennifer, 18; Susan, 17; and Adam, 16). Here is a brief
summary of data taken from Ruth's intake form.

k Psychosocial History Ruth is the oldest of four children. Her father
is a fundamentalist Christian minister, and her mother is a housewife.
She describes her father as distant, authoritarian, and rigid; as a
child, her relationship with him was one of unquestioning, fearful
adherence to his rules and standards. She remembers her mother as being
critical, and Ruth thought she could never do enough to please her
mother. At other times her mother was supportive. The family
demonstrated little affection. In many ways she took on the role of
caring for her younger brother and sisters, largely in the hope of
winning the approval of her parents. When she attempted to have any kind
of fun, she encountered her father's disapproval and outright scorn. To
a large extent, this pattern of taking care of others has extended
throughout her life. k Presenting Problem Ruth reports general
dissatisfaction with her life, seeing it as rather uneventful and
predictable. She feels some panic over reaching the age of 39, wondering
where the years have gone. For 2 years she has been troubled with a
range of psychosomatic complaints, including sleep disturbances,
anxiety, dizziness, heart palpitations, and headaches. At times she must
push herself to leave the house. Ruth complains that she cries easily
over trivial matters, often feels depressed, and does not like her body.
Ruth has recently become aware that she lives for others. Living this
way leads her to overlook many of her own needs and desires. She has not
cultivated healthy interdependence in her relationships and realizes
that she plays a role of "superwoman" in all aspects of her life. She
feels that she gives and gives in all of her relationships, to the point
that she feels empty. She has a difﬁcult time asking others to attend to
her needs. She tries to be the good wife and good mother that her family
expects her to be---and that she expects herself to be. In most
respects, Ruth does not like herself. She does not like her looks or her
body, and she worries about what her family of origin expects of her.
She goes to church every Sunday, but she has left her father's church,
which is a source of some guilt for her. Although her parents have not
disowned her, it sometimes feels that they have. As a counselor, what
are you focusing on so far? k History of Presenting Problem

Ruth's major career was as homemaker and mother until her children
became adolescents. She then entered college part-time and obtained a
bachelor's degree in child development. She recently

Beginning of Counseling

9

graduated from college as an elementary education major, and she is now
working on her teaching credential. She looks forward to becoming an
elementary school teacher, yet she often feels so overwhelmed that she
wonders if she will ever reach her career goals. Through her contacts
with others at the university, she became aware of how she has limited
herself, how she has fostered her family's dependence on her, and how
frightened she is of branching out from her secure roles as mother and
wife. She completed an introductory course in counseling that encouraged
her to look at the direction of her own life. This course and her
experiences with fellow students acted as a catalyst in getting her to
take an honest look at her life. Ruth is not clear at this point who she
is, apart from being a mother, a wife, and a student. She realizes that
she does not have a good sense of what she wants for herself and that
she typically lives up to what others in her life want for her. If you
could ask Ruth one question, what would it be?

Drawing on Theories as Applied to the Case of Ruth Let's shift
perspectives again and discuss how I would draw on different theories to
work with Ruth. I will tap into ﬁve general theoretical models of
counseling. First are the psychodynamic approaches, which include
psychoanalytic therapy, object-relations approaches, and Adlerian
therapy. Although Adlerian theory differs from psychoanalytic theory in
many respects, it can broadly be considered a psychodynamic perspective.
The second category comprises the experiential and relationship-oriented
therapies, which include the existential approach, the person-centered
approach, Gestalt therapy, and psychodrama. Third are the
action-oriented therapies, which include behavior therapy, rational
emotive behavior therapy, cognitive therapy, reality therapy, and
redecision therapy (or transactional analysis). These are sometimes
known generally as cognitive behavioral approaches. Fourth are the
postmodern approaches, which include solution-focused brief therapy and
narrative therapy. The ﬁ fth general approach is the systems
perspective, of which feminist therapy and family therapy are a part, as
are some of the emerging culture-speciﬁc counseling approaches. The
systems orientation stresses the importance of understanding individuals
in the context of the surroundings that inﬂuence their development.

k Theories During the Early Stage At the beginning of the counseling
relationship, my concern is to establish a foundation that will provide
safety for clients to be able to undertake the risks necessary in making
fundamental life changes. The concepts that I ﬁnd particularly useful at
this time come from the experiential therapies, especially
person-centered and existential therapy. I incorporate many constructs
from the person-centered approach in my therapeutic style. For example,
I believe Ruth will tell me a great deal about what she wants from life
if I can really listen with deep understanding. Although I see my
overall style as being active and directive, I ﬁ rst and foremost want
to

10

CHAPTER ONE

see the world from Ruth's vantage point. She will offer rich clues and
provide me with leads if only I care enough to deeply listen and
observe. From the person-centered approach, I value the emphasis on
striving to experience Ruth's world from her subjective perspective and
trusting in her basic wisdom. This approach gives priority to the
quality of our relationship, which I believe is the curative factor that
brings about healing and change. I want to approach meeting Ruth with as
much presence, openness, and interest as I am able to bring to the
initial encounter. What I most want to do is assist her in creating her
own agenda rather than being too quick to present my agenda to her. Let
me share my thoughts about Ruth's ﬁrst counseling session. Early in the
session, she lets me know that she is nervous about coming to her ﬁrst
counseling session. She does not know what to expect. She lets me know
that she feels confused about what she really wants for herself and what
kind of life she most wants. Her hope is that I will tell her what to do
so that she can go and do it and then feel better. She expects that I
will give her guidance, at the very least, and would like it if I were
to give her advice and tell her what to do with her life. Ruth is
putting me in the place of the expert and, in doing so, is minimizing
her personal power to make meaningful decisions herself. Although I can
appreciate her anxiety and lack of faith in her own ability to take an
active stance toward life, I do not serve her well if I make decisions
about her life for her. Consistent with the philosophies of
person-centered therapy, feminist therapy, and the postmodern
approaches, I believe that Ruth, with good support, has the capacity to
identify what she wants in her life and that she will be able to chart
her own course. At our initial meeting I do not have a clear idea of
where our journey together will take us, for much depends on how far
Ruth wants to go and what she is willing to explore. I start by giving
her a chance to say how she feels about coming to the initial session,
and I ask some of these questions, giving her time to respond to each
one: • What prompted you to call and come in for this appointment? •
What do you want me to know about you? • In what areas is your life
going well? • What do you wish was different? • What were you
experiencing as you were getting ready to come to this session? • What
is going on in your life that you particularly like? These questions
open the discussion of what Ruth is experiencing as she makes her ﬁrst
contact with me. They are central to the assessment process, which
begins during the initial session. A guiding question in the back of my
mind during this assessment is, "What does this client most need to
understand about herself to grow and to deal more effectively with her
present relationships?" From our initial session, I learn that Ruth has
decided to seek individual counseling to explore several areas of her
life. • Ruth describes some of these major symptoms: "I sometimes feel
very panicky, especially at night when I'm trying to sleep. Sometimes I
wake up and ﬁnd it difﬁcult to breathe, my heart will be pounding, and I
break out in a cold

Beginning of Counseling

11

sweat. I toss and turn trying to relax, and instead I feel tense and
worry a lot about many things. It's hard for me to turn off these
thoughts. Then during the day I'm so tired I can hardly function, and I
ﬁnd that lately I cry very easily if even minor things go wrong." A
physician whom she consulted could ﬁnd no organic or medical basis for
her physical symptoms and recommended personal therapy. • Ruth's four
children range in age from 16 to 19, and all of them are now ﬁnding more
of their satisfactions outside the family and the home and are spending
increasing time with their friends. She sees these changes and is
concerned about "losing" them. She is having particular problems with
her daughter Jennifer, and she is at a loss as to how to deal with
Jennifer's rebellion manifested by staying out late at night, drinking
excessively at parties, and showing no interest in school. Ruth feels
very much unappreciated by her children. • Ruth is not really sure who
or what she wants to become in the future. She would like to develop a
sense of herself apart from the expectations of others. She does not ﬁnd
her relationship with her husband, John, at all satisfactory. He appears
to be resisting her attempts to make changes and prefers that she remain
as she was. Ruth is anxious over the prospect of challenging this
relationship, fearing that she might end up alone. • Ruth is
experiencing increasing concern over aging and losing her "looks." These
factors have provided the motivation for her to take the necessary steps
to initiate individual therapy. Perhaps the greatest catalyst that
triggered her to come for therapy is the increase in her physical
symptoms and her anxiety.

k Anxiety Over Beginning Counseling It is to be expected that Ruth has
some anxiety about initiating therapy. I want to provide her with the
opportunity to talk about what it is like for her to come to the ofﬁce
today. That in itself provides the direction for much of our session. I
surely want to get an idea of what has brought her to therapy. What is
going on in her life that motivates her to seek therapy? What does she
most hope for as a result of this venture? I structure the initial
session so that she can talk about her expectations and about her fears,
hopes, and ambivalent feelings. Because Ruth's trust in me will be an
important part of the therapy process, I give her the chance to ask
questions about how counseling generally works. I believe in
demystifying the treatment process. Ruth will get more from her therapy
if she knows how it works, the nature of her responsibilities and mine,
and what she wants from this process. (These basic concepts are all
derived from several theoretical approaches, especially from models such
as Adlerian therapy, behavior therapy, cognitive behavior therapy,
reality therapy, and feminist therapy). As a way for Ruth to establish
trust with me, she might ask personal information about me, such as my
beliefs, values, and life circumstances. Depending on what she asks, I
am likely to directly answer her questions. However, I will probably
also explore with her why this information is important to her. While I
strive to be appropriately open and self-disclosing, I also want to
establish appropriate therapeutic boundaries.

12

CHAPTER ONE

Feminist therapy offers a number of key concepts that can be
incorporated in the early phases of the therapeutic endeavor. The
feminist perspective assumes that the client is an expert in her own
life. I want to reinforce this idea with Ruth. This is not to minimize
my expertise as a healer, but I must always remember that my
interventions are to be guided by what Ruth wants for herself, not what
I think Ruth should want or my vision of her ideal life. To help her
sort out conﬂ icting beliefs about the roles she plays, her therapy
might include a gender-role analysis so that she can come to a fuller
understanding of the limiting roles she has uncritically accepted. With
this expanded awareness, she can assume more power to make choices about
the roles she wants to accept or modify. I must truly secure Ruth's
informed consent, and in doing so convey to her the expectation that she
will be in charge of much of what we do in the sessions. She will be an
active agent and make decisions at every juncture. I will not keep Ruth
in the dark about how therapy works or about my interventions.
Ultimately, my hope is that Ruth will be empowered to become her own
counselor. My role will be to help her acquire the tools necessary to
actively shape the events of her life and to actively engage in
directing her own life.

k The Therapeutic Contract

As I begin formulating a working contract, one that will give some
direction to our sessions, I discuss what I see as my primary
responsibilities and functions, as well as Ruth's responsibilities in
the process. I want her to know at the outset that I expect her to be an
active party in this relationship, and I tell her that I function in an
active and directive way. (This is characteristic of most of the
cognitive behavioral and action-oriented therapies.) Early in the
counseling process it is essential that I get some sense of what Ruth
wants from counseling and from life. Although her responses are vague at
ﬁrst, I work with her to become as speciﬁc and concrete as possible
regarding how she views her life situation and what she expects from the
therapy process. (This process is especially important in Adlerian
therapy, behavior therapy, cognitive behavior therapy, reality therapy,
and feminist therapy. I will further discuss goals in Chapter 3.)

k Letting Ruth Tell Her Story Counselors often receive information about
clients before meeting them for the ﬁ rst time. These data may have been
gathered in an intake or as part of a referral process. However, I do
not begin by gathering life-history data, though I do think this is
important. I want to make person-to-person contact with Ruth rather than
starting with her "problem." Even if her concerns surface in therapy
rather quickly, the initial attention should be on her as a whole
person, not the presenting problem. I see value in ﬁrst letting her tell
her story in the way she chooses. How she walks into the ofﬁce, her tone
of voice, postures, facial expressions, gestures, hesitations in speech,
nonverbal language, mannerisms, and style of speech are all of interest
to me. The details she chooses to go into, and what she decides to
relate and not to relate, provide me with a valuable perspective from
which to understand her. I am interested in how she perceives the events
in her life and how she feels in her subjective

Beginning of Counseling

13

world. (This concept of understanding the phenomenological world of the
client is especially important in the existential, person-centered,
Adlerian, and narrative models.) I make the assumption that Ruth has
generated stories to make sense of herself and the world. One of my
tasks as a counselor is to assist Ruth in freeing herself from
problem-saturated stories and to reauthor her story about herself and
her relationships. Drawing upon the narrative approach involves a shift
in the focus of most traditional psychotherapy approaches. Being
inﬂuenced by narrative therapy, I will strive to establish a
collaborative approach with special interest in listening to Ruth's
story, searching for times in her life when she was resourceful, and
assisting her in separating herself from identifying herself with her
problem. From the very beginning of our work together, I will be
listening for times when Ruth was not bogged down with her problems and
when she was able to draw upon some strength. Granted, there will be
limited time for Ruth to share her story during the ﬁrst session. This
process can begin, yet it will take several sessions for her to reveal
key themes in her life. If I do too much structuring initially, I may
interfere with her typical style of presenting herself. I strive to
listen carefully and to let her know what I am hearing. Understanding
the client's world is something I especially value in the initial stages
of therapy. I want to avoid the tendency to talk too much during this
initial session. Being fully present in the therapy session and giving
Ruth my sincere attention will pay rich dividends in our subsequent work
together. If I listen well, I will get a good sense of why she is coming
to therapy. If I fail to listen accurately and sensitively, there is a
risk of going with the ﬁrst problem she states instead of waiting and
listening to discover the depth of her experience. If I am too eager to
help, I might try too hard to quickly resolve her presenting problem.
Patience is a critical variable in learning to listen before designing
an intervention. As I begin to understand Ruth's experiential world, I
have a basis for making interventions. Most of what I will do in my
therapeutic work with Ruth is based on the assumption that she can
exercise her freedom to change situations, even though the range of this
freedom may be restricted by external factors. I assume that Ruth cannot
be understood without considering the various systems that affect
her---family, social groups, community, church, and other cultural
forces. For the counseling process to be effective, it is critical to
understand how Ruth inﬂuences and is inﬂuenced by her social world. (As
multicultural, feminist, and family therapists have emphasized, the
human condition needs to be understood within the context of a system,
which includes the social and cultural framework.) Ignoring either the
internal or the external perspectives in understanding Ruth's life
experience will restrict my effectiveness with her. As I work with Ruth,
I am not consciously thinking about what set of techniques I am about to
use. I adapt the interventions to ﬁt her needs rather than attempting to
ﬁt her to my techniques. In deciding on techniques to introduce, I take
into account an array of factors about Ruth. Some of the areas I
consider include her readiness to confront an issue, her stage in the
change process, her cultural background, her value system, and her trust
in me. My concern is to help her identify and experience whatever she is
feeling, identify ways in which her assumptions inﬂuence how she feels
and behaves, and experiment with new behaviors.

14

CHAPTER ONE

Concluding Comments I am convinced that an integrative perspective is
needed to effectively counsel the diverse range of clients who seek
counseling. Each therapeutic approach has useful dimensions, and
accepting the validity of one model does not necessarily imply a
rejection of seemingly divergent models. It is not a matter of a theory
being "right" or "wrong," for every theory offers a unique contribution
to understanding human behavior and has unique implications for
counseling practice. Pluralism in society necessitates choosing an
integrative approach to counseling practice. Of necessity, discussion of
the theoretical orientations mentioned in this chapter has been brief.
For a more elaborate discussion of the various theoretical approaches,
see Theory and Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009b).
If you are using the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling (Corey, 2005),
Session 1 (The Beginning of Counseling) illustrates some of the
principles I've developed in this chapter. The ﬁrst session of the
online program, Theory in Practice: The Case of Stan, demonstrates
setting the foundation for assessment and treatment. Also, Chapter 1 of
Case Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a) provides an
overview of 11 counseling models and will give a comprehensive picture
of the case of Ruth, including various practitioners' views regarding
her diagnosis. After reading this chapter on the beginning of
counseling, take time to reﬂect on the following questions as a way of
clarifying your thoughts: • At this point, what is the main theory you
would choose as a framework for practice? • What are the main challenges
you face in developing your personalized approach to counseling? • What
aspects of informed consent would you want to be sure to address with a
client during the initial counseling session? • What do you consider to
be the main advantages and disadvantages of time-limited therapy? • What
are your thoughts about being a client in counseling yourself as a way
to personally learn about how the counseling process works? • What value
do you place on conducting an assessment of a client as a way to provide
direction for the counseling process? • What value do you see in
arriving at a diagnosis of a client as part of the early stage of
counseling? • How can assessment and diagnosis be a collaborative
endeavor between you and your client? • What are some advantages and
disadvantages of basing an integrative approach on the thinking,
feeling, and doing dimensions?

CHAPTER TWO

k

The Therapeutic Relationship

I place central emphasis in counseling on the client--counselor
relationship. The quality of this person-to-person encounter is what
leads to positive change. My basic attitudes toward the client and my
personal characteristics of honesty, integrity, and courage are what I
have to offer. Therapy is a journey taken by counselor and client, a
journey that delves deeply into the world as perceived and experienced
by the client. This type of quest demands that the therapist also be in
contact with his or her own phenomenological world.

Developing a Working Relationship The value of the client--therapist
relationship is a common denominator among all approaches to counseling,
yet some approaches place more emphasis than others on the quality of
the relationship. This is especially true of the existential,
person-centered, and Gestalt approaches, and it is also true of feminist
therapy and the postmodern approaches (solution-focused therapy and
narrative therapy). These relationship-oriented approaches (sometimes
referred to as experiential approaches) are all based on the premise
that the quality of the client-therapist relationship is primary, with
techniques being secondary. Other therapeutic approaches do not dispute
the importance of the relationship between therapist and client, but
they place less emphasis on it and more on effective use of techniques.
The quality of the therapeutic relationship is of critical importance to
therapy outcomes (see Duncan, Miller, & Sparks, 2004; Miller, Duncan, &
Hubble, 2005; Norcross, 2002a, 2003). Norcross (2002) states that
empirical evidence indicates that both the client--therapist
relationship and the methods a therapist uses are directly related to
treatment outcome. Miller, Duncan, and Hubble (2005) maintain that the
therapeutic relationship is a central ingredient in successful therapy
and that in some studies as much as 30% of client improvement is
attributable to variables inherent in a working therapeutic alliance.
Other research highlights the importance of the client's rating of the
therapeutic relationship in successful therapy. In addition, the
client's experience -- 15 --

16

CHAPTER TWO

of meaningful change in the early stages of treatment is one of the best
predictors of positive results (Hubble, Duncan, & Miller, 1999). An
effective therapeutic relationship fosters a creative spirit that
focuses on developing techniques aimed at increasing awareness, which
enables clients to change their thinking, feeling, and behaving. Part of
the therapeutic relationship involves listening to client feedback about
the therapy process. Duncan, Miller, and Sparks (2004) write about ways
to improve the effectiveness of psychotherapy through clientdirected,
outcome-informed therapy. They maintain that one of the best ways to
improve the effectiveness of psychotherapy is for therapists to take
direction from their clients. The active participation of clients in
their therapy is one of the most potent contributors to positive
outcome. Here are some assumptions I hold and some key notions that are
central to my deﬁ nition of effective therapy. This is an example of my
personal metatheory. • The quality of the person-to-person encounter in
the therapeutic situation is the catalyst for positive change. • The
therapist's role is rooted in his or her way of being; attitudes are
more important than the techniques employed. • The counselor's chief
role is to be present, both physically and emotionally, with the client
during the therapeutic hour. • The basic work of therapy is done by the
client; the therapist's job is to create a climate in which the client
is likely to try out new ways of being. • The therapist can best invite
the client to change by modeling authentic behavior. • The therapist's
attitudes and values are at least as critical as his or her knowledge,
theory, or techniques. • To function optimally, the therapist must have
a good connection with the client and be centered within him- or
herself. • A therapist who is not sensitively tuned in to his or her own
reactions to a client runs the risk of becoming a technician and is
likely to miss key pieces of information. • An effective alliance
enables the client to experience the safety necessary for risk-taking
behavior. • Awareness emerges within the context of authentic engagement
between therapist and client. These somewhat overlapping notions give a
sense of the paramount importance of the therapeutic relationship. If
you operate within a relationship-oriented framework, you will be much
less anxious about using the right technique or about stimulating
clients to think, feel, or act in a speciﬁc manner. Of course, you will
most likely utilize a wide range of techniques designed to enhance
clients' capacity to savor their experience. As a therapist, you might
conceive of your role as that of a consultant. This role is stressed in
both behavioral and solution-focused approaches. Your clients tell you
what they want, and you then serve as a resource person, helping them
explore ways to achieve their goals. As a consultant, you will teach
your clients speciﬁc strategies they can use in a variety of situations.

The Therapeutic Relationship

17

Who you are as a person will inﬂuence clients' progress in therapy. We
invite our clients to grow by modeling authentic behavior. The therapist
who possesses wide knowledge, both theoretical and practical, yet lacks
human qualities of compassion, caring, good faith, honesty,
authenticity, and sensitivity, will have difﬁculty making a signiﬁcant
difference in the lives of clients. Self-disclosure is one avenue for
both letting clients know you better and of being "real" in your work.
If you keep yourself hidden during the therapeutic session or if you
engage in inauthentic behavior, clients will also remain guarded and
persist in their own inauthentic ways. You can help clients become more
trusting and open by selectively disclosing your own responses at
appropriate times. Of course, this disclosure does not mean an
uncensored sharing of every ﬂeeting feeling or thought. Rather, it
entails a willingness to share persistent reactions with clients,
especially when this sharing is likely to be facilitative. Therapist
self-disclosure is a value shared by a number of theoretical
orientations including existential therapy, the person-centered
approach, Gestalt therapy, reality therapy, and feminist therapy. The
person-centered approach has contributed greatly to an understanding of
the central role of the therapeutic relationship in the healing process.
Carl Rogers (1957, 1961, 1980) did pioneering work on three personal
characteristics of the therapist that form the essence of the
therapeutic relationship: (1) congruence or genuineness, (2)
unconditional positive regard and acceptance, and (3) accurate empathic
understanding. Known as the therapeutic core conditions, these factors
are a basic part of all theoretical orientations. Congruence means that
as a therapist you are real; that is, you are genuine, integrated, and
authentic during the therapy hour. You are without a false front; your
inner experience and outer expression of that experience match; and you
can openly express feelings, thoughts, reactions, and attitudes that are
present in the relationship with your client. In your therapeutic work,
you need to communicate your deep and genuine caring for your client.
This caring is unconditional in that you do not judge your client's
feelings, thoughts, and behavior as good or bad. You value and accept
the client without placing stipulations on this acceptance. Acceptance
recognizes a client's right to have her or his own beliefs and feelings.
One of your main tasks is to understand your client's experiences and
feelings with sensitivity and accuracy as they are revealed in the
moment-to-moment interaction during the therapy session. It is
imperative that you strive to sense your client's subjective experience,
particularly in the here and now. Empathy requires a deep and subjective
understanding of the internal world of the client and a sense of
personal identiﬁcation with the client's experience. By tuning in to
your own feelings, you are able to share the client's subjective world.
Empathic understanding implies that you will sense your client's
feelings as if they were your own without becoming lost in those
feelings. This empathy on your part deepens the client's
selfunderstanding and helps the client clarify his or her beliefs and
worldviews. Even the action-oriented approaches (such as behavior
therapy, cognitive behavior therapy, rational emotive behavior therapy,
reality therapy, and solutionfocused brief therapy) view the quality of
the client--therapist relationship as

18

CHAPTER TWO

a core element of effective therapy. Practitioners who subscribe mainly
to the cognitive behavioral perspectives stress the therapeutic
alliance, rapport, and a collaborative working relationship. Unlike a
person-centered therapist who is not particularly concerned about
techniques, action-oriented therapists view a good working relationship
as necessary, but not sufﬁcient, to produce change. For example, in
behavior therapy, the premise is that clients are mainly helped by the
skillful application of speciﬁc behavioral interventions. However, the
successful application of these techniques is done in the context of a
working alliance. Beyond a working relationship, which is monitored
throughout the duration of counseling, the behavior therapist is
expected to be skilled in making interventions that will help clients
change in the direction they choose. A more extensive discussion of the
role of techniques for assisting clients to change the ways they are
thinking, feeling, and behaving is presented in Chapters 6, 7, and 8.\*
Therapy is a deeply personal relationship. I am inﬂuenced by the
existential and person-centered approaches, which emphasize the personal
characteristics and attitudes of the therapist. I think that the person
I am is just as important as my knowledge of counseling theory and the
level of my skills. Therefore, discovering the person you are is
critical to your success in creating effective therapeutic alliances.
This takes time, being open to life experiences, supervision, and a
willingness to engage in self-exploration. Although it is essential to
use techniques effectively---and to have a theoretical base from which
to draw a range of techniques---this ability is meaningless in the
absence of a therapeutic connection that is characterized by mutual
respect and trust.

Becoming the Client: Sharing in a Collaborative Partnership Therapy as a
Collaborative Venture Assume that you and I are beginning a therapeutic
relationship. Let's expand on the idea that therapy is a collaborative
effort. I see many advantages to your assuming an active role as a
client, and I encourage you to participate as fully as possible in all
phases of assessment and treatment. Therapy at its best is an active
collaborative process of working with the client as an active
self-healer. Bohart's (2006) integrative approach is based on the
assumption that the client is the most important common factor in making
therapy work. He points to research ﬁndings that postulate the client as
an active agent. Bohart describes his role as creating a supportive,
empathic relationship with clients that allows them to go beyond a
defensive stance. A number of therapeutic approaches stress this notion
of collaboration between client and therapist, including feminist
therapists, Adlerians, cognitive behavior therapists, behavior
therapists, solution-focused therapists, and narrative therapists.
Therapy as a collaborative venture involves client and therapist working
together toward common goals. How can you best be encouraged to assume
an active stance in your treatment? \*For a more complete discussion of
the therapeutic relationship, see Norcross (2003).

The Therapeutic Relationship

19

If you appear to be getting little from the therapeutic relationship, I
examine my part in this outcome by asking myself about my involvement
and willingness to risk with you as your therapist. In addition, I
explore with you how you might be contributing in part to your lack of
progress. I recognize that I cannot make you want to change, but I can
create a climate in which together we are able to look at the advantages
and disadvantages of making changes. Both of us share the responsibility
for creating an environment that is supportive of change.

The Relationship During the Early Stage of Counseling During the ﬁrst
few sessions my main task is helping you deﬁne and clarify your
problems. My aim is to build a relationship with you that will encourage
you to reveal your story, focus more clearly on what you want to change,
and attain a new perspective in dealing with your problems. What do you
feel your role should be in this process? You might be seeking
professional assistance because you realize you are not dealing with
problem situations satisfactorily. You may seek counseling because you
struggle with self-doubt, feel trapped by your fears, or suffer from
some form of loss. You may need to heal from psychological wounds. And
you might seek help not because you feel plagued by major problems but
because you are not coping with daily challenges as effectively as you
would like. You may ﬁnd yourself in a meaningless job, experience
frustration because you are not living up to your own goals and ideals,
or feel dissatisﬁed in your interpersonal life. You realize that you are
not managing your life as well as you might. Why have you come for
counseling?

k Creating a Therapeutic Climate

How open are you to self-exploration? The kind of climate I am able to
create during the initial sessions is crucial to a good therapeutic
relationship. I can make the mistake of working too hard, asking too
many questions, or offering quick solutions. If we can create a
collaborative partnership together, I can assist you greatly by teaching
you how to assess your own problems and search for your own solutions.
How much responsibility are you willing to assume, both inside and
outside the sessions? (These aspects are central to both behavior
therapy and reality therapy.) You will learn to identify and clarify
problem areas and how to acquire problemsolving skills that you can use
in a variety of difﬁcult situations in everyday living. In a sense, from
the very ﬁrst meeting I can be most helpful to you by encouraging you to
look within yourself for resources and strengths you can draw on to
better manage your life.

k Considering the Cultural Context You may be frustrated and angry due
to societal factors such as being discriminated against in your
workplace because of your age, gender, race, religion, or sexual
orientation. It would be a disservice if I were to encourage you to
settle for injustices in an oppressive environment. Instead of merely
solving your presenting problem, I can begin supporting you in your
efforts to take action within your community to bring

20

CHAPTER TWO

about change. To accomplish this, I may need to be prepared to assume a
variety of helping roles---educator, advocate, social change agent, and
inﬂuencer of policymakers. I must respect the purpose for which you
initiated therapy. If I pay careful attention to what you tell me about
what you want, this can be the foundation of our work. My task then is
to encourage you to weigh the alternatives and to explore the
consequences of what you are doing with your life. Even though
oppressive forces may be severely limiting the quality of your life, you
are not merely the victim of circumstances beyond your control. What can
you do to improve your situation? Together we may be able to discover
new courses of action that will lead to a change in your situation. As I
engage you in identifying and assessing your problems, I must avoid a
stance of "blaming the victim." (As both feminist and family systems
therapy stress, the source of your problems may be within your
environment rather than due to an internal conﬂ ict on your part.) It
may be that you come to me not to resolve internal conﬂicts but to
better understand and deal with external stressors in your environment.
I am aware that self-reliance and independence may not be a part of your
worldview, and interdependence may be a core value in your life. It can
be useful to put you in contact with external resources within the
community that you can utilize in meeting the demands of daily living.
You may need my services and my guidance to be linked to resources
within your community. Some of these resources include arranging for
legal assistance or assisting you in coping with day-to-day survival
issues such as getting a job, arranging for child care, or taking care
of an elderly parent. This is a vital part of the community approach to
change. Treating all clients in the same manner and using the same basic
interventions will most likely restrict the effectiveness of therapy.
The "one size ﬁts all" notion hampers creativity and can lead to your
feeling misunderstood. What can you tell me about your basic values and
beliefs? Understanding your cultural background helps me establish a
therapeutic working relationship. Although it is not necessary that I
always have an in-depth understanding of your culture and worldview, I
must know some of your basic beliefs and values if I hope to make a
signiﬁcant contribution to your change. If I am not aware of the central
values that guide your behavior and decisions, you will soon pick up on
this and will not likely return for further sessions. I am open to a
discussion with you regarding some of the similarities and differences
in our background (such as ethnicity, age, gender, to mention a few).
This allows us to be alert to the ways that our differences might
inﬂuence our work together.

k Understanding the Family Context

From a family systems perspective, individuals are best understood
within the context of their relationships and by assessing their
interactions within an entire family. I cannot fully understand you by
viewing you only from an individual frame of reference. It is necessary
to work with you from a person-in-environment context, which includes
having some appreciation of your family's past and present inﬂuence on
you. What can you tell me about your family history and patterns?

The Therapeutic Relationship

21

From the family systems models, your problems are viewed as an
expression of a dysfunction within a family, and these dysfunctional
patterns often can be identiﬁed across several generations. The central
principle of family systems therapy is that the client is connected to
living interpersonal systems and that change in one part of the system
reverberates throughout other parts. Actions by any individual family
member will inﬂuence all the others in the family, and their reactions
will have a reciprocal effect on the individual. Therefore, as your
counselor, it is not possible for me to accurately assess your concern
without observing the interaction with and mutual inﬂuence among other
family members, including the broader contexts in which you and your
family live. To focus primarily on studying your internal dynamics
without adequately considering interpersonal dynamics yields an
incomplete picture of you. Your family provides a primary context for
understanding how you function in relationship to others and how you
behave.

Your Role as a Counselor in Creating a Working Relationship In this
section, reﬂect on the attitudes you think would be conducive to
establishing good rapport with your clients and think about behavior
that you would want to model to your clients.

Establishing the Relationship If your clients are to feel free to talk
about their problems, you must provide attention, active listening, and
empathy. Clients must sense your respect for them, which you demonstrate
by your attitudes and behaviors. You reveal an attitude of respect when
you are concerned about your clients' best interests, view them as able
to exercise control of their own destiny, and treat them as unique
individuals rather than as stereotypes. Your clients will beneﬁt greatly
by your acknowledgment that their concerns are important and that it
takes courage to talk about themselves. You demonstrate your attitudes
toward your clients through your behavior in a session. Some of these
behaviors include the following: • Actively listening to and
understanding clients • Acknowledging their desire to change •
Suspending critical judgment • Expressing appropriate warmth and
acceptance • Communicating that you have an understanding of their world
as they experience it • Providing a combination of support and challenge
• Assisting clients in cultivating their inner resources for change •
Helping clients take the speciﬁc steps needed to bring about change Ask
yourself how well you are able to pay attention to others, to fully
listen to them, and to empathize with their situation. Assess the
qualities you possess that will either help or hinder you in assuming
the internal and subjective

22

CHAPTER TWO

frame of reference of clients. Because these qualities exist on a
continuum, it is best to think about the degree to which you see
yourself possessing these attitudinal and behavioral characteristics.
Consider how you would rate yourself on these questions: • How do you
attend to what clients are telling you both verbally and nonverbally? Do
you pay attention mainly to what clients disclose, or do you also notice
the way they deliver their messages? • How do you let others tell their
story? Do you get impatient and want to interrupt? Do you encourage
clients to tell stories in great detail to satisfy your own curiosity?
Do you have a tendency to get lost in the details of their story and
miss the essence of their struggle? • How often are you able to detect
the core messages when clients speak? How do you check with clients to
make certain you are understanding them? • How do you keep clients
focused on issues they want to explore? Can you keep your own
centeredness, even when clients may seem very fragmented or are making
demands on you? • Can you set aside your own biases for a time and
attempt to enter the client's world? For example, if you consider
yourself a self-sufﬁcient or independent woman or man, are you willing
to accept the client who tells you she is willing to be subservient to
her husband? • How do you communicate your understanding and acceptance
to clients? • To what extent do you work nondefensively when you detect
signs of resistance from clients? How do you use this resistance as a
way of helping clients explore their issues more deeply? Although it may
seem deceptively simple to merely listen to others, the attempt to
understand the world as others see it is demanding. Respect,
genuineness, and empathy are best considered "states of being," not
techniques to be used on clients. Establishing a working relationship
with clients implies that you are genuine and respectful in observable
ways and that the relationship is a two-way process in which clients'
interests assume priority.

Helping Clients Gain a Focus People who seek assistance are often
overwhelmed by their problems. By trying to talk about everything that
is troubling them in one session, they may also manage to overwhelm you.
A focusing process is necessary to provide direction for the therapeutic
efforts. To achieve this focus, make an assessment of the major concerns
of the client. You could say to a client who presents you with a long
list of problems: "Unfortunately, we won't be able to deal with all your
problems in one session. What was going on in your life when you ﬁ nally
decided to call for help?" Other focusing questions are "At this time in
your life, what seems most pressing and troublesome to you?" and "If you
could address only one problem today, which one would you pick?" Once
clients determine what concerns they are willing to explore, you can
collaborate with them in designing a treatment contract. By focusing on
what is salient in the present, you assist clients in clarifying their
own problems and

The Therapeutic Relationship

23

establish a direction for you to design other interventions. Your power
to heal others is the result of a process of genuine dialogue with your
clients.

k An Example of Counseling Stan In the online and DVD program Theory in
Action: The Case of Stan, I demonstrate how I work with Stan when he
presses me for more direction and for giving him answers to his
problems. In the personcentered therapy vignette (Session 5), Stan
wonders what I think of him and is convinced that I must be frustrated
with his slow progress. In this session I demonstrate immediacy, in
which I share with him how and I perceive him and how he affects me. I
also afﬁ rm that I believe Stan has the capacity to ﬁnd answers within
himself rather than rely on me to give him answers.

My Integrative Approach With Ruth See Session 2 (The Therapeutic
Relationship) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling.

The Relationship as the Cornerstone of Therapy I am convinced that one
of the most signiﬁcant factors determining the degree to which Ruth will
attain her goals is the therapeutic relationship that she and I can
create. I believe that Ruth will get the most from her therapy if she
knows how the therapeutic process can work. As much as possible, I am
concerned with the potentially harmful uses of power dynamics in the
relationship with my client. Therefore, I strive to build mutuality and
a sense of partnership into the therapeutic endeavor. Because I trust
Ruth to ﬁnd her own direction in counseling, I will encourage her to
participate with me in planning and structuring the sessions. My main
focus is on being real, on accepting her feelings and thoughts, on
demonstrating my unconditional positive regard for her, and on
respecting her as a person. If I am able to listen carefully and reﬂect
what I am hearing, and if I am able to deeply empathize with her life
situation, Ruth will be able to clarify her struggles and work out her
own solutions to her problems. Although she is only somewhat aware of
her feelings at the initial phase of therapy, she will move toward
increased clarity as I accept her fully, without conditions and without
judgments. My main aim is to create a climate of openness, trust,
caring, understanding, and acceptance. Then she can use this
relationship to move forward and grow.

Our Second Session I ask Ruth to reﬂect on any thoughts she might have
about our ﬁrst session. She lets me know that she is not accustomed to
looking at herself, nor is she comfortable being the focus of attention.
We'll need to explore this further because much of the therapeutic
process depends on clients paying increased attention to what they are
experiencing and doing. Together we explore how Ruth can assume an
active role by thinking about topics she wants to bring up in her
sessions and by deciding on some ways she wants to be different in her
daily life. Rather than assume total responsibility for the direction of
her therapy, I look

24

CHAPTER TWO

for ways to collaborate with Ruth on the direction of our work. As a
teacher and a consultant, I am helping her learn about her own
therapeutic process so that she can continue personal growth on her own
after therapy has ended.

Listening to Ruth's Story One way of deepening the therapeutic
relationship is to demonstrate an interest in the client's story. I
began listening to Ruth's story during the ﬁ rst session, but one
meeting is not enough for her to share the many signiﬁcant events and
turning points in her life. Subsequent sessions are needed for her to
ﬂesh out her story. I would hope she can begin thinking about the kind
of life she would like for herself. Narrative therapy emphasizes the
value of devoting time to listening to clients' stories and to looking
for past events that clients can reinterpret in new ways. Ruth's life
story inﬂuences both what she notices and remembers. In this sense, her
story inﬂuences how she will perceive the future. I also make the
assumption that many of Ruth's problems have been created by her
restricted and self-defeating vision of herself and her world. Part of
our work together will be to look for inner resources that will enable
her to create a new story for herself. From the narrative perspective,
my commitment is to help her rewrite the story of her life. Through this
collaboration, she can review and reframe events from her past and write
a new story for her future. At this phase of our work, I am also
inﬂuenced by the feminist therapy notion that our collaboration will be
aimed at freeing Ruth from the inﬂuence of oppressive elements in her
social environment and empowering her to become an active agent who is
directing her own life. Although I did not begin the initial session by
asking Ruth a series of questions pertaining to her life history, in
this session I will ask questions to ﬁll in the gaps in her story. This
method gives a more comprehensive picture of how she views her life now,
as well as events that she considers signiﬁcant in her past. Through the
use of questions that challenge her to separate herself from an identity
that is linked to problems, I assist her in the process of reauthoring
her life story. As a homework assignment, I may suggest an
autobiographical approach and ask Ruth to write about the critical
turning points in her life. This will include events from her childhood
and adolescent years, relationships with parents and siblings, school
experiences, current struggles, and future goals and aspirations. I ask
her what she thinks would be useful for her to recall and focus on, and
what she imagines would be useful to me in gaining a better picture of
her subjective world. In this way, Ruth does some reﬂecting on her life
experiences outside of the session, she takes an active role in deciding
what her personal goals will be for therapy, and I have a sense of where
and how to proceed with her.

Helping Ruth Externalize Her Problem Ruth's autobiography provides me
with signiﬁcant clues to the unfolding of the story of her life. During
the early sessions, I encourage her to separate her identity as a person
from her problems by posing questions that externalize her problems.
Narrative therapy insists that the person is not the problem, and I view
Ruth's problems as something separate from her. She presents many

The Therapeutic Relationship

25

problems that are of concern to her, yet we cannot address all of them
at once. When I ask her what one problem most concerns her right now,
she replies, "Guilt. I feel guilty so often over so many things that I
don't do. No matter how hard I work at what is important to me, I
generally fall short of what I expect of myself, and then I feel
guilty." From reading Ruth's autobiography and from listening to her
story, it becomes clear that her problem-saturated story contains a
theme of "guilt." She feels guilty because she is not an adequate
daughter, because she is not the mother she thinks she should be, and
because she is not as accomplished a student as she demands of herself.
When she falls short of "perfect performances" in these and other areas,
guilt is the result. My intention is to help Ruth view her problem of
guilt as being separate from who she is as a person. Toward this end, I
ask questions of her about how her guilt occurs and ask her to give
examples of situations where she experiences guilt. I am interested in
charting the inﬂuence of the problem of guilt. Using elements of
solution-focused therapy and the narrative approach, I ask Ruth
questions aimed at ﬁnding exceptions to feeling guilty: • Has there ever
been a time when guilt could have taken control of your relationship,
but didn't? What was it like for you? How did you do it? What does it
say about you that you were able to do that? • How do you imagine your
life would be different if you didn't have the problem of guilt? • Can
you think of ways that you can begin to take even small steps to divorce
yourself from unnecessary guilt? My questioning is aimed at discovering
moments when Ruth hasn't been dominated or discouraged by the problem of
guilt. This provides a basis for considering how life would be different
if guilt were not in control. I assure her that there may be times when
feeling some guilt is appropriate and can alert us that it is time to
change our actions. However, we want to work together so that she can
let go of unnecessary or overly burdensome guilt. As our therapy
proceeds, I expect that she will gradually come to see that she has more
control over her problem of guilt than she believed. As she is able to
distance herself from these problematic themes (such as guilt), she will
be less burdened by her problem-saturated story and will discover a
range of options. She will likely focus more on the resources within
herself to construct the life she wants.

Concluding Comments The single most important element in becoming a
competent counselor is your way of being. If you can be fully present
and be yourself, you can be a catalyst for clients to engage in
introspection, relevant self-disclosure, and risk taking. Knowing who
you are is the starting point for developing your own view of
counseling. Techniques are always secondary to your personal vitality
and your ability to establish and maintain a growth-producing
therapeutic relationship. Techniques are not useful if they are not
sensitively adapted to the particular

26

CHAPTER TWO

client and context. The outcome of a technique is inﬂuenced by the
relationship between you and your client. Techniques are merely tools to
amplify emerging material that is present and to encourage exploration
of issues that have personal relevance to clients. More important than
the techniques you use are the attitudes you have toward clients. Your
primary function as a therapist is to support clients in their journey
of making decisions regarding how they want to live. After reading this
chapter about the therapeutic relationship, take time to reﬂect on the
following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on the kinds of
relationships you want to create with your clients: • How do you view
the role of techniques in the counseling process? • What emphasis do you
place on the client--therapist relationship? If you had to describe in a
few words what you consider a "working relationship" to be, what would
you tell your client? • How important do you consider your
self-disclosure to be in your work as a counselor? How do you assess
when it might be helpful to your client for you to self-disclose? What
kinds of disclosures are you most likely to make? Are there some
disclosures you are not likely to make to clients? • To what degree do
you agree that counseling is a collaborative venture? What are some
speciﬁc things you are likely to say and do as a counselor during the
initial session to establish a collaborative relationship? What are some
things you might say to clients about what they can expect of you as
their counselor? What would you most expect of them as clients? • If you
were a client in counseling, what kind of relationship would you want
and expect from your counselor? • Carl Rogers identiﬁed three core
characteristics of the therapist that constitute the essence of the
therapeutic relationship: congruence, unconditional positive regard, and
empathy. How are these therapeutic core conditions basic to all
theoretical orientations? • What are a few things you would most want to
attend to during the early stage of counseling as a way of creating a
safe and trusting climate? • What are your reactions to the following
statement? "Your primary function as a therapist is to support clients
in their journey of making decisions regarding how they want to live."

CHAPTER THREE

k

Establishing Therapeutic Goals All theoretical orientations address the
central role of goals as a factor in successful outcomes. Some therapies
focus on expressing feelings, whereas others stress identifying
cognitive patterns, and still others concentrate on changes in behavior.
I believe combining a thinking, feeling, and acting approach is most
useful when integrating theory and technique. In working with clients,
you will establish target goals in each of the areas of their
functioning, especially those that the client views as problematic. Even
with the same client, you will at times be focusing on different
dimensions of functioning such as changing beliefs, exploring a range of
feelings, or implementing behavioral changes. It is essential that you
be ﬂexible in deﬁning with your clients a variety of goals that provide
direction to their therapy. Without clear goals, the counseling sessions
will most likely not be productive. Let me stress that therapeutic goal
setting is a collaborative process. As a therapist, you may have goals
for treatment outcomes, but your clients set speciﬁc, measurable,
manageable goals with your assistance. In discussing values and
counseling goals with your clients, it is inevitable that you will
consider both your personal values and the values you espouse as a
counselor. For example, you would probably agree that it is desirable
for clients to strive to know themselves and to make choices about the
way they want to live. Many processoriented goals are part of the
therapeutic endeavor, such as clients engaging in self-disclosure,
risk-taking, and doing work outside the therapy sessions to bring about
change. It is useful to articulate these process goals early in the
counseling relationship. The goals of counseling are almost as diverse
as are the theoretical approaches. Goals include restructuring the
personality, uncovering the unconscious, creating social interest, ﬁ
nding meaning in life, curing an emotional disturbance, examining old
decisions and making new ones, developing trust in oneself, becoming
more self-actualizing, reducing anxiety, shedding maladaptive behavior
and learning adaptive patterns, gaining more effective control of one's
life, designing creative solutions to life's challenges, reauthoring
one's life story, ﬁnding exceptions to problems, becoming aware of and
reducing the -- 27 --

28

CHAPTER THREE

inﬂuence of gender-role socialization, acquiring personal empowerment,
and creating new patterns of relationships within a family system.
Despite this diversity of goals, most therapeutic approaches share some
common features, yet they differ in their assumptions about the best way
to achieve these goals. To some degree, they have the goal of
identifying what the client wants and then helping the client modify
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Each theoretical orientation focuses
on a particular dimension of human experience as a way to change other
facets of personality. In my own integrative approach, there is room to
incorporate most of these goals. At different stages in therapy,
different goals assume prominence. You can work with clients by helping
them identify a range of speciﬁc goals that will provide a framework for
their work. The priority of the client's goals will inﬂuence the current
direction of therapy, but all of the goals will continue to be relevant
throughout the course of the client's therapy. The main goal of therapy
endorsed by most theoretical orientations is to assist the client in
bringing about changes within an individual in the realms of thinking,
feeling, and behaving. These changes, however, often have repercussions
on the systems of which the individual is a part. Family systems
approaches have a broader goal than merely bringing about change within
the individual. In family therapy, and in feminist therapy as well, the
goal is to bring about change within systems. When therapy is
successful, the family often learns about patterns that have been
transmitted from generation to generation or learns ways to detect and
solve problems that keep members stuck in dysfunctional relational
patterns. Incorporating concepts from systems models into an integrative
approach broadens counseling to deal with changing individuals and
systems.

Becoming the Client: Establishing Counseling Goals In this section, I
identify basic considerations in the process of formulating meaningful
counseling goals. Become the client once again. Keep in mind that goal
setting will be a collaborative process. How can I work with you to
identify clear and personal goals to guide the sessions? What are some
of the obstacles to formulating concrete goals, and how can we best deal
with these obstacles? To begin with, I have some general goals that are
congruent with my philosophy of counseling that will inﬂuence the
direction of our sessions. One major goal is to establish a therapeutic
relationship that will serve as a foundation for all of our work
together. Another goal is to operate from a guiding philosophy that will
allow for systematic exploration of the personal goals you identify as
being important to you as my client. I want to teach you a framework for
resolving the problems you bring to counseling, with special emphasis on
teaching you how to deal successfully with future problems. What goals
do you have for our work together? Although I have some general goals
that are a vital part of the counseling process, it will be up to you to
identify personal goals that will determine what

Establishing Therapeutic Goals

29

we talk about in our sessions. It is possible that you have given a good
deal of thought to what you want out of your life, yet you could still
beneﬁt from identifying, clarifying, and discovering better ways of
reaching your goals. It is possible that you had a generalized notion of
what you wanted to get from your counseling. For example, you might
inform me: "I'd just like to feel better about myself. I don't like
myself very much." It probably would not be of much help to you if I
simply asked you to be more concrete. However, asking self-reﬂective
questions such as these might result in more clarity about what you want
for yourself: • If you were feeling better about yourself, what would
you be feeling? • Imagine that you felt better about yourself. What
would you be telling me about who you are and how your life is? • Can
you give me some idea of what goes on in your head when you feel bad
about yourself? • Tell me about a particular area in your life that
you'd like to feel better about. Is there one special area that you wish
could be different? By following your lead and gently asking you to say
more about speciﬁc times that you have felt good or what situations in
particular you most struggle with, both you and I will gradually get a
sharper picture of what you want. Your goals for counseling will be much
more meaningful if you deﬁ ne them for yourself. As I listen to you, my
interventions are aimed at getting you to state your goals in such a
manner that we both know what you want and have a frame of reference to
understand the degree to which you are attaining your goals. I let you
know that determining goals is a joint project. I won't be making
decisions for you about what we'll be exploring. I like the Adlerian
notion of goal alignment, which means that goal setting involves a
mutual, collaborative process between the client and the therapist. In
addition, I value the cognitive behavioral approaches that emphasize the
collaboration between therapist and client in determining goals. I see
it as your responsibility to deﬁne the target areas for us to explore in
our sessions, yet it is my responsibility to guide you in narrowing down
your goals in such a fashion that we will both have a clear picture of
how to proceed. Developing goals is not something that you can do
quickly without thoughtful reﬂection. Establishing and reﬁning goals
takes time and continued effort, yet doing so gives direction to the
counseling process. The action-oriented therapies (behavior therapy,
cognitive behavior therapy, rational emotive behavior therapy, reality
therapy, and solution-focused brief therapy) provide very useful
concepts for identifying speciﬁc goals at the outset of the therapeutic
process. In helping you to achieve your goals, I assume an active and
directive role. Although you generally determine what behavior will be
changed, I typically suggest ideas of how this behavior can best be
modiﬁed. In designing a treatment plan, I intend to employ techniques
and procedures that are speciﬁcally appropriate for your situation. In
selecting these strategies, I have a range of options. The multimodal
approach, which is a form of behavior therapy, provides a context that
allows me to borrow techniques from a variety of therapeutic systems and
apply them to your unique situation.

30

CHAPTER THREE

This approach provides for the therapeutic ﬂexibility and versatility
required to effectively achieve a diverse range of goals. Drawing on the
behavioral approaches, reality therapy, and solutionfocused brief
therapy, you and I identify goals that can be measured or monitored. The
goals of reality therapy include behavioral change, better decision
making, improving signiﬁcant relationships, enhanced living, and more
effective satisfaction of psychological needs. These action-oriented
therapies provide a speciﬁc focus of directional change that enable us
to evaluate our work together. Can you think of a personal goal that ﬁts
one of these categories? I also ask you to consider long-range goals.
What would you most like to be able to say about yourself or your life
situation one year from now? Five years from now? The art of developing
goals consists of breaking these long-term goals into relatively
short-term objectives that lead you in the direction you want to move.
The category of goals we might discuss would encompass the full spectrum
of your thinking, feeling, and behaving---with a particular focus on
speciﬁc areas within each of these domains that you most want to change.
Together we will continue this process of delineating personal goals by
identifying speciﬁc steps you are willing to take, both in the session
and outside the ofﬁce, to get what you want from life. Indeed, I expect
that your goals will change as counseling progresses. As you learn how
to best use the counseling sessions, other concerns may become evident.

Various Types of Therapeutic Goals Because counseling is a collaborative
partnership, I do not accept full responsibility for deciding what the
focus of our therapy sessions will be. It is not my job to decide for
you how you should live your life. My job is to help you formulate
workable goals and to provide you with the tools you'll need to achieve
your goals. There are at least three general categories of goals: the
cognitive realm, the emotional dimension, and the behavioral realm.

k Cognitive Goals

First, let's examine some possible goals in the cognitive realm that
you'd be interested in exploring in your own counseling sessions. My aim
is to listen for some of your underlying beliefs, especially thought
patterns that seem to present difﬁculty for you. I would not identify
what I think are faulty beliefs; rather, I would ask you to identify
beliefs that you hold that do not serve you well or that lead to
problematic behavior. Because you are likely preparing to become a
counselor, or are already engaged in some type of counseling practice,
reﬂect on these statements to determine the degree to which you hold
similar beliefs pertaining to yourself as a counselor in training: • I
must always function competently and perfectly. There is no room for
making mistakes, for any mistake means that I'm a failure. • I really
need the continual afﬁrmation from my clients if I am to feel worthwhile
as a professional. • It is essential that I have the right technique for
every problem situation a client presents or else I will surely fall ﬂat
on my face and look incompetent.

Establishing Therapeutic Goals

31

• I am fully responsible for the progress or lack of progress that my
clients make. • If a client does not turn up for a second session, it is
most likely due to my ineptness in making good contact with this person
at the ﬁrst meeting. In listening to self-statements such as these, I
strive to focus on core beliefs that potentially result in problematic
emotional and behavioral consequences for you. For instance, are you
convinced that you are completely responsible for your clients'
therapeutic outcomes? Your core beliefs have a number of consequences.
You may worry excessively about your clients and experience a great deal
of stress in your work. Not only does the belief that you are totally
responsible for client outcomes cause you anxiety, this belief can
actually contribute to client dependency. Working together it is
important that you and I determine speciﬁc cognitive goals that will
guide your work in therapy. For example, you may decide that you want to
challenge your beliefs about the need to assume total responsibility for
those with whom you work.

k Affective Goals

As my client, I ask you about the realm of emotions you are
experiencing, especially feelings that you view as problematic. I tend
to notice any bodily changes that may indicate emergent feelings. Rather
than interpret what you are feeling, my tendency is to ask you what you
are experiencing. As you are talking, what did you just become aware of?
I notice that you just teared up. Can you say what that is about? What
are you experiencing right now? I ﬁnd that it is most useful to begin
work with the affective realm and then move to an exploration of
thoughts and behaviors. I invite you to be as speciﬁc as possible in
identifying emotional concerns. You might say that you are frightened of
intimacy. First of all, I want to know what intimacy means to you. I
also want to know if this is a situation that you want to change. You
may shy away from getting too close to people because of a host of
fears, yet keeping distant could well be acceptable to you. It is not my
job to urge you to take risks in this area if you do not want to be
different. However, if you'd like to be able to experience closeness
with a few people and not ﬂee from intimacy, this could become a target
goal for our work. I draw heavily from Gestalt therapy as a way to
assist you in getting closer to your moment-by-moment experiencing. By
asking you to notice what you are aware of in the present moment, you
are better able to move into whatever realm is salient for you---be it
awareness of a thought, a bodily state, or feelings. If it is
appropriate, we might use a range of experiential techniques to deal
with affective goals that are important to you.

k Behavioral Goals In addition to setting cognitive and affective goals,
it is essential that we identify behavioral goals. We can explore your
self-defeating thinking patterns, and you might express a range of
feelings in sessions, yet therapy can hardly be complete without
establishing concrete behavioral goals. Let's assume that you let me
know that you would like to take better care of yourself. You realize
that too often you feel driven by outside forces rather than feeling in
charge of yourself. You contribute to this sense of constant pressure

32

CHAPTER THREE

by telling yourself that you don't have time for yourself. Using
elements of behavior therapy, reality therapy, and rational emotive
behavior therapy, I invite you to examine the choices you are making
about your body and your overall wellness. I ask you to examine your
present level of physical and psychological well-being. What balance do
you want to achieve in areas such as rest, exercise, diet, and ways you
spend time? Which of the following behavioral goals might ﬁt for you as
a client? • I am willing to keep a record of what I do in my work to
determine whether there are some patterns that I want to change. • I am
willing to make more time for rest and sleep. • I want to create a
better balance between work and leisure. • I am willing to ask for help
when I feel overwhelmed. • I want to ﬁnd an exercise program I would
proﬁt from and enjoy. • I want to change my diet. I am willing to start
by monitoring what and how much I eat and drink to determine if there
are areas I want to change. Identifying counseling goals may seem like a
simple matter, but counseling is not a linear process of resolving a
single problem. You are a complex and integrated being, and any one
problem you have is best seen as one aspect of the larger picture.
Counseling is a more complex and interesting process than simply
resolving problems.

Goal-Directed Behavior and Goal Setting I ﬁnd the Adlerian approach
particularly valuable in establishing therapeutic goals. Several key
Adlerian concepts have special relevance for the process of establishing
goals, both for therapy and for life: the goal-directedness of behavior,
struggling with feelings of inferiority, striving for superiority, and
social interest. Alfred Adler's system emphasizes the social
determinants of behavior. This "socioteleological" approach implies that
we are primarily motivated by social forces and strive to achieve
speciﬁc goals. Adler's view is that we create both short- and long-term
goals that motivate our behavior and inﬂuence our personality
development. It is our long-term goals, in particular, that guide our
movement toward what we perceive as completion and perfection. Another
key concept from the Adlerian approach that is directly related to the
process of forming goals is the notion of social interest. This concept
embodies the feeling of being connected to all of humanity---past,
present, and future---and to being involved in making the world a better
place. Social interest is the individual's positive attitude toward
other people in the world that involves a sense of identiﬁcation and
empathy with others. As an antidote to social isolation and
self-absorption, social interest leads to courage, optimism, and a true
sense of belonging. Our happiness and success are largely related to
social connectedness. As social beings, we have a need to be of use to
others and to establish meaningful relationships in a community. We
cannot be understood in isolation from our social context. We are
primarily motivated by a desire to belong. Only within the group can we
actualize our potential.

Establishing Therapeutic Goals

33

Clarifying Counseling Goals With Ruth See Session 3 (Establishing
Therapeutic Goals) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. During the
beginning stages, I assist Ruth in getting a clearer grasp of what she
most wants from therapy as well as seeing some steps she can begin to
take to attain her objectives. Like most clients, she is rather global
in stating her goals in her autobiography, so I work with her on
becoming more concrete. When she looks in the mirror, she says she does
not like what she sees. She would like to have a better self-image and
be more conﬁdent. In general, she says that she is dissatisﬁed with her
body. I am interested in knowing speciﬁcally what she does not like, the
ways in which she now lacks conﬁdence, and what it feels like for her to
confront herself by looking at herself and talking to me about what she
sees. Ruth reports that she would like to be more assertive. When she
says this, I help her pinpoint speciﬁc instances in which she is not
assertive and ask her to describe what she actually does or does not do
in such circumstances. We consistently move from the general to the
speciﬁc. The more concrete she is, the greater are her chances of
attaining what she wants. I suggest that Ruth use a journal to keep
track of how she is doing in meeting her goals. Journal writing can
bring clarity to her work in the therapy sessions, and this practice is
a good way to extend the inﬂuence of what we do together into her daily
life. If Ruth experiences difﬁculties in applying what she is learning
in therapy to daily life, writing about it will be an excellent way to
ﬁgure out alternative strategies. She can bring to her sessions the
essence of some of what she writes in her journal. It is essential that
Ruth give considerable thought to what she wants to explore in the
counseling sessions. I want to convey to her that she is the one who
must come up with her own goals---not goals that she thinks others want
for her and certainly not goals that I aspire to for her. Ruth must
decide what she wants to explore and the areas she is most interested in
changing. Ruth will be able to make progress toward her self-deﬁned
goals because she is willing to become actively involved in challenging
her assumptions and in carrying out behavioral exercises, both in the
sessions and in her daily life. For instance, Ruth establishes a number
of goals that she is interested in pursuing in the counseling sessions.
She does not like her appearance, she is experiencing considerable
difﬁculty with her daughter (Jennifer), and she would like to improve
her relationship with her husband. In a later session, Ruth decides that
she wants to enroll in a ﬁtness class as part of her exercise program.
The class is full, however, which gives her an opportunity to practice
her assertive behavior skills. She is successful and is able to attend
the class. Previously it would not even have occurred to Ruth to seek
out the instructor and ask to be admitted to a class that was already
full. She learns early on the importance of making speciﬁc plans aimed
at translating what she is learning in the therapy sessions to various
segments in her daily life. Although my job is to help her learn how to
change, she is the one who actually chooses to apply these skills,
making change possible.

34

CHAPTER THREE

In the process of assisting Ruth in identifying personal goals, I borrow
from reality therapy by asking her to look at the direction of her life.
What is her life like at this time? What seems to be working for her?
What feelings, thoughts, and actions are not moving her in the direction
she would like to evolve? I might well ask Ruth to project her life one
year into the future and describe what she would like to say that she
has become or achieved. My aim in doing this is to invite her to
evaluate what she is presently doing to determine if her actions are
getting her what she wants. To help her pinpoint what she wants, I ask
her these questions: • If you were already the person that you wish you
were, what kind of person would you be? • What would you be doing if you
were living as you would want? • Is what you are doing at this time
taking you closer to or farther away from your goals? This line of
questioning will focus Ruth on the process of critically thinking about
where she is now and where she would like to go in the immediate future.
This kind of self-evaluation is at the heart of reality therapy. One of
the aspects of reality therapy that I especially value is the emphasis
placed on guiding clients in the self-evaluation process. By
consistently expecting Ruth to engage in a self-evaluation process, I
help her create her own agenda based on an inner inventory of her own
actions, cognitions, and feelings. When she decides for herself that her
present behavior is not working, she will be much more open to
participating collaboratively in designing goals that will meet her
needs. Once clear goals are established in a collaborative fashion,
meaningful evaluation of the progress of therapy can be charted. At each
session, it will be critical that Ruth and I spend a brief amount of
time assessing the degree to which counseling is helping her attain her
goals. If her goals seem to lose vitality, this is a sign that we need
to take another look at what she most wants to explore in our sessions.
At the beginning of most sessions, Ruth and I will discuss at least
brieﬂy what she wants from this particular session. I tend to ask these
questions: • What are you aware of as you approach this session? • How
do you want to use your time in here today? What is it that you want to
talk about? • What are you hesitating to explore yet think it would be
important for you to talk about? With these focusing questions, the
responsibility is with Ruth to determine what her therapy goals are for
each session. In short, I see goal setting as an ongoing process that is
best deﬁ ned with the client. It is my job to teach her how to become a
collaborator in selecting both short- and long-term goals as well as
being a partner in deciding how she wants to use her therapy hour. **For
a further discussion of counseling goals with Ruth, see the different
practitioners' perspectives presented in Chapters 2 through 13 of Case
Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a).

Establishing Therapeutic Goals

35

Concluding Comments It is essential to be ﬂexible in deﬁning with your
client a variety of goals that provide direction to therapy. Without
clear goals, it is a sure bet that the counseling sessions will not be
productive. Carefully consider the purposes for which your clients seek
counseling and then collaboratively design speciﬁc, clear, and realistic
goals to guide the therapeutic process. In reﬂecting on the construction
of your own integrative approach to counseling, be sure to develop a
systematic way of incorporating cognitive, affective, and behavioral
goals as a starting point for therapy. After reading this chapter on
establishing therapeutic goals, take time to reﬂect on the following
questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on the kinds of goals you
want to establish with your clients. • As a counselor, how could you
make establishing therapeutic goals a collaborative process? • How does
your theoretical orientation inﬂuence your view of therapy goals? • What
challenges do you expect to face in assisting your clients in the
development of speciﬁc goals for the therapeutic process? • How could a
client's therapy goals be used as a way to evaluate therapy outcomes? •
What importance do you place on expecting your clients to develop both
short-range goals and long-range goals? • What are some uses you can see
in asking clients to keep track of their progress in meeting their goals
by writing in a journal? • If a client had very vague or ill-deﬁned
goals, how would you assist this individual in formulating meaningful
goals for the therapy sessions?

CHAPTER FOUR

k

Understanding and Addressing Diversity In this chapter I examine the
role of diversity in an integrative counseling model. There are many
types of diversity to consider, but perhaps the ones that come to mind
most readily revolve around race and ethnicity. I would like to broaden
this discussion to include spiritual as well as cultural factors. As you
read, think about how open you are to learning about diversity as it
pertains to your counseling practice. What will it take for you to
become multiculturally competent? What part will spirituality play in
your counseling style?

Multicultural Concerns Multiculturalism cannot be ignored by
practitioners if they hope to meet the needs of their increasingly
diverse client groups. Traditional theories of counseling have been
criticized by some practitioners for having major limitations with
respect to working with culturally diverse clients (Sue & Sue, 2008). I
believe that the contemporary theories can be expanded to incorporate a
multicultural component. Many of the key concepts of these theories can
be adapted to a cultural framework that has meaning for diverse client
groups (Ivey, D'Andrea, Ivey, & Simek-Morgan, 2007). Multicultural
theory is grounded on the premise that assessment and treatment must
take into account the cultural experiences and contexts that shape
clients' identities. Multicultural counseling and therapy embrace
techniques drawn from various therapeutic approaches but adapt these
methods to the cultural values and expectations of individual clients
(Ivey & Brooks-Harris, 2005). In writing about integrative psychotherapy
with culturally diverse clients, Ivey and Brooks-Harris (2005) contend
that all therapy is multicultural in nature, in that it is necessary to
pay attention to many contextual and sociocultural factors. They argue
that the notion of "one best theory" will eventually be a thing of the
past as new ways of integrating theory and practice evolve. They write:
"Bringing into the therapeutic hour dimensions of race/ethnicity,
gender, sexual orientation, and disability enriches individual
uniqueness. -- 36 --

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

37

Discarding the outmoded concept of self and replacing it with
self-in-context, being-in-relation, and person-in-community will enable
us to think of what it means to be human in new ways. Multicultural
therapy is leading us in a new direction" (p. 335). Let me add a word of
caution about generalizing to a particular racial, ethnic, or cultural
group. Individuals within a particular group may differ more than
individuals from various groups. I like the perspective taken by
Vontress, Johnson, and Epp (1999), who advocate a conceptual approach to
counseling in which the focus is always on the individual rather than on
the individual's race, ethnicity, or cultural background. Despite
cultural differences, they maintain that it is important to recognize
that people are more alike than different. They remind us that clients
at times seek counseling over problems in living that do not pertain
primarily to their race, ethnicity, or culture of origin. Vontress and
his colleagues place emphasis on basic human conditions that transcend
culture, such as existential concerns about living, loving, and dying.
Being existentially oriented, these writers state that a human-to-human
encounter is therapeutic for all clients, regardless of their cultural
background. How this encounter occurs, however, is culturally
determined. Keep in mind that different cultures ascribe varying
meanings and deﬁnitions to the universal existential concerns. Although
mental health problems are best understood in a cultural context, it is
essential to remember that each client is a unique individual. The
central challenge we face working with clients who differ from us is to
ﬁnd a way to pay attention to what is signiﬁcant to them and to get into
their world. We can accomplish this goal by listening to what our
clients are expressing and respecting what we hear.

Diversity as Central in the Counseling Process According to Paul
Pedersen (1997, 2008), the multicultural perspective seeks to provide a
conceptual framework that both recognizes the complex diversity of a
pluralistic society and suggests bridges of shared concern that link all
people, regardless of their differences. This perspective looks at both
the unique dimensions of a person and how this person shares themes with
those who are different. Mere knowledge of certain cultural groups is
not enough; it is important to understand the variability within groups.
Each individual must be seen against the backdrop of his or her cultural
group, the degree to which he or she has become acculturated, and the
level of development of racial identity. Pedersen (1997, 2000, 2008)
emphasizes the importance of understanding both group and individual
differences in making accurate interpretations of behavior. Pedersen
(2008) contends that it is no longer possible for therapists to ignore
their own cultural context or the cultural context of their clients.
Whether practitioners pay attention to cultural variables or ignore
them, culture will continue to inﬂuence both the client's and the
therapist's behavior, and the counseling process as well. Counselors who
ignore culture will provide less effective services. Understanding the
role that diversity plays in the therapeutic process is essential to
successful outcomes.

38

CHAPTER FOUR

Pedersen (cited in Nystul, 1999; Pedersen 2008) has moved toward a
culture-centered approach to counseling, maintaining that accurate
assessment, meaningful understanding, and effective intervention demand
that the client's cultural context be central to the counseling process.
Pedersen (2008) believes culture-centered interventions depend on an
inclusive deﬁnition of culture as well as a broad deﬁnition of the
counseling process. Pedersen deﬁnes culture broadly to include variables
such as race/ethnicity, gender, age, socioeconomic status, religion,
sexual orientation, and disability. Using this framework, all counseling
can be considered multicultural. He contends that by deﬁning culture
broadly it is possible to view culture as the "thousand persons" we all
have collected from various sources who follow us wherever we go and who
inﬂuence all our decisions. For us to have a sense of cultural
self-awareness, it is necessary for us to have access to and dialogue
with those inner voices. Technical eclecticism seems especially
necessary in working with a diverse range of cultural backgrounds. Harm
can come to clients who are expected to ﬁt all the speciﬁcations of a
given theory, whether or not the values espoused by the theory are
consistent with their own cultural values. Rather than stretching your
client to ﬁt the dimensions of a single theory, you must make your
theory and practice ﬁt the unique needs of the client. This requirement
calls for you to possess knowledge of various cultures, awareness of
your own cultural heritage, and skills to assist diverse clients in
meeting their needs within the realities of their culture. Counselors
must be able to assess the special needs of clients. Depending on the
individual client's ethnicity and culture and also on the concerns that
bring this person to counseling, you will need to show ﬂexibility in
utilizing diverse therapeutic strategies. Some clients will need more
direction and guidance; others will be very hesitant in talking about
themselves in personal ways, especially early in the counseling process.
What may appear to be resistance is very likely to be the client's
response to years of cultural conditioning and respect for certain
values and traditions. It is important to be familiar with a variety of
theoretical approaches and have the ability to employ and adapt your
techniques to ﬁt the person-in-environment. The challenge you face is to
ﬁnd practical strategies for adapting the techniques you have developed
to enable clients to question the impact their culture continues to have
on their lives. Ivey and Brooks-Harris (2005, p. 332) identify a number
of key multicultural strategies for bringing about individual and social
change. These practical strategies include viewing clients culturally,
clarifying the impact of culture, celebrating diversity, facilitating
identity development, recognizing the impact of identity, appreciating
multiple identities, highlighting oppression and privilege, creating an
egalitarian collaboration, exploring societal expectations, integrating
spiritual awareness, understanding the psychotherapist's worldview,
reducing biases, and supporting social action. As a counselor, if you
are able to implement practical strategies such as these, your clients
will then able to make decisions about what facets of their existence
they want to keep and what they would like to change. Becoming a
culturally competent counselor is a continuing process, not a
destination that you reach once and for all. Being an effective
counselor involves reﬂecting on how your own culture inﬂuences you and
your interventions in

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

39

your counseling practice. This awareness will be a critical factor in
your becoming more sensitive to the cultural backgrounds of the clients
who seek your help. Various writers suggest that understanding and
addressing diversity evolves from three primary practices. First, as a
counselor, you must be aware of your own assumptions, biases, and values
about human behavior, and of your own worldview as well. Second, you
need to become increasingly aware of the cultural values, biases, and
assumptions of diverse groups in our society, and come to an
understanding of the worldview of culturally different clients in
nonjudgmental ways. Third, you need to begin developing culturally
appropriate, relevant, and sensitive strategies for intervening with
individuals and with systems (Lee, 2006; Sue & Sue, 2008). At this point
I recommend that you take an inventory of your current level of
awareness, knowledge, and skills that have a bearing on your ability to
function effectively in multicultural situations by reﬂecting on these
questions: • To what extent are you aware of how your own culture
inﬂuences the way you think, feel, and act? • What could you do to
broaden your understanding of both your own culture and other cultures?
• To what degree are you able to identify your basic assumptions,
especially as they apply to diversity in culture, race/ethnicity,
gender, class, religion, language, and sexual identity? • How are your
assumptions likely to affect the manner in which you function in your
professional work? • How ﬂexible are you in applying the techniques you
use, depending on the speciﬁc needs of your clients? • How prepared are
you to understand and work with individuals from different cultural
backgrounds? • What life experiences have you had that will help you to
understand and make contact with individuals who have a different
worldview from yours? • Can you identify any areas of cultural bias that
could inhibit your ability to work effectively with people who are
different from you? If so, what steps might you take to challenge your
biases?

Theories Applied to Understanding Diversity Perspectives In this section
I summarize brieﬂy some of the theoretical systems from the vantage
point of their contributions to understanding diversity. I have included
key concepts that I ﬁnd most useful in understanding and working with
clients from a multicultural perspective and some main points that I
incorporate in my integrative counseling practice.\*

\*For further discussion of these topics, I highly recommend Sue and Sue
(2008), Counseling the Culturally Diverse: Theory and Practice;
Vontress, Johnson, and Epp (1999), Cross-Cultural Counseling: A
Casebook; and Pedersen (2000), A Handbook for Developing Multicultural
Counseling Awareness.

40

CHAPTER FOUR

k Adlerian Contribution to Understanding Diversity

The Adlerians' focus on social interest, on belonging, and on the
collective spirit ﬁts well with the value systems of many client
populations. Collectivist cultures that stress the welfare of the social
group and that emphasize the role of the family will ﬁnd the Adlerian
focus on social interest to be congruent with their values. Not only is
Adlerian theory congruent with the values of many cultural groups, but
the approach offers ﬂexibility in applying a range of cognitive and
actionoriented techniques to help clients explore their practical
problems. If culture is deﬁned broadly to include age, roles, sexual
orientation, and gender differences, there will be cultural differences
even within a family. The Adlerian approach emphasizes the value of
subjectively understanding the unique world of the individual. Culture
is one signiﬁcant dimension for grasping the subjective and experiential
perspective of an individual.

k Existential Contribution to Understanding Diversity

Because it is grounded in the universal characteristics of human beings,
Vontress, Johnson, and Epp (1999) contend that the existential approach
is perhaps the most applicable of all approaches for working with
culturally diverse clients. Of all the counseling theories, the
existential approach comes closest to describing the universal human
experiences that transcend the boundaries that separate cultures.
Vontress and his colleagues indicate that we are all multicultural in
the sense that we are the product of many cultures. They encourage
counselors in training to focus on the universal commonalities of
clients ﬁrst, and areas of differences second.

k Gestalt Therapy's Contribution to Understanding Diversity There are
many opportunities to apply Gestalt experiments in creative ways with
diverse client populations. Gestalt experiments can be tailored to ﬁt
the unique way in which an individual perceives and interprets his or
her culture. Gestalt therapists approach each client in an open way and
without preconceptions. This is essential in working with clients from
other cultures. Moreover, Gestalt therapists attempt to fully understand
the background of their clients' culture. They are concerned about how
and which aspects of this background become central, or ﬁgural, for them
and what meaning clients place on these ﬁgures. k Reality Therapy's
Contribution to Understanding Diversity

Many of the key concepts of reality therapy can be applied when working
with a diverse range of clients. I especially value the straightforward
approach of asking clients to look at what they are doing to determine
the degree to which their actions are satisfactory to them. Once clients
decide what thoughts, feelings, and behaviors they want to target for
change, I employ reality therapy procedures in designing action plans to
bring about these changes. Wubbolding (2000) believes that reality
therapy needs to be modiﬁed to ﬁt the cultural context of people other
than North Americans. Wubbolding has found that some of the direct
questions and confrontations that he uses with

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

41

Western clients must be adapted with non-Western clients. He points to
some basic language differences between Japanese and Western cultures.
North Americans are inclined to say what they mean, to be assertive, and
to be clear and direct in asking for what they want. In Japanese
culture, assertive language is not appropriate, and communication is
less direct. The reality therapist's tendency to ask direct questions
may need to be softened, with questions being raised more elaborately
and indirectly. It may be a mistake, for example, to ask individualistic
questions built around whether speciﬁc behaviors meet clients' needs.
Flexibility in using techniques is a foremost requirement in working
with culturally diverse clients, and key concepts and procedures must be
tailored to ﬁt speciﬁc client populations.

k Cognitive Behavioral Contribution to Understanding Diversity The
cognitive behavioral approaches have advantages in multicultural
counseling situations. A cognitive behavioral orientation places
emphasis on therapists functioning as teachers who encourage clients to
learn skills to deal with the problems of living. The psychoeducational
nature of this approach addresses developmental needs of clients and
stresses prevention rather than focusing on pathology. From this
orientation, the stress is on changing speciﬁc behaviors and developing
problem-solving skills rather than expressing feelings. Clients who
appreciate the educational dimensions of a helping relationship and who
are looking for action plans and behavioral change will be receptive to
this therapy because it offers concrete methods for dealing with their
problems. One aspect of the cognitive behavioral approaches that I
especially appreciate is providing clients with a framework to think
about their thinking. Within the framework of their cultural values and
worldview, clients can explore their beliefs and provide their own
reinterpretations of signiﬁcant life events. This allows therapists to
guide clients in a manner that respects clients' underlying values. This
dimension is especially important when counselors do not share the same
worldview and cultural background as their clients. k Feminist and
Multicultural Contributions to Understanding Diversity

Feminist therapy and multicultural perspectives of therapy practice have
a great deal in common. Feminist therapy demands recognition of the role
oppressive environmental forces have played in keeping women subjugated
to men. The feminist perspective of understanding the use of power in
relationships has application for understanding power inequities due to
racial and cultural factors as well. Neither feminist nor multicultural
therapists are willing to settle for adjustment to the status quo. Nor
does either approach rest solely on individual change; both demand
direct action for social change as part of the role of therapists. Many
of the social action and political strategies that call attention to
oppressed groups have equal relevance for women and for ethnic
minorities. Therapists who subscribe to the assumptions underlying
feminist and multicultural perspectives demonstrate their belief that
therapy should free individuals and increase their range of choices.

42

CHAPTER FOUR

Recognizing the Spiritual Domain Effective counseling addresses the
body, mind, and spirit. Although the ﬁeld of counseling was slow to
recognize the need to address spiritual and religious concerns, there is
now widespread interest in the role of spirituality in both assessment
and treatment (Hagedorn, 2005). Evidence for this interest is found in
the many books and articles written on spiritual and religious values in
counseling. Publications of the American Counseling Association (ACA)
and the American Psychological Association (APA) are signs that these
key professional organizations recognize the importance of spiritual
issues in counseling practice. There is also a growing interest in
positive psychology, which considers topics such as humility, virtue,
forgiveness, gratefulness, altruism, and hope. Survey data of both
practicing counselors and counselor educators indicate that spiritual
and religious matters are therapeutically relevant, ethically
appropriate, and potentially signiﬁcant topics for the practice of
counseling in secular settings (Burke et al., 1999). Spiritual and
religious values can be integrated into the therapy process using a
variety of methods and through a number of different theoretical
orientations.\* Spirituality, like the cultural dimension, might very
well be at the center of an integrative approach. Spirituality and
religion are critical sources of strength for many clients, are the
bedrock for ﬁnding meaning in life, and can be instrumental in promoting
healing and well-being. Research has indicated that counselors' values
inﬂuence every phase of the therapeutic process, including the theories
of personality and therapeutic change, assessment strategies, therapy
goals, and the selection of intervention strategies (Richards, Rector, &
Tjeltveit, 1999). There is growing empirical evidence that our spiritual
values and behaviors can promote physical and psychological well-being
and can be instrumental in promoting healing (Richards & Bergin, 2005;
Richards et al., 1999). Exploring these values with clients can be
integrated with other therapeutic tools to enhance the therapy process.
If you do not raise the issue of how spirituality inﬂuences your
clients, they might assume that such matters are not relevant for
counseling. Spirituality is an important component of mental health, and
its inclusion in psychotherapy practice can render the treatment process
more effective. In your work with culturally diverse client populations,
you will need to be prepared to address your clients' spiritual
concerns. Religion and spirituality are often part of the client's
problem, but these values can also be part of the client's solution.
During the assessment process, it can be ascertained how certain beliefs
and practices of the client can be a useful focal point for exploration.
You will be challenged to address spiritual and religious beliefs in
both assessment and treatment practices, if these beliefs are important
to the client. Many therapists and researchers now consider spiritual
beliefs and behaviors as potentially powerful resources for promoting
therapeutic change (Cashwell & Young, 2005; Frame, 2003; Richards &
Bergin, 2005).

\*Several writers recommend techniques for working with spiritual values
that should be part of a multidimensional, integrative approach to
counseling practice. See Cashwell and Young, (2005); Frame (2003);
Hagedorn (2005); Richards and Bergin (2005); Richards, Rector, and
Tjeltveit (1999); Sperry and Shafranske (2005); and Sollod (2005).

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

43

Religious faith, or some form of personal spirituality, can be a
powerful source of meaning and purpose. For some, religion does not
occupy a key place, yet a personal spirituality may be a central force.
Spiritual values help many people make sense out of the universe and the
purpose of our lives on this earth. Spirituality can help us get in
touch with our own powers of thinking, feeling, deciding, willing, and
acting. Like any other potential source of meaning, religious faith or
spirituality seems most authentic and valuable when it enables us to
become as fully human as possible. Your clients may sometimes discover
that they need to reexamine their values. It is essential that you
remain open and nonjudgmental, and recognize that there are multiple
paths toward fulﬁlling spiritual needs. It is not your role as a
counselor to prescribe any particular pathway. It is unethical to
attempt to convert clients to a particular religious or spiritual set of
values. You can, however, assist clients in exploring their own values
to determine the degree to which they are living within the framework of
this value system. It is important that you monitor yourself for subtle
ways you might be inclined to push certain values in your counseling
practice, either toward embracing a particular spiritual perspective or
abandoning it. It is critical to keep in mind that it is the client's
role to determine what speciﬁc values to retain or modify. There are
some common denominators that both religion and counseling share. Both
religion and counseling help people ponder questions such as: "Who am
I?" "What is the meaning of my life?" "Who decides the direction of my
life?" At their best, both counseling and religion foster healing
through self-exploration. Some of the ways spirituality can inﬂuence
successful treatment outcomes include learning to accept oneself,
forgiving others and oneself, admitting one's shortcomings, accepting
personal responsibility, letting go of hurts and resentments, dealing
with guilt, and learning to let go of self-destructive patterns of
thinking, feeling, and acting. To be able to address these values with
clients without imposing your spiritual views is certainly part of
ethical and effective practice, which implies that you are aware of your
own spiritual and religious values.

Assessing Your Own Spirituality Your own value system inﬂuences every
facet of your counseling practice, including your assessment strategies,
your views of goals of treatment, the interventions used, the topics
explored during the sessions, and evaluations of therapy outcomes.
Indeed, no therapy is value-free. You have an ethical responsibility to
be aware of how your beliefs affect your work and make sure you do not
unduly inﬂuence your clients. If you hope to assist your clients with
their spiritual concerns, you must both acknowledge and be comfortable
with your own spiritual and religious beliefs. The process of exploring
your own values and increasing your awareness of your spiritual beliefs
is critical in developing competence in working with your clients'
religious and spiritual concerns (Hagedorn, 2005). Take a moment to
reﬂect on these questions: • What role does spirituality or religion
play in your life? • To what extent does religion or spirituality
provide you with a source of meaning?

44

CHAPTER FOUR

• What connection, if any, do you see between spirituality and religion?
• What are your views concerning established, organized religions? • Has
religion been a positive, negative, or neutral force in your life? Even
if spiritual and religious issues are not the focus of a client's
concern, these values may enter into the sessions indirectly as your
client explores moral conﬂicts or grapples with questions of meaning in
life. Can you maintain objectivity when spiritual and religious values
are explored in counseling sessions? Is objectivity either possible or
desirable? How do you think your values will inﬂuence the way you
counsel? How would you answer direct questions from your clients about
your religious/spiritual beliefs? Can you maintain a healthy awareness
of the similarities and differences between your worldview and that of
your client? If you have little belief in spirituality, are hostile to
organized religions, or identify yourself as a secular humanist, can you
empathize with clients who view themselves as being deeply spiritual or
who feel committed to the teachings of a particular religion? If you are
convinced that having a meaning in life hinges on accepting certain
religious beliefs, can you be of help to clients who do not share your
conviction? Sollod (2005) describes six paths to integrating
spirituality with psychotherapy. One of these paths is for therapists to
use concepts and methods derived from their own spiritual approaches in
their counseling practices, if doing so is relevant to an individual
client. Sollod gives the example of a therapist with a Buddhist
background who was able to use meditative techniques to better enable
him to listen nonjudgmentally to his clients. This therapist was able to
access his own spirituality as a resource in facilitating the
therapeutic process and achieving his clients' therapy goals.

Understanding Ruth From a Diversity Perspective See Session 4
(Understanding and Dealing With Diversity) of the CD-ROM for Integrative
Counseling. Ruth brings up the point that she and I are different. When
I inquire about how we are different and what this means to her, she
mentions that she is a woman and I am a man and implies that we have
experienced a different type of socialization. As I mentioned earlier,
some differences between client and counselor cannot be ignored. Yet
more important than the speciﬁc ways that she and I differ is the matter
of which differences are salient for Ruth. I cannot assume that I
automatically know the meaning of our differences, even if they seem
obvious. I ask her what differences particularly stand out to her and
what meaning these differences hold for her. My aim is to make it easier
for Ruth to talk about whatever differences she is aware of and how
these differences affect her in our relationship. Ruth wonders if I can
really empathize with her experience as a woman. In many ways she has
been socialized to obediently follow traditional roles

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

45

and behave in ways that others expect of her. Although she does not
identify herself as being an oppressed person, she does seem to be
oppressed in some respects. Because of our differences in gender and
socialization, Ruth wonders if we can work together. I let her know that
it might be difﬁcult for me to understand some aspects of her life, and
also let her know that I will tell her when I am having trouble grasping
her subjective perspective. For instance, it may be challenging for me
to understand the power of the socialization she has experienced and how
difﬁcult it is for her to change certain roles that she has been playing
for most of her life. I also invite her to tell me whenever she feels
that our differences are getting in her way. I do not want to make
assumptions about my ability to work effectively with Ruth until we have
had an opportunity to work together for at least a short time.
Principles of feminist therapy can provide useful guidelines in
understanding the therapeutic implications of ways that Ruth and I have
unique life experiences. In the therapy sessions, I can assist her in
evaluating how oppression may be operating in her life today. As a
woman, she has learned to put her personal needs on the back burner and
to focus on her role as caretaker for her family. This makes it difﬁcult
for her to identify and honor what she wants out of therapy. I need to
monitor my own perceptions, which are ﬁltered through the lens of my
experiences and which may not be the same as Ruth's. Because oppression
profoundly inﬂuences her beliefs, choices, and perceptions, we will
examine the cultural context of how her gender-role socialization is
inﬂuencing her behavior now.

k Ruth Brings Up Her Spirituality

Although I do not have an agenda to impose religious or spiritual values
on Ruth, I do see it as my function to assess the role spirituality
plays in her life currently---and to assess beliefs, attitudes, and
practices from her earlier years. Ruth grew up attending a
fundamentalist religious group, and she very much hopes I will be able
to understand this aspect of her upbringing. Several times she initiated
a discussion about the void she feels in the area of religion. When she
does bring up this topic, I want to honor her request to seriously
consider the personal meaning religious themes have for her. Ruth was
taught that she should never question the religious and moral values
that were "right." Eventually, she rejected much of the guilt-oriented
aspects of her religion, but on an emotional level she still felt a
sense of unease and has yet to ﬁnd what she considers a viable
alternative to the religion of her parents. At this time, I do not have
a vested interest in having Ruth return to her former beliefs or to ﬁnd
a new religion to replace the one she rejected. I want to pay attention
to where she appears to be stuck, or where she is conﬂ icted, or what
she most hopes she could change as it pertains to religion. Ruth lets me
know that mainly what she remembers from her church experiences is
feeling a sense of guilt that she was not good enough and that she
always fell short of being the person her church and parents thought she
should be. Not only was she not enough in the eyes of her parents, but
she was also not enough in the eyes of God. With this disclosure, my aim
would be to discuss the guilt Ruth experiences. Guilt is a natural
response when we fail to meet our own standards or when we are not
living in accordance with our core values.

46

CHAPTER FOUR

However, guilt that results in self-criticism and self-condemnation
needs to be explored. I work with Ruth to examine the role guilt serves
in her life. Ruth is engaged in a struggle to ﬁ nd spiritual values that
will help her ﬁ nd meaning in her life. Although formal religion does
not seem to play a key role for her now, she is struggling to ﬁ nd her
place in the world. She is seeking spiritual avenues that provide her
with purpose, but she is ﬂoundering somewhat and realizes that this is a
missing dimension in her current life. I see my role as encouraging her
to remain open to pursuing a variety of spiritual pathways. Ruth lets me
know that she is pleasantly surprised that I am even mentioning religion
and spirituality. She was not sure whether it was appropriate to bring
such matters into counseling. She lets me know that it was good for her
to be able to initiate a discussion about her past experiences with
religion and her present quest to ﬁnd a spiritual path that has meaning
to her. She informs me of her intention to further explore in her
sessions ways that she can enhance her spiritual life. I will remain
open to these discussions as they are introduced by Ruth.

Concluding Comments Diversity is a reality that must be factored into an
integrative approach to counseling. Regardless of theoretical
orientation, both clients' and therapists' underlying values must be
taken into account. Some of the values implicit in contemporary
counseling theories include an emphasis on individualism, the separate
existence of the self, and individuation as the foundation for maturity.
But these values may not be equally relevant to all people, and
therapists must recognize that contemporary counseling theories are not
value-neutral. Spiritual or religious values can be considered a
dimension of a client's culture. Research has indicated that
spirituality is a key component of mental health, so integrating
spirituality into the therapy process is appropriate for some clients.
Counselors need to be prepared to address spiritual and religious
concerns that a client might raise. The psychoanalytic, behavioral,
cognitive behavioral, and existential approaches originated in
Euro-American culture and are grounded on a core set of values. There is
a danger of seeing these values as having universal applicability. The
relationship-oriented therapies---such as person-centered theory,
existential therapy, and Gestalt therapy---emphasize freedom of choice
and self-actualization. If you base your practice on these orientations,
you will likely focus on individual responsibility for making internal
changes as a way to cope with problems, and you will view individuation
as the foundation for healthy functioning. Listen to your clients and
determine why they are seeking help and how best to deliver the help
that is appropriate for them in their unique context. After reading this
chapter on understanding and addressing diversity, take time to reﬂect
on the following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on these
issues in counseling practice.

Understanding and Addressing Diversity

47

• To what extent do you think contemporary counseling theories can
incorporate a multicultural perspective? • In what ways should diversity
be a central part of the counseling process? • What do you think it will
take for you to become a culturally competent counselor? • How can
spiritual or religious values of a client be best addressed in the
counseling process? • What are your reactions to this statement?
"Effective counseling addresses the body, mind, and spirit." • How might
exploring a client's spiritual/religious values be integrated into any
counseling approach as a way to enhance the counseling process? • During
the assessment process, what are some questions you might ask a client
regarding his or her spiritual and religious beliefs and experience? •
Would you initiate a discussion of a client's spiritual/religious
beliefs, or wait until the client brings up such a topic?

CHAPTER FIVE

k

Understanding and Working With Resistance One of the biggest fears as a
trainee in counseling might be working with highly resistant behavior of
a client. Many beginning counselors take any signs of resistance in
those with whom they are counseling in personal ways. They may think:
"If I were an effective counselor, I shouldn't have this resistance. I
should be able to help anybody who comes to me." or "If clients reach an
impasse, or are uncooperative, or don't come back for a second session,
this is a sign of my inadequacy as a counselor." Your self-talk may not
be quite so harsh, yet faced with a challenging client you might well
blame yourself for what you've done or failed to do. In any event, I
doubt that you would actually welcome resistance as the source of
productive material for therapeutic work. Take a few moments to think
about the meanings you attach to resistance. Is it a part of every
counseling venture, regardless of how motivated your client is and how
skillful you may be as a counselor? Is resistance a client's plot to
sabotage your best efforts? Most clients with whom you work will test
you in some way to determine whether the relationship with you is safe
for them. It is essential that you encourage openness on the part of
your clients so that they are able to express their hesitations and
anxieties. Your clients are likely to have mixed feelings regarding
staying in a safe zone versus taking the risk of letting you know them.
Both you and your clients need to understand the meaning of resistance
and come to view it as something to explore in the counseling process.

Understanding the Dynamics of Resistance Some of my colleagues have
trouble with the word "resistance," thinking of it as a negative term
that implies something is wrong with the client. They have a good point
because resistance is often equated with stubborn refusal to cooperate
with treatment, viewed as something the client is doing wrong, or
perceived by counselors as a sign of their ineptness. My view of
resistance is that it is a normal phenomenon that is basic to the
counseling process. Resistance is a fundamental part of therapy that
must be recognized and explored. Once resistance -- 48 --

Understanding and Working With Resistance

49

is identiﬁed, it can be addressed cognitively, affectively, and
behaviorally in an integrative way. While resistance is often viewed as
an impediment to therapeutic progress, in actuality it is central to
productive work. I agree with Preston (1998) that for most clients
resistances are not impediments to therapy---they are the therapy. He
views the challenge for therapists as learning how to manage
resistances, not how to eliminate them. Preston believes that much of
therapy involves removing roadblocks, freeing up and expanding internal
experiencing, and eventually stepping back and watching clients move
along the pathway of healing. As I hope to illustrate, by coming to
understand and deal with your own patterns of resistance, you open up
possibilities for modifying your behavior and also for developing skills
in managing resistance in clients. In understanding the dynamics of
resistance, both clients' and therapists' contributions to the
resistance must be considered. It is important that clients do not feel
blamed or come to believe that something is inherently wrong with them
for experiencing resistance. Nor should therapists feel that resistance
always implies a lack of sensitivity or timing on their part. If you are
engaged in intense work with a client, he or she might become frightened
and stop the process as a form of self-protection against anxiety. This
behavior often makes sense because your client may have been
psychologically and physically hurt in the past and resorted to defenses
as a way to cope with an intolerable situation. Your client's guarded
behavior might well be a defense against getting wounded again. You may
need to explore these fears for your client to learn to trust you. If
you show a willingness to address your client's defensive behavior, the
chances are increased that your client will be willing to take a look at
various forms of resistive behavior. If you consistently approach what
looks like resistance with respect and concern, you increase the chances
your client will explore this behavior in counseling sessions.

Respecting and Reframing Resistance From a behavioral perspective I am
reminded that what I identify as "resistance" might well be an excuse on
my part for not doing a thorough assessment or for inadequately
utilizing techniques. This perspective requires that I look at what I am
doing to determine how I might be getting in my client's way. Chapter 3
emphasized the value of the therapist working with clients to establish
clear and realistic personal goals as a framework for the direction of
counseling. If I impose my vision of what I think the client should be
working on, "resistance" is to be expected. From a psychoanalytic
perspective, resistance is typically deﬁned as the individual's
reluctance to bring into conscious awareness threatening material that
has been previously repressed or denied. It can also be viewed as
anything that prevents individuals from dealing with unconscious
material. From a broader perspective, resistance can be viewed as
behavior that keeps us from exploring personal conﬂicts or painful
feelings. I agree with the psychoanalytic conceptualization of
resistance as defensive strategies aimed at protecting us and preserving
our inner core in the face of anxiety.

50

CHAPTER FIVE

Clients may demonstrate a variety of resistances. It is critical for you
to respect this resistance and understand its meaning. Resistance is not
something that needs to be "gotten around quickly" or bypassed. Part of
respecting resistance means that you understand the functions these
defenses serve. There are times when people need their defensives in
order to survive a crisis situation. At such times, you need to be
supportive rather than insist that your clients surrender their
protection. Teyber (2006) suggests that counselors must understand
clients' reluctance as an outdated coping strategy that at one time
served a self-preservative and adaptive function. Teyber believes that
by honoring their resistance, clients are able to appreciate the fact
that a particular coping strategy was the best possible response to a
difﬁcult situation at an earlier time in their development. By viewing
clients' symptoms and resistive behaviors as survival mechanisms, both
counselors and clients can recognize that some resistance is normal and
makes sense. From Teyber's perspective, it is inaccurate to view client
resistance as simply lacking motivation. Instead, resistance is a
natural part of the therapeutic process that needs to be explored and
understood. It is helpful for counselors to explore with clients how
they are experiencing each session, beginning at the initial meeting.
Unless counselors ask clients about potential problems they experience
with the counseling process, their concerns will likely remain unspoken.
Prochaska and DiClemente (2005) view a client's unwillingness to
recognize or own a problem not as an act of resisting the therapist but
as resisting change. They emphasize the importance of a therapist
appreciating how frightening the prospect of change is to many clients.
Clients who are contemplating change often experience ambivalence, and
the therapist needs to develop patience during this sometimes lengthy
and frustrating stage of change. Although therapists are responsible for
challenging clients to take action necessary to bring about desired
changes, they must avoid instilling blame and guilt in their clients.
Prochaska and DiClemente suggest that the therapist become an ally
rather than a person attempting to coerce change. Perhaps the key to
understanding clients' various forms of defensive behavior is in paying
attention to your own reactions that are triggered by this resistance. A
useful barometer in assessing clients' behavior is for you to tune in to
what you are feeling as you are working with your clients. In dealing
with difﬁcult clients, monitor your responses to their behavior. If you
respond in an aggressive or defensive way, a difﬁcult situation is
likely to worsen. Your task is to approach difﬁcult clients in a
different way and work cooperatively with them so that they might learn
new and more effective ways of coping. Clients whom you perceive as
being difﬁcult or resistant may contribute to your own feelings of
self-doubt and incompetence and bring out your feelings of inadequacy
and impatience. If you quickly become annoyed with clients you view as
resistive, you are likely to cut off avenues of reaching them. Avoid
labeling clients and instead describe the behaviors you are observing.
When you view clients as being scared, overwhelmed with grief, cautious,
or hurt, you can reframe any pattern of resistance they manifest. If you
change the word "resistant" to more descriptive and nonjudgmental
terminology, your own attitude toward

Understanding and Working With Resistance

51

clients who appear to be "difﬁcult" may change. As you change the lens
by which you perceive clients' behaviors, it will be easier for you to
adopt an understanding and respectful stance, which in turn can increase
the chances that your clients will be willing to explore the meaning of
their reluctance. Instead of viewing their resistance as behavior that
is designed to make your work impossible, approach such behavior with a
genuine sense of interest and respect.

Becoming the Client: Experiencing Resistance in Yourself I ask you again
to assume the role of client and imagine that you and I are engaged in a
therapeutic relationship. I am presenting some key ideas about the
experience of resistance in this way because I believe you will come to
appreciate the inevitable place of resistance in the therapeutic process
if you allow yourself to consider ways you might resist when you are
anxious. I encourage you to involve yourself in personal counseling if
you plan to become a professional counselor. You are apt to learn a
great deal about interventions that are both helpful and unproductive
through your experience as a client. If you and your therapist work well
together, you will also learn quite a bit about how you present yourself
to the world. You are bound to respect the courage it takes to forge
ahead even though you are frightened, particularly at those times when
you wonder if the gain is worth some of the pain you might be
experiencing. In Chapter 10, when we consider the topics of transference
and countertransference, I go into greater detail on the importance of
opening yourself to some form of personal self-exploration---individual
counseling, group counseling, family therapy, or some other pathway
toward self-understanding such as spiritual direction. For now, let me
encourage you to be as open as you can in imagining yourself in the role
of a client in counseling with me as you deal with your own ways of
resisting. I will assign a variety of resistive behaviors to you in this
section and show how I might intervene. Allow yourself to get into the
role of actually experiencing the various forms of defensive behaviors.
Some of these scenarios will not ﬁt you, and you may have other creative
ways of resisting that I do not describe. See what you can learn about
yourself by placing yourself in the center of resistance. If you and I
are involved in a client--therapist relationship, my main endeavor is to
create and maintain the kind of working relationship that will allow you
to take signiﬁcant risks. Part of this relationship means that I must
recognize the signs of resistance, both in you and in myself. If you and
I are not dealing well with resistance, it may be a sign that our
relationship needs strengthening. (Refer to Chapter 2 on the therapeutic
relationship as the foundation for effective counseling for more on this
topic.) The ways you might resist are many, some subtle and others more
obvious. Ask yourself if you might engage in any of these resistive or
defensive behaviors: • Forgetting about your counseling appointment •
Frequently showing up late for your sessions

52

CHAPTER FIVE

• Not having material to bring into the sessions • Complaining that you
are not being helped by counseling • Being silent and expecting to be
drawn out by the therapist • Becoming defensive when you get feedback •
Engaging in long-winded stories and leaving out how you are feeling •
Doing a great deal of intellectualizing about why you feel the way you
do • Avoiding emotional expression • Striving very hard to please the
therapist • Talking in the abstract and remaining global • Depending on
the therapist excessively Some of these behaviors may be anchored in
reality and be a realistic and appropriate response. For instance, your
defensiveness regarding feedback from your therapist may be a function
of how the therapist presents the feedback to you. Everything that looks
like resistance may not actually be resistance. This is why resistance
needs to be explored and its meaning sensitively discussed. What are
some other ways that you might resist? Imagine that you are coming for
one of the early sessions of counseling with me. Are you experiencing
any reluctance? How do you think you would deal with any anxiety you
might be experiencing? What will you talk about at the ﬁrst session? If
you are like many in the helping professions, you might have trouble
asking for help for yourself. Do you think you should be problemfree if
you are going to be an effective counselor? Do you have some pressing
problems but feel that you should be able to resolve them on your own
without any assistance from anyone? How open are you? How much do you
want from counseling? Students enrolled in counseling programs often go
for counseling because it is required as part of the program or because
they have been encouraged by their professors (or authors of their
textbooks). Some of the reluctance they might be experiencing can be
summarized thusly: "Well, I'm not really sure I need therapy, but I
suppose I could learn something about myself from coming in here. To be
truthful, though, it is sort of difﬁcult for me to ask for help. In many
ways I think I should be able to deal with my problems by myself. After
all, everyone has problems, so maybe I could get along ﬁne without
counseling. Besides, I've got a lot going for me in my life, and things
are great. If I start questioning, who knows what I might ﬁnd out. Maybe
it would be better to let good enough be!" Now I don't expect you or any
client to say this much as an opening statement, but it does illustrate
some of the ambivalence I see in counseling students when they present
themselves for personal counseling. Reﬂect for a moment about some of
the ambivalence you might be experiencing if you came to counseling
because of the urging of your professors or mainly to meet a requirement
of your program. If you do have feelings of ambivalence, or negative
reactions, to the expectation of receiving personal therapy, how might
this relate to your views of counseling in general? It will be beneﬁcial
to spend time exploring some of your beliefs about seeking counseling
for yourself. Do you think initiating counseling means that you are not
in control of your life? Are you admitting that there is something wrong

Understanding and Working With Resistance

53

with you by going for counseling? We can certainly talk about these
beliefs and how such beliefs might hinder your openness in this
counseling relationship--- and how these beliefs might hinder you as a
counselor. Talk about what you are experiencing as you come into this
session today. Are you feeling excited? Anxious? Hopeful? Frightened?
Cautious? Eager? I will continue to center my questions around your
feelings, especially if you are experiencing hesitation, to get to the
core reasons for your resistance. Imagine we work well together and you
decide there are some areas of your life in which you feel somewhat
stuck and want to understand more fully. Assume this is the ﬁ fth
session, and you bring up for discussion the gulf that you sense between
you and your father. You tell me: "My Dad has never been emotionally
available to me, and I still miss this. You'd think that by this time I
should be over needing approval and affection from my father. The truth
is there are times when I realize I'm still looking to others for what
I've missed with him. I still remember when I was a child and how much I
wanted him to notice me and tell me I was special. But I felt he never
really knew me and wasn't too interested in spending time with me." Now,
if you had shared this with me, there would be rich material to pursue
here. But let's assume that with every question I pose you draw a blank.
You have little to say and seem emotionally reserved. There are long
pauses, and many times you grow silent. You give only terse responses to
my inquiries. Can you imagine any of this happening? There are many
reasons you might not be ready to work and why you may be hesitant. I
want to know about these reasons, but I also want you to understand your
own reluctance. Then you can decide whether you are willing to change.
Resistance typically occurs when a person begins to approach painful or
threatening material that, if revealed, could result in feelings of
vulnerability. It makes sense that you are not eager to experience
feelings of shame, vulnerability, and uncertainty. At the same time, I
want to be consistent in inviting you to address the ways you may be
holding back. When you get close to painful experiences and become
frightened, do you try to avoid these feelings by some kind of
diversion? I will encourage you to challenge your tendency to ﬂee.
Instead, I will encourage you to go deeper into the feeling or behavior
you wish to avoid. In my view, facing and experiencing feelings takes
courage. Your willingness to endure the pain that is necessary for
getting unstuck and making way for new growth is a reﬂection of that
courage. Regarding the long pauses and your short answers, I would most
certainly ask what is going on inside of you that you are not
expressing. You appear to be censoring your thoughts and carefully
editing what you verbally express. I might say any or all of these
things: "I hope you will rehearse out loud." "You are quiet, yet it
seems like a lot is going on in your head. Are you willing to put words
to any of this?" "I'm noticing that you give short answers, that you
think a long time before replying, and that you seem to be very
cautious. What is it like to be in here now? How free do you feel to put
into words what is on your mind and in your heart?" I am not too quick
to make the assumption that your silences represent a sure sign of
resistance. Your silence could be related to any number of factors. Are
you ﬁguring out what you think I want to hear? Are you hesitant to speak

54

CHAPTER FIVE

because it will open a ﬂood of emotion? Are you waiting for me to
comment more on what you say before you speak? You might be trying very
hard to ﬁgure out what is going on inside of you. I cannot know what
keeps you quiet unless you eventually talk about it. Without labeling
what you are doing as resistance, I point out what I see you doing and
invite you to comment on what this means to you. I am trying to open a
dialogue regarding what you are thinking and feeling as you sit in this
session. At this point I suggest that you participate in a Gestalt
experiment. I ask you to bring what you are experiencing with your
father into the room at this moment: "There is an empty chair over here.
Would you be that child who so much wanted to be noticed and wanted
Dad's approval? Tell him that now. He is sitting in that chair and is
ready to listen to you." Your response is a ﬂat refusal! Although I am
not invested in forcing you to participate in any particular technique,
I am interested in exploring your reluctance in seeing where this
experiment might lead. Talking about what is holding you back seems
crucial to me. You respond to my questioning in one of these ways: • It
seems stupid talking to an empty chair. I would feel foolish doing that.
• I'm afraid of doing what you ask because just thinking about it brings
tears to my eyes. • I'd rather just tell you about my father because it
would feel weird for me to talk to him when he is really not here.
Talking about what your reluctance means to you is one way to make this
setting safer for you. If you'd feel foolish, I ask what it would be
like for you to feel foolish in my presence. This could open up useful
material. If you indicate you don't want to put your father in the empty
chair and talk to him because just imagining this brings you to tears, I
follow that lead more fully. What are you crying about? How is it for
you to get close to sadness at this moment? If I am able to understand
the purpose your resistance serves and respect your hesitation, you will
be more likely to come to a new understanding of your defensiveness. I
want to show you that I am willing to go as far as you are and that I
will not push you to do what you say you do not want to do. Ultimately,
you decide which topics you are willing to pursue and how far you will
go. By exploring the anxiety underlying an apparent resistance, the soil
is being prepared for you to engage in self-exploration in more depth.
In another session you begin with: "Today I want to talk about the tough
time I am having in getting over being rejected in a relationship. Some
days I think I'm ﬁne, and other days I really get depressed and start
thinking all sorts of horrible things about myself." Well, there are
many ways to work with this. Depending on the context of what you are
describing, I might pursue a cognitive path with you, or encourage you
to get more in contact with the feelings you are experiencing, or talk
with you about actual courses of action you might take in doing
something different. In fact, in one session it is very possible that we
would work with what you are telling yourself about this breakup
(cognitions and self-talk), I'd invite you to stay with feelings that
are surfacing as you talk, and I'd suggest some behavioral steps you can
take in moving in a different direction.

Understanding and Working With Resistance

55

But what if you have mixed reactions about engaging in a dialogue on any
level? What if your resistances are getting the best of you and you
don't seem to be getting far in working cognitively, emotionally, or
behaviorally? Put yourself in the following scenarios and imagine these
ways you would resist. You feel devastated over this breakup. This is
proof that you're unlovable. I suggest that you examine the validity of
your conclusions. You reply that you should have been over this by now.
As you reveal some of what you tell yourself about the breakup, I notice
you tearing up, yet smiling at the same time. I describe what I'm
noticing, and you withdraw. I suggest that you talk more about feeling
rejected. Instead you provide an intellectual discussion about the
tentative nature of interpersonal relationships and come up with a
number of truisms such as "Life is difﬁcult" and "Nothing ventured,
nothing gained." I notice the ways I see you are defending yourself, and
I invite you to say more. For instance, what might happen if you were to
allow yourself to feel the intensity of what you are feeling about the
loss of this relationship---without smiling and without giving
intellectual explanations? Following your resistance in a gentle but
insistent manner could free you of the impasse you are experiencing. I
am not at all sure where your exploration will lead if I ask you to stay
with whatever avoidances emerge, yet I have a hunch that doing so will
be productive. I encourage you to let down some unnecessary defenses but
not to strip away all of your defenses. This process must be done
respectfully and carefully, yet persistently. There is more I'd like to
do with you as a client pertaining to handling resistance, however there
are limitations of doing this on the printed page. Let yourself reﬂect
on some of the main ways you are likely to resist when your anxiety
surfaces. Perhaps you can do some of this work by writing in your
journal. Imagine all the ways you might resist when you are threatened
psychologically. What are some defenses you rely on? What are examples
of defenses you have used when you felt vulnerable? How did this work
for you? To what extent do you think you would challenge your resistance
by talking about it? I hope you don't think courage means that you are
without any fear. Courage means being afraid yet going ahead
nevertheless. At points in your therapy you may become hesitant because
of fear of your emerging feelings. How could you remain in the moment
longer when your initial tendency is to withdraw? As you read about
Ruth's case, see if you can identify with her resistance.

Understanding Ruth's Resistance See Session 5 (Understanding and Dealing
With Resistance) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. As Ruth's
therapy progresses, I expect some resistance---hesitation, defenses, and
barriers---at certain anxiety-provoking points. Growth and change, even
when positive, can involve discomfort. Ruth has conﬂicting aspects
within her personality. Although a large part of her would like to
change, she fears the implications of changing. I want her to know that
resistance is not just something to

56

CHAPTER FIVE

be overcome, nor is it something for which I am judging her. Resistance
is representative of familiar defensive approaches she uses in daily
life. She needs to recognize her resistance as a defensive strategy to
cope with anxiety. It is also good for her to learn that her defenses
can interfere with her ability to change in a direction that could make
her life fuller and more gratifying. I want to do my best to respect
Ruth's genuine concerns about moving forward. If handled properly,
resistance can be one of the most valuable tools that she can use in her
quest for self-understanding. Rather than ﬁghting her initial resistance
or hesitation, I will view it as a positive sign of strength.
Originally, Ruth's defenses served her in adapting to very difﬁcult life
circumstances. Her defenses were her best attempt to deal with conﬂ
icting situations at an earlier period of development. It is important
for her to realize that she is now capable of far more creative and
healthy responses to the challenges she faces. Overall, Ruth is willing
and motivated. She is insightful, courageous, able to make connections
between current behavior and past inﬂuences, willing to try risky
behaviors both in the session and out of the session, and willing to
face difﬁcult issues in her life. Even under such favorable and almost
ideal circumstances, it is not uncommon for her to experience some
resistance and to entertain doubts about the value of counseling. To
some extent, it is healthy to resist: it shows that she is aware of the
risks of changing and the anxiety that is associated with coming to
terms with unknown parts of herself. In one of her sessions, Ruth
discusses whether to continue therapy. She exhibits some resistance in
the form of not wanting to be in the therapy session. She is realizing
that many in her family do not like the changes she is making. She
recalls me telling her that she might get worse before she gets better.
From her vantage point, this is exactly what is happening at home.
Things are getting worse, which is causing her to doubt the value of
what she is doing in counseling.

Borrowing From a Psychoanalytic View Ruth's resistance can be understood
in the context of the intolerable anxiety and pain that she fears might
arise if she were to become aware of feelings locked up inside of her.
Because her resistance blocks threatening material from entering
awareness, I ask her to talk about what her resistance means to her. I
am ﬁrst interested in her interpretation about how she is dealing with
threatening situations, and perhaps later I will offer my hunches. I
will ﬁ rst support her in facing her fears. At times I will suggest an
interpretation in the form of a hunch so she can become aware of the
reasons for her resistances, which will allow her to deal with them. For
example, "Let me share a hunch about what I see going on and see what
you think of it. What we've been talking about is really frightening for
you. Getting your family riled up over your changes is certainly not
comfortable for you. It has temporarily overwhelmed you, and you seem to
want to give up." Ruth can then reﬂect on the feedback I offer her and
decide how accurate and useful my impressions of her are. By sharing a
hunch with her about the possible meanings a certain behavior may hold,
I hope to deal with signs of resistance in a collaborative,
nonjudgmental, nonthreatening, and respectful manner.

Understanding and Working With Resistance

57

Drawing on Other Approaches Most clients will be ambivalent, defensive,
and hesitant at some point in the counseling process. This push-pull is
occurring with Ruth and could result in premature termination of therapy
if she does not discuss her fears and reservations about being in
counseling. Although she is externalizing her concerns by focusing on
her husband's displeasure over her changes and the negative reactions
from her children, internal factors may also be affecting Ruth and
contributing to her resistance. She is really split. Part of her wants
to cling to the status quo, but another part of her wants to branch out
and become more of the person she would like to be. I ask her to voice
her doubts about the value of therapy. It is clear that she is
ambivalent. Talking about her reluctance to participate fully in therapy
can be done in a gentle yet confrontational way, along with providing
support to face issues that she might otherwise avoid. Later in the
session I suggest we work with her ambivalence over wanting to change
and resisting change. Using a Gestalt technique, I suggest a role play.
I ask Ruth to be the side of her that wants to remain the same because
that is the feeling that seems to be the strongest in her now. I take on
the role of the side of Ruth that wants to move forward. In this role
play we debate the pros and cons of changing. I do my best to highlight
the advantages of taking the risks involved in making signiﬁcant life
changes. She has an opportunity to express out loud what she tends to
rehearse silently about the guarantees of sticking with the "old
version" of her life. After engaging in this role play for a time, I ask
her what she is experiencing. We then reverse roles so that she can
deepen her experience of the splits within her. After switching roles
for a time, she decides that she wants to stay in therapy, even though
it is causing chaos at home. Toward the end of the session Ruth admits
that she had not realized how scared she was, yet she adds that
preserving the status quo isn't working for her either. It has become
clear to her that she is caught in a rut and experiences life as being
limited. She wants more from her life, yet she is frightened when she
considers what she might have to do or become to have a more satisfying
existence. Because I accept the existential notion of the client's place
in choosing how far to go, it is Ruth who decides whether she is willing
to face her reluctance in making some basic changes in her life. The
feminist therapy approach reminds me of how crucial it is for Ruth to be
an active participant in her counseling and to make her own choices. I
am committed to ensuring that our therapeutic relationship does not
become another arena in which she stays in a passive, dependent role. It
is important that she give voice to her experiencing now. Initially, she
tended to look to me for answers or advice. As I continued to place the
responsibility back on her, and to relate to her more as a person than
as an "expert," she experienced glimpses of what it is like to trust
more in her own power. She is beginning to get in touch with a range of
feelings, including anger and other "prohibited" emotions she learned to
deny to herself. Some of her self-doubts and anxiety over continuing in
therapy relate to a host of feelings that she has kept in check but that
are now emerging within her. I want her to feel that it is acceptable to
talk openly about her anxiety over these "new" feelings.

58

CHAPTER FIVE

At this point I attempt to pull together some of the conﬂ icting themes
we've talked about in the session and invite Ruth to reﬂect on where she
wants to go from here. I suggest a homework assignment, as I frequently
do, with the expectation that she will gain greater clarity of the
options open to her and the choices she is willing to make. (Here I draw
on behavior therapy, reality therapy, and rational emotive behavior
therapy.) For one week I ask Ruth to write in her journal all the
reasons for staying the same versus the reasons for making changes. I
ask her to reﬂect, for one day, on what her life might be like if she
quits therapy and to think about the kind of life she might have if she
continues on the path she has pursued for much of her life. On another
day I ask her to write in her journal about how she imagines her life
could be if she continues with her therapy and makes some of the changes
she desires. She agrees to follow through with this homework, which
gives us a good place to continue in a subsequent session.

Guidelines for Dealing With Resistance in Clients By putting yourself in
the role of the client, I hope you have come to appreciate how
challenging the counseling process can be. I suspect that some of your
most valuable lessons on how to recognize, understand, and deal with
resistance in your clients will be learned from your own experience with
personal counseling. In addition to encouraging you to formulate your
own perspective on the role of resistance in the counseling process,
here are a few suggestions for you to consider when you meet with
hesitation on a client's part. • Think of resistance as a normal process
involving a lack of readiness on a client's part to get involved in
counseling. Work with the resistance rather than ﬁght it. • If you label
certain behaviors your clients display as "resistance," they might feel
judged and begin to think of resistance as something totally negative. •
Realize that initially many clients are defensive about having to meet
with you to deal with their problems. Simply coming in for counseling
may be a sign of weakness in their minds, which may make them hesitant
to be open. • It is important to understand the many meanings of client
resistance and not to interpret it as evidence of your professional
incompetence. If you are focused on defending yourself against the
various forms of resistance you encounter with clients, you deprive them
of opportunities to explore the meanings of their resistance. •
Encourage clients to explore any form of resistance rather than demand
that they give up their resistance. • State your observations, hunches,
and interpretations in a tentative way rather than making dogmatic
pronouncements. • Avoid labeling and judging a client, and instead
describe the behavior the individual is displaying. Let your client know
how he or she is affecting you in a nonblaming and noncritical way. •
Distinguish between the phenomenon of resistance, which is occurring in
your client, and your reactions to the client's resistance. Monitor your
reactions so that you don't escalate client resistance.

Understanding and Working With Resistance

59

• Deal with resistance in a positive way. If you accept your client and
do not react defensively, this will probably melt the intensity of the
client's resistance. If you meet resistance with resistance, you are
likely to entrench this pattern. • Allow clients to express their
feelings about prior negative experiences with counseling. Ask them what
they would like to do differently with you. • Provide clients with a
brief explanation of how you work and strive to obtain genuine informed
consent. Educate clients about ways they can use the relationship with
you to help themselves. • Let clients know that counseling often entails
some setbacks. If they know from the beginning that personal learning is
not always a smooth path, they are less likely to react with
discouragement when they experience a plateau or a relapse. • Strive to
arrive together at a clear statement of the problem or the reason the
client seeks counseling at this particular time. As soon as possible,
design interventions in small, manageable steps that lead to a
satisfactory solution. • Remain attentive to the types of resistance
displayed by your clients. Talk openly with your supervisor about these
patterns so that you can adjust some of your behaviors if they appear to
exacerbate client resistance.

Concluding Comments Resistance is not an enemy to be feared or a
therapeutic evil to be eliminated; it is the very substance of the
therapeutic process. To better understand the role resistance plays and
how best to deal with it, be open to identifying resistive patterns
within yourself. Remember your difﬁculty in being open to your own
growth, and use this as a model for understanding your clients. If you
keep in mind how you deal with resistance, you will be less likely to
personalize client resistance. As a way to identify how you deal with
resistance in yourself, take some time at this point to reﬂect on the
following questions: • When you consider yourself in the role of a
counseling client, what might lead to resistance for you? What are some
of the ways in which you are most likely to resist? What kind of
resistive behaviors might you use? • When you have experienced
resistance, can you remember some of your bodily reactions? What kind of
self-talk goes on within you when you experience resistance? • What
might help you to reduce your level of resistance or defensiveness? What
would you want from your counselor when you are resistant? • Take a few
minutes to consolidate your thinking about resistance. What is your
deﬁnition of resistance? As a counselor, what will help you to
understand and deal with any resistance you might encounter from
clients? • Imagine the characteristics of a resistant and difﬁcult
client sitting in your ofﬁce. How does this client affect you? What kind
of resistive behavior do you think you would be most challenged by as a
counselor? What kind of client is most likely to bring out your
defensive reactions? Can you learn anything about yourself by paying
attention to your reactions to your most difﬁcult client?

CHAPTER SIX

k

Cognitive Focus in Counseling

All integrative approaches make room for the cognitive dimension---we
are all thinking beings. I pay a great deal of attention to thinking as
a vital component in counseling because the content of thought processes
greatly inﬂuences both how we feel and how we act. An integrative
approach requires dealing with self-talk, faulty thinking, core beliefs,
and one's worldview. I ﬁnd many aspects of cognitive behavioral therapy
(CBT) very valuable in my work, both during therapy sessions and in a
variety of everyday life situations. Therapy is essentially a teaching
and learning process, which makes cognitive and behavioral methods most
relevant. Cognitive behavioral approaches are quite diverse. Two main
forms include rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT), developed by
Albert Ellis (2001a, 2001b), and cognitive therapy (CT), developed by
Aaron Beck (see Alford & Beck, 1997; J. Beck, 1995, 2005). Both of these
approaches place thinking at the core of emotional and behavioral
disturbances and treatment. Their differences lie mainly in the style a
therapist employs. Both REBT and CT are based on the assumption that if
we change our thinking we can also change our feelings and the way we
act. In these approaches, the client must be active if change is to
occur. Clients work collaboratively with the therapist, assuming the
role of a learner in the therapy sessions and engaging in homework they
practice in daily life.\*

Beneﬁts and Limitations of a Cognitive Focus Cognitive therapists are
interested in what clients think, believe, and the way in which they
perceive the world. Basic beliefs may be the product of considerable
reﬂection and questioning, or clients may have acquired a number of
beliefs without critically evaluating them. In either case, how clients
feel and what they do in certain situations has a lot to do with their
basic beliefs and \*In the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The
Case of Stan, I demonstrate how I work with Stan's faulty beliefs from a
cognitive behavioral perspective. Session 8 involves a role-playing
demonstration aimed at challenging some of Stan's core beliefs.

-- 60 --

Cognitive Focus in Counseling

61

thought patterns. Some beliefs may serve clients well, whereas others
may lead to problems for clients. Although signiﬁcant others may have
contributed to shaping clients' current lifestyles, clients are
responsible for maintaining self-destructive ideas and attitudes that
inﬂuence their daily transactions. Cognitive therapists see value in
confronting clients with questions such as these: • What are your
assumptions and basic beliefs? • Have you really examined the core ideas
you live by to determine whether they are your own values or merely
"introjects," beliefs you have uncritically acquired from others?
Adlerian therapy, rational emotive behavior therapy, cognitive therapy,
choice theory/reality therapy, narrative therapy, and solution-focused
therapy share the basic assumption that clients' interpretations of
situational events are crucial to understanding their clients. Instead
of talking about events, therapists with a cognitive focus explore the
personal meanings clients attach to these events. Although clients
beneﬁt from a cognitive understanding of their problems, an overemphasis
on the cognitive realm can shortchange the emotional dimension. For
instance, it may be difﬁcult for clients to identify and experience what
they are feeling. Because of the anxiety of staying with painful
emotions, clients might use some form of deﬂection and engage in
intellectualizing. If clients too quickly try to ﬁgure out why they are
feeling a certain way, they may avoid facing what they are feeling. For
example, if a client doesn't get a job she wanted, she might engage in
self-deception and rationalizations about why she didn't really want the
job in the ﬁrst place rather than experiencing her feelings and
appropriately expressing them in the here and now. Approaches that
highlight cognition typically do not give much attention to exploring a
client's past emotional issues. Working within a cognitive framework,
therapists pay attention to clients' past without getting lost in the
past and without assuming a fatalistic stance about earlier traumatic
experiences. Past unresolved childhood experiences can be fruitfully
explored in therapy if these earlier experiences are connected to a
client's present level of functioning. From my perspective, painful
early experiences need to be recognized, reexperienced, and worked
through in therapy before clients can free themselves of their
restrictive inﬂuences. Present beliefs about self and clients' current
problems are often related to past hurt. Unless clients come to terms
with these past traumas, the vestiges of these traumas tend to linger in
the background and inﬂuence their current ways of being. From my
perspective, the cognitive behavioral approaches work best once clients
have identiﬁed and dealt with their emotional issues. In practice, I
don't see how it is effective to work exclusively in a cognitive way, or
an emotive way, or a behavioral way. In fairness, my guess is that most
modern cognitive behavior therapists operate on the assumption that
there is a high degree of interaction among the cognitive, affective,
and behavioral domains. The grandfather of cognitive behavior therapy,
Albert Ellis, has for many years maintained that rational emotive
behavior therapy is highly interactive and that it is impossible to work
on just a single dimension of personality. Aaron Beck, the father of
cognitive therapy, emphasizes the integration of thinking, feeling, and
behaving. As you will see

62

CHAPTER SIX

in Ruth's case, by dealing with certain core beliefs she becomes
emotionally touched and experiences various bodily sensations. In other
words, when she thinks, she also feels and acts. When she acts, she
feels and thinks. When she feels, she thinks and acts. Cognition,
emotion, and behavior are not separate human functions; rather, they are
interactive and integrated. (A theory that offers useful insight here is
reality therapy with its concept of total behavior. According to reality
therapy, every behavior includes the components of thinking, feeling,
and doing.)\*

Becoming the Client: Experiencing Cognitive Behavioral Techniques To be
most creatively applied, cognitive and behavioral strategies must be
tailored to the client's unique needs and situation. Once again, assume
that you are my client. To increase cooperation, it is important that I
respect your reactions to an intervention. These interventions are tools
to be used in service of you, the client. Here are a few cognitive
behavioral techniques from my integrative approach that I might employ
with you as my client.

Paying Attention to Your Thinking Do you engage in catastrophic
thinking? Do you dwell on the most extreme negative scenarios in many
situations? When you get stuck, I want you to imagine the worst possible
outcome of the situation. Then ask, "What is the worst thing that could
occur? If this happens, what would make this such a negative outcome?"
You can learn to engage in more realistic thinking, especially if you
consistently notice times when you tend to get caught up in catastrophic
thinking. As your therapist, I look for evidence to support or refute
some of your core beliefs. Once we identify a number of your
self-defeating beliefs, you can begin to monitor the frequency with
which these beliefs intrude in situations in everyday life. During
counseling sessions, I often ask you, "Where is the evidence for ?" Make
it a practice to ask yourself this question, especially as you become
more adept at spotting dysfunctional thoughts and paying attention to
your cognitive patterns. For example, the statement "I must be approved
of and accepted by all the signiﬁcant people in my life" can be disputed
with statements such as "Where is it written that I must have this
approval?" "Why must I have their total approval to feel like a
worthwhile individual?" An effective and functional belief might include
this statement: "There is no evidence that I absolutely must have
approval from others, though I would like to be approved of by those
whom I respect." You might also tell yourself, "I really cannot stand
rejection, so I must keep to myself so I won't be hurt." How would this
belief affect the way you respond to others? I would ask you: "Even
though rejection would hurt, would it be catastrophic? How might this
fear of being rejected keep you from getting what you want in your \*For
further reading on integrating cognitive therapy into a comprehensive
approach, consult Alford and Beck (1997); J. Beck (1995, 2005); Ellis
(1999, 2001a, 2001b); Ellis and MacLaren (1998); and Ledley, Marx, and
Heimberg (2005). For a general treatment of cognitive perspectives, see
Corey (2009b, chap. 10).

Cognitive Focus in Counseling

63

relationships?" At this point, make a list of statements that might get
in your way at times. What are a few examples of basic conclusions that
you could challenge?

Doing Homework Assignments The cognitive behavioral approaches place
considerable emphasis on putting newly acquired insights into action. I
will suggest tasks both for therapy sessions and everyday life as I
believe these are a necessary part of the process leading to change.
Homework assignments enable you to practice new behaviors and assist you
in the process of your reconditioning. The therapy hour is limited, and
activities designed to be continued outside the ofﬁce can augment
therapy sessions. The best homework consists of activities you suggest,
especially self-help assignments that grow out of the previous session.
It is essential that I tailor homework assignments to your speciﬁc
problems and that these activities be collaboratively developed by both
of us. Again, let me stress that homework or any intervention is geared
to what you want for yourself, not what I, as your therapist, think you
should want---or what I want for you. After you have identiﬁed some
unsupported conclusions and faulty beliefs, between therapy sessions
record and think about how your beliefs contribute to your personal
problems. In this way you can work hard at critically examining your
self-defeating cognitions. When you come to the next therapy session,
bring up speciﬁc situations in which you did well or in which you
experienced difﬁculty. As you consistently question the actual evidence
for situations you encounter, you become more effective in challenging
your self-talk. This allows you to determine whether your
self-statements are based on accurate or erroneous information. I will
show you ways to carry on your own therapy, largely through homework
activities, without my direct intervention. This provides you with tools
you can use to continue learning once formal counseling ends. In my
view, much of our counseling endeavor will deal with educating you,
teaching you coping skills, and enabling you to see the connection
between what you are learning in the therapy ofﬁce and everyday living.
I particularly value the emphasis CBT puts on bibliotherapy and
psychoeducational assignments such as listening to tapes, reading
self-help books, keeping a record of what you are doing and thinking,
and attending workshops. In this way you can further the process of
change in yourself without becoming excessively dependent on me as your
counselor. We will review psychoeducational assignments to assess the
value of these assignments for you.

Drawing on Adlerian Concepts Adlerian psychology pays particular
attention to the cognitive aspects of personality and in many ways can
be considered a cognitive approach to counseling. For Adlerians,
feelings are aligned with thinking and are the fuel for behaving.
Working within an Adlerian framework, my assumption is that ﬁ rst you
think, then you feel, and then you act. Because emotions and cognitions
serve a purpose and aim at a central goal in your life, much of our time
during counseling is spent discovering and understanding your purpose
and reorienting you in a useful way. You can expect to explore what
Adlerians call "private

64

CHAPTER SIX

logic," which includes concepts about yourself, others, and your life.
The core of the therapy experience consists of discovering the purposes
of your behavior or symptoms and the basic mistakes associated with your
coping. In therapy let's assume we discover that the structure of your
private logic is captured by this syllogism: • I am basically unlovable.
• The world is ﬁlled with people who are likely to reject unlovable
persons. • Therefore, I must keep to myself so I won't be discovered and
rejected. It is easy to see how depression or a sense of hopelessness
might follow from this thinking. Learning how to correct such faulty
assumptions will be central to your therapy. Through the therapeutic
process, you will discover that you have resources and options to draw
on in dealing with signiﬁcant life issues and life tasks.

Working With Ruth From a Cognitive Perspective See Session 6 (Cognitive
Focus in Counseling) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. My
integrative approach in counseling Ruth involves exploring her cognitive
structures, which include her belief systems, her thoughts, her
attitudes, and her values. More speciﬁcally, in family systems therapy
attention is given to family rules; in behavior therapy attention is
given to beliefs and assumptions that have an inﬂuence on her behavior.
In rational emotive behavior therapy attention is on self-defeating
beliefs and self-indoctrination; Adlerian therapy focuses on her basic
mistakes and faulty thinking. In reality therapy the emphasis may be on
Ruth's values and what she wants in her world; in feminist therapy we
would conduct an assessment of the impact of gender-role messages (which
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 12). Whatever terms are used, I
tend to zero in on the underlying messages that Ruth seems to be hearing
now in her life. I assume that her self-talk is relevant to her
behavior. From a cognitive behavioral perspective, I examine the ways in
which Ruth's internal dialogue and her thinking processes are affecting
her day-to-day behavior. I use an active and directive therapeutic
style. Therapy is time-limited, present-centered, solution-focused, and
structured. My task is to help Ruth recognize and change her
self-defeating thoughts and maladaptive beliefs, so we concentrate on
the content and process of her thinking by looking for ways to
restructure some of her beliefs. Rather than merely telling Ruth what
faulty beliefs she has, I encourage her to gather data and weigh the
evidence in support of certain beliefs. Through a Socratic dialogue,
Ruth and I identify where her thinking, feeling, and behaving is
problematic. I assist her in detecting her faulty thinking, in learning
ways of correcting her distortions, and in substituting more effective
self-talk and beliefs. Here are a few of the questions I raise for Ruth
to ponder and to answer: "What do you suppose it would be like if you
were not to live up to the standards others

Cognitive Focus in Counseling

65

have set for you?" "If you remain the way you are now, what do you
imagine your life will be like in a few years?" "How might you feel
different if you were able to ease up on yourself?" A main cognitive
technique I use with Ruth is disputing faulty beliefs. Much of her
therapy involves her learning ways to argue with her internal dialogue.
Here are some questions aimed at getting Ruth to examine the evidence
for the validity of her beliefs: "Does having this belief help or hinder
you in your life?" "Where is the evidence for your belief ?" "Who told
you that this belief is accurate?" Not only do I introduce debating
methods during the therapy hour, but I also encourage Ruth to pay
attention to her internal dialogue in daily life and to detect patterns
of thinking that become problematic for her. She can then argue with her
internal voices when she catches herself getting stuck in old patterns.
I am especially inclined to employ cognitive interventions when it
appears that Ruth is giving in to internal voices that reinforce a
stance of powerlessness. Such techniques are called for in situations
where she might make dire predictions about her future, when such
conclusions are based on negative beliefs. My interventions are aimed at
getting Ruth to reﬂect on what she is saying and how this is inﬂuencing
how she is feeling. My hope is that she will explore the facts involved
in these situations, take another look at some of the conclusions she
has arrived at, and develop an open stance in assessing new situations.
My aim is to get her to think about her thinking and how it has a
pervasive inﬂuence on her life today. In dealing with her cognitions
from an Adlerian perspective, I might focus Ruth's attention on messages
she incorporated as a child and on the decisions that she made.
Eventually, she is likely to begin thinking about the reasons she made
some early decisions. I challenge her to look at these decisions about
life, about herself, and about others and to make necessary revisions
that can lead her to form new assumptions about life. (The topic of
early decisions and redecisions is elaborated on in Chapter 12.) From
rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) I especially value the emphasis
on learning to think rationally. I look for ways Ruth contributes to her
negative feelings by the process of self-indoctrination with faulty
beliefs. I challenge her to test the validity of the dire consequences
she predicts. For example, she is extremely self-critical, she demands
perfection, she believes that she must live up to what others expect of
her at all times, and she drives herself by performance-oriented
standards to the point of exhaustion. I value the stress put on doing
hard work in uprooting beliefs that have no validity and replacing them
with sound and realistic beliefs. Ruth must ﬁ nd for herself a new set
of beliefs that allow her to enjoy life more fully. It is not my place
to provide her with realistic and appropriate beliefs, but I work with
her in creating constructive beliefs of her own. Although I do not think
that merely examining her faulty logic is enough for personality change
to occur, I do see this process of critically examining her thinking as
an essential component of therapy. Ruth has convinced herself that she
must be the perfect daughter, the perfect wife, the perfect mother, and
the perfect student. She has an underlying dysfunctional belief that she
must be perfect in all that she attempts. If she is not perfect, in her
mind, there are dire results. She is continually rating her
performances, and she is bound to think poorly of herself because of her
unrealistically high standards.

66

CHAPTER SIX

Indeed, there is a judge sitting on her shoulder. I will consistently
remind her that rating herself as a person will take her on a path
toward misery. Although she might continue to rate some of her actions,
she can productively reﬂect on separating what she is doing from her
personhood. I hope to teach her practical ways to talk back to her
internal critic, to learn a new and functional self-dialogue, and to
help her reevaluate her experiences as she changes her behavior. Ruth
hears this underlying message, which was given to her by her mother: "If
you can't do a job well, don't do it at all." Because of this, she
frequently experiences frustration and guilt. As I am talking with her
about her perfectionism, she indicates that she wishes she could be
kinder to herself and not feel and believe that she can never make a
mistake. She says, "I'd like to ease up on myself." I suggest a role
play in which she plays the part of herself that would like to ease up
and I play the part of her that is the critical and driving self.
Whenever she indicates that she wants to do less and not push herself so
hard, I tell her that she cannot afford to get lax. One of the desired
outcomes of counseling is for Ruth to become less selfcritical. My
rationale for this cognitive role play with her is to facilitate an
examination on her part of what she believes and where she got her
beliefs. I hope that she will begin to question messages that she has
uncritically accepted, then she can determine whether her beliefs are
serving her at this point in her life. Through a process of debating,
disputing, and critically examining some of the messages that Ruth lives
by, she will gain increased clarity of the many ways she is trying to
measure up to external expectations. By arguing with me as I role-play a
familiar side of her, she will be increasingly able to experience the
depth to which her self-talk actually exhausts her. She says: "I am so
tired of always having to measure up. I am just exhausted. But I don't
know how to stop. I'm caught in a whirlwind and just don't know how to
stop." She feels very tired of striving to live up to expectations. What
is interesting therapeutically is that Ruth gets a clearer picture of
what she is doing and how it is affecting her. Although she does not
want to pursue the path she is going down, she is at a loss to know how
to stop or even slow down. She becomes quite emotional as she talks
about not knowing how to stop. She shares her exhaustion about always
feeling that she has to measure up---and she adds that she just does not
want to live this way anymore. Ruth is giving a clear message of wanting
to make a basic change. Now we can use a host of interventions to help
her change some of her core beliefs that lead to her exhaustion. From a
cognitive behavioral framework, I accept the assumption that it is not
an event or a situation in life that actually causes problematic
emotions. Rather, it is the evaluation of events and the beliefs people
hold about these events that get them into trouble. I listen attentively
to Ruth's underlying assumptions as she participates in a role play with
me to see if she has uncritically incorporated messages that are
contributing to her high level of personal stress. I want her to
understand that when she is less than perfect in situations, it is her
perception and evaluation that contributes to her problems. Drawing from
REBT, I have most likely explained to her the A-B-C model, as developed
by Albert Ellis (2001b). This concept is based on the premise that A
(the activating event) does not cause C (the emotional consequences);
rather, it is

Cognitive Focus in Counseling

67

mainly B (her belief about the activating event) that is the source of
her problems. Much of my teaching will be about how she can change B
(her belief system) and thereby make some signiﬁcant emotional and
behavioral changes. My expectation is that Ruth will realize that her
feelings of anxiety are not caused by speciﬁc events she is experiencing
at home and in her program at the university. For instance, if Ruth's
children do very little for her but expect her to be "on call" whenever
they want her, this very reality is not the factor that is causing her
present psychological difﬁculties. The source of her problem is what she
tells herself about the kind of inadequate mother she is. She operates
from the basic belief that if her "mothering skills" are less than
perfect, she is deﬁcient as a person. In essence, she is making the
mistake of globally rating herself as a person on the basis of some of
her children's behaviors. My interventions are aimed at getting her to
better understand the connection between some of her core beliefs and
her ways of feeling and acting. I hope she can discover how her
self-talk is inﬂuencing how she is feeling and what she is doing. At
some point in Ruth's therapy, it is likely that we will examine the
validity of many of her interpretations about life situations and her
conclusions about her basic worth. Beck's cognitive therapy emphasizes
identifying and changing negative thoughts and maladaptive beliefs (also
known as schemata). According to Beck's cognitive model of emotional
disorders, to understand the nature of emotional problems it is
essential to focus on the cognitive content of a client's reaction to an
upsetting event or stream of thoughts (see J. Beck, 1995). I draw on a
range of cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques to demonstrate to
Ruth that she produces her own emotional disturbances by the faulty
beliefs she has acquired. In this and other sessions, we explore what
cognitive therapists call "cognitive distortions" (see Dattilio &
Freeman, 1992), which include the following: Arbitrary inferences. Ruth
makes conclusions without supporting and relevant evidence. She often
engages in "catastrophizing," or thinking about the worst possible
scenario for a given situation. Overgeneralization. Ruth holds extreme
beliefs based on a single incident and applies them inappropriately to
other dissimilar events or settings. For instance, because she and her
husband are experiencing marital difﬁculties, she is convinced that she
is a failure in all aspects of her marriage. Personalization. Ruth has a
tendency to relate external events to herself, even when there is no
basis for making this connection. She relates an incident in which a
professor did not call on her in class, even though her hand was raised.
She was convinced that her professor did not value her thoughts and was
bothered by her. She did not consider any other possible explanations
for what happened. Labeling and mislabeling. Ruth presents herself in
light of her imperfections and mistakes. She allows a single problem
situation to deﬁne her total being. Polarized thinking. Ruth frequently
engages in thinking and interpreting in all-or-nothing terms. Either she
is a success as a mother or she is a total failure in mothering.

68

CHAPTER SIX

Over a number of sessions we work on speciﬁc beliefs. The aim is for
Ruth to critically evaluate the evidence for her conclusions. I view my
role as promoting corrective experiences that will lead to changes in
her thinking. I expect to assist her in discovering for herself how to
distinguish between functional and dysfunctional beliefs. She can learn
this by testing her conclusions. My assumption is that only through
learning to apply rigorous self-challenging methods will she succeed in
freeing herself from the self-defeating thinking that contributed to her
problems. Although the cognitive dimension is emphasized, this cannot be
accomplished without bringing in the behavioral dimension. Together we
will design behavioral homework assignments that put Ruth in situations
where she is challenged to confront her self-defeating beliefs and her
self-limiting behavior.\*

Concluding Comments Now that you have read this chapter, go back over
some of the key themes I've identiﬁed from the cognitive approaches and
apply them to yourself. Try to identify some of your basic convictions,
core beliefs, and self-talk. Ask yourself where you acquired your basic
beliefs and how they appear to be inﬂuencing the ways you feel and act
today. After reading this chapter on the cognitive focus in counseling,
take time to reﬂect on the following questions as a way of clarifying
your thoughts on the cognitive focus. • What are some of the key
concepts and techniques from the cognitive behavioral approaches that
you most value in understanding yourself? • How do you imagine it would
be for you to be a client in cognitive behavioral therapy? • What
cognitive concepts and techniques ﬁt well with your personal philosophy
of counseling? • What are some cognitive methods that you would most
want to use in working with your clients? • How likely are you to employ
homework assignments with your clients? • What do you see as the main
beneﬁts of a cognitive focus? • What do you see as some of the
limitations of a cognitive focus?

\*For a more detailed description of working with Ruth from a cognitive
behavioral perspective, see Albert Ellis's counseling with Ruth using
REBT, Frank Dattilio's cognitive behavioral methods with Ruth, and my
counseling with Ruth from a CBT approach in Case Approach to Counseling
and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a, chap. 8).

CHAPTER SEVEN

k

Emotive Focus in Counseling

In Facilitating Emotional Change: The Moment-by-Moment Process,
Greenberg, Rice, and Elliot (1993) present the theory and methods of an
emotionally focused approach to counseling, which is aimed at the
construction of new emotional meaning. According to Greenberg and her
colleagues, it is important for therapists to strive to see, hear, and
understand clients' moment-by-moment experiencing. It is more important
to facilitate this experiential process in clients than to modify their
cognitions or behaviors. When the therapist is able to afﬁrm clients'
experiences, they feel safe enough to generate new emotional meanings.
In other words, the provision of an empathically attuned and respectful
relationship provides the support necessary for clients to allow
themselves to experience a range of feelings that they might otherwise
block, which then allows them to modify their patterns of thinking and
acting.

Beneﬁts and Limitations of an Emotive Focus Just as cognition is
essential to an integrative counseling style, so is the emotional
dimension. Too often---especially with brief therapy aimed at
discovering solutions to problems as efﬁciently and quickly as
possible---what clients are feeling is relegated to a secondary
position. Even in brief therapy, I want to be open to exploring
emotions. Clients need to have an opportunity to talk before the
therapist confronts their mode of thinking. Often the best route to
getting clients to examine their cognitions is by encouraging them to
identify, express, and talk about what they are feeling. It can be
tempting, on the other hand, to view the release of emotions as an end
in itself. I value the role of catharsis in counseling, but I believe it
is essential to work with the associated insights and cognitions
underlying the emotional patterns. It is important to link emotional
exploration to cognitive and behavioral work. Signiﬁcant personal
changes tend to come about when clients are taught how to transfer what
they have learned in therapy sessions to everyday situations.
Transferring this learning is not an automatic process. Therapists need
to -- 69 --

70

CHAPTER SEVEN

teach clients how to maintain these positive emotional and behavioral
changes. This can be done by helping clients plan ways of coping
effectively when they meet with frustration in the world and when they
regress by seeming to forget the lessons they have learned. If therapy
is aimed primarily at emotional release, the likely result will simply
be an emotional experience. Without any kind of cognitive or behavioral
follow up, clients are not likely to acquire a method for transferring
their learning to a range of situations in daily life.

Becoming the Client: Experiencing Emotionally Focused Therapy I prefer
to begin therapy by paying attention to what you are experiencing on an
emotional level. I attend to how emotions are manifested in your body. I
think the truth of many of your struggles can be found in what you are
feeling and what your body is telling you. I ask, "What are you aware of
at the moment and what do you want to do with that?" Noticing your
emotional and bodily states can be signiﬁcant routes to gaining
awareness of what you are experiencing and doing. Without awareness,
change is not possible. Gestalt therapy experiments are designed to
expand your awareness and to help you try out new modes of behavior. I
create and use interventions, or experiments, to facilitate the
exploration of material that emerges from our interactions in the
session. Experiments enable you to become aware of aspects of experience
that had previously been out of awareness. Within the safety of the
therapeutic situation, you are given opportunities to "try on" a new
behavior. The Gestalt way of creating experiments is a powerful and
effective way to connect you to your emotions. Although Gestalt therapy
offers rich pathways to your emotional experiencing, this approach taps
whatever is in your awareness at the moment and, in that sense, it is
truly integrative. *The interventions I make are geared to your
thoughts, feelings, and actions and are routes to supporting your
self-exploration. Such interventions have the purpose of facilitating
your self-understanding, not promoting my personal agenda as your
therapist or to meet my needs. It is extremely important that the
interventions I make are done with respect and concern for you as my
client. I tend to avoid using planned techniques or exercises as
catalysts to open up feelings. Experiments are more powerful when they
grow out of the phenomenological context of therapy and when they are
chosen for a speciﬁc therapy situation. As a way to demonstrate an
experiential, emotionally focused approach, let me present you with some
"problems" that I encourage you to "adopt" as my client. You tell me
that at this moment you feel a sense of sadness. I ask you to say more
and to describe how you experience this sadness. You respond, "I'm
feeling sad when I think of how hard I try to get approval from
everyone. I'm so* In the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The
Case of Stan, I demonstrate how I work with a dream that Stan presents
using Gestalt methods. Session 6 illustrates Gestalt therapy
experiments.

Emotive Focus in Counseling

71

caught up in getting you to like me that I forget what it is I want for
myself. I feel right now like I felt so much around my parents---always
trying to do what they wanted so they would think well of me, yet never
feeling that I was able to get what I wanted." You are saying a great
deal, and I encourage you to keep talking. As you speak, I direct your
attention to what you are experiencing in your body. You state that your
heart is heavy and that it feels broken. I suggest that you stay with
this bodily feeling as much as possible and put some words to what it is
like for you to talk at this time. I might even ask you to give your
heart a voice and give expression to your "heavy and broken heart."
Where we go next depends on what emerges in your moment-to-moment
awareness. Inﬂuenced by Gestalt therapy, I follow the leads you provide
and support you in your efforts to stay focused on the images, feelings,
thoughts, and sensations that come to the surface. I encourage you to
stay with what is as fully as possible. Operating within the framework
of the Gestalt approach, I ask you to bring any concerns about what was
or will be into the present and directly experience these concerns.
Being in the present moment involves a transition between your past and
your future. As a way to keep our work emotionally focused, I make use
of Gestalt experiments that are spontaneously created to ﬁt your present
situation. Meaningful dialogue often results from staying with the
changing ﬂow of your present-centered awareness. By following whatever
it is that you are experiencing and showing you how to follow your own
energy, you will gradually increase your awareness. To help you make
contact with the present moment, I typically ask "what" and "how"
questions but rarely ask "why" questions. To promote "now" awareness, I
encourage a dialogue in the present tense by asking, "What is happening
now? What is going on now?" "What are you experiencing as you share your
struggle? What is your awareness at this moment?" "How are you
experiencing your sadness?" "As you talk of your heavy heart, what is
this like for you? If your heart could express itself, what would that
be like for you?" Now imagine yourself in this scenario. You say that
you sometimes feel totally inadequate and that you have a hard time
liking yourself. I ask you to tell me more about what it feels like to
be this way. How did you come to these conclusions about your worth as a
person? I do not offer you immediate reassurance or tell you that you
are an adequate person who is likeable. Although reassuring feedback may
make you feel good for a short time, it is doubtful that this feeling
would last very long. Your internal critic will not believe any positive
feedback I might offer you---at least if I attempt to reassure you too
soon. I am more interested in assisting you in exploring both your
feelings and your thoughts. I also want to give you a chance to express
what you often don't say. If you are able to talk fully about feeling
inadequate and having difﬁculty liking yourself, you stand a better
chance of arriving at your own solutions to the problems you face. I
strive to create a therapeutic climate that will enable you to sort out
your thoughts and feelings, which will lead to making better decisions
and changes. Mere reassurance and advice do not facilitate
self-examination, but a willingness to listen to you can encourage you
to share what you are feeling in the moment, to engage in signiﬁcant
self-disclosure, and to explore your struggles.

72

CHAPTER SEVEN

Even though you may have stayed with some intense feelings and allowed
yourself to experience the power of your feelings in your body, you
might become uncomfortable and want to distance yourself from some
feelings that arise as you talk with me. You may express fears about
getting involved with me and display resistance toward any attempt at
delving into deeply personal concerns. You tell me, "I'm afraid that if
I get deep into my feelings I'll get stuck and won't be able to get out
of it. I'm afraid if I let myself feel that I'll get out of control.
There is a part of me that wants to get into my emotions, yet another
part of me wants to get into my head and keep control." Whether or not
your fears are expressed, they tend to give rise to some ambivalence:
the desire to reveal yourself is balanced by the reluctance to expose
yourself. To work with your ambivalence, I suggest a role play in which
we each take one of these two sides of yourself. Gestalt therapy and
psychodrama often employ an empty-chair or twochair technique. This is
another way to act out your present feelings in the therapy session.
Having a dialogue with various aspects within yourself, or between
yourself and another individual, is particularly useful when you are
feeling ambivalent about a direction to pursue or when you are in some
kind of conﬂ ict situation. I suggest that rather than talking about a
situation, you make it present by actually bringing to life a conﬂ ict
you are experiencing. You tell me that you often feel very young and
awkward when you try to relate your accomplishments to your mother. I
say to you: "So, sitting in the chair you are in now, become that young
and awkward person and talk to this other (empty) chair---to your
mother. What would you like your mother to know about your
accomplishments? What are you saying to your mother in this scene?" Next
I ask you to switch chairs and become your mother and reply the way you
expect her to---or reply in the manner that you hope she would. By
bringing emotionally laden material or a conﬂ ict into the present
through this two-chair exercise, you and I get a better understanding of
how you struggle with relationships or with feeling young and foolish.
Experiential methods adapted from psychodrama and Gestalt therapy tend
to facilitate a deeper understanding and insight, as well as a greater
emotional connection to your words. An alternative way I might work with
your feelings about your mother is to suggest that you participate in a
soliloquy, another psychodrama technique. Imagine yourself in a place
where you can think out loud (soliloquize) and say what you are thinking
and feeling. This could be a useful follow-up intervention to the
two-chair dialogue between you and your mother. This intervention
facilitates clariﬁcation and an open expression of what you may be
experiencing internally but not expressing verbally. Future projection,
another psychodrama technique, is designed to help you express and
clarify concerns you have about your future. An anticipated event is
brought into the present moment and acted out. In this case, you enact a
version of the way you hope a situation will ideally unfold between you
and your mother. Of course, you could enact a dreaded fear of tomorrow
with the most horrible outcome. For instance, your mother might tell you
that she does not expect you to ever accomplish anything of any merit.
Once you clarify your hopes

Emotive Focus in Counseling

73

for a particular outcome, you are in a better position to take speciﬁc
steps that will enable you to achieve the future you desire.\*

Working With an Emotive Focus Many clients have a fear of emotional
connection. Out of self-protection, they may compartmentalize their
emotions and attitudes, which leads to a damming up of emotions. In
therapy, when clients are able to reconnect their emotions and bodily
reactions to speciﬁc events in life, emotions tend to be released---
tears, laughter, anger, vulnerability, guilt, hope. This is the
catharsis that often accompanies the experiential aspect of therapy. If
clients are given the opportunity to talk and if the therapist pays
attention to what clients are communicating, this alone may be enough to
trigger intense emotional reactions. Why is emotional release so
important? There is a connection between physical health and emotional
health. Abundant research teaches us that many physical illnesses and
psychosomatic symptoms are the result of bottling up emotions. If you
repress your anger, you pay a price for this. If you are chronically
under intense stress, your body may react with a host of illnesses. If
you hold in your emotional pain, you expend a great deal of energy, and
this takes a toll on your body. Clearly, there are links between
repressing emotions and symptoms such as headaches, asthma, backaches,
arthritis, and muscular tension. I am convinced that it takes a great
deal of energy to deny emotional pain, and denied emotions often are
expressed in the body. For example, if you are excessively blocked from
your grief after a signiﬁcant loss or death of someone you love, the
result can be a chronic sense of pain. This unexpressed pain is likely
to prevent you from being emotionally open to experiencing the fullness
of other relationships. Experiential techniques borrowed from
psychodrama such as empty-chair work, soliloquy, future projection, role
reversal, and role playing can help to heal an emotional wound. If
clients have blocked sadness and grief over losing a special person,
either through death or the breakup of a relationship, this unexpressed
pain tends to keep them stuck. It can also interfere with intimacy
because they fear once again experiencing a loss. The catharsis that
occurs in therapy is a release of pent-up feelings, which facilitates
the healing process. I don't think it is necessary to press for
catharsis as an end in itself, however. For some clients, expressing
intense emotions may be contraindicated. Blatner (1985) points out that
this emotional release occurs when the sense of self expands in any of
four categories: abreaction when one rediscovers one's previously
disowned feelings; renewed hope in discovering how those feelings can be
integrated into one's life; relief that one's full being can be
accepted; and a deepened sense of signiﬁcance as one ﬁnds meaning in
life. Although catharsis is a natural part of many of the experiential
or emotionally focused therapies \*For a more detailed discussion of
other techniques I might employ with you in an emotionally focused
manner, refer to Chapters 9 and 11 of this book and to Corey (2008,
chap. 8) and Corey (2009b, chap. 8). See also Jon Frew's Gestalt
approach with Ruth in Case Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy
(Corey, 2009a, chap. 6).

74

CHAPTER SEVEN

(especially Gestalt therapy, existential therapy, person-centered
therapy, and psychodrama), it is not a goal in itself. Rather, it is an
indicator of emotional expansion and integration. Blatner (1985)
suggests that dramatic emotional releases should not become the
exclusive focus in therapeutic work, for subtle and gentle catharses can
also result in healing. Insight, or gaining an increased awareness of a
problem situation, often follows the process of an emotional release.
Insight is the cognitive shift that connects the awareness of the
various emotional experiences with some meaningful narrative or growing
understanding. Insight adds a degree of understanding to the catharsis
and allows clients to begin the essential process of gaining control
over inappropriate modes of either suppressing or expressing those
feelings. Further, clients gradually come to a cognitive and emotional
(or experiential) understanding that they no longer have to continue
living as they did before. Both Gestalt therapy and psychodrama
frequently involve some form of catharsis. Although there is value in
catharsis, my experience with therapy groups has taught me time and
again how essential it is to provide a context in which clients can come
to an understanding of how their bottled-up emotions have affected both
themselves and their relationships. Yet emotional release and
self-understanding alone are not the only ingredients of lasting changes
in thinking, feeling, and behaving. Integrating insights and developing
and practicing more effective behaviors is cognitive work. Formulating
action plans toward the end of a therapy session is often most
effective. Take time to make a few comments about the process and
determine what can be done to apply new understandings in daily life.
One excellent way to help clients achieve closure on emotional issues is
to have them begin to think about the meaning of their heightened
emotional states. Encourage clients to formulate their own
interpretations of their problem situations and to reﬂect on how their
beliefs and decisions may be contributing to some of the emotional
turmoil they are reexperiencing.

Working With Ruth in Identifying and Exploring Feelings See Session 7
(Emotive Focus in Counseling) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling.
The person-centered approach stresses that one of the ﬁrst stages in the
therapy process involves identifying, clarifying, and learning how to
express feelings. I encourage Ruth to talk about any feelings she is
aware of, especially those that are a source of difﬁculty. These
feelings may be vague and difﬁcult to identify at ﬁrst. One of Ruth's
main therapeutic goals is to come to terms with her inner truths, which
involves her having a better sense of what she thinks and feels.
Greenberg, Rice, and Elliot (1993) describe the steps involved in the
process of attaining this expanded awareness, which I will integrate in
the discussion of my work with Ruth here.

Emotive Focus in Counseling

75

To facilitate Ruth's experiential emotional process, I must establish a
sense of safety in the therapy situation. If I can create a
nonjudgmental and accepting environment, I hope that eventually Ruth
will be able to unconditionally accept herself and all of her feelings.
During the early stages of our sessions, I rely on listening with
understanding. I encourage her to talk about what most concerns her and
what recent events have led to her decision to come to therapy at this
time. Greenberg and colleagues (1993) refer to this as encouraging
"storytelling." If I can really hear Ruth's deeper verbal and nonverbal
messages, some of which may not be fully clear to her, I can respond to
her in a way that lets her know that I have some appreciation for what
it is like in her world. (Grasping the subjective or experiential world
of clients is a key concept of many theoretical orientations including
existential therapy, person-centered therapy, Gestalt therapy, and
Adlerian therapy.) I need to do more than merely reﬂect what I hear her
saying; I need to share with her my reactions as I listen to her, and
perhaps how I am being affected by her in the session. The more I am
able to communicate that I understand and accept the feelings she has,
the less need she has to deny or deﬂect her feelings. As a result, her
capacity for clearly identifying what she is feeling at any moment
gradually increases. There is a great deal of value in letting Ruth tell
her story in the way she chooses. The way she walks into the ofﬁce, her
gestures, her style of speech, the details she chooses to go into, and
what she decides to relate and not to relate provide me with clues to
her world. By being attentive and tracking what she is doing in the
moment, I am getting a larger picture of her world. Certainly I am not
getting the entire story, but it is possible to grasp signiﬁcant samples
of her story. At this time she is giving me the "short version" of her
life story. I will inquire about her presentation as a way to understand
the personal meanings of her thoughts and feelings pertaining to events
in her life. My interventions are aimed at checking to make sure that I
am understanding her accurately and conveying to her my understanding of
her situation. Here I am inﬂuenced by concepts from the person-centered
approach such as listening with understanding, presence, and focusing on
the subjective aspects of a client's experiencing. If I do too much
structuring too soon or if I am too directive, I will interfere with
Ruth's typical style of presenting herself. So, at this early stage of
counseling, I agree with the person-centered therapists who stress
attending and listening on the counselor's part and focus on the
productive use of silence. Although I am not inclined to promote long
silences early in counseling, there is value in not jumping in too soon
when silences occur. Instead of coming to the rescue, it is better to
explore the meanings of the silence. To help Ruth express and explore
her feelings, I draw heavily on Gestalt therapy experiments. I teach her
to pay attention to what is emerging in her awareness. I am guided by
the shifts in her awareness, and together we create experiments that
grow out of her present-centered awareness. The emphasis is on our
dialogue and the quality of contact we are able to make in the therapy
session. Because she has yet to work through her feelings of not feeling
valued for who she is, such concerns surface in her therapy. Ruth is
aware that her value comes from the functions she performs for her
family. She does not feel that she is valued apart from what she is able
to do for others.

76

CHAPTER SEVEN

I invite Ruth to experience her feelings fully and bring whatever she is
feeling into the present by reliving an event surrounding these feelings
rather than by merely reporting outside events or long-standing themes
in her life. For instance, if she says that she is sad when she thinks
about how people in her family do not give her recognition in her own
right, I ask that she stay with the sadness. If she can, I encourage her
to share at this moment how she is experiencing her sadness. If she
reports feeling tense, I ask her how she experiences this tension and
where it is located in her body. I encourage her to make contact with
her feelings by asking her to "be that feeling." My rationale for doing
this is based on my belief that direct experiencing is more therapeutic
than talking about a feeling or event. Thus, if Ruth has a knot in her
stomach, she can intensify her feeling of tension by "becoming the knot,
giving it voice and personality." If I notice that she has moist eyes, I
may direct her to "be her tears now." By putting words to her tears, she
avoids abstractly intellectualizing about all the reasons she is sad or
tense. Before she can change her feelings, she must allow herself to
fully experience these feelings. The experiential therapies give me
valuable tools for guiding her to the expression of feelings. In this
session I have made many different interventions, one of which is to ask
Ruth to talk to me as if I am her husband. I ask her to stay with
whatever she is experiencing, paying particular attention to her body
and to the emotions welling up in her, doing her best to express these
emerging feelings. Role-playing Ruth's husband gives me an opportunity
to observe how she presents herself to her husband and to get some sense
of how he might receive her verbal and nonverbal messages. For her the
role play is likely to trigger feelings surrounding a speciﬁc situation
with her husband, which brings her work to a deeper level than if she
had merely reported a situation. Toward the end of an emotionally
intense role-playing session, I suggest homework to Ruth involving
writing a letter to her husband expressing some of the feelings that
just came up for her. But I stress to her the importance of not giving
him this letter---at least not now. Writing the letter may trigger
memories, and she may experience further emotional release. I hope this
will help her begin thinking about the inﬂuence her husband has on her
life. By writing the letter, Ruth is likely to gain clarity and a new
perspective on how she wants to approach her husband. Even if the letter
is burned or buried after writing, this can be a very therapeutic
exercise because she is able to release feelings that have been kept
under cover. At our next session, I will ask her if she wrote the
letter, and, if she did, what it was like for her to do so. What was she
feeling and thinking as she was writing to her husband? How was she
affected when she read the letter later? Is there anything that she
wants to share with me? The direction of our session could depend on her
response as she provides clues to where we need to go next.

Concluding Comments I have emphasized the role of expressing feelings in
the therapeutic process. Now let me give you a few guidelines for doing
experiential, emotionally focused work with your clients. It is
important for you to be able to experience your own emotions and to
express them in a healthy way. Your ability to be

Emotive Focus in Counseling

77

emotionally present for your clients hinges on how centered you are
yourself and whether you have access to your own emotions. If you are
frightened by your feelings, you won't be able to facilitate a process
with clients that enables them to express and work through their
feelings. If you are scared of your own anger or of anger directed
toward you, it will be quite difﬁcult for you to assist clients in
dealing constructively with their anger. If you have denied your own
pain over signiﬁcant losses, you will not be able to be present for
clients as they open painful subjects in their therapy. If you are
extremely uncomfortable with conﬂict, it is unlikely that you will be
instrumental in helping clients stay with a conﬂict long enough to bring
resolution to a situation. If you are afraid to cry or lose control, how
can you expect to deal with clients who keep their tears inside lest
they get out of control? If your emotions frighten you, chances are that
you will ﬁnd some way to divert your clients' attention away from
intense feelings. If a client is afraid of becoming engulfed in
depression and you are running from depression, how can you
therapeutically engage this individual? To assist your clients, you need
to manage your own emotions. As clients relive painful memories attached
to events, you must be able to care about them without getting lost in
their emotional pain. If you are easily triggered by the emotionally
laden stories of your clients, you may not have what it takes to help
them work through painful scenarios. As your clients affect you
emotionally, be aware of the feelings this evokes in you. Recognize your
own emotional reactions and put them on hold until you can be properly
attended to in your own supervision or therapy sessions. Over time,
experienced counselors learn ways to use their emotional reactions to
clients as helpful forms of information about the client, the process of
therapy, and themselves. I have placed a great deal of importance on
assisting clients in the process of identifying, experiencing, and
exploring their emotions. This does not imply that you should insist
that your clients always deal with their emotions. Begin where your
clients are, and determine what would be most useful for them at that
particular time. If you push too hard for emotional expression, clients
are likely to become uncomfortable and defensive. Keep in mind that the
emotional work needs to be connected with what clients are thinking and
doing. It may serve little therapeutic purpose to elicit feelings from
clients if this is done mainly for dramatic effect. After reading this
chapter on the emotive focus in counseling, take time to reﬂect on the
following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on the emotive
focus. • What are some of the main beneﬁts and limitations of an emotive
focus in counseling? • What are some ways to integrate cognitive and
behavioral work in assisting clients in processing an emotional
experience? • If you were a client in counseling, what value would you
place on expressing and exploring your emotions? • What are your
reactions to the following statement? "Often the best route to getting
clients to examine their cognitions is by encouraging them to identify,
express, and talk about what they are feeling."

CHAPTER EIGHT

k

Behavioral Focus in Counseling The term behavior therapy refers to the
application of numerous techniques and procedures that are rooted in a
variety of learning theories. No single theory undergirds the practice
of contemporary behavior therapy, nor does this approach take a single
form in practice. Behavior therapy includes both traditional behavior
therapy and cognitive behavior therapy. My integrated behavioral focus
includes many behavior therapy methods, along with other action-oriented
therapies, such as multimodal therapy, rational emotive behavior
therapy, cognitive therapy, reality therapy, and solutionfocused brief
therapy. From an integrative perspective, I will address some basic
concepts that most of these theoretical orientations share and describe
a range of behavioral techniques associated with these other
action-oriented models. The behavioral perspective stands in contrast to
the relationship-oriented and experiential approaches described in
previous chapters. Experiential approaches place considerable emphasis
on clients' achieving insight into their problems as a prerequisite for
change. Behavior therapists operate on the premise that changes in
behavior can occur prior to understanding oneself and that behavioral
changes may well lead to an increased level of selfunderstanding. I draw
on a wide variety of behavioral techniques derived from social learning
theory, such as reinforcement, modeling, shaping, cognitive
restructuring, desensitization, in vivo exposure, relaxation training,
coaching, behavioral rehearsal, and mindfulness. Indeed, behavioral
interventions can be incorporated into many of the relationship-oriented
therapies, and by doing so clients can consolidate their learning and
continue to solve new problems more effectively. The behavior-oriented
perspective I describe in this chapter assists clients in exploring how
past and present thoughts, feelings, and behaviors have worked for them
and what they have cost. The action-oriented therapies provide methods
that are measurable, plan-speciﬁc, and realistic. From an integrative
perspective, behavioral methods can be usefully combined with the
relationshiporiented approaches. I particularly value the call for
action that is typical of -- 78 --

Behavioral Focus in Counseling

79

behavioral approaches because I believe such actions are necessary to
bring about signiﬁcant personal change.\*

Beneﬁts and Limitations of a Behavioral Focus The behaviorally oriented
models place emphasis on speciﬁcs and the need for a systematic
application of therapeutic techniques. Clients often make global
statements such as "I feel unloved; life has no meaning." Behavioral
approaches aim toward greater speciﬁcity so that focused therapy can
proceed. A behavior therapist might reply like this to such a global
statement: "Who speciﬁcally is not loving you? What is going on in your
life to bring about this meaninglessness? What are some speciﬁc things
you might be doing that contribute to the state you are in? What speciﬁc
behaviors, thoughts, or feelings would you most like to change?" One of
the major beneﬁts of a behavioral focus is the wide variety of speciﬁc
techniques available in counseling diverse client populations; these
techniques have the advantage of empirical support for their
effectiveness. Because the behavioral emphasis is on doing, as opposed
to merely talking about problems and gathering insights, clients
formulate plans of action for changing behavior. Behavioral
interventions can be employed to treat a wide array of problems: helping
people stay with an exercise plan, managing stress, and treating
hypertension, to name a few. In my view, behavior therapy is at its best
when it is used integratively. Clients who look for action plans and
behavioral change are likely to cooperate with behavioral approaches
because they include concrete methods for dealing with problems of
living. In addition, a behavioral focus ﬁts well with short-term
counseling. When using the behavioral perspective, listen very carefully
to your clients and allow them to express and explore their feelings
before implementing a treatment plan. The basic therapeutic conditions
stressed by the person-centered therapist---active listening, accurate
empathy, positive regard, genuineness, respect, and immediacy---can and
should be integrated into a behavioral framework. If you are too eager
to work toward resolving problems, you may pay little attention to
exploring feelings. There are pitfalls in focusing too rigidly on
clients' presenting problems and missing the deeper message. Thus, if
you are teaching clients assertion skills that they can use in a job
interview, remain open to addressing their thoughts (self-talk)
associated with going to the interview as well as their emotional
reactions (anxiety).

\*In the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, the
focus is on a follow-up to Stan's homework and making plans for use
outside of the session. Session 7 illustrates behavioral methods of
teaching Stan assertiveness training and setting up realistic homework.
Session 9 demonstrates how to formulate a concrete action plan based on
reality therapy notions.

80

CHAPTER EIGHT

Understanding the Seven Modalities of Human Functioning Assessment is a
crucial step in using a behavioral approach to therapeutic change.
Arnold Lazarus has provided a useful way to obtain information and
target personal goals. The essence of Lazarus's BASIC I.D. model is that
the complex personality of humans can be divided into seven major areas
of functioning: B ⫽ behavior; A ⫽ affective responses; S ⫽ sensations; I
⫽ images; C ⫽ cognitions; I ⫽ interpersonal relationships; and D ⫽
drugs, biological functions, nutrition, and exercise (Lazarus, 1997a,
1997b, 2005, 2006, 2008). Although these modalities are interactive,
they can be considered discrete functions. Clients are social beings who
move, feel, sense, imagine, and think. A comprehensive assessment of
these seven modalities of human functioning is an important part of the
behavioral approach. The BASIC I.D. is the cognitive map that provides
systematic attention to each aspect of human functioning. Let's take a
closer look at each of the modalities in the BASIC I.D. 1. Behavior.
This modality refers primarily to overt behaviors, including acts,
habits, and reactions that are observable and measurable. Some questions
asked are: "What would you like to change?" "What would you like to
start doing?" "What would you like to stop doing?" 2. Affect. This
dimension refers to emotions, moods, and strong feelings. Questions
asked include: "What emotions do you experience most often?" "What
emotions are problematic for you?" 3. Sensation. This area refers to the
ﬁve basic senses of touch, taste, smell, sight, and hearing. A typical
question asked is: "Do you suffer from unpleasant sensations, such as
pains, aches, dizziness, and so forth?" 4. Imagery. This area pertains
to ways in which we picture ourselves, and it includes memories, dreams,
and fantasies. A few questions asked are: "How do you see yourself now?"
"How would you like to be able to see yourself in the future?" 5.
Cognition. This modality refers to insights, ideas, opinions, self-talk,
and judgments that constitute one's fundamental values, attitudes, and
beliefs. Questions include: "What are the values and beliefs you most
cherish?" "What are some negative things you say to yourself?" "What are
the main 'shoulds,' 'oughts,' and 'musts' in your life?" "How do they
impede effective living?" 6. Interpersonal relationships. This area
refers to interactions with other people. Examples of questions include:
"What do you expect from the signiﬁcant people in your life?" "What do
they expect from you?" "Are there any relationships with others that you
hope to change?" 7. Drugs/biology. This modality includes more than
drugs; it takes into consideration one's nutritional habits and exercise
patterns. Typical questions are: "Do you have any concerns about your
health?" "Do you take any prescribed drugs?" "What are your habits
pertaining to diet, exercise, and physical ﬁtness?"

Behavioral Focus in Counseling

81

Once this initial assessment is complete, more focused discussions can
proceed in identiﬁed problem areas. This leads to identiﬁcation of
therapy goals, the ﬁrst step in a treatment plan.

Becoming the Client: Experiencing Behavior-Oriented Therapy Put yourself
in the role of the client to experience the beneﬁts of behaviororiented
therapy. The behavioral methods described in this section can be most
useful in translating your insights into concrete action plans. As my
client, you will be offered a range of behavioral strategies, but I
still want to attend to what you are thinking and feeling. We talk about
how your self-talk and thinking inﬂuences how you feel, and we explore
how your thinking and feeling patterns inﬂuence what you are doing. By
focusing on what you are doing, you can make an evaluation of the degree
to which your present behavior is getting you what you want. In working
on speciﬁc behaviors, we begin with an assessment to identify patterns.
A place for us to start working is by doing a brief, but comprehensive,
assessment using the BASIC I.D. model. Once this initial assessment of
the seven behavioral areas is completed, the next phase of work explores
problem areas and allows me to understand you more fully. We are then
ready to identify a set of therapy goals that both of us mutually agree
are suitable for your therapy. Which of these behavioral goals will you
set for yourself? • Learning to ask clearly and directly for what you
want • Learning to be assertive without becoming aggressive • Acquiring
habits that lead to physical and psychological relaxation • Developing
speciﬁc habits for a healthy lifestyle (exercising regularly,
controlling eating patterns, reducing stress) • Monitoring your behavior
or cognitions as a means to change • Recognizing and challenging
self-destructive thought patterns or critical self-statements that lead
to problematic behaviors • Learning communication and social skills •
Developing problem-solving strategies to cope with a variety of
situations encountered in daily life Once you have identiﬁed your goals,
I help you break down these general goals into speciﬁc, concrete,
measurable goals that can be pursued in a systematic fashion. For
example, if you say you'd like to feel more adequate in social
situations, I ask: "What are you doing or not doing that seems to be
related to your feeling of inadequacy? What are the conditions under
which you feel inadequate? Can you give me some concrete examples of
situations in which you feel inadequate? In what speciﬁc ways would you
like to change your behavior?" Borrowing from reality therapy, I ﬁ nd
Wubbolding's (2000) WDEP formulation to be especially useful in my work
with you.

82

CHAPTER EIGHT

• W stands for exploring wants, needs, and perceptions. I do not tell
you what you should change but encourage you to examine what you want. •
D stands for exploring the direction of your current behavior and
determining what you are doing to attain this. • E stands for
evaluation, which consists of you making your own evaluation about what
you are actually doing. It is up to you to decide how well your current
behavior is working for you. • P stands for planning. In applying
reality therapy, we develop speciﬁc, realistic plans and then talking
about how you might carry them out in everyday life. Knowing what you
are willing to change is the ﬁrst step. Through self-evaluation you
determine what you have been doing that is not working. This lowers
resistance and opens you up to other behaviors or directions. Knowing
how to bring about this change is the next step. At each of these points
in the WDEP model, speciﬁc questions get you to look at what you are
doing and ﬁgure out better ways to arrange your life. After you and I
work through the steps in the WDEP model and identify therapeutic goals,
we decide on the various avenues by which these goals can be
accomplished. You may have trouble reaching your goals because your
plans are not sufﬁciently thought out, which makes them difﬁcult to
implement. By developing and assessing behavioral strategies together,
we can move in the direction of making your vision a reality. An aspect
I particularly like about behavior therapy and related action therapies
is the wide range of behavioral techniques available to assist you in
moving in the direction you desire. Here is a sample of the behavioral
strategies we might apply to meet your personal goals: • You indicate
that you experience a good deal of anxiety. You ﬁnd yourself rushing and
doing many things at once. I teach you a few basic relaxation procedures
that you agree to practice once a day. • You say that you want to get
better at asking for what you want, without sounding apologetic. I use
strategies such as coaching, modeling, and assertion training to teach
you how to approach others more effectively. • You want to improve your
time management skills. You ﬁnd that you procrastinate a great deal and
then rush to complete projects. Together we brainstorm possibilities for
effectively dealing with procrastination. We come up with a number of
speciﬁc points for better managing your time as a student: focus on
demanding subjects ﬁrst, set goals in number of pages of a reading
assignment, create a reward system, avoid guilting yourself about what
you don't do, give yourself credit for what you do, stop the
interruptions, allow for short breaks. • You would like to reduce your
anxiety when you feel you are being tested, which prevents you from
going on job interviews. I begin with a speciﬁc analysis of the nature
of your anxiety by asking how you experience this anxiety in speciﬁc
situations, including what you actually do in these situations: "When
did it begin? What are some situations when you most experience this
anxiety? What do you do at these times? What are your feelings and
thoughts in these

Behavioral Focus in Counseling

83

situations? How do your present fears interfere with obtaining what you
want? What are the consequences of your behaviors in threatening
situations?" After this assessment, we deﬁne speciﬁc behavioral goals,
and I introduce strategies to help you reduce your anxiety to a
manageable level. For example, you state one of your goals as: "I will
arrange for one job interview during this week and report back at our
next session." I get a commitment from you to work toward this goal, as
well as any others you agree to at later times, and together we evaluate
your progress toward meeting these goals throughout the duration of
therapy. • You are expected to actively work outside of your counseling
sessions. At each of your sessions we collaboratively design homework
activities that enable you to take into your daily life what you are
learning in the ofﬁce. Homework is carefully designed and is aimed at
getting you to carry out positive actions and induce emotional and
attitudinal change. This practice extends the value of the brief time we
have during a session and fosters an active stance on your part in
working on your goals. Toward the end of therapy, I encourage you to
review your progress, make plans, and identify strategies for dealing
with continuing or potential problems. Going back to the multimodal
BASIC I.D. assessment grid, you can now see how it is possible to have a
behavioral orientation in a broad sense. Behavior includes emotions,
sensations, imagery, cognition, interpersonal relationships, and health.
Because you are an integrated being functioning in all of these
modalities, a behavioral focus in counseling must attend to more than
simply what you are doing. Your thoughts, feelings, and physiological
reactions inﬂuence your behaving. As we work on speciﬁc behaviors that
we have targeted for exploration, I also need to be mindful of thoughts
and feelings you are experiencing pertaining to the behavioral
dimension. Throughout our work together, I encourage you to see the
value in actively trying new behavior rather than leaving action to
chance. One way of fostering an active stance is to formulate a clear
contract that includes writing out a plan of action. In this way you are
continually being confronted with what you want and what you are willing
to do.

Developing a Behavioral Contract Contracts are a useful frame of
reference for evaluating the outcomes of counseling, but developing an
effective contract is not as easy as it may seem. I borrow some speciﬁc
aspects of formulating and carrying out a plan from a prominent reality
therapist, Robert Wubbolding (2000). Here are some speciﬁc suggestions
for creating an effective plan. • Plans are based on the client's
personal goals. Begin by having the client specify desired changes.
Goals should be measurable, attainable, positive, and signiﬁcant to the
client. • Goals must be translated into target behaviors. Ask what
speciﬁc behaviors the client wants to increase or decrease. Design plans
around the answer to this question.

84

CHAPTER EIGHT

• Once behavioral changes the client wants to acquire are evaluated, an
action program to bring about change is devised. • Encourage the client
to come up with clear plans for what he or she will do today, tomorrow,
and the next day to bring about change and to anticipate what might get
in the way of these plans. • It is a good idea to begin the plan as soon
as possible. Ask the client, "What are you willing to do today to begin
to change your life?" "What are you going to do now to attain your
stated goals?" • Good plans are simple and easy to understand. Plans
should be ﬂexible and open to modiﬁcation as the client gains a deeper
understanding of the speciﬁc behaviors she or he wants to change. • The
plan should be within the limits of the client's motivation and
capacities. Like goals, plans should be realistic, attainable, and
reﬂective of what the client needs and wants. • Good plans are speciﬁc.
Develop speciﬁcity by addressing questions such as "What?" "Where?"
"With whom?" "When?" and "How often?" • Plans are best stated in
positive terms by pointing out what will be done rather than what won't
be done. • It is a good idea to develop plans the client can carry out
alone. Plans that are contingent on what others will do or not do can be
restrictive and difﬁcult to evaluate. • In choosing action-oriented
steps, it is essential that the client considers his or her internal and
external resources and limitations. • Effective plans are repetitive,
and ideally, are performed daily. • Effective planning involves
process-centered activities, such as applying for a job, writing a
letter to a friend, taking a yoga class, devoting 2 hours a week to
volunteer work, or taking a vacation. • It may be necessary to revise
the plan from time to time. Ask the client, "Is your plan helpful?" If
the plan does not work, it can be reevaluated and alternatives
considered. • When a plan is not working, it is often the result of
having a mismatch between the client's goals and the plan, or failure to
break each step down into manageable parts. Creating and carrying out
behavioral plans enables clients to gain effective control over their
lives. This is clearly the teaching aspect of counseling, which is best
directed toward providing clients with new information and assisting
them in the discovery of more effective ways of getting what they want
and need. Resolutions and plans are empty unless there is a decision to
carry them out. It is crucial that clients commit to a deﬁnite plan that
they can realistically accomplish. The ultimate responsibility for
making plans and implementing them rests with clients. Clients are
learning speciﬁc skills with the expectation that they will be
responsible for transferring what they learn in the counseling setting
to everyday life. The therapist's goal is to consistently encourage
clients to learn speciﬁc information and skills for coping with a range
of challenges they will encounter in day-to-day living. The expectation
is that clients can become

Behavioral Focus in Counseling

85

their own counselor by learning a set of skills for effective living
that they can apply not only to present problems but also to future
difﬁculties.

Working With Ruth Using a Behavioral Focus See Session 8 (Behavioral
Focus in Counseling) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. My
initial focus is on doing a thorough assessment of Ruth's current
behavior. I use the BASIC I.D. model to obtain useful information and
target personal goals. *I ask Ruth to monitor what she is doing so that
we can create baseline data to evaluate any changes. We then continue
our work by collaboratively developing concrete goals. I use a wide
range of cognitive and behavioral techniques to help Ruth achieve her
goals, including stress-reduction techniques, assertion training,
behavior rehearsals, modeling, coaching, systematic desensitization, in
vivo exposure, ﬂooding, mindfulness methods, and relaxation methods. I
emphasize learning new coping behaviors that Ruth can use in everyday
situations. She practices these activities both during her therapy
sessions and during the week outside of the ofﬁce. **Ruth indicates that
she has difﬁculty focusing her attention and that she continually thinks
about all the things she "should" be doing. To assist her in learning
how to direct her attention to whatever she is doing each moment, I
introduce mindfulness practice, which can help her to become alive to
the moment. Mindfulness is the act of being intentional in experiencing
in a nonjudgmental way what is happening in the present. Although this
sounds simple, most people actually ﬁnd it quite challenging to be fully
present and alive to the moment. I teach Ruth speciﬁc mindfulness skills
in the therapy sessions. Then, for homework, I ask her to monitor her
experience of mindfulness practice each day in her journal. We then
discuss her progress in using mindfulness skills as a way to center
herself and reduce stress in her life. I also suggest that she read Jon
Kabat-Zinn's (1990) book, Full Catastrophe Living, and use his
mindfulness meditation practice tapes daily at home. Ruth and I discuss
Kabat-Zinn's notion that each moment of our waking life is a moment that
can bring us greater stillness and awareness. We also discuss
Kabat-Zinn's (1990) statement: "Mindfulness practice provides an
opportunity to walk along the path of your own life with your eyes open,
awake instead of half unconscious, responding consciously in the world
instead of reacting automatically, mindlessly" (p. 442). In our sessions
each week, I ask how her practice is going and whether she is
progressing on applying these mindfulness principles to her everyday
living.*** *For a detailed description of a multimodal-behavior
therapist's perspective on Ruth, written by Arnold Lazarus, see Case
Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a, chap. 8). **For
further discussion of behavior therapy and other action-oriented
approaches, see Corey (2009b, chap. 9), Corsini and Wedding (2008,
chap. 7), Lazarus (1997a), Prochaska and Norcross (2007, chap. 9), Sharf
(2008, chap. 8), and Wubbolding (2000).*** Some excellent resources on
using mindfulness practice in psychotherapy are Dimidjian and Linehan
(2003); Kabat-Zinn (1990); Germer (2005a, 2005b); and Germer, Siegel,
and Fulton (2005).

86

CHAPTER EIGHT

How do Ruth and I determine the degree to which she is progressing? What
criteria do we use to make this determination? A fundamental part of
behavior therapy consists of the work clients do outside of the therapy
hour. Thus, on a regular basis, Ruth carries out homework assignments
and then we evaluate the results during our therapy sessions. This gives
us both an index of her progress. Furthermore, behavioral interventions
have measurable results. The techniques we used are continually veriﬁed
to determine how well they are working. Actual changes in Ruth's
behavior provide critical information for making this evaluation. Her
own evaluation of how much progress she sees and how satisﬁed she is by
the outcomes is a major factor in assessing therapeutic results. In a
particular counseling session, Ruth tells me that she feels encouraged
to go forward and make some of the changes that are important to her.
She brings up the subject of her weight. As we talk about what her
weight means to her, Ruth mentions that she does not exercise and that
she does not have much energy. I need to be careful not to make a
decision for her regarding developing an exercise program and managing
her weight. Instead, it is critical to ascertain what she wants in these
areas. Although I am utilizing behavioral strategies with her, I also
employ techniques from feminist therapy such as gender-role analysis and
gender-role intervention. This involves asking her to recall parental
messages she received related to weight and appearance. The technique of
gender-role intervention places Ruth's concern about her weight in the
context of society's role expectations for women. My aim is to provide
her with insight into the ways social issues and unrealistic standards
of the "perfect body" are affecting her psychologically. This leads to a
discussion of unrealistic strivings and a critical appraisal of how she
measures her worth. After discussing which messages Ruth wants to
change, we implement a plan for creating these changes. She states that
she wants to develop a regular exercise program. If her program is to
work well for her, she must identify what type of exercise is
appropriate for her. Once she is clear that she wants to commit herself
to regular exercise, we are ready to formulate an action plan that will
help her get what she wants. Together we determine that walking will be
a vital part of her exercise program. We work out the details, including
how often she will walk and for how long. I encourage her to use her
friend as a source of support in helping her stick with her plans.
Furthermore, I strongly recommend that she ﬁnd ways to monitor her
progress and keep herself accountable in following her plans for
appropriate eating and exercising habits. Working from an integrative
perspective, it is imperative that I also attend to Ruth's thoughts and
feelings about her weight and her body image in general. Her self-talk
is not helpful to her in this area. She castigates herself about not
looking right and about being weak because she is overweight. Her
negative self-talk leads to feelings of defeat, depression, and anger
with herself. When her clothes don't ﬁt, she tells herself she is
totally unattractive and feels upset and discouraged. It will not be
enough to simply chart out the steps in a behavioral program for weight
control through exercise and dieting. We will also need to address her
thoughts and emotions at the same time as we are working behaviorally.
Placing her concerns about her body in the context of

Behavioral Focus in Counseling

87

societal standards that dictate what constitutes the ideal physical
appearance may aid in Ruth's understanding. Because her concerns involve
her thoughts, feelings, and actions, it is necessary to work on all
these levels to some extent, even though we may focus on one particular
dimension at certain times in counseling.

Concluding Comments The behaviorally oriented models place emphasis on
speciﬁcs and the need for a systematic application of therapeutic
techniques. One of the major beneﬁts of a behavioral focus is the wide
variety of speciﬁc techniques available in counseling diverse client
populations; these techniques have the advantage of empirical support
for their effectiveness. Because the behavioral emphasis is on doing,
clients formulate action plans designed to change behavior. Clients who
desire behavioral change tend to cooperate with behavioral strategies
because they include concrete methods for dealing with the problems of
living. I recommend that you review the key themes of the behavioral
approaches described in this chapter and apply them to yourself. Apply
the WDEP model (of reality therapy) to identify a behavior you are
willing to change. This might be a behavior you'd like to reduce or a
behavior you'd like to acquire. Once you have selected your target
behavior, apply the guidelines for developing an action plan to
yourself. After reading this chapter on the behavioral focus in
counseling, take time to reﬂect on the following questions as a way of
clarifying your thoughts on the behavioral focus. • What is one of your
behaviors that is not working for you at this time? • What is the
importance of developing a speciﬁc and realistic action plan as a
requisite for change? • What value do you see in applying
Lazarus'sBASICI.D.model as a way to conduct an assessment of a client? •
What are the characteristics of an effective plan? What are some
guidelines you would use to help your clients design plans for change? •
How do you imagine it would be for you to be a client in
behavior-oriented therapy? • What concepts and techniques from the
behavioral approaches ﬁt into your personal approach to counseling?

CHAPTER NINE

k

An Integrative Perspective

The early history of counseling was full of theoretical wars as
practitioners argued over the "best" way to bring about personality
change. Many practitioners and scholars were resistant to psychotherapy
integration, often to the point of being blind to alternative theories
and of ignoring effective methods from other theoretical schools.
However, since the 1980s most therapists have seriously considered
integrating the best from the various schools (Norcross, 2005).
Therapists now acknowledge the limitations inherent in a speciﬁc theory
and the potential value of other theoretical systems, and most
practitioners use some form of integration today. In a survey of 2,281
respondents conducted by the Psychotherapy Networker ("The Top 10,"
2007), clinicians were asked to identify their theoretical orientations
and the kind of therapy they actually practiced. Only 4.2% identiﬁed
themselves as relying on one therapy model exclusively; the other 95.8%
claimed they combined a variety of approaches. Most of the participants
in the survey rely on cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) in their
practice. CBT is used in combination with other methods by 68.7% of
these practitioners. An integrative approach is best characterized by
attempts to look beyond and across the conﬁnes of single-school
approaches to see what can be learned and how clients can beneﬁt from
all perspectives (Arkowitz, 1997). Integrative counseling is the
intentional process of selecting concepts and methods from a variety of
systems. It is a creative synthesis of the unique contributions of
diverse theoretical orientations, dynamically integrating concepts and
techniques that ﬁt your unique personality and style. Gold and Stricker
(2006) deﬁne psychotherapy integration as the search for ways in which
the various schools of psychotherapy can inform and be combined, rather
than adhering to a speciﬁc theory of psychotherapy. **For various
perspectives on psychotherapy integration, I highly recommend Norcross
and Goldfried (2005), Handbook of Psychotherapy Integration; and
Stricker and Gold (2006), A Casebook of Psychotherapy Integration.
Reading these edited books will give you a sense of the direction being
taken by the psychotherapy integration movement. In addition to these
sources, many textbooks dealing with counseling theory have a chapter on
integration of therapies. I recommend Corey (2009b, chaps. 15 & 16);
Ivey, D'Andrea, Ivey, and Simek-Morgan (2007, chap. 15); Prochaska and
Norcross (2007, chaps. 15 & 16); and Sharf (2008, chaps. 16 & 17).

-- 88 --

An Integrative Perspective

89

There are multiple pathways to achieving this integration, two of the
most common being technical eclecticism and theoretical integration.
Technical eclecticism tends to focus on differences, chooses from many
approaches, and is a collection of techniques. This path calls for using
techniques from different schools without necessarily subscribing to the
theoretical positions that spawned them (Lazarus, 2008). In contrast,
theoretical integration refers to a conceptual or theoretical creation
beyond a mere blending of techniques. This path has the goal of
producing a conceptual framework that synthesizes the best of two or
more theoretical approaches to produce an outcome richer than that of a
single theory (Norcross, 2005). Theoretical integration is the most
complex, sophisticated, and difﬁcult of all types of integration (Gold &
Stricker, 2006). Arnold Lazarus (1997a), founder of multimodal therapy,
espouses technical (or systematic) eclecticism. Multimodal therapists
borrow from many other therapy systems, using techniques that have been
demonstrated to be effective in dealing with speciﬁc problems. Clinical
effectiveness is determined by the degree of a therapist's ﬂexibility,
versatility, and technical eclecticism (Lazarus, 2008). Lazarus raises
concerns about theoretical eclecticism because he believes blending bits
and pieces of different theories is likely to obfuscate therapeutic
practice. He contends that by remaining theoretically consistent, but
technically eclectic, practitioners can spell out precisely what
interventions they will employ with various clients, as well as the
means by which they select these procedures.\* While I see many
advantages to incorporating a diverse range of techniques from many
different theories, I also think it is possible to incorporate key
principles and concepts from various theoretical orientations. Some
concepts from the experiential approaches blend quite well with
cognitive behavioral approaches. For example, the experiential
approaches emphasize here-and-now awareness, the therapeutic
relationship, and an exploration of feelings---all concepts easily
incorporated into action-oriented therapies. Clients can be asked to
decide what they want to do with present awareness, including making
behavioral plans for change. All the action-oriented therapies depend on
a good rapport between client and therapist. Techniques will not take
root if there is not a good working relationship, and clients are more
likely to cooperate with a therapist's cognitive and behavioral
interventions if they feel the therapist is genuinely interested in
them.

Searching for Common Denominators Across Therapy Schools Another route
to psychotherapy integration is the common factors approach, which
starts by identifying speciﬁc effective ingredients of any group of
psychotherapies (Gold & Stricker, 2006). This approach to integration
searches for common elements across different theoretical systems.
Despite many differences among \*For a more detailed discussion of
technical eclecticism, see Lazarus (1995, 1996, 1997a, 2005, 2006).

90

CHAPTER NINE

the theories, a recognizable core of counseling practice is composed of
nonspeciﬁc variables common to all therapies. These common factors are
thought to be at least as important in accounting for therapeutic
outcomes as the unique factors that differentiate one theory from
another (Norcross, 2005). In his study on the implications of outcome
research on psychotherapy integration, Lambert (1992) concluded that the
common therapeutic factors are divided into four general areas, with the
following percentages accounting for improvement in therapy clients: (1)
client factors and extratherapeutic inﬂuences (40% of the improvement in
therapy), (2) therapeutic relationship factors (30% of improvement), (3)
expectancy and placebo effects (15% of improvement), and (4) speciﬁc
models and techniques (15% of improvement). What is interesting in this
study is the ﬁnding that client factors and the client--therapist
relationship account for 70% of the outcome of psychotherapy. A
surprising ﬁnding is that little evidence supports the superiority of
one theoretical model or technique over another (see Lambert, 1992). The
kind of integration I am suggesting looks for common denominators across
therapeutic schools. However, blending theoretical constructs is more
challenging than utilizing diverse techniques from different schools. If
you attempt to blend theoretical constructs from different orientations
in your own integrative model, you must make sure that these concepts
are compatible and that these frameworks lend themselves to a workable
merger. Some blending simply does not make much conceptual sense. For
instance, psychodynamic theory, which focuses on unconscious factors as
the source of present-day problems, does not blend nicely with theories
that reject the unconscious, such as rational emotive behavior therapy
and reality therapy. Likewise, psychodynamic theories are geared around
central concepts such as exploration of past traumatic events,
exploration of dreams, working through the transference relationship,
and countertransference. The theoretical models of rational emotive
behavior therapy and reality therapy do not allow much room to explore
these theoretical constructs.

The Foundation of My Integrative Approach In this section I present some
elements of my integrative approach to counseling. Existential theory
comes closest to my worldview and serves as the foundation for
constructing my theoretical orientation, but I also draw heavily from
two other related theories---Gestalt therapy and psychodrama. After
brieﬂy describing some of the key concepts and themes from the
existential, Gestalt, and psychodrama orientations, I discuss how I
incorporate basic concepts and techniques from a number of the
action-oriented therapies as well.

Existential Therapy as a Philosophical Base My own philosophical
orientation is strongly inﬂuenced by the existential approach, which
conceives of counseling as a life-changing process. Counseling is a
journey in which the therapist is a guide who facilitates client
exploration. A number of key themes from the existential approach seem
to me to capture the essence of this therapeutic venture. According to
the existentialist view, we

An Integrative Perspective

91

are capable of self-awareness, which is the distinctive capacity that
allows us to reﬂect and to decide. With this awareness we become free
beings who are responsible for choosing the way we live, and thus we
create our own destiny. I like the emphasis on freedom and
responsibility, for this notion challenges us to redesign our lives. I
encourage people to look at the choices they do have, however limited
they may be, and to accept responsibility for choosing for themselves.
However, making choices gives rise to existential anxiety, which is
another basic human characteristic. This anxiety is heightened when we
reﬂect on the reality of death. Facing the inevitable prospect of
eventual death gives the present moment signiﬁcance as we become aware
that we do not have forever to accomplish our goals. The reality of
death is a catalyst that can challenge us to create a life that has
meaning and purpose. We strive toward a meaningful life by recognizing
our freedom and by making a commitment to choose in the face of
uncertainty.\* Both existential therapy and person-centered therapy
place central prominence on the person-to-person relationship. Client
growth occurs through this genuine encounter. The common factors
approach to psychotherapy integration supports the notion that the
quality of the therapeutic relationship is a key factor that inﬂuences
the outcomes of therapy. In my judgment, emphasizing the human quality
of the therapeutic relationship lessens the chances of making counseling
a mechanical process. In thinking about therapy from an existential
perspective, I am not preoccupied with which techniques I might employ
or with creating an agenda for my client. It is not the techniques I use
that make a therapeutic difference; rather, it is the quality of my
relationship with my client that heals. My main interests are in being
as fully present as I am able to be for the client, establishing a
trusting relationship, and moving into the client's subjective world. If
my client is able to sense my presence and my desire to make a real
connection, then a solid foundation is being created for the hard work
that follows. Because the existential approach is concerned with the
goals of therapy, basic conditions of human existence, and therapy as a
shared journey, I do not feel bound by a speciﬁc set of techniques.
Although I do incorporate a wide range of techniques from other
orientations, my philosophical framework about the meaning of human
existence guides my interventions. An existential view provides me with
the framework for understanding universal human concerns, including
facing and dealing with the problem of personal freedom, self-alienation
and estrangement from others, the fear of death and nonbeing, living
with courage, exploring the meaning of life, and making critical
choices.\*\*

Gestalt Therapy: A Holistic Perspective Gestalt therapy is truly an
integrative orientation in that it focuses on whatever is in the
client's awareness. From the Gestalt perspective, feelings, thoughts,

\*In the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, in
Session 4 Stan brings up his fear of death and we explore this in light
of him ﬁ nding meaning and purpose in his life. \*\*For further
discussions of existential therapy, see Corey (2009b, chap. 6); Corsini
and Wedding (2008, chap. 9); Frew and Spiegler (2008, chap. 5);
Prochaska and Norcross (2007, chap. 4); Sharf (2008, chap. 5); and van
Deurzen (2002).

92

CHAPTER NINE

body sensations, and actions are all used as guides to understand what
is central for the client in each moment. The centrality of whatever is
in the client's awareness is an ideal way to understand the world of the
client. I attempt to approach clients with an open mind. I place
emphasis on what occurs phenomenologically with my client. By paying
attention to the verbal and nonverbal cues provided, I have a starting
point for exploring the client's world. Functioning within a Gestalt
framework, I view my main goal as striving to increase the client's
awareness of "what is." Change occurs through a heightened awareness of
what the client is experiencing moment to moment. The approach stresses
present awareness and the quality of contact between the individual and
the environment. Instead of trying to make something happen, my role is
assisting the client to increase awareness, which will allow
reidentiﬁcation with the disowned parts of the self. The Gestalt
approach is characterized by many key concepts that can be fruitfully
blended into other orientations. Gestalt therapy (and psychodrama)
techniques encourage clients to bring painful memories and feelings
pertaining to both past and present events to center stage. Through the
skillful and sensitive use of Gestalt therapy interventions, it is
possible to assist clients in heightening their present-centered
awareness of what they are thinking and feeling as well as what they are
doing. The client is provided with a wide range of tools, in the form of
Gestalt experiments, for making decisions about changing the course of
living. Gestalt therapy utilizes the experiment to move clients from
talk to action and experience. This is a perspective on growth and
enhancement, not merely a system of techniques to treat disorders. With
the emphasis given to the relationship between client and therapist,
there is a creative spirit of suggesting, inventing, and carrying out
experiments aimed at increasing awareness.\*

Psychodrama: An Integrative Approach Although psychodrama is primarily
used in group therapy, many psychodrama techniques can be useful in
individual counseling. Using psychodrama, the client acts out or
dramatizes past, present, or anticipated life situations and roles. This
is done in an attempt to gain deeper understanding, explore feelings and
achieve emotional release, and develop behavioral skills. Signiﬁcant
events are enacted to help the client get in contact with unrecognized
and unexpressed feelings, to provide a channel for the full expression
of these feelings and attitudes, and to broaden the role repertoire.
Integrated with other systems---such as psychodynamic, experiential, and
cognitive behavioral approaches---psychodrama offers a more experiential
process, adding imagery, action, and direct interpersonal encounters. In
turn, psychodrama can utilize methods derived from the other
experiential approaches and the cognitive behavioral approaches to
ground clients in a meaningful process. \*For speciﬁc examples of
Gestalt experiments when working with the emotive dimension, review
Chapter 7 of this book. For further discussion of Gestalt therapy, see
Corey (2009b, chap. 8); Corsini and Wedding (2008, chap. 10); Frew and
Spiegler (2008, chap. 7); Prochaska and Norcross (2007, chap. 6); Sharf
(2008, chap. 7); and Woldt and Toman (2005).

An Integrative Perspective

93

According to Blatner (1996, 2000), a major contribution of psychodrama
is that it supports the growing trend toward technical eclecticism in
psychotherapy. Practitioners are challenged to draw on whatever tools
will be useful in a given situation. Yet psychodrama is best viewed as
an optional set of tools rather than a single approach for all clients
(Blatner, 1996). Psychodrama uses a number of speciﬁc techniques
designed to intensify feelings, clarify implicit beliefs, increase
self-awareness, and practice new behaviors. One of the most powerful
tools of psychodrama is role reversal, which involves the client taking
on the part of another person. Through reversing roles with a signiﬁcant
person, the client is able to formulate signiﬁcant emotional and
cognitive insights into his or her part in a relationship. This
technique also creates empathy for the position of the other person. It
is clear that psychodramatic techniques can be adapted to ﬁt well within
the framework of other theoretical models, including psychoanalytic
therapy, behavior therapies, multimodal therapy, Gestalt therapy,
Adlerian therapy, play therapy, imagination therapy, family therapy, and
group therapy. According to Blatner (2006), psychodrama's value lies in
the fact that its methodology can be integrated with other therapeutic
approaches rather than acting in seeming competition.\*

Drawing on the Action-Oriented Therapies As important as it is to work
with the emotional realm, I think it is essential to incorporate
concepts and techniques from the action-oriented approaches to bring
about both cognitive and behavioral changes. Here are some of the ways I
utilize the action-oriented therapies in my integrative model.

Behavior Therapy A basic assumption of the behavioral perspective is
that most problematic cognitions, emotions, and behaviors have been
learned and that new learning can modify them. Although this modiﬁcation
process is often called "therapy," it is more properly an educational
experience in which individuals are involved in a teaching/learning
process. There are many parallels between counseling and education.
Counseling is educational in that people develop a new perspective on
ways of learning, and they also try out more effective ways of working
with their cognitions, emotions, and behaviors. Techniques from the
action-oriented approaches can be used to attain humanistic goals that
characterize the experiential therapies. It is clear that bridges can
connect experiential and behavior therapies.\*\*

Multimodal Therapy Multimodal therapy is a branch of behavior therapy.
As you learned in Chapter 8, it is a comprehensive, systematic, holistic
approach to behavior therapy developed by

\*See Blatner (1996, 1997, 2006) and Corey (2008, chap. 8) for a
discussion of psychodrama applied to group counseling. \*\*For further
discussion of behavior therapy, see Corey (2009b, chap. 9); Corsini and
Wedding (2008, chap. 7); Frew and Spiegler (2008, chap. 8); Prochaska
and Norcross (2007, chap. 9); and Sharf (2008, chap. 8).

94

CHAPTER NINE

Arnold Lazarus (1997a, 2005, 2006, 2008). Grounding his practice on
social learning theory, Lazarus endorses drawing techniques from just
about all of the therapy models. In his integrative model new techniques
are constantly being introduced and existing techniques are reﬁned, but
never used in a shotgun manner. I incorporate many multimodal concepts
and strategies in my personal integrative style of counseling.
Multimodal methods allow me to challenge selfdefeating beliefs, offer
constructive feedback, and provide positive reinforcement. I am able to
coach, train, and model for my clients. Using this approach, I can
function actively and directively by providing information and
instruction. I am constantly adjusting my techniques to achieve the
client's goals in therapy. I ask the question, "What is best for this
particular person?" I make a careful attempt to determine precisely what
relationship and what treatment strategies will work best with each
client and under which particular circumstances. Because individuals are
troubled by a variety of speciﬁc problems, it is appropriate that both a
multitude of treatment strategies and different therapeutic styles are
used to bring about change.\*

Cognitive Behavior Therapy Most of the contemporary therapies can be
considered "cognitive" in a general sense because they have the aim of
changing clients' subjective views of themselves and the world. However,
the cognitive behavioral approaches differ from both psychodynamic and
experiential therapies in that the major focus of cognitive behavior
therapy (CBT) is on both undermining faulty assumptions and beliefs and
teaching clients the coping skills needed to deal with their problems.
In many respects rational emotive behavior therapy (REBT) can be
considered as a comprehensive and eclectic therapeutic practice.
Numerous cognitive, emotive, and behavioral techniques can be employed
in changing one's emotions and behaviors by changing the structure of
one's cognitions. Like REBT, Beck's cognitive therapy is truly an
integrative approach, drawing on many different modalities of
psychotherapy (Alford & Beck, 1997). Cognitive therapy serves as a
bridge between psychoanalytic therapy and behavior therapy. Cognitive
therapy provides a structured, focused, active approach. A feature I
particularly value in all the cognitive behavioral therapies (and in
feminist therapy as well) is the demystiﬁcation of the therapy process.
Being based on an educational model, these therapies all emphasize a
working alliance between therapist and client. These approaches
encourage self-help, provide for continuous feedback from the client on
how well treatment strategies are working, and provide a structure and
direction to the therapy process that allows for evaluation of outcomes.
I especially appreciate the reality that clients are active, informed,
and responsible for the direction of therapy because they are partners
in the enterprise.\*\*

\*For further discussion of multimodal therapy, see Beck (2005); Corey
(2009a, chap, 7; 2009b, chap. 9); Corsini and Wedding (2008, chap. 11);
and Lazarus (1997a). \*\*For further discussion of cognitive behavior
therapy, see Corey (2009b, chap. 10); Corsini and Wedding (2008,
chap. 8); Frew and Spiegler (2008, chap. 9); Ledley, Marx, and Heimberg
(2005); Prochaska and Norcross (2007, chap. 10); and Sharf (2008,
chap. 10).

An Integrative Perspective

95

Reality Therapy/Choice Theory In many ways choice theory, which
underlies the practice of reality therapy, is grounded on
phenomenological and existential premises. From the perspective of
choice theory, we choose our goals and are responsible for the kind of
world we create for ourselves. We are not helpless victims, and we can
create a better life. We are responsible for what we choose to do, no
matter what has happened in the past. Reality therapy shares many
concepts with the cognitive behavioral therapies. One concept of reality
therapy I ﬁnd particularly useful is total behavior, which teaches that
all behavior is made up of four inseparable but distinct components:
acting, thinking, feeling, and the physiology that must accompany all of
our actions, thoughts, and feelings. The main emphasis is given to
acting and thinking, for these aspects of total behavior are easier to
change than are the feeling and physiology components. The key to
changing a total behavior lies in choosing to change what we are doing
and thinking because these are the behaviors that we can control. I
value the basic notion of the need to assume personal responsibility for
our feelings that is stressed by reality therapy. This philosophy takes
us out of a passive role and challenges us to accept our part in
actually creating our feelings. For example, depression is not something
that simply happens to us but is often a result of what we are doing and
how we are thinking. Glasser (1998, 2001) speaks of "depressing" or
"angering" rather than "being depressed" or "being angry." With this
perspective, depression can be explained as an active choice we make
rather than the result of being a passive victim. This process of
"depressing" keeps anger in check, and it also allows us to ask for
help. The use of the "ing" words serves to emphasize that feelings are
behaviors, which are generated. Clearly, the emphasis of this theory is
on how we act and think, and in this sense it shares many of the themes
of cognitive behavioral approaches.\*

Solution-Focused Brief Therapy Solution-focused brief therapy (SFBT) is
based on the optimistic assumption that people are healthy, competent,
resourceful, and possess the ability to construct solutions and
alternative stories that can enhance their lives. In SFBT the
therapeutic process provides a context whereby individuals focus on
creating solutions rather than talking about their problems. Some common
techniques include the use of miracle questions, exception questions,
and scaling questions. Practitioners with a solution-focused orientation
tend to engage clients in conversations that lead to progressive
narratives that create situations in which clients can make steady gains
toward their goals. Therapists often ask clients: "Tell me about times
when your life was going the way you wanted it to." These conversations
illustrate stories of life worth living. On the basis of these
conversations, the power of problems is lessened and new directions and
solutions are made possible.\*\* \*For further discussion of reality
therapy and choice theory, see Glasser (1998, 2001); Corey (2009b,
chap. 11); Frew and Spiegler (2008, chap. 10); Sharf (2008, chap. 11);
and Wubbolding (2000). \*\*For a further discussion of solution-focused
brief therapy, see Corey (2009b, chap. 13); deShazer (1985, 1988, 1991);
deShazer and Dolan (2007); Prochaska and Norcross (2007, chap. 14); and
Sharf (2008, chap. 12).

96

CHAPTER NINE

Adlerian Therapy The basic goal of the Adlerian approach is to help
clients identify and change their mistaken beliefs about self, others,
and life and thus participate more fully in a social world. The
therapeutic process helps clients make some basic changes in their style
of living, which leads to changes in the way they feel and behave. I
especially like the Adlerian perspective on therapy as a cooperative
venture. Therapy is geared toward challenging clients to translate their
insights into action in the real world. One of the strengths of the
Adlerian approach is its relationship to technical eclecticism. The
Alderian model lends itself to versatility in meeting the needs of a
diverse range of clients (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 2006). Adlerians
are not bound to follow a speciﬁc set of procedures, which gives them a
great deal of freedom in working with clients. Adlerian therapists are
resourceful in drawing on a variety of cognitive, behavioral, and
experiential techniques that they think will work best for a particular
client. One of Adler's most important contributions is his inﬂuence on
other therapy systems. Many of his basic ideas have found their way into
other psychological schools, such as family systems approaches, Gestalt
therapy, learning theory, reality therapy, rational emotive behavior
therapy, cognitive therapy, person-centered therapy, solution-focused
brief therapy, and existentialism (Corey, 2009b). All these approaches
are based on a similar concept of the person as purposive and
self-determining and as striving for growth and meaning in life. The
Adlerian perspective is holistic, meaning that individuals can be
understood by taking into consideration all the aspects of human
functioning. This theory addresses the client's past, present, and
future. The notion of teleology, or striving for meaning and purpose, is
central. I like that this theory makes room to address spiritual
concerns in counseling. The concept of social interest---that we need to
contribute to making the world a better place---can be a part of any
theoretical system. Going beyond the self and getting involved in making
a difference in the lives of others is integrative in its very nature.
All of these concepts can be adapted to any theoretical model.
Contemporary Adlerian theory is an integration of cognitive,
psychodynamic, and systems perspectives, and in many respects resembles
the social constructionist theories. Contemporary social constructionist
theories, or constructivist therapies, share common ground with the
Adlerian approach. Some of these common characteristics include an
emphasis on establishing a respectful client--therapist relationship, an
emphasis on clients' strengths and resources, and an optimistic and
future orientation (Carlson, Watts, & Maniacci, 2006).\*

Feminist and Systemic Therapies Feminist therapy is generally relatively
short-term therapy aimed at both individual and social change. The major
goal is to replace the current patriarchal system with feminist
consciousness and thus create a society that values equality in
relationships, that stresses interdependence rather than dependence,

\*For further discussion of Adlerian therapy, see Carlson, Watts, and
Maniacci (2006); Corey (2009b, chap. 5); Corsini and Wedding (2008,
chap. 3); Frew and Spiegler (2008, chap. 4); Prochaska and Norcross
(2007, chap. 3); and Sharf (2008, chap. 4).

An Integrative Perspective

97

and that encourages women to deﬁne themselves rather than being deﬁned
by societal demands. Feminist therapists are committed to actively
breaking down the hierarchy of power in the therapeutic relationship
through the use of various interventions. Some of these strategies are
unique to feminist therapy, such as genderrole analysis and
intervention, power analysis and intervention, assuming a stance of
advocate in challenging conventional attitudes toward appropriate roles
for women, and encouraging clients to take social action. Therapists
with a feminist orientation understand how important it is to become
aware of typical gender-role messages clients have been socialized with,
and they are skilled in helping clients identify and challenge these
messages. Feminist therapists also borrow therapeutic strategies from
various therapy models. A few of these interventions include role
playing, bibliotherapy, psychoeducation, assertiveness training,
behavior rehearsal, cognitive restructuring, psychodrama techniques,
identifying and challenging untested beliefs, and journal writing.
Feminist therapy principles and techniques can be applied to a range of
therapeutic modalities such as individual therapy, couples counseling,
family therapy, group counseling, and community intervention. Both
feminist and systemic therapies are based on the assumption that
individuals are best understood within the context of relationships.
Most of the individual counseling theories do not place a primary focus
on the role of systemic factors in inﬂuencing the individual. However,
both feminist and systemic therapies operate on the premise that an
individual's problems cannot be understood by focusing solely on the
individual's internal dynamics. An individual's dysfunctional behavior
grows out of the interactional units of the family, the community, and
social systems. Thus, solutions to an individual's problems need to be
designed from a contextual perspective. Incorporating concepts from the
client's external world is of paramount importance in my integrative
approach. Concepts from feminist, systemic, and multicultural approaches
add an essential dimension to understanding how individuals can best
change by addressing both their internal and external worlds. In my
approach I deal with the systemic (family, community, cultural)
variables that contribute to an individual's core problems and draw on
these factors as resources to foster the change process.\*

Working With Ruth in Cognitive, Emotive, and Behavioral Ways See Session
9 (An Integrative Perspective) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling.
As a basis for selecting techniques to employ with Ruth, I look at her
as a thinking, feeling, and behaving person. I work with these three
dimensions in an interactive fashion rather than in a linear fashion.
Thus, I do not \*For further discussion of feminist therapy and systemic
therapy, see Corey (2009b, chaps. 12 & 14), and Sharf (2008, chaps. 13 &
14).

98

CHAPTER NINE

work with Ruth's cognitions, then move ahead to her feelings, and ﬁ
nally proceed to behaviors and speciﬁc action programs. All of these
dimensions are interrelated. When I am working with her on a cognitive
level (such as dealing with decisions she has made or one of her
values), I am also concerned about the feelings generated in her at the
moment and about exploring them with her. Cognitive and emotive
dimensions have an interactive inﬂuence on actions. Therefore, we
explore how her thoughts and feelings are inﬂuencing what she is doing
and also what she can do differently. This doing would involve new
behaviors, which she can try in the session to deal with a problem, and
new skills, which she can take outside and apply to problems she
encounters in real-life situations. As a basis for this integrative
style, I draw on the experiential therapies, which stress expression and
experiencing feelings; on the cognitive therapies, which pay attention
to the client's thinking processes, affecting behavior and beliefs; and
on the action-oriented therapies, which stress the importance of
creating a plan for behavioral change. In one counseling session I
employ a role-playing technique in which I assume the persona of Ruth
while she takes on the role of her husband, John. My purpose in doing
this reverse role play is to teach her how she can assertively approach
her husband and let him know of her desire that they go on a retreat for
married couples. We rehearse a number of ways that she could deal with
John in the session. Ruth is aware that when she does not get what she
wants she has a tendency to shut down. I try to get her to talk out
loud, at least in the therapy sessions, when she has a tendency to fade
away. Before the session ends, I asked her if she feels ready to deal
with her husband in real life. She indicates that she does want to ask
John to go on the couple's retreat, and I ask her to design some
homework that would enable her to apply the role-playing situations we
did in the ofﬁce to her situation at home. My integrative approach takes
into account that Ruth is part of a system. To be able to more
completely understand her, it is necessary to explore how she ﬁts into
her family of origin and the quality of her relationships with her
present family. She has identiﬁed strained relationships with her mother
and father and also with her children and husband. My hope is that we
will have at least one session with all of the members of her family of
origin. The focus will be on Ruth gaining greater clarity on how her
interpersonal style is largely the result of her interactions with her
family of origin. I accept that it is not possible to understand Ruth
apart from the context of the system of which she is a part. I agree
with family therapists who would claim that to understand her present
development it is necessary to go back three generations to see the
impact of her family of origin. Most likely she is unaware of how her
family of origin is inﬂuencing how she thinks, feels, and acts. Lacking
this awareness, she makes assumptions in her present relationships,
especially with her husband and her children. If I work individually
with Ruth, the emphasis can still be on the many ways her current
struggles are related to her family system. Rather than trying to change
the members of her family, we will largely work on discovering what

An Integrative Perspective

99

she most wants to change about herself in relation to how she interacts
with them.\*

Study a Primary Theory---But Be Open to Integration For those of you who
are beginning your counseling career, my general suggestion is to select
the primary theory closest to your basic beliefs. Learn that theory as
thoroughly as you can, and at the same time be open to examining other
theories in depth. If you begin by working within the parameters of a
favored theory, you will have an anchor point from which to construct
your own counseling perspective. But do not think that simply because
you adhere to one theory you can use the same techniques with all of
your clients. Even if you adhere to a single theory, you will need to be
ﬂexible in the manner in which you apply the techniques that ﬂow from
this theory as you work with different clients. As you think about your
client and the therapy sessions to come, ask yourself this question:
"What treatment, by whom, is the most effective for this individual with
that speciﬁc problem, and under what set of circumstances?" (Paul, 1967,
p. 111). Regardless of what model you may be working with, you must
decide what techniques, procedures, or intervention methods to utilize,
when to use them, and with which clients. You will most likely encounter
a diverse range of client populations. For counseling to be effective,
it is necessary to utilize techniques and procedures in a manner that is
consistent with clients' values, life experiences, and cultural
background. Although it is unwise and possibly unethical to stereotype
clients because of their cultural heritage, it is useful to assess how
the cultural context has a bearing on their problems. Some techniques
may be contraindicated because of clients' socialization. Thus, clients'
responsiveness (or lack of it) to certain techniques is a critical
barometer in judging the effectiveness of these methods.

Beneﬁts and Limitations of Integration Effective counseling involves
proﬁciency in a combination of cognitive, affective, and behavioral
techniques. Such a combination is necessary to help clients think about
their beliefs and assumptions, to experience on a feeling level their
conﬂicts and struggles, and to translate their insights into action
programs by behaving in new ways in day-to-day living. Preston (1998)
contends that no one theoretical model can adequately address the wide
range of problems clients will present in therapy. He says it is
essential for therapists to have a basic grasp of various therapeutic
models and for them to have at their disposal a number of intervention
strategies. The pivotal assessment question is, "What does this
particular person most need in order to suffer less, to heal, to grow,
or to cope more effectively?" Preston \*For a more complete discussion
of counseling Ruth from a family systems perspective, multicultural and
integrative perspectives, and my integrative approach applied to the
case of Ruth, see Case Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey,
2009a, chaps. 12, 13, & 14).

100

CHAPTER NINE

recommends that your selection of interventions be guided by your
assessment of the client. This lends weight to the concept of
integrating assessment with treatment, which I addressed in Chapter 8.
Once you know what your client's target problems and goals are, design
speciﬁc techniques that can be effective with that client. I believe it
is needlessly restrictive to apply only a few techniques from a single
theory to most clients. I like to incorporate a wide range of procedures
in my therapeutic style. However, unless you have an accurate, in-depth
knowledge of theories, you cannot formulate a true synthesis. Simply
put, you cannot integrate what you do not know (Norcross, 2005).
Constructing your integrative orientation to counseling practice is a
long-term venture that is reﬁned with experience. Synthesizing various
techniques or approaches in a systematic way is not accomplished merely
by completing a course in counseling theory. The challenge is for you to
think and practice integratively---but critically. There are some
drawbacks to encouraging the development of an integrative model, as
opposed to sticking primarily with one theory. At its worst, eclecticism
can be an excuse for sloppy practice---a practice that lacks a
systematic rationale for what you actually do in your work. If you
merely pick and choose according to whims, it is likely that your work
will reﬂect your lack of knowledge. It is important to avoid the trap of
emerging with a hodgepodge of unamalgamated theories thrown hastily
together. According to Norcross (2005), a haphazard eclecticism is
mainly an outgrowth of pet techniques and inadequate training and an
arbitrary blend of methods. Psychotherapy integration rests on the
assumption that different clients require different methods, yet this
blending of concepts and methods needs to be done systematically.
Norcross (2005) expresses a hope for psychotherapy integration that
"will engender an open system of informed pluralism, deepening
rapprochement, and evidence-based practice, one that leads to improved
effectiveness of psychosocial treatments" (p. 19).

Concluding Comments Throughout this book I have presented the advantages
of constructing a systematic, consistent, personal, and disciplined
approach to integrating various elements in your counseling practice.
Whatever the basis of your integrative approach to counseling, you need
to have a basic knowledge of various theoretical systems and counseling
techniques to work effectively with a wide range of clients in various
clinical settings. Sticking strictly to one theory may not provide you
with the therapeutic ﬂexibility that is required to deal creatively with
the complexities associated with clinical practice. One reason for the
trend toward integrative counseling is the recognition that no single
theory is comprehensive enough to account for the complexities of human
behavior, especially when the range of client types and their speciﬁc
problems are taken into consideration. Consider the contributions of the
various counseling models and work toward creating your own integrative
perspective. If you are open to an integrative perspective, you may ﬁnd
that several theories play a crucial role in your personal approach. By
accepting that each theory has strengths and weaknesses and is, by
deﬁnition, "different" from the

An Integrative Perspective

101

others, you have some basis to begin developing a counseling perspective
that ﬁts you. It is helpful to remember the ways in which these
perspectives have emerged, both as responses to other theories, and also
to changing historical and cultural phenomena. After reading this
chapter on an integrative perspective, take time to reﬂect on the
following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on using an
integrative approach in counseling practice. • What do you understand by
an integrative approach to counseling? • What are the differences
between technical eclecticism and theoretical integration? • What are
some potential advantages of incorporating a diverse range of techniques
from various theories? • In what way is the client--therapist
relationship a common denominator among the various theoretical models?
• What are the main beneﬁts and limitations of an integrative approach?
• In what ways can the existential approach serve as a philosophical
foundation for an integrative approach? • How might you draw on the
action-oriented therapies as a part of your integrative counseling
stance? • What have you learned thus far that will help you in designing
your own integrative approach to counseling practice?

CHAPTER TEN

k

Working With Transference and Countertransference Clients bring
unresolved feelings with signiﬁcant others into the therapeutic
relationship and project them onto their counselors. Transference occurs
in many different kinds of relationships, but especially in intensive
forms of therapy. Regardless of whether your theory explicitly makes
room for concepts such as transference and countertransference, it is my
belief that these factors operate in most counseling relationships. As
you read this chapter, reﬂect on how you might be affected by the
intensity of therapeutic work. I hope you can remain open to identifying
and exploring areas of your countertransference that will surely
inﬂuence your functioning with others. Being able to deal
therapeutically with clients' reactions to you is a major challenge in
the client--therapist relationship. It is imperative for you to
recognize and deal with internal conﬂicts and past pain that are
triggered by your work as a counselor.

Contrasting Views of Transference Transference is common in the
therapeutic process, and it is essential that you understand what
transference means and that you know how to deal with it ethically and
effectively. In developing your own integrative approach, you must
conceptualize a way to understand both transference on a client's part
and your reactions to the client's transference with you---or your
countertransference. In psychodynamic approaches, transference and
countertransference are viewed as central to the therapy process. An
unconscious process, transference typically has its origins in the
client's early childhood, and it constitutes a repetition of past
conﬂicts. Because of this unﬁnished business, the client perceives the
counselor in a distorted way. When such feelings are transferred to the
counselor, the intensity of the feelings have more to do with unresolved
issues in the client's life than to the present counseling situation.
For example, the client may transfer unresolved feelings toward a stern
and unloving father to the therapist, who, in the client's eyes, becomes
stern and unloving. The client may also develop a positive -- 102 --

Working With Transference and Countertransference

103

transference and seek the love, acceptance, and approval of an
all-powerful therapist. A central part of psychoanalytic therapy
involves the therapist becoming a psychological substitute for
signiﬁcant others. Transference allows clients to understand and resolve
unﬁnished business from these past relationships through the present
relationship with the therapist. In essence, working through a similar
emotional conﬂict in the therapeutic relationship counteracts the
effects of a client's early negative experiences. Reﬂect on these
questions: Do you remember times in your personal counseling when you
experienced transference toward your counselor? What was this like for
you? What did your counselor do that was helpful to you? If you have not
been in personal counseling, think about transference reactions you have
experienced toward authority ﬁgures such as teachers, employers, and
supervisors. What were some of the reactions you had toward them? What
might have been useful to you in understanding and dealing with these
reactions so that you could perceive these individuals more
realistically? The psychoanalytic model offers the oldest perspective
for grasping the implications of both transference and
countertransference, and these concepts are a basic part of my
integrative approach. Altman (2008) contrasts the classical
psychoanalytic model with the contemporary relational model of
psychoanalytic therapy in reference to transference and
countertransference. The analyst practicing classical psychoanalysis
strives for a detached and objective stance from which to make
observations and interpretations of the client's psychodynamics. In
contrast, the relational view (modern psychoanalytic therapy) recognizes
that the participation of the therapist in the therapeutic process
cannot be eliminated. Altman points out that contemporary psychoanalytic
practice acknowledges the therapist as a full participant in the therapy
situation. All interventions that therapists make involve elements of
their subjective experiences as well as their objective observations.
Furthermore, clients inﬂuence the experience of therapists as well as
vice versa. In the contemporary relational model, basic concepts such as
transference and countertransference pertain to a more general mode of
here-and-now interactions within the therapeutic situation. Transference
may be the result of the client's interpretation of the therapist's
behavior and are not necessarily distortions carried over from the
client's past. Countertransference may be inﬂuenced by the therapist's
unresolved past conﬂicts, but it can also be the result of the
therapist's theory or his or her interpretations of the client's
behavior. According to Altman, in classical psychoanalysis the analyst
remains outside the relationship and has the function of giving
insight-producing interpretations. However, in contemporary relational
psychoanalytic therapy, the relationship is much more central.
Psychoanalytic practitioners consider the transference situation to be
valuable because its manifestations provide clients with the opportunity
to reexperience a variety of feelings that would otherwise be
inaccessible. Transference can also provide many clues to here-and-now
interactions between the therapist and the client. Transference can be
understood and worked with in other therapy systems as well, including
existential and Gestalt therapies. I mention this so that you do not get
the picture that the only way of understanding and exploring
transference in the therapeutic relationship is via the psychoanalytic

104

CHAPTER TEN

route. Thinking of transference more broadly, it can be described as any
feelings clients project onto their counselor, whether the source of
these feelings is in past or present relationships. Reality therapy,
rational emotive behavior therapy, and behavior therapy do not have a
framework for addressing transference and countertransference. Reality
therapy, as taught by William Glasser (1998, 2001), actually rejects the
concept of transference. Since the inception of reality therapy, Glasser
has consistently maintained that reality therapists should make no
effort to be anyone but themselves. He contends that transference is a
way for people to avoid taking personal responsibility in the present.
Rational emotive behavior therapists tend to take a dim view of working
with transference phenomena. According to Ellis (1999), transference is
not encouraged, and when it does occur, the therapist is likely to
confront it. The therapist wants to show that a transference
relationship is based on the irrational belief that the client must be
liked and loved by the therapist (or parent ﬁgure). Ellis believes that
devoting any length of time to reliving earlier traumatic situations or
exploring transference feelings is "indulgence therapy," which might
result in clients feeling better, but will rarely aid them in getting
better. Although cognitive behavior therapists may not use the terms
"transference" and "countertransference," I think many of them recognize
that these phenomena do occur in the therapeutic relationship and they
address these issues. Cognitive behavioral practitioners place
considerable emphasis on the working alliance and a collaborative
partnership. When there are ruptures in this working alliance,
especially when they are due to what is going on in the here-and-now
therapeutic interaction, CBT practitioners would be inclined to discuss
any factors that might be impeding the therapeutic relationship.

The Connection Between Transference and Countertransference Your clients
will bring past reactions to signiﬁcant others and place them on you in
the present. A client may view you with a mixture of positive and
negative feelings, and at different times the same client may express
love, affection, resentment, rage, dependency, and ambivalence.
Transference can be a path that enables clients to gain insight into how
they operate in a wide range of relationships. Clients may experience
transference with many people, not just with you as their counselor. The
psychoanalytic perspective holds that it is essential for you as a
therapist not only to know your clients, but also to know yourself. One
way of attaining this self-knowledge is to monitor and reﬂect upon your
behavior in the context of the here-and-now interactions with your
clients. Be attentive to your own reactions toward clients and how you
work with them therapeutically. The transference reactions your clients
have toward you will very likely evoke reactions in you as a counselor.
These reactions can become problematic if they result in
countertransference, which refers to the feelings aroused in you by your
clients. In countertransference, your unconscious emotional responses to

Working With Transference and Countertransference

105

a client may result in a distorted perception of the client's behavior.
As was mentioned earlier, your feelings might have more to do with your
unresolved conﬂicts from other past or present relationships than with
any feature of the relationship with your client. In the broad sense,
countertransference can be thought of as any of your projections that
can potentially get in the way of helping your client. It is important
to be alert to the possibility of countertransference so that "your
problem" does not become your client's problem. However, if you can
recognize and monitor your countertransference, this phenomenon does not
have to be a destructive aspect in the therapeutic relationship.

Working With Transference Therapeutically Here are some examples of
transference situations you are likely to encounter with clients whom
you counsel. Ask yourself what your response might be to a client's
feelings toward you, and what feelings are likely to be evoked in you.

k Clients Who Make You Into Something You Are Not Some clients will want
you to be a parent substitute for them. They may see you as a savior who
will take care of them and solve all their problems. They see you as an
allknowing person who will provide them with answers. Other clients may
immediately distrust you because you remind them of a former spouse, a
critical parent, or some other important ﬁgure in their life. Some
clients will not let themselves get emotionally close to you because
they feel that as children they were abandoned by people they cared for.
Clients who feel their parents did not care for them and who felt
abandoned may be very careful about letting you into their lives. k
Clients Who Become Excessively Dependent on You

Some clients may not make decisions without ﬁrst ﬁnding out what you
think. They want to call you at any time of the day or night. They may
want to run over the allotted time for their session. Dependent clients
may view you as all knowing and all wise. They are convinced that you
have the right answers for them and at the same time never think of
ﬁnding their own answers. They are likely to want you to afﬁrm them and
convince them that they are special in your eyes. There are subtle ways
for you to inadvertently foster client dependence. Even though you may
intellectually understand the value of promoting autonomy, there may be
payoffs for encouraging dependence. For example, if your clients depend
on you and tell you how important your input is to them, this can
reinforce your need for feeling important and for being needed. Do you
have any needs that could be met by allowing certain clients to develop
dependence on you? How can you monitor this situation?

k Clients Who Are Not Able to Accept Boundaries Some clients have
problems understanding or accepting appropriate boundaries. Much of
their behavior within the counseling relationship may be aimed at
testing you so that they know how far they can go with you. Some of your
clients may transgress therapeutic boundaries and want to enter into a
friendship or develop some kind of social

106

CHAPTER TEN

relationship with you. Wanting more than a client--therapist
relationship can be a manifestation of transference. As children, these
clients knew no boundaries, and now they are likely to be lost and to
feel anxious because they are not certain where they stand with you. In
working with such clients, it is essential not to fall into the trap of
allowing them to treat you as they did a parent. One way you can do this
is by being clear about your own boundaries. Know your role and function
in the therapeutic relationship, and avoid relaxing appropriate
boundaries so as to be liked by your clients.

k Clients Who Displace Anger Onto You Some clients will strike out at
you with displaced anger. These clients are likely to tell you that
because you are supposed to be helping them you have no right to express
your own feelings. Recognize that you are probably getting more of this
client's anger than you deserve. Avoid getting into a debate. If you
take what you are getting too personally, you are bound to begin to
react defensively, and possibly with countertransference. k Clients Who
Fall in Love With You

Some clients will make you the object of their affection. They may see
you as the ideal person and want very much to become a person just like
you. They are convinced that they could ﬁ nd a resolution to their
problems if only they found a person like you who would love and accept
them. How might you respond to being the object of adulation? This may
be an appropriate time for self-disclosure on your part. For example, if
you feel uncomfortable with accolades being showered on you by clients,
you can share with them that it is difﬁcult to hear some of what they
are telling you. For example, you might say: "I do appreciate your
liking and valuing me, yet at times I become uncomfortable with it. At
times I sense that you perceive me as being without faults. By elevating
me as high up as you do, it is likely that at some point I will fall far
short of your expectations. That can be a very difﬁcult moment for both
of us." These few illustrations of transference behaviors demonstrate
how essential it is for you to gain awareness of your own needs and
motivations. If you are unaware of your own dynamics, you might tie into
your clients' projections and get lost in their distortions. You are
likely to avoid focusing on key therapeutic issues and instead focus on
defending yourself. If you understand your own reactions to clients,
you'll have a better frame of reference for understanding their
reactions to you. As you reﬂect on ways that you may be emotionally
triggered in working with certain clients, think about how you are
affected by those clients you perceive as being especially difﬁcult. How
do you respond to the different forms of transference? What kind of
transference tends to elicit intense emotional reactions on your part?
Do you take intense reactions of a client in a personal way? Do you
blame yourself for not being skillful enough? Do you become combative
with clients who project a range of feelings toward you? When clients
appear to work very hard at getting you to push them away, it can be
therapeutically useful to explore what they are getting from this
self-defeating

Working With Transference and Countertransference

107

behavior or how what they are doing serves them. You might say to such a
client: "You know, I would very much like to work with you. Sometimes I
get the sense that you are trying hard to get me not to like you. Are
you aware of trying to get me to push you away?" Handled properly in the
therapeutic relationship, clients can experience and express feelings
toward you that more properly belong to others who have been signiﬁcant
in their lives. When these feelings are productively explored, clients
become aware of how they are keeping old patterns functional in their
present relationships. It is a mistake to think that all feelings your
clients have toward you are signs of transference. Clients may become
realistically angry with you because of something you have done or not
done. Their anger does not have to be an exaggerated response triggered
by past situations. If you are consistently late for sessions, for
example, clients may become upset with you over not giving them the time
and respect they deserve. Their reactions may well be justiﬁed and
should not be "explained away" as a mere expression of transference.
Likewise, clients' affection toward you does not always indicate
transference. It could be that clients genuinely like some of your
traits and enjoy being with you. You can err both by being too willing
to accept unconditionally whatever clients tell you and by interpreting
everything they tell you as a sign of transference. In short, it is
difﬁcult to identify certain reactions as being rooted either in
transference or in reality.\*

Addressing Countertransference Issues The other side of transference is
countertransference---unrealistic reactions you might have toward your
clients that may interfere with your objectivity. It is important for
you to consider countertransference as a potential source of difﬁculty
that may develop between you and a person with whom you are working. You
do not have to be problem-free, but it is crucial that you be aware of
how your own problems can affect the quality of your working
relationships with clients. Simply having feelings toward a client does
not automatically mean that you are having countertransference
reactions. You may feel deep empathy and compassion for some of your
clients as a function of their life situations. Countertransference
occurs when your needs become too much a part of the relationship or
when your clients trigger old wounds of yours. Just as your clients will
have some unrealistic reactions to you and will project onto you some of
their unﬁnished business, so will you have some unrealistic reactions to
them. Your own vulnerabilities will be opened up as you are drawn into
some of the transference reactions of those you help. Norcross and Guy
(2007) suggest that practitioners are challenged to "leave their clients
at the ofﬁce" rather than ruminating about them when practitioners leave
the ofﬁce. Learning to manage our reactions to clients who exhibit
problematic behavior is an essential aspect of self-care. Although your
countertransference has the potential for getting in the way of working
effectively with certain clients, this does not mean that all \*In the
online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, in Session 2
I demonstrate how I work with Stan's reactions to me as his therapist
and explore his transference.

108

CHAPTER TEN

countertransference is problematic or necessarily harmful.
Countertransference can have both positive and negative effects on the
counseling process. If your own needs or unresolved personal conﬂicts
become entangled in your professional relationships and blur your sense
of objectivity, you have lost control and your countertransference
reactions will probably interfere with the client's capacity to change.
If you use your own feelings as a way of understanding yourself, your
client, and the relationship between the two of you, these feelings can
be a positive and healing force. Even though you may be insightful and
self-aware, the demands of the counseling profession are great. The
emotionally intense relationships that develop with your clients can be
expected to bring your unresolved conﬂicts to the surface. Because
countertransference may be a form of identiﬁcation with your client, you
can get lost in the client's world, which limit your ability to be a
therapeutic agent. If you become aware of certain symptoms---such as a
strong aversion to certain types of clients or a strong attraction to
other types of clients---seek consultation, participate in supervision,
or enter your own therapy for a time to work out these personal issues
that stand in the way of your clinical effectiveness. Your
countertransference reactions can teach you a great deal about yourself.
Be alert to the subtle signs of countertransference and do not be too
quick to pin the blame for your reactions on your clients. For example,
you may ﬁnd that certain clients evoke a parental response in you. Their
behavior can bring out your own critical responses to them. Knowing this
about yourself will enable you to work through some of your own
projections or places where you get stuck. You will not be able to
eliminate countertransference altogether, but you can learn to recognize
it and deal nondefensively with whatever your clients evoke in you. Your
own supervision is a central factor in learning how to deal effectively
with both transference and countertransference reactions. Your blind
spots can easily hamper your ability to deal with "difﬁcult clients" or
with your own old wounds. Focus on yourself in your supervision sessions
rather than talking exclusively about a client's problem. Spend some
time exploring your thoughts, feelings, and reactions toward certain
clients. A good way to expand your awareness of potential
countertransference is by talking with colleagues and supervisors about
your feelings toward clients. This is essential if you feel stuck and
don't quite know what to do in some of your sessions. Ongoing
supervision will enable you to accept responsibility for your reactions
and at the same time prevent you from taking full responsibility for
directions that your clients take. Self-knowledge is your most basic
tool in dealing effectively with transference and countertransference.
It is good to remember that being instrumental in the changes your
clients are making will certainly inﬂuence you. If you are unwilling to
acknowledge your own personal problems, you'll not have much leverage
when you challenge clients to work through their transference issues.

Self-Disclosure in the Therapeutic Relationship The traditional or
classical model of psychoanalytic therapy discourages therapists from
engaging in self-disclosure in the therapeutic relationship. Therapists
typically assume an anonymous stance, which is sometimes called the

Working With Transference and Countertransference

109

"blank-screen" approach, engaging in very little self-disclosure and
maintaining a sense of neutrality. By doing so, therapists are
attempting to foster a transference relationship in which their clients
will make projections onto them. If the therapist reveals little and
rarely shares personal reactions, it is assumed that whatever the client
feels toward the therapist is largely the result of projections
associated with other signiﬁcant ﬁgures from the past. These
projections, which have their origins in unﬁnished and repressed
situations, are considered the very essence of the psychoanalytic
endeavor. As we have seen, contemporary relational psychoanalytic
therapy assumes that the therapeutic relationship is of central
importance in terms of facilitating client change. The contemporary
version allows for appropriate self-disclosure on the part of the
therapist, especially his or her reactions to what is happening within
the here and now of the therapeutic situation. Many therapeutic models
do not call for therapist detachment and remaining anonymous. In fact,
person-centered therapy, existential therapy, and Gestalt therapy call
on counselors to engage in appropriate self-disclosure as a way of
creating an authentic relationship. Indeed, therapy is seen as an I/Thou
encounter in which both counselor and client are deeply affected. Many
cognitive behavior therapists, reality therapists, feminist therapists,
and family therapists make use of self-disclosure as a basic procedure
and relationship tool. A certain degree of self-disclosure to your
clients is one way to diminish their projections of unrealistic
reactions toward you. If you are not a mysterious ﬁgure and your clients
know something about you, they are less likely to make up scenarios
about you in fantasy. From the person-centered approach I appreciate the
emphasis given to immediacy and to an open discussion of how both
parties are experiencing the therapeutic relationship. Perhaps the most
important type of self-disclosure is the kind of here-and-now immediacy
that focuses on what is transpiring between you and your client. This
could be especially useful in cases in which clients are involved in a
transference relationship with you. If you are having a difﬁcult time
listening to a client, for example, it could be useful to share this
information. You might say: "I've noticed at times that it's very
difﬁcult for me to stay connected to what you're telling me. I'm with
you when you talk about yourself and your own feelings, but I tend to
get lost as you go into great detail about all the things your daughter
is doing or not doing." In this statement the client is not being
labeled or judged, but you are giving your reactions about what you hear
when your client tells stories about others. Letting clients know how
you are perceiving and experiencing them is an important form of
immediacy. Selectively discussing some of your reactions toward them may
be useful, especially if you encourage clients to discuss the feedback
you give them. Although I caution against indiscriminately revealing
your personal problems to your clients, sharing yourself can be a
powerful intervention in making contact with your clients. It is
critical that what you reveal is appropriate and timely, and that it is
done for a client's beneﬁt. If your feelings are very much in the
foreground and inhibit you from fully attending to a client, it may be
helpful for you and your client if you share how you are being affected.
To

110

CHAPTER TEN

determine if your self-disclosures are in the service of a client, ask
yourself these questions: • What motivated me to disclose? • To what
extent do my disclosures help clients talk more honestly and speciﬁcally
about themselves? • Does what I share about myself with clients help
them put their problems into a new perspective or help them consider new
alternatives for action? • To what extent is my self-disclosing helping
clients translate their insights into new behavior? Self-disclosure does
not mean telling clients detailed stories about your personal past or
present problems. Too much sharing of yourself can easily distract both
you and your clients from productive self-exploration. Sometimes merely
letting clients know that you have similar personal issues or similar
feelings about a life situation, without going into elaborate detail, is
very healing for them. Your disclosure can help them accept some of
their reactions as normal and can result in a sense of being understood
by you. Admittedly, you are vulnerable when you share your own
experiences, feelings, and reactions. Yet can you expect your clients to
be willing to be vulnerable in front of you if you rarely show them
anything of yourself?

Working With Transference and Countertransference With Ruth See Session
10 (Working With Transference and Countertransference) of the CD-ROM for
Integrative Counseling. Ruth displays reactions toward me that can be
described as transference. Consider these statements that Ruth made to
me in a session: "No matter how hard I try, I'm not able to please you.
I'm not doing something right. I feel you are critical of me. You are
judging me, and I'm not enough, just like with my Dad. I feel that I
can't please you or meet your expectations. You must be disappointed
that I'm taking so long to get better." Because Ruth brought up these
reactions, I think there is therapeutic merit in encouraging her to
express herself in some detail. At some point in the session I might ask
her to explore connections she is making between her father and me,
especially if it is apparent that transference is occurring. Exploring
her feelings toward me, and what she is attributing to me, can lead to
insights regarding unresolved conﬂ icts with father ﬁgures. What about
my part in this relationship? If I deal with Ruth's transference
reactions toward me appropriately, this can be an avenue of increased
selfunderstanding on her part. However, it is essential that I monitor
my potential countertransference. The assumptions she makes about me
might well strike a sensitive chord for me, as indeed it did in this
session. If I am caught up in my own countertransference, I might
respond defensively and become irritated. I am aware that I tend to get
impatient and defensive when clients tell me how I am and then treat me
on the basis of their perceptions---without including me

Working With Transference and Countertransference

111

in this checking-out process. If Ruth continues to make conclusions
about who I am and what I think of her without including me in this
process, I am likely to feel misunderstood or unappreciated by her. Then
I might become caught up in justifying my position or protecting myself.
If I am expending a great deal of energy defending myself, I will not be
able to deal with her reactions in a therapeutic manner. However, in the
session under discussion, I recognize my own vulnerability and I let her
know how I am affected by hearing what she is saying and how it affects
me when I feel judged by her. If I can suspend my tendency to convince
Ruth that I am different from the person she is perceiving me to be, we
can work through this transference. If she were to say to me "I can't
imagine that you'd want to invest the energy and time in really
listening to my pain or really understanding me," I could respond with
"I'd like to hear more about how you came to this conclusion about me."
I invite more exploration of the transference rather than negating it. I
also engage in self-disclosure and let Ruth know that some of her
feelings of "not being enough" touched me personally. Operating on the
assumption that I can actually use my personal reactions in a
therapeutic manner by appropriately disclosing to Ruth, I tell her:
"There are times when I also feel that I am not enough. When I am told
how I am, and when I feel judged, this taps into old issues for me. When
I am extending myself and feel that I am not appreciated, it is easy for
me to tell myself that I am being judged as inadequate." Disclosing this
opened up a dialogue that she could use to reﬂect on her experience in
therapy. Later in the session, I tell Ruth that I do not always say the
right thing, nor am I always as sensitive as I might be. I admit that
perhaps some of my shortcomings make it difﬁcult for me to acknowledge
the work that she has done in these sessions. My self-disclosure had an
impact on Ruth, for she becomes silent and then gets teary. I ask her to
talk about the tears. She indicates that she is surprised that I am not
blaming her and that I am willing to consider my part in how she is
perceiving and reacting to me. One of Ruth's fears is that I would tell
her that what she is telling me is just about her father. Furthermore,
that we both had in common the struggle with feeling enough personally
was afﬁrming for her to hear. It is critically important that I am
increasingly able to recognize countertransference patterns in myself
and that I take steps to monitor my reactions. I certainly need to be
cognizant of the ways my reactions could blur my vision and hamper my
effectiveness with Ruth. Through supervision, and perhaps personal
counseling, I can learn to identify and accept some immediate reactions
that are stirred up inside me when I feel judged or negatively
evaluated. It may not be important or appropriate for me to share this
with my client, but knowing myself is critical in maintaining a sense of
objectivity.

Concluding Comments I believe personal therapy is essential in your
personal and professional development as a counselor. I think it is very
important that you have the experience of being a client at some time,
if for no other reason than to learn to appreciate

112

CHAPTER TEN

the courage and persistence it takes to be on the receiving end of the
therapy process. In your personal therapy you may experience
transference and thus know ﬁrsthand how it is to view your therapist as
a parent ﬁgure. Making use of personal therapy could be an extremely
valuable resource, both as a way to resolve some of your personal issues
and as way to increase your self-awareness and ability to work with
others. Your own therapy provides you with an avenue to explore and
process your countertransference reactions to clients. Personal
counseling is useful in helping you recognize how you may overidentify
with certain clients, how you might meet some of your needs at the
expense of your clients, and how control issues may be played out
between you and a client. I am convinced that to the extent that you
have not dealt with your past problems or unresolved interpersonal conﬂ
icts, these issues will creep in and color your reactions to your
clients. If you have not explored your own pain associated with critical
episodes in your life, you are in danger of being carried away on a
client's emotional tidal wave. A commitment to working on our own
current and past problems is a crucial part of taking care of ourselves.
It is essential to remember that our degree of self-care is directly
related to our effectiveness as therapists. It is unrealistic to think
that you can completely rid yourself of all traces of
countertransference or that you can ever fully resolve certain issues
from the past. There will always be residual feelings attached to
certain events you've experienced in your life, and you will have your
own sources of vulnerability. However, you can become aware of the signs
of these reactions and can deal with these feelings in your own therapy
and supervision sessions. Over time, you can begin to use your
countertransference reactions to become more sensitively attuned to your
client's experiences. You should be aware of what your conﬂicts are and
how they are likely to affect you as a counselor. It is critical for you
to recognize and express yourself when you are triggered. For example,
if you have great difﬁculty in dealing with anger, chances are that you
will do something to dilute these emotions when they occur in your
clients. If you are extremely uncomfortable with conﬂict and ﬁnd
yourself withdrawing in the face of conﬂ ict, it is a good bet that you
are likely to ﬁnd ways to skirt around conﬂict, even when your clients
bring up conﬂicts they are having outside of the session. If you have
not allowed yourself to grieve over some signiﬁcant loss, you may ﬁnd it
challenging to remain present with clients when they are dealing with
feelings surrounding loss and grief. How can you be present for your
clients and encourage them to express feelings that you are so intent on
denying in yourself? A review of research studies on the outcomes and
impacts of the psychotherapist's own psychotherapy reveals that more
than 90% of mental health professionals report satisfaction and positive
outcomes from their own experiences in personal therapy (Orlinsky et
al., 2005). According to Orlinsky and colleagues, personal therapy
contributes to the clinician's professional work in these three ways:
(1) as part of the therapist's training, personal therapy provides a
context for experientially learning what is helpful or not helpful; (2)
through a positive experience in personal therapy, a therapist can
further enhance those interpersonal skills that are essential to
effectively practicing

Working With Transference and Countertransference

113

therapy; and (3) a successful experience in personal therapy can teach
therapists how to manage the ongoing stresses associated with clinical
work.\* Through being a client yourself, you have an experiential frame
of reference from which to view yourself as you are. It gives you a
basis for compassion for your clients, for you can draw on your own
memories of reaching impasses in therapy, of both wanting to go further
and at the same time wanting to stay where you were. Being willing to
participate in a process of self-exploration can reduce the chances of
assuming an attitude of arrogance. Indeed, experiencing counseling as a
client is very different from merely reading about counseling theories
and techniques. By reﬂecting on your own experience as a client, you can
identify aspects of the counseling process that are foundational. You
will learn what attitudes and behaviors of therapists actually
facilitate working through resistance with clients. This personal and
experiential dimension can only enhance your knowledge and skill base in
the process of becoming a counselor. After reading this chapter on
working with transference and countertransference, take time to reﬂect
on the following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts on how
these concepts may be used therapeutically in counseling practice. •
What is your understanding of the concept of transference? • What value
do you place on working with transference in the therapeutic
relationship? • What is your understanding of countertransference? • If
you became aware of countertransference reactions to a client, what
course of action would you be inclined to take? • What value do you see
in therapist self-disclosure? • What are your thoughts about requiring
(or recommending) psychotherapy for those studying to become counselors?
• How is therapist self-care related to a therapist's ability to provide
effective services to clients?

\*For more information on the topic of personal therapy for mental
health practitioners, I highly recommend The Psychotherapist's Own
Psychotherapy: Patient and Clinician Perspectives (Geller, Norcross, &
Orlinsky, 2005). For an excellent discussion of therapist self-care, I
recommend Leaving It at the Ofﬁce: A Guide to Psychotherapist Self-Care
(Norcross & Guy, 2007).

CHAPTER ELEVEN

k

Understanding How the Past Inﬂuences the Present Some approaches, such
as reality therapy, behavior therapy, rational emotive behavior therapy,
cognitive therapy, and solution-focused brief therapy, do not examine
the historical determinants of behavior. Their premise is that present
conditions, rather than traumas or faulty learning during early
childhood years, inﬂuence clients' problems, and that cognitive and
behavioral techniques can change the relevant current factors that
inﬂuence clients' behaviors. However, I believe that the past is
critical in understanding and dealing with a client's present cognitive,
emotional, and behavioral difﬁculties.

Understanding How the Past, Present, and Future Are Intertwined k
Bringing the Past Into the Present

The psychoanalytic model holds that the shadow of the past can haunt the
present, and I continue to see the vital connection between the past and
the present in the work I do. Typical problems that people bring to
counseling include an inability to freely give and accept love;
difﬁculty recognizing and dealing with feelings such as anger,
resentment, rage, hatred, and aggression; an inability to direct one's
own life; difﬁculty separating from one's parents and becoming a unique
person; a need for and a fear of intimacy; and difﬁculty accepting one's
own sexual identity. From the psychoanalytic perspective, these problems
of adult living have their origin in early development. Early learning
is not irreversible, but to change its effects we must become aware of
how certain early experiences have contributed to our present
personality functioning. I have incorporated these basic psychoanalytic
concepts in my personal integrative approach to counseling. A common
misconception about psychoanalytic therapy is that it resembles an
archaeologist digging out relics from the past, dwelling on the past to
the exclusion of present concerns. Kernberg (1997) indicates that there
is an increasing interest by contemporary psychoanalytic therapists in
focusing on the unconscious meanings in the here and now before
attempting to reconstruct the past. Modern practitioners are still
interested in their clients' pasts, but they -- 114 --

Understanding How the Past Inf luences the Present

115

intertwine that understanding with the present (DeAngelis, 1996). Among
the contemporary psychoanalytic therapists are those who subscribe to
objectrelations theory and view the internal and external world of
relationships as central to therapy. Therapy is largely based on the
early relations of a child and mother and how this early relationship
shapes the child's inner world and later adult relationships (St. Clair,
2004). As the therapist moves back and forth in time, the aim is to
understand how early patterns are repeated in the present. Insight can
be a vehicle that enables clients to relinquish old behaviors from the
past that intrude into the present. It is useful for clients to
understand and use historical data in their therapy, but they also need
to be aware of the pitfalls of getting lost in their past by recounting
endless and irrelevant details of their early experiences. A
preoccupation with the past can be time consuming and can inhibit
progress, as well as being a form of resistance. Discussion centering on
childhood events is less useful than dealing with the past in relation
to here-and-now interactions between client and therapist.

k Envisioning the Future Our vision of our future can have an impact on
our present functioning, just as our past can. Beitman, Soth, and Good
(2006) claim that we are inﬂuenced to think, feel, and act through our
images of our future. They state: "Psychotherapy integration is achieved
when therapists and clients collaborate to reshape problematic
expectations of the future images that are based on the debris of the
past" (pp. 43--44). A number of therapeutic approaches emphasize future
strivings. Along with valuing the Gestalt and psychodrama approaches for
dealing with the future, I ﬁnd useful a number of concepts from
solution-focused therapy, Adlerian therapy, reality therapy, and
existential therapy---all of which have concepts dealing with future
aspirations. Solution-oriented therapy eschews the past---and even the
present---in favor of the future. It is so focused on what is possible
that it has little or no interest in or understanding of the client's
problem. DeShazer (1991) has suggested that therapists do not need to
know a problem to solve it and that there is no necessary relationship
between problems and their solutions. By focusing on the future and
using techniques such as the miracle question (deShazer, 1985, 1988;
deShazer & Dolan, 2007), solution-focused therapists encourage clients
to move toward their vision of a better life. I very much agree with the
Adlerian premise that clients can be understood best by looking at where
they are going and what they are striving to accomplish. I appreciate
the perspective of the Adlerians, who look for continuity, or a pattern,
in life. *The present-oriented behavioral focus of reality therapy is a
good reference point for enabling clients to clarify a vision regarding
what they would like to say about their life 5 years from now.
Connecting present behavior with future plans is an excellent device for
helping clients formulate a concrete plan of action. I believe clients
can actually create their own future in this manner.* In the online and
DVD program, Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, in Session 3 I
demonstrate how I work with a series of Stan's early recollections. This
technique shows how a client's early memories are often connected to
present-day themes.

116

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Becoming the Client: Examining Your Past, Present, and Future Your past
is still alive in the person you are today, and it can inﬂuence your
future direction. As your therapist, I ask you to reﬂect on the
following questions: • What themes stemming from your childhood are
still a part of your personality today? • What unresolved conﬂicts from
your childhood get in the way of your enjoyment? To what extent do your
present behavior or current problems indicate areas of unﬁnished
business? • What events occurred during your childhood or adolescence
that you might bring into your personal counseling sessions? • Is there
a signiﬁcant person in your life that you would like to bring into this
session? Are you willing to engage in a role-play session with me acting
as that person? • What value do you see in reexperiencing some difﬁcult
situation you have been through earlier and talking about how you are
feeling in the moment in therapy? Think of one particular relationship
in your life right now that you'd like to improve. Imagine that you are
having a dialogue with that person one year from now. What would you
most want to say to him or her? What would you most hope to hear from
this person? Exploring your vision of your future would certainly be a
factor in my work with you. How valuable do you think that imagining
yourself in the future might be for you personally? The miracle
question, designed by deShazer (1985, 1988), is one way I help you
clarify your future goals and strivings. In our therapy session, I ask,
"If a miracle happened and the problem you have was solved overnight,
how would you know it was solved, and what would be different?" I then
encourage you to enact "what would be different" in spite of the
perceived problems. By formulating this future perspective, you are
focusing on what you want in your life and how you can go about getting
it. Being inﬂuenced by the Adlerian philosophy, I operate on the
assumption that you live by goals and purposes, are moved by
anticipation of the future, and create meaning. My assumption is that
these three aspects of time are dynamically interrelated: your decisions
are based on what you have experienced in the past, on your present
situation, and on the goals toward which you are moving. As you and I
look for this continuity in your life, the emphasis is on the
goal-directed nature of all your behavior. From the perspective of
reality therapy, it would help to know what your goals in life are. If
you decide that your present behavior is not getting you what you want,
you are in a good position to think ahead about the changes you would
like and what you can do now to actualize your aspirations. I hope you
will reﬂect on the personal applications of dealing with your past,
present, and future. Remember that who you have been has implications

Understanding How the Past Inf luences the Present

117

for who you now are. What you are striving to become has implications
for the person you are today.\*

Working With Ruth's Past, Present, and Future See Session 11
(Understanding How the Past Inﬂuences the Present) of the CD-ROM for
Integrative Counseling.

Dealing With the Past in an Integrative Style Utilizing my integrative
approach to counseling Ruth, I am interested in understanding and
exploring (within the restrictions of our time frame) her early history
and assisting her in gaining insight into how her past connects to some
of the problems she is experiencing today. When the past seems to have a
signiﬁcant bearing on Ruth's present attitudes or behavior, we bring it
into the present as much as possible through the use of Gestalt
techniques. I heavily construct my integrative practice around Gestalt
therapy concepts as a way to illuminate the connections between the past
and the present. When Ruth speaks about a past event, I ask her to bring
whatever feelings surface into the present by reliving them through a
variety of role-playing techniques. This is more potent than merely
talking about past events. For example, I suggest to her that she become
the hurt child and talk directly to her father in fantasy. I say: "Bring
your father into this room now, and let yourself go back to the time
when you were a child. Tell him now, as though he were here and you were
that child, what you most want to say." By paying attention to what is
occurring moment by moment with Ruth, I get additional clues as to how
best to intervene. She may now say all the things she wanted to say to
her father as a child but, because of her fear, kept deep inside
herself. She might tell her father what she most wanted from him then
and what she still wants with him now. The theoretical rationale for
most of these techniques is rooted in the assumption that the emotions
that were overwhelming to her as a child were dealt with by some form of
distortion or denial. By reliving an experience as though it was
happening now, emotions that were repressed can come to the surface. In
the supportive, accepting, and safe therapeutic environment, Ruth can
allow herself to experience feelings that she has cut off from
awareness, and she can now express these feelings that are keeping her
stuck. By challenging her assumptions of how her father is, she is able
to establish a new basis for relating to him. Through this process, she
relives the hurt, yet she also can experience understanding and
resolution of a painful situation. By symbolically dealing in the here
and now with people in her life with whom she feels unﬁnished, she can
bring closure to some painful events. \*For a more detailed discussion
of concepts I would draw from in working with your past, present, and
future, see the discussions of Adlerian therapy, existential therapy,
reality therapy, and solution-oriented therapy in Theory and Practice of
Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009b). For ideas for examining how
your past choices inﬂuence your present and how to establish personal
goals, see I Never Knew I Had a Choice (Corey & Corey, 2006).

118

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Let's look at a few critical situations between Ruth and her father,
along with how I intervened. One critical incident took place when she
was 6 years old. She reported: "My father caught me 'playing doctor'
with an 8-year-old boy. He lectured me and refused to speak to me for
weeks. I felt extremely guilty and ashamed." Ruth is likely to have
guilt regarding sexuality stemming from this incident. To help her
explore this past incident and how it still has a current impact, I use
Gestalt methods. I ask Ruth to be herself (at the age of 6) and talk to
me now (as her father). I say to her: "Imagine I'm your father, and I'm
not going to say anything. I'll just listen to you. I just caught you
with this neighbor boy. Tell me what is going on with you right now." As
she talks, I simply listen on the assumption that what is important now
is to allow her to express feelings that she has kept to herself for so
long. She tells me how embarrassed, ashamed, and sorry she is for
letting that happen. She is sure that I (as her father) view her as bad
and dirty, that I am greatly disappointed in her, and that I won't love
her anymore. It is clear that she is still affected by her past and her
rigid upbringing. She is convinced that she did something very wrong in
the eyes of her father and her church. Because Ruth brings up the matter
of her church, it seems an appropriate transition to move to an
exploration of how her religious upbringing has a current inﬂuence on
her. I suggest a second role play in which she becomes the "voice of her
church," the past, and her father. I ask her to talk to me from that
stance. For my own part in the role play, I assume the more accepting
part and the voice that she would like to hear. She is able to get into
her part with great conviction because she is saying aloud what she
heard for so many years growing up and what she has told herself
silently. She has incorporated the critical and judgmental voice of her
father and the church without really examining the validity of the
messages she is receiving from either of these sources. In roleplaying
the "accepting side," I want to get across that "Even though I have my
faults and am imperfect, I am certainly not a bad person." As Ruth's
assertive side, a central message I'm striving to get across is that
Dad's approval costs me my integrity: "I have been striving all my life,
Dad, to get your approval. But to be what you want I have to be scared
and always feel guilty. I don't want to do that anymore. To get your
approval costs too much." This gives Ruth an idea of what she would like
to be able to say and really believe. She says: "I sure wish I could
talk to my father that way!" We devote several sessions to discussion of
how her father played a central role in the moral and religious values
that she believed she had to accept to stay in his "good graces."
Eventually, Ruth gets the insight that she does not want to live by the
religious dogma her father preached, nor does she want to accept for
herself the messages he continues to give her about the "right path for
living." The two role plays we do here demonstrate working with both
feelings and beliefs that have been an integral part of Ruth's being for
so long. The enactment of these role plays brings the past into the here
and now and allows her to give expression to beliefs and feelings that
have roots in her early childhood. My intervention is designed to enable
her to clarify how she wants to think, feel, and believe today.

Understanding How the Past Inf luences the Present

119

Along with Gestalt methods, I draw on concepts and techniques from
psychodrama to help Ruth understand her past. In psychodrama, she would
enact conﬂicts as if they were occurring in the present moment, rather
than narrating past events. For instance, I could ask her: "Show me what
happened when you were a young child and your father caught you with the
neighborhood boy." Psychodrama offers encouragement to her to speak in
the present tense and to use action words. Placing the client in the
present, regardless of when the scenes actually happened, has a tendency
to reduce verbal reporting and turn clients into actors (Moreno, 1987).
When she engages in showing me what she is thinking or feeling, she
moves toward concrete experiencing and cuts through defenses. She will
also move away from abstract and impersonal discussions about a topic by
plunging into personal enactment of a concern. A basic tenet of
psychodrama, much the same as Gestalt therapy, is that reliving and
reexperiencing a scene from the past will give Ruth both the opportunity
to examine how that event affected her at the time it occurred and a
chance to deal differently with the event now. By replaying a past event
in the present, she is able to assign new meaning to it. Through this
process, she can work through unﬁnished business and develop a new and
different ending to an earlier situation.

Dealing With the Present in an Integrative Style Appreciating and fully
experiencing the present is lost on many of us. We ruminate about the
past, or engage in endless thinking about the future. Our minds are
noisy, which makes it difﬁcult to be in the moment. As we put our
energies toward what might have been or what might be, our capacity to
take hold of the moment diminishes dramatically. Gestalt therapy focuses
on the power of the present. Most Gestalt techniques are designed to put
clients into closer contact with their ongoing experiencing and increase
their awareness of what they are feeling from moment to moment. Just as
there are advantages to focusing on the here and now, there can be
disadvantages to this exclusive focus. Polster (1987) observes that too
tight a focus, with a highly concentrated emphasis on the here and now,
will foreclose on much that matters, such as continuity of commitment,
the implications of one's acts, dependability, and responsiveness to
others. In his current thinking, Polster stresses the importance of
having clients ﬂesh out their stories, which may include working with
the past, the present, and the future. I am counseling Ruth from a
present-centered perspective. Most of our discussions deal with her
thoughts and beliefs, her emotional states, and what she is doing
currently. Even though I am open to exploring some of her past
experiences, my focus is on examining ways that her past still has a
present inﬂuence. Ruth and I can direct attention to her immediate
feelings as well as her thoughts and actions. It seems essential to me
that we work with all three dimensions---what she is thinking, what she
is actually doing, and how her thoughts and behaviors affect her feeling
states. By directing her attention to what is going on with her during
our sessions, Ruth becomes aware of how she interacts in her world apart
from therapy.

120

CHAPTER ELEVEN

Dealing With the Future in an Integrative Style The technique of making
a past situation a present one can be applied to future events as well.
The rationale for doing this is the same as working with the past. If
the future comes alive through enactment, there is less chance of
dealing with abstractions. I frequently utilize both Gestalt and
psychodrama techniques to assist clients in experiencing their hopes,
fears, and expectations for the future. If Ruth is afraid of a future
confrontation with her father, I ask her to live her expectations in the
here and now by speaking directly to her father in a role-play
situation. By expressing her fears and hopes in the safety of the
therapy context, she is likely to gain clarity about what she would like
to say to her father in real life. Thus, she may say in a role play to
her symbolic father: "I want to tell you how much I'd like to be close
to you, but I'm afraid that if I do so, it won't matter to you. I'm
afraid of saying the wrong things and pushing you even further away.
Sometimes I think I have disappointed you because I haven't become the
person you expected." Psychodrama is also highly useful for exploring
some anticipated event in the future. In psychodrama, the past, present,
and future are all signiﬁcant tenses, yet the action is played out in
the present moment. Psychodrama can enable Ruth to bring the future into
the now: "Show me how you'd like to be able to talk with your father one
year from now. Let me be your father and try on some of the things you'd
like to be able to say to him." A technique in psychodrama known as
"future projection" can be appropriate in counseling Ruth, especially
when she brings up wanting improvements in her signiﬁcant relationships
(with her husband, her children, and her parents). When I ask her to
participate in living out a scenario in the future, my goal is to help
her express and clarify concerns she has about the future. Her future
concerns are not merely discussed, but an anticipated event is brought
into the present moment and acted out. These concerns may include her
wishes and hopes, fears of tomorrow, and goals that provide some
direction to her life. In implementing this technique, I have her
imagine a future time and place with selected people, bring this event
into the present, and get a new perspective on a problem. Ruth may act
out either a version of the way she hopes a given situation will ideally
unfold or her version of the worst possible outcome. Once Ruth clariﬁes
her hopes for a particular outcome, she is in a better position to take
speciﬁc steps that will enable her to achieve the future she desires.
For example, she can be asked to carry on the kind of dialogue with her
father that she would ideally like one year hence. A role-reversal
technique can be powerful if used in a timely manner. I might suggest to
her: "Let yourself become your father. You know the words you'd most
like to hear from him. As your father, speak to me (as Ruth) and tell me
what you wish he would say and how you would hope he would act." Through
reversing roles with her father, Ruth is able to formulate signiﬁcant
emotional and cognitive insights into the situation involving her
father. She can also project herself forward and tell him how she has
acted differently toward him during the previous year. If she gets a
clearer sense of the kind of relationship that she would like with him
and if she

Understanding How the Past Inf luences the Present

121

accepts her own responsibility for the quality of this relationship, she
can begin to modify some of the ways in which she approaches her
father.\*

Concluding Comments It is one thing to read about the concepts and
techniques I've described in my integrative approach, but it is quite
another matter to apply them to yourself. The more you are able to
identify personal themes of signiﬁcance associated with your past,
present, and future, the greater your chance of coming to appreciate
some of these concepts. If you see value in counseling clients from the
perspective I've described, you are likely to ﬁnd ways of using
techniques aimed at bringing both past and future concerns into present
situations with your clients. If you are reluctant to personally engage
in any experiential role-playing scenarios, my guess is that you won't
feel comfortable making these interventions with others. Although the
emphasis of this chapter has been mainly on identifying and expressing
feelings, there is plenty of room for exploring cognitive and behavioral
patterns associated with the past, present, and future. After reading
this chapter on understanding how the past inﬂuences the present, take
time to reﬂect on the following questions about how your own past has
inﬂuenced your present and future goals. • What are some of your past
experiences that continue to inﬂuence who you are today? • If you could
revise one of the chapters of your life, how would you rewrite it? • To
what extent do you see your past as giving you an appreciation of the
struggles of the clients with whom you will work? • Consider three
aspects of your current existence that you would most like to change. If
you were successful in changing them, how do you imagine that your life
would be different? • What kind of life would you like to have 5 years
from now? Are there any steps you can take now to move closer to your
goals? • How much time do you devote to thinking about future goals and
aspirations? To what degree do you think that your vision of your future
has an inﬂuence on how you think, feel, and act today?

\*For a review of both Gestalt therapy and psychodrama, see Theory and
Practice of Group Counseling (Corey, 2008). See also Theory and Practice
of Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009b) for more elaborate
discussions of Gestalt therapy and existential therapy. For a more
complete discussion of ways to work with Ruth's past, see Case Approach
to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a).

CHAPTER TWELVE

k

Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change Existential therapy is the
foundation of my integrative approach to counseling, and I operate on
its assumption that we each can be the architects of our own lives. If
you don't like the design of your present existence, you can take steps
to revise the blueprints. If you were one of my clients, I would invite
you to look at your life as a plan and to evaluate the blueprints that
inﬂuence who you are today. In the previous chapter we looked at how the
past, present, and future are all interrelated. The issues that were
discussed in that chapter are closely related to the topics we will now
consider---early decisions and behavior change. As critical as it is for
clients to understand where they've come from and to appreciate some of
the motivations for their present behavior, I believe this is only part
of the story. Understanding the context of early decisions may be useful
to clients in getting a better picture of their development, but
self-understanding needs to lead to action if clients are to make
signiﬁcant behavioral change. Insight without action will not help
clients make existential decisions. This chapter addresses ways of
helping clients understand their earlier decisions and increasing their
capacity to make new decisions.

Understanding Redecision Therapy Redecision therapy rests on basic
concepts of injunctions, early decisions, and new decisions. Redecision
therapy, developed by Mary and Robert Goulding (1979), is a form of
transactional analysis (TA) that offers a useful framework for
understanding how learning during childhood extends into adulthood. This
approach is based on the assumption that as adults people make decisions
based on past premises that at one time were appropriate to their
survival needs but may no longer be valid. It stresses the capacity to
change early decisions and is oriented toward increasing awareness, with
the goal of enabling clients to alter the course of their lives. In
redecision therapy, clients learn how the rules they received and
incorporated as children now inﬂuence their actions. -- 122 --

Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change

123

Injunctions and Early Decisions An injunction is a parental message that
tells children what they have to do and be to get recognition and
acceptance. Although some of these injunctions may be given in a verbal
and direct manner by parents to children, more often than not these
messages are inferred: "Don't be separate from me," "Don't be the sex
you are," "Don't want," "Don't need," "Don't think," "Don't be
important," "Don't feel," and "Don't be a child" (Goulding, 1987;
Goulding & Goulding, 1979). When you were a child, you decided either to
accept these parental messages or to ﬁght against them. Here are a few
examples of some of these injunctions and possible early decisions. You
may have heard the message "Don't talk" and decided that you have no
voice. You may have accepted the injunction "Don't feel" and made an
early decision that your feelings are of no value. A common message is
"Don't make mistakes." If you heard and accepted this message as a
child, you may fear taking risks so as not to look foolish. You might
equate making mistakes with being a failure. A possible early decision
you may have made is, "Because I made a dumb choice, I won't decide on
anything important again!" Another common injunction is "Don't be
close." Related to this injunction are the messages "Don't trust" and
"Don't love." Based on these messages, you may have made a decision such
as this: "I let myself trust another person by getting close, and it
failed. In the future I will keep myself distant, and that way I won't
risk rejection." These early decisions became a basic part of your
personality. Many of these decisions may have been appropriate in
certain situations in childhood, but they are inappropriate when carried
into an individual's adult years. A major part of therapy consists of
becoming aware of messages clients may still listen to and the impact of
these early decisions in present-day living.

Understanding the Inﬂuence of Your Family Operating within the mindset
of family therapy, I would inquire about the kind of rules you
experienced in your family. Family rules may be spoken or unspoken, but
they are powerful inﬂuencers of how you think, feel, and act currently.
These rules, which are often couched in terms of "shoulds" or "should
nots," become strong messages that govern interactions within a family.
It is impossible to grow up without rules such as these: "Never be angry
with your father." "Always keep a smile on your face." "Don't bring
attention to yourself." "Never let people see your weaknesses; show
neither love nor anger." "Don't talk back to your parents; always try to
please them." "Don't talk to outsiders about your family." "Children are
to be seen but not heard." "Have fun only when all the work is ﬁ
nished." "Don't be different from other family members." As a child, you
may have decided to accept a rule and live by it for reasons of both
physical and psychological survival. When you carry such a pattern into
your adult interactions, however, it may no longer serve you.

124

CHAPTER TWELVE

Applying Redecision Therapy to Behavior Changes Throughout their
writings, the Gouldings stress that early decisions are reversible. If
you are participating in redecision therapy as a client, it is assumed
that you cooperated in making the early decisions that direct your life,
so you can now make new decisions that are appropriate and that will
allow you to experience life differently. Making an intellectual
decision to be different is rarely enough to counteract years of past
conditioning. It often helps to employ experiential techniques to go
back to the early childhood scenes in which these decisions were made.
Many of the Gestalt techniques I described in Chapters 7 and 9 can be
used to become emotionally and cognitively aware of the impact of
earlier decisions and can facilitate the process of redecision.
Awareness is an important ﬁ rst step in the process of changing clients'
ways of thinking, feeling, and behaving. In the early stages of
counseling, techniques are aimed at increasing clients' awareness of
their problems and their options for making substantive changes in their
lives. As therapy progresses, clients explore the "shoulds" and
"shouldn'ts," the "dos" and "don'ts," by which they have been trained to
live. Once clients have identiﬁed and become aware of these
"internalized voices," they are in a better position to critically
examine these messages to determine whether they are willing to continue
living by them. Whatever injunctions clients have received, and whatever
the resulting life decisions were, redecision therapy maintains that
they can change by making a new decision in the moment. In therapy
clients will be challenged from the outset to make new decisions for
themselves. Clients are frequently required to imagine returning to the
childhood scenes in which they made self-limiting decisions. Counselors
facilitate this process with interventions such as these: "As you are
speaking, how old do you feel?" "Is what you are saying reminding you of
any times when you were a child?" "What pictures come to your mind right
now?" "Could you exaggerate the frown on your face?" "What scene comes
to mind as you experience your frowning?" "What are you feeling as you
describe this scene?" There are many ways of assisting clients in
returning to some critical point in their childhood (Goulding, 1987).
Once clients are able to identify an early scene (such as the one Ruth
recalled in Chapter 11), it is helpful to allow them to reexperience the
scene. Clients might reexperience the scene in fantasy through the use
of a Gestalt experiment where some past scenario is brought into the
present moment. As part of replaying this earlier experience, it is
important for clients to be able to reject the decisions they once made
in response to such messages. In this redecision work, clients enter the
past and create fantasy scenes that help them to safely give up old and
currently inappropriate early decisions. Armed with an understanding in
the present that enables clients to relive the scene in a new way, they
see that a particular decision was the best they could do at a difﬁcult
time but that now they can modify that decision. According to the
Gouldings, it is possible to give a new ending to the scenes in which
original

Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change

125

decisions were made---a new ending that often results in a new beginning
in which clients think, feel, and act in revitalized ways.\*

Becoming the Client: Experiencing the Redecision Process I incorporate
some key concepts of redecision therapy in my integrative approach. I
want to explore your injunctions or messages. Such concepts are quite
useful in the overall context of understanding how you make certain
decisions about yourself and your place in the world. I very much accept
the existential notion that what has been decided can be redecided.
Toward the ending phase of counseling, there is considerable focus on
examining past decisions and looking forward to making new decisions. At
this phase of your counseling, I ask you to review what you have learned
about your early decisions as a result of participating in therapy (an
approach characteristic of existential therapy, transactional analysis,
and rational emotive behavior therapy). To stimulate this review, I
typically pose these kinds of questions: • Do you want to revise any of
your early decisions? • Do you see these decisions as still appropriate
for you now? • What new decisions do you want to make? As you recall
from Chapter 6 (on the cognitive perspective in counseling practice), a
variety of cognitive behavioral techniques can assist you in
understanding early decisions in the form of core beliefs and self-talk.
Cognitive restructuring can be incorporated into most forms of therapy.
Once decisions and core beliefs have been identiﬁed, you are then in a
position to critically evaluate these beliefs and decisions and modify
them. Through techniques such as cognitive disputing, debating, Socratic
questioning, reframing, and cognitive restructuring, you can actively
incorporate a sound set of beliefs and create a more effective way of
life. The action-oriented phase of counseling is a time for you to solve
problems and make decisions. During this time, you and I consider
possible alternatives and their consequences, evaluate how these
alternatives will meet your goals, and decide on a speciﬁc course of
action. The best alternatives and new possibilities for action are ones
you generate. Once you become clear about some early decisions, you can
continue to participate in a wide range of homework activities that will
enable you to practice what you are learning in therapy. A major part of
the counseling process consists of making new decisions based on the
expanded information you have acquired about yourself. By immersing
yourself in behavioral homework, you can eventually learn to become your
own counselor, and you can reinforce this redecisional process.
Utilizing an Adlerian technique, I encourage you to act as if you are
the person you want to be, which can serve to challenge your

\*For a more detailed treatment of the topics of transactional analysis,
injunctions, decisions, and redecisions, see Theory and Practice of
Group Counseling (Corey, 2008, chap. 12)

126

CHAPTER TWELVE

self-limiting assumptions. I ask you to catch yourself repeating old
patterns that have led to ineffective behavior. It will be essential for
you to set tasks for yourself and do something speciﬁc about dealing
with your problems. In this way, your new insights and new decisions
lead to concrete actions.\*

Working Toward Redecisions With Ruth See Session 12 (Working Toward
Decisions and Behavior Change) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling.

k Identifying Family Rules and Messages Ruth and I spend some time
identifying and exploring family rules and messages. She comes up with
as many family rules as she can recall in growing up as a child. She
recollects parental messages such as these: "Don't think for yourself."
"Follow the church obediently, and conform to God's will." "Never
question the Bible." "Live a moral life." "Don't get close to people,
especially in sexual ways." "Sexuality is bad and wrong, unless you are
married." "Always be proper and appropriate." We spend time identifying
and dealing with gender-role messages Ruth still struggles with such as
these: "Your main concern should be your family." "Don't put your career
needs before what is expected of you as a woman." "Defer to what men
want." "Always be ready to nurture those who need care and attention." k
Exploring Early Decisions In working with Ruth's early decisions, I
borrow concepts from both the psychoanalytic and family therapy models.
The psychoanalytic approach emphasizes reconstructing the past and
working through early conﬂicts that have been repressed to resolve these
unconscious conﬂicts. In some approaches to family therapy, Ruth would
work to understand family behavior patterns three generations back to
unravel patterns and emotional baggage she may have acquired from her
family background. In exploring Ruth's early decisions, I employ a
directive and actionoriented approach. Functioning as a teacher, I focus
on what she can learn that will lead to changes in the way she is
thinking, feeling, and behaving. Once we have identiﬁed some of the
major messages she has internalized, I will ask her to begin thinking
about the decisions she made about herself, others, and the world. I
will also ask her to reﬂect on the direction in which her early
decisions are taking her. Ruth sees with increasing clarity that she has
lived much of her life in ways that were designed to get her father's
approval. She feels that unless she gets her father's acceptance and
approval she will not feel good about herself. She reasons that if the
father who conceived her could not love her then nobody ever could. If
this man does not show her love, she is doomed to live a loveless life!
Drawing from Adlerian and cognitive behavioral concepts, I proceed by
getting her to look at themes in her \*In the online and DVD program,
Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, in Session 11 solution-focused
techniques are applied to Stan's quest in making behavioral changes. In
Session 12 the narrative approach is used to illustrate encouraging Stan
to work toward redecisions.

Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change

127

life and by guiding her in critically evaluating some invalid
assumptions she continues to make. At this stage of her therapy, Ruth is
increasingly challenging her thinking and her value system. She is
raising questions about the meaning of her life. She is looking at
beliefs and values she has accepted to determine if she still wants to
base her life on them. Does she want to spend the rest of her life in a
futile attempt to "win over" her father, or some other man? What will it
take for her to ﬁnally gain her father's acceptance and love?---if this
is possible. What might she think of the person she must become to gain
his acceptance? Pursuing these questions gets her to think, challenge,
and decide for herself on her standards for living. Because Ruth has let
me know that she wants to reconsider her value system, I have an
investment in assisting her in this process. Our counseling requires her
to carefully consider what part of her value system she wants to retain
and what she wants to modify. I do not expect her to throw away all that
she was taught. The experiential and relationship-oriented approaches
emphasize the importance of Ruth critically examining her values so that
they become her own. Authenticity consists of living by values she
chooses rather than living blindly by values given by others.

k Ruth's Existential Quest The goal of our therapeutic endeavor is for
Ruth to become increasingly capable of making self-directed choices and
inﬂuencing the quality of her future through her choices. She is
challenged to re-create herself through her projects. Much of our work
together involves my inviting her to raise core questions about her
existence, such as "Who am I?" "Who have I been?" and "Where am I
going?" A basic existential premise that I accept in my relationship
with Ruth is that she is not the victim of circumstances. To a large
extent, she is what she has chosen and is choosing to be today. For much
of her life, Ruth has lived a restricted existence. She has tended to
see few options for dealing with life situations, and she often reported
feeling trapped or helpless. One of my central tasks is to invite her to
examine the ways she is living a restricted existence. I encourage Ruth
to reﬂect on the direction of her life, to recognize her range of
alternatives, and to make decisions without any ﬁrm guarantees about the
future. Once she becomes aware of factors in her past and of stiﬂ ing
modes of her present existence, she can begin to accept responsibility
for changing her future. As she recognizes some of the ways in which she
has passively surrendered control, she can start on a path of
consciously shaping her own life and designing the future she wants. k
Feminist Perspective The feminist therapy model provides me with a
valuable lens to understand some of Ruth's core struggles. The
intervention of gender-role analysis is especially useful. Gender-role
analysis can be employed to increase her insight about how societal
gender-role expectations have adversely affected her and to help her
understand how women and men are socialized differently. Through this
process, Ruth will learn to identify gender-role messages (verbal,
nonverbal, and modeled) she has experienced in

128

CHAPTER TWELVE

her lifetime. With my help she will be in a position to examine the
socialization messages she received from society as a whole, from her
family of origin, and from her religion. As a result, she will learn
that many of her conﬂ icts about her life and identity are due to the
fact that she wants to step outside her traditionally deﬁned female
gender role. She is now able to identify the positive and negative
consequences of following those gender-role messages. Through therapy
Ruth learns how she has internalized certain gender-role messages in
conscious and unconscious ways. My hope is that she will be able to
acquire a full range of behaviors that are freely chosen rather than
those prescribed by gender-role stereotypes.\*

k Encouraging Ruth to Act As much as possible, I structure situations in
the therapy session that will facilitate new decisions on Ruth's part.
Her redecisions have to be made on both the emotional and cognitive
levels, but it is also important that she commit herself to some course
of action aimed at changing herself and bringing about environmental
change. Here I like the reality therapy emphasis on getting Ruth to
decide on a plan of action and then make a commitment to carrying it
out. Therapy is a place of safety where clients can experiment with new
ways of being to see what behavioral changes they really want to make.
Ruth has learned that insight without action is incomplete. She must
apply the lessons learned in therapy to real-life situations. I
consistently encourage her to carry out homework assignments that
challenge her fears and inhibitions in a variety of practical
situations. Seeing linkages between the therapy sessions and daily life
ﬁts into most of the action-oriented behavioral approaches. Because Ruth
sincerely wants to be different, we use session time for role playing
and behavioral rehearsal. Then I ask her to try out her new learning in
different life situations, especially with her family. For me,
translating what is learned in the sessions into daily life is the
essence of what therapy is about. One assignment Ruth carried out was to
approach an instructor in the ﬁtness class at her college and request a
place in the class as an added student, even though the class was
closed. Regardless of the outcome, she is learning that she has a right
to express what she wants. Her old style would be to assume that since
the class was closed there would be absolutely no way that she could
ever add it. This assignment helped her understand that she does not
have to give up so soon. Ruth is thinking about terminating her therapy.
She is starting to think more about getting on with her life without
formal therapy. She is learning that she can make new decisions and that
she can follow her own lead. It is important to address termination
issues. The ﬁnal session will not be enough to accomplish all the tasks
for ending the counseling process. Therefore, I ask her \*For a more
detailed description of working with Ruth from a feminist therapy model,
see the piece written by Kathy M. Evans, Susan R. Seem, and Elizabeth A.
Kincade in Case Approach to Counseling and Psychotherapy (Corey, 2009a,
chap. 10). Also, see the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The
Case of Stan, Session 10, which illustrates working with Stan's views of
his gender-role socialization (using feminist concepts).

Working Toward Decisions and Behavior Change

129

to think about what she has learned from her counseling and to develop a
plan of what she would like to continue doing when she no longer comes
in for counseling. I draw on both the cognitive behavioral and
experiential approaches in moving to this new direction in her life. I
am asking her to talk about how she would like to feel differently and
think differently. This consolidation process will help Ruth put a new
perspective on what she is taking away from her therapy experience, and
also continue her work past therapy.

Concluding Comments Once clients understand the context of their early
decisions, they are in a position to modify them if they decide these
decisions no longer work for them. Redecision therapy provides a
framework for understanding how early childhood experiences play out in
adulthood. A major part of therapy consists of creating new beginnings
to modify some of our early decisions. Spend a few minutes thinking and
imagining the person you want to be. Let yourself identify speciﬁc
characteristics you would have if you actually were the person you are
striving to become. Try this homework assignment: Pick some week that
you would be willing to act as if you are this person in a setting, such
as home, school, or work. At the end of the week, ask yourself what is
stopping you from becoming the person you want to be. I hope you will
reﬂect on some of your early decisions and how they extend into your
current functioning. Here are some questions to ask yourself as you
think about the issues addressed in this chapter. • Is there anything
you can do to make the changes you most want to make? • Are there any
early decisions you made that you would like to examine more fully? • Is
there a decision about your life that you are willing to revise? • What
are some of the ways that the injunctions you received and the decisions
you made based on these injunctions tend to work for you? Against you? •
How did your family of origin inﬂuence the kinds of messages that you
heard in growing up? • How did your family of origin inﬂuence some of
the most central decisions you have made in your life to date?

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

k

Evaluation and Termination

Just as the initial session sets the tone for the therapeutic
relationship, the ending phase enables clients to maximize the beneﬁts
from the relationship and decide how they can continue the change
process. As a counselor, your goal is to work with clients in such a way
that they can terminate the professional relationship with you as soon
as possible and continue to make changes on their own. From your ﬁrst
contact with clients, it is important to convey the idea that your
intention is to assist them to function effectively without you. It is
not helpful to clients if their therapy continues indeﬁnitely. The
interventions for endings assist clients in consolidating their learning
and determining how they can proceed once they stop coming in for
treatment. Terminating therapy can be viewed as a positive step, for it
means that clients have reached a point where they can use their newly
acquired skills to deal with challenges they may face. The tasks of
termination include helping clients see what they have accomplished in
therapy, summarize the counseling experience, set goals for the future,
and learn how to deal with symptoms that reemerge (Ledley, Marx, &
Heimberg, 2005). Toward the end of the therapy experience, the therapist
becomes a consultant and assists the client in preventing relapse,
consolidating gains, and identifying potential problem areas. Helping
clients assume ownership of the changes they have made is part of the
ﬁnal work of the therapy relationship (Prochaska & DiClemente, 2005).\*

Guidelines for Effective Termination I ﬁnd the action-oriented
approaches (reality therapy, behavior therapy, cognitive behavior
therapy, and solution-focused brief therapy) especially useful in
providing methods for consolidating learning and transferring what was
learned in therapy to daily living. Here are some guidelines for you to
consider in effectively accomplishing the tasks of therapeutic endings:
\*In the online and DVD program, Theory in Action: The Case of Stan, in
Session 13 I demonstrate speciﬁc aspects that Stan and I attend to
during the termination phase of his therapy.

-- 130 --

Evaluation and Termination

131

• Remind clients of the approaching end of the sessions with you. Ask
clients what they'd most like to talk about in the ﬁnal two meetings
with you. At a session prior to the last one you could even ask, "If
this were our last meeting, how would that be for you?" • If you are not
limited to a speciﬁed number of sessions, and both you and your client
determine that termination is appropriate, one option is to space out
the ﬁnal few sessions. Instead of meeting weekly, your client might come
in every 3 weeks. This schedule allows more opportunity to practice new
behaviors and to prepare for termination. • Review the course of
treatment. What lessons did clients learn, how did they learn them, and
what do they intend to do with what they have learned? What did they ﬁnd
most helpful in the sessions with you? How do they evaluate their own
participation in this process? It is good for clients to take the lead
in addressing these questions. This review and summary process involves
both cognitive and emotional aspects. It should also include a
discussion of ways to maintain treatment gains and ways to continue
their work after termination. • Encourage clients to talk about their
feelings of separation. Just as clients may have had fears about seeking
help, they may have fears about terminating the counseling relationship.
• Be clear about your own feelings about endings. You may be ambivalent
about letting go of certain clients. Reﬂect on the degree to which you
may need your clients more than they need you. Monitor any signs of
countertransference so that your needs do not make closure difﬁcult for
your clients. Talk to a supervisor or a trusted colleague about these
feelings. • A guiding principle of counseling is helping clients achieve
self-directed behavior. Pay attention to clues your clients give about
ending the client-- counselor relationship and be willing to discuss
this at appropriate times. • Remember that if you are an effective
counselor you'll eventually put yourself out of business---at least with
your current clients. Your task is to get them moving on their own, not
to keep them coming to you for advice. Give clients the tools to become
their own counselors. Even though you may feel some sadness when
terminating with some clients, realize that you have done a good job in
your role of creating self-reliance in your client. • Realize that a
counseling experience is not aimed at ﬁ xing all of a client's problems.
Counseling is an ongoing and evolutionary process. At a later period of
development, clients may be ready to deal with a new set of problems or
concerns in ways they are not ready to do upon termination. • Let your
clients know of your availability at a future time. Encourage clients to
return at a later time should they feel a need for further learning.
Clients may need only a session or a few sessions to get refocused. Be
sure clients know that asking for help in the future is not a sign of
failure but an indication of new levels of strength. • Assist clients in
translating their learning into action programs. If clients have been
successful, the ending stage is a commencement; they now have some new
directions to follow in dealing with problems as they arise.
Furthermore, clients acquire some needed tools and resources for
continuing the process of personal growth. For this reason, discussing
available programs and making

132

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

referrals are especially timely tasks toward the end of your work with
clients. In this way, termination of the professional relationship can
lead to new beginnings in a client's personal relationships. These
guidelines are a good start in bringing about a successful ending to
counseling. What other topics would you want to raise with your clients
at the ﬁnal phase of therapy? What goals are essential for an effective
and positive ending of a counseling relationship? What are some
techniques for closure you would use?

Becoming the Client: Taking Credit for Your Changes The ﬁnal phase of
your counseling may be a difﬁcult time, and I want to give you an
opportunity to fully express your feelings. Consider concepts and
techniques that would be useful to bring closure to your experience if
you were the client. What do you need to do to summarize your
experience, cement your gains, and terminate effectively? Positive
endings include discussing your thoughts and feelings about your
experience in the therapeutic journey. If you are like some clients, you
may have some fear that you won't be able to carry into your everyday
life some of the central things you learned in therapy. I want you to
understand what you did to make your therapy experience meaningful. What
you will do once your therapy formally ends is as important as the
sessions in the ofﬁce. Therefore, you and I will spend considerable time
talking about what you learned, how you learned it, and what you will do
with what you learned now that the counseling sessions are coming to an
end. I am especially interested in hearing your perceptions about any
changes in ways you think, feel, and behave. I listen to what the
counseling experience has meant to you and take my lead from your
comments. I ask you at the ﬁnal session to review speciﬁc insights you
had throughout the course of your personal work. My experience has
taught me that many clients tend to forget some of what they learned and
to discount the actual value of what they did in their therapy. I want
to help you retain whatever you have learned about others, about human
struggling, about life, and about yourself. Unless you are able to
articulate what you learned through your counseling, and how you learned
it, you may not recall key lessons when you need them. I will also ask
you what you might do when you experience setbacks or unexpected
difﬁculties. Part of termination is preparing to deal with less than
ideal circumstances and coping with obstacles that block your goals.
During our ﬁnal session, I ask you to imagine your life in some ideal
future circumstance, a technique that is used by both Gestalt and
psychodrama approaches. I might suggest to you any of the following: •
Imagine that you are coming in for a follow-up session 5 years from now
and that we are meeting to discuss how your life has changed. What do
you most want to be able to say to me? • Let yourself fantasize about
all the ways in which you want to be different in your everyday life
once you leave formal therapy. Close your eyes and

Evaluation and Termination

133

carry on a silent dialogue between yourself and the people who are most
special to you. What are you telling them? What are they replying? •
Imagine that a year has passed since you ended your counseling and
nothing has changed in your life---that you have continued the way you
have always been. Try to picture how you would feel. During the ﬁnal
phase of therapy, I rely heavily on the cognitive and actionoriented
approaches that are characteristic of the behavior therapies, reality
therapy, rational emotive behavior therapy, and solution-focused brief
therapy. I encourage you to continue keeping a journal---writing down
the problems you are encountering, describing how you feel about
yourself in speciﬁc situations, and listing your successes and
difﬁculties in following through with your contracts. Because I believe
that an appropriate book read at the right time could be a powerful
catalyst in making changes, I encourage you to read as a way of
continuing to work on yourself. I suggest that you formulate a contract
that will spell out what you will do to maintain your gains and
accomplish new goals you are setting for yourself. To implement your
contract, I encourage you to continue giving yourself homework
assignments. As the ﬁnal session draws to a close, I give you an
existential message to take with you: "I hope you have become aware of
your role in bringing about change in your life. You can assume power by
focusing on changing yourself rather than trying to get others to be
different. You have become aware of the choices that are open to you;
thus, you can now reﬂect on the decisions you will make. Even if you
decide to remain largely as you are, you are now aware that you can
choose differently. Although choosing for yourself can provoke anxiety,
it does give you a sense that your life is yours and that you have the
power to shape your own future." Finally, I want you to know that you
are welcome to call for follow-up sessions if the need arises. Although
bringing closure to our work together is essential, I want you to feel
welcome to call for future contacts if this is in your best interest.

Evaluating Ruth's Therapy Experience See Session 13 (Evaluation and
Termination) of the CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling. Throughout the 13
counseling sessions, Ruth and I discuss her progress in therapy. We
especially look at the degree to which she is getting what she wants
from counseling (and from me). If for some reason she is not
successfully meeting her objectives, we explore possible factors that
might be getting in the way of her progress. At our initial session I
made clear to Ruth that a main aim of our relationship is to help her to
function without me as her counselor. In our journey together we have
been working toward the ultimate goal of Ruth becoming her own
counselor. When is it time for Ruth to terminate therapy? Termination of
therapy is as important as the initial phase, for now the challenge is
to put into practice what she has learned in the sessions by applying
new skills and attitudes to

134

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

daily social situations. During the previous session, she brings up a
desire to "go it alone." When she indicates this desire, I am thinking
that this signiﬁes major progress. We talk about her readiness to end
therapy and her reasons for considering termination. Ultimately, I see
termination of Ruth's therapy as her choice. Once she attains a degree
of increased self-awareness, has succeeded in making some cognitive
shifts, and has acquired some speciﬁc behavioral skills in meeting
present and future problems, I hope she will begin thinking of ending
formal therapy. To keep Ruth in therapy after she has made signiﬁcant
changes on many levels could result in needlessly fostering her
dependence on me, which certainly would not lead to her empowerment. In
our ﬁnal sessions Ruth spends considerable time talking about what she
learned in her counseling sessions, how she learned these lessons, and
what she wants to do with what she has learned now that she will be
terminating counseling. This is a good time to talk about where she has
been and where she can go from here. Together we develop an action plan
and talk about how she can best maintain her new learning. I also share
with her my perceptions of the directions I have seen her take. The
focus of the ﬁnal sessions is on speciﬁc changes Ruth has made over the
course of her therapy and what aspects of her therapy were most helpful.
She indicates that the focus of our work shifted at different times.
Sometimes the focus was on Ruth's thoughts, other times on her feelings,
and other times on insights she was gaining. At times she needed to
simply experience and express her feelings, other times she needed to
take action, and other times she needed to reﬂect on her beliefs,
thoughts, and decisions. From her vantage point, she has gained a new
appreciation for herself as a thinking, feeling, and doing individual.
In Adlerian terms, we are in the reorientation phase. At this time the
central task is to encourage Ruth to translate her insights into acting
in new and more effective ways. We explore her perception of her future,
and she establishes revised goals. Where does she want to go from here?
What are some concrete plans she can put into action? What are some
contracts she can establish as a way to provide her with a useful
direction? There are a number of options open to her, some of which we
explore during the ﬁnal sessions. Once Ruth decides what direction she
wants to move toward, it is critical that she develop a practical plan
of action and make a commitment to carry out her plan. Referrals and
suggestions for continued growth are particularly useful at this time.
For example, now that her individual counseling is ending, she may want
to consider joining a therapeutic group. In a group setting she can
continue working on interpersonal concerns and can increasingly learn
the value of including others in her life. Besides a therapy group, Ruth
could also ﬁ nd support in a variety of social networks. Getting
involved in some form of social action program, or ﬁnding ways she can
involve herself to beneﬁt others, could be a most important way to
maximize the beneﬁts of her therapy. In essence, she can continue to
challenge herself by doing things that are difﬁcult for her yet at the
same time broaden her range of choices. For example, she could get
involved in an exercise class that she has previously avoided out of a
fear of how

Evaluation and Termination

135

others would look at her body. It is important that she express a
willingness to deal with her feelings as they arise in new situations.
One of Ruth's core struggles was with her husband and members of her
family, and referral to a couples therapist or a family therapist may be
in order. She might decide to invite her husband and children to be part
of a few family therapy sessions. Certainly her changes have not been
easy for her husband, her children, and herself. Her changes have
implications for others in her family. Even a session or two with the
entire family could be instrumental in renegotiating some shifts in
roles and expectations. If Ruth does not succeed in bringing about a
family session, she can still continue to behave in different ways with
each member of her family. Instead of placing the emphasis on changing
others in her family, she can focus on herself and relate differently to
her husband and children. Indeed, if she presents herself in new ways
and keeps the focus on herself, others may be affected by her new way of
being. Evaluating the process and outcomes of therapy is essential. This
evaluation can take the form of devoting a session or two to discussing
Ruth's speciﬁc changes in therapy. I think it is of paramount importance
that she be able to recognize what she actually did, both in the therapy
sessions and in her life outside, to bring about the changes she is
experiencing in her life. Giving herself recognition and taking credit
for these changes is empowering. Her growth is not due to magic on my
part, for I am only instrumental in facilitating her changes. Ruth needs
to identify what she speciﬁcally did to bring about her process of
transformation. If she recognizes her part in her growth, she will be
able to continue making positive strides. Here are a few questions I ask
Ruth to help her appraise the meaning of her experience in counseling: •
What did you learn that you consider the most valuable? • How did you
learn these lessons? • What can you do now to keep practicing new
behaviors that work better for you? • How can you continue implementing
in your life what was begun in counseling? • Where do you want to go
from here? Do you have any future plans? • What will you do when you
experience setbacks? • How will you handle any regression to old ways or
temporary defeats? It is crucial that Ruth and I explore possible
stumbling blocks and ways to cope with them. At times, it is inevitable
that she will revert to old patterns and experience self-defeating
thoughts and behaviors. I will prepare her for the possibility that
lapses might be expected. The point is not that she never experiences
setbacks, but that she learns to catch herself when she slips into old
familiar patterns. As soon as she becomes aware that she is thinking,
feeling, and acting in ways that are not serving her well, Ruth is in a
position to make a shift and do something different. When she hears her
internal critic carping away at her, she can catch this negative voice
and shift to a new dialogue. When she experiences depression or anxiety,
she will notice this and remain for less time in these states. When she
behaves in apologetic ways, she

136

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

will realize that she does not have to apologize for her existence. The
process of catching herself at those times when she becomes ensnared in
self-defeating patterns enables her to become her own counselor. I will
introduce the concept of relapse prevention, which has as its goal the
prevention of the occurrence of problematic behavior once formal therapy
ends (Brunswig, Sbraga, & Harris, 2003). Before she entered counseling,
Ruth was unaware of these patterns, and thus, they controlled her. Now
that formal counseling is ending, she has a greater appreciation that
her answers lie within and that she does have the potential to be the
expert in her own life. Ruth is realizing that termination of our
relationship is the beginning of a new journey.

Concluding Comments The Future of Psychotherapy Integration What is the
future of psychotherapy integration? It may be reassuring to you that
there is no one "right" approach to the integration of counseling
practice. Integrative counseling is best viewed as an evolving framework
rather than as a ﬁ xed integrative approach. Arkowitz (1997) asserts
that there is not one truth to be discovered, but many different ways of
looking at our complex world. Arkowitz states, "Integrative thinking in
psychotherapy has generated new ways of thinking about psychotherapy and
change, new ideas that can be tested, and new and useful clinical
approaches" (p. 272). Gold and Stricker (2006) make the claim that
"psychotherapy integration has moved from the fringes of
psychotherapeutic activity and thinking to a much more prominent and
central place" (p. 13). Gold and Stricker note that therapists with
various orientations seem to be talking more freely about approaches
other than their own and demonstrate a greater willingness to experiment
with new methods and integrative perspectives. In their commentary on
future directions in psychotherapy integration, Eubanks-Carter,
Burckell, and Goldfried (2005) emphasize that great progress has been
made in the ﬁeld of psychotherapy integration. They conclude: "During
the past 20 years, the major schools have demonstrated a growing
openness to new ideas from other orientations, from basic research, and
from other disciplines such as spiritual practices. More than ever, we
are in a position to make progress toward consensus if we are willing to
try" (p. 518).

Designing Your Personal Integrative Approach As our journey comes to an
end, let me leave you with a few summary remarks concerning your
personal integrative orientation to counseling. Remember that designing
your counseling approach does not have to be completed by the time you
ﬁnish this book or this course. A good place to begin is by mastering a
primary theory that will serve as a guide for what you do in the
counseling process. Select a theory that comes closest to your beliefs
about human nature and the change process. Look for ways to personalize
the theory or theories of your choice to your own practice with clients.

Evaluation and Termination

137

Take the key concepts of several theories that have personal relevance
for you and apply these ideas to your own life. One way to do this is by
thinking of yourself as a client as you continue studying these
theories. What aspects of the different theories would most help you as
a client in understanding yourself? In addition, ask yourself what
aspects of each theory would be most useful to you as a therapist in
working with diverse client groups. What basic concepts are essential
aspects of your theoretical orientation? What concepts would most help
you make sense of the work you are doing with your clients? Try to
answer these questions by experimenting within the parameters of one or
more theories. I have described the concepts and techniques I employ in
my integrative approach, both as I worked with you as a client and also
with the case of Ruth. I hope this will help you create your own unique
style. Commit yourself to a reading program and consider attending a
variety of professional workshops. Reading is a realistic and useful way
to expand your knowledge base and to provide you with ideas on how to
create, implement, and evaluate techniques. Take time to review the
resources given throughout this book and also listed in the References
and Suggested Readings at the end of the book. Attend workshops dealing
with different aspects of the counseling process and as a way to learn
about the implementation of techniques. Just about every theoretical
system I've mentioned is associated with one or more professional
organizations where you can get further training in the particular
orientation. (Consult the Where to Go From Here sections in Theory and
Practice of Counseling and Psychotherapy \[Corey, 2009b\] for places to
contact for training and supervision of a speciﬁc therapy model.) As you
attend workshops, be open to ideas that seem to have particular meaning
for you and that ﬁt the context of your work. Don't adopt ideas without
ﬁrst putting them through your personal ﬁlter. As you experiment with
many different counseling techniques, avoid using techniques in a rigid
or "cookbook" method. Techniques are merely tools to assist you in
effectively reaching your clients. Personalize your techniques so they
ﬁt your style, and be open to feedback from your clients about how well
your techniques are working for them. As you practice, be open to
supervision throughout your career. Talk with supervisors and colleagues
about what you are doing. Discuss some of your interventions with other
professionals and think of alternative approaches you could take with
clients. Remain a life-long learner and continue thinking about
alternative theoretical frameworks. Be open to borrowing techniques from
various theories, yet do so in a systematic way. Think about your
theoretical rationale for the techniques you employ. Continue reﬂecting
on what ﬁts for you and what set of blueprints will be most useful in
creating an emerging model for practice. Although you will have a solid
foundation consisting of theoretical constructs, realize that the art of
integrative counseling consists of personalizing your knowledge so that
how you function as a counselor is an expression of your personality and
life experiences. No prefabricated model will ﬁt you perfectly. Instead,
your challenge is to customize a counseling approach, tailoring it to ﬁt
you.

138

CHAPTER THIRTEEN

After reading this chapter on evaluation and termination, take time to
reﬂect on the following questions as a way of clarifying your thoughts
on evaluating client outcomes and termination of the therapeutic
relationship. • In what ways can termination of therapy be a positive
step? • What guidelines do you think are most important for the
effective termination of a therapy relationship? • What are some ways
you might prepare your clients for ending the therapy relationship? •
What challenges might you face because of your own issues over loss or
experiences with endings when assisting clients in exploring termination
issues? • What are some ways to evaluate the meaning of a therapy
experience? • What challenges do you expect to encounter in designing
your personal integrative approach to counseling? • If you favor an
integrative approach, do you have a primary theory that you use as a
base?

REFERENCES AND SUGGE STED RE ADINGS

This reference list represents a carefully chosen group of books that I
think will be useful as resources for designing a personal integrative
approach to counseling. References marked with an asterisk are highly
recommended for further reading. ALFORD, B. A., & BECK, A. T. (1997).
The integrative power of cognitive therapy. New York: Guilford Press.
ALTMAN, N. (2008). Psychoanalytic therapy. In J. Frew & M. D. Spiegler
(Eds.), Contemporary psychotherapies for a diverse world (pp. 42--92).
Boston: Lahaska Press. ARKOWITZ, H. (1997). Integrative theories of
therapy. In P. L. Wachtel & S. B. Messer (Eds.), Theories of
psychotherapy: Origins and evolution (pp. 227--288). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. *BECK, J. (1995). Cognitive therapy:
Basics and beyond. New York: Guilford Press.* BECK, J. S. (2005).
Cognitive therapy for challenging problems. New York: Guilford Press.
BEITMAN, B. D., SOTH, A. M., & GOOD, G. E. (2006). Integrating the
psychotherapies through their emphases on the future. In G. Stricker &
J. Gold (Eds.), A casebook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 43--54).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. BLATNER, A. (1985).
The dynamics of catharsis. Journal of Group Psychotherapy, Psychodrama
and Sociometry, 37(4), 157--166. BLATNER, A. (1996). Acting-in:
Practical applications of psychodramatic methods (3rd ed.). New York:
Springer. BLATNER, A. (1997). Psychodrama: The state of the art. The
Arts in Psychotherapy, 24(1), 23--30. BLATNER, A. (2000). Foundations of
psychodrama: History, theory, and practice (4th ed.). New York:
Springer. BLATNER, A. (2006). Current trends in psychodrama.
International Journal of Psychotherapy, 11(3), 43--53. *BOHART, A. C.
(2006). The client as active self-healer. In G. Stricker & J. Gold
(Eds.), A casebook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 241--251).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.* BRUNSWIG, K. A.,
SBRAGA, T. P., & HARRIS, C. D. (2003). Relapse prevention. In W.
O'Donohue, J. E. Fisher, & S. C. Hayes (Eds.), Cognitive behavior
therapy: Applying empirically supported techniques in your practice
(pp. 321--329). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. BURKE, M. T., & MIRANTI, J. G.
(Eds.). (1995). Counseling: The spiritual dimension. Alexandria, VA:
American Counseling Association. BURKE, M. T., HACKNEY, H., HUDSON, P.,
MIRANTI, J., WATTS, G. A., & EPP, L. (1999). Spirituality, religion, and
CACREP curriculum standards. Journal of Counseling and Development,
77(3), 251--257. *CARLSON, J., WATTS, R. E., & MANIACCI, M. (2006).
Adlerian therapy: Theory and practice. Washington DC: American
Psychological Association.* CASHWELL, C. S., & YOUNG, J. S. (2005).
Integrating spirituality and religion into counseling: A guide to
competent practice. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling Association.

-- 139 --

140

References and Suggested Readings

COREY, G. (2008). Theory and practice of group counseling (7th ed.)
\[and Student Manual\]. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. *COREY, G. (2009a).
Case approach to counseling and psychotherapy (7th ed). Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole.* COREY, G. (2009b). Theory and practice of counseling and
psychotherapy (8th ed.) \[and Student Manual\]. Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole. COREY, G., & COREY, M. (2006). I never knew I had a choice
(8th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. COREY, G., COREY, M., CALLANAN, P.,
& RUSSELL, J. M. (2004). Group techniques (3rd ed.). Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole. COREY, G., COREY, M., & HAYNES, R. (2003). Ethics in
action: CD-ROM. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. COREY, G., COREY, M., &
HAYNES, R. (2006). Groups in action: Evolution and challenges---DVD and
workbook. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. *COREY, G. (with HAYNES, R.).
(2005). CD-ROM for integrative counseling. Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
COREY, M., & COREY, G. (2006). Groups: Process and practice (7th ed.).
Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. COREY, M., & COREY, G. (2007). Becoming a
helper (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. CORSINI, R. J., & WEDDING,
D. (Eds.). (2008). Current psychotherapies (8th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole. DATTILIO, F. M., & FREEMAN, A. (1992). Introduction to
cognitive therapy. In A. Freeman & E. M. Dattilio (Eds.), Comprehensive
casebook of cognitive therapy (pp. 3--11). New York: Plenum. DeANGELIS,
T. (1996). Psychoanalysis adapts to the 1990s. APA Monitor, 27(9), 1,
43. DeSHAZER, S. (1985). Keys to solutions in brief therapy. New York:
Norton. DeSHAZER, S. (1988). Clues: Investigating solutions in brief
therapy. New York: Norton. DeSHAZER, S. (1991). Putting difference to
work. New York: Norton.* DeSHAZER, S., & DOLAN, Y. M. (with KORMAN, H.
TREPPER, T., McCULLOM, E, & BERG, I. K.). (2007). More than miracles:
The state of the art of solution-focused brief therapy. New York:
Haworth Press. DIMIDJIAN, S., & LINEHAN, M. M. (2003). Mindfulness
practice. In W. O'Donohue, J. E. Fisher, & S. C. Hayes (Eds.), Cognitive
behavior therapy: Applying empirically supported techniques in your
practice (pp. 229--237). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. DREIKURS, R. (1997).
Holistic medicine. Individual Psychology, 53(2), 127--205. *DUNCAN, B.
L., MILLER, S. D., & SPARKS, J. A. (2004). The heroic client: A
revolutionary way to improve effectiveness through client-directed,
outcome-informed therapy. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. ELLIS, A. (1999).
How to make yourself happy and remarkably less disturbable. Atascadero,
CA: Impact Publishers.* ELLIS, A. (2001a). Feeling better, getting
better, and staying better. Atascadero, CA: Impact. *ELLIS, a. (2001b).
Overcoming destructive beliefs, feelings, and behaviors. Amherst, NY:
Prometheus Books. ELLIS, A., & MacLAREN, C. (1998). Rational emotive
behavior therapy: A therapist's guide. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact
Publishers. EUBANKS-CARTER, C., BURCKELL, L. A., & GOLDFRIED, M. R.
(2005). Future directions in psychotherapy integration. In J. C.
Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration
(2nd ed., pp. 503--521). New York: Oxford University Press.* FRAME, M.
W. (2003). Integrating religion and spirituality into counseling: A
comprehensive approach. Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. \*FREW, J., &
SPIEGLER, M. D. (2008). Contemporary psychotherapies for a diverse
world. Boston: Lahaska Press.

References and Suggested Readings

141

*GELLER, J. D., NORCROSS, J. C., & ORLINSKY, D. E. (Eds.). (2005). The
psychotherapist's own psychotherapy: Patient and clinician perspectives.
New York: Oxford University Press. GERMER, C. K. (2005a). Mindfulness:
What is it: What does it matter? In C. K. Germer, R. D. Siegel, & P. R.
Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness and psychotherapy (pp. 3--27). New York:
Guilford Press. GERMER, C. K. (2005b). Teaching mindfulness in therapy.
In C. K. Germer, R. D. Siegel, & P. R. Fulton (Eds.), Mindfulness and
psychotherapy (pp. 113--129). New York: Guilford Press.* GERMER, C. K.,
SIEGEL, R. D., & FULTON, P. R. (Eds.). (2005). Mindfulness and
psychotherapy. New York: Guilford Press. GLASSER, W. (1998). Choice
theory: A new psychology of personal freedom. New York: HarperCollins.
*GLASSER, W. (2001). Counseling with choice theory: The new reality
therapy. New York: HarperCollins. GOLD, J., & STRICKER, G. (2006).
Introduction: An overview of psychotherapy integration. In G. Stricker &
J. Gold (Eds.), A casebook of psychotherapy integration (pp. 3--16).
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. GOULDING, M. M.
(1987). Transactional analysis and redecision therapy. In J. K. Zeig
(Ed.), The evolution of psychotherapy (pp. 285--299). New York:
Brunner/Mazel. GOULDING, M., & GOULDING, R. (1979). Changing lives
through redecision therapy. New York: Brunner/Mazel. GOULDING, R., &
GOULDING, M. (1978). The power is in the patient. San Francisco: TA
Press.* GREENBERG, L. S., RICE, L. N., & ELLIOTT, R. (1993).
Facilitating emotional change: The moment-by-moment process. New York:
Guilford Press. *HAGEDORN, W. B. (2005). Counselor self-awareness and
self-exploration of religious and spiritual beliefs: Know thyself. In C.
S. Cashwell & J. S. Young (Eds.), Integrating spirituality and religion
into counseling: A guide to competent practice (pp. 63--84). Alexandria,
VA: American Counseling Association. HALL, C. R., DIXON, W. A., &
MAUZEY, E. D. (2004). Spirituality and religion: Implications for
counselors. Journal of Counseling and Development, 82(4), 504--507.*
HUBBLE, M. A., DUNCAN, B. L., & MILLER, S. D. (1999). The heart and soul
of change: What works in therapy. Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. *IVEY, A. E., & BROOKS-HARRIS, J. E. (2005). Integrative
psychotherapy with culturally diverse clients. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 321--339). New York: Oxford University Press. IVEY, A. E., D'ANDREA,
M. D., IVEY, M. B., & Simek-Morgan, L. (2007). Theories of counseling
and psychotherapy: A multicultural perspective (6th ed.). Boston: Allyn
& Bacon.* KABAT-ZINN, J. (1990). Full catastrophe living: Using the
wisdom of your body and mind to face stress, pain, and illness. New
York: Dell. KERNGERG, O. F. (1997). Convergences and divergences in
contemporary psychoanalytic technique and psychoanalytic psychotherapy.
In J. K. Zeig (Ed.), The evolution of psychotherapy: The third
conference (pp. 3--22). New York: Brunner/Mazel. KRAMER, S. A. (1990).
Positive endings in psychotherapy: Bringing meaningful closure to
therapeutic relationships. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. LAMBERT, M. J.
(1992). Implications of outcome research for psychotherapy integration.
In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldstein (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
integration (pp. 94--129). New York: Basic Books. LAZARUS, A. A. (1995).
Different types of eclecticism and integration: Let's be aware of the
dangers. Journal of Psychotherapy Integration, 5(1), 27--39. LAZARUS, A.
A. (1996). The utility and futility of combining treatments in
psychotherapy. Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, 3(1), 59--68.

142

References and Suggested Readings

LAZARUS, A. A. (1997a). Brief but comprehensive psychotherapy: The
multimodal way. New York: Springer. LAZARUS, A. A. (1997b). Can
psychotherapy be brief, focused, solution-oriented, and yet
comprehensive? A personal evolutionary perspective. In J. K. Zeig (Ed.),
The evolution of psychotherapy: The third conference (pp. 83--94). New
York: Brunner/Mazel. *LAZARUS, A. A. (2005). Multimodal therapy. In J.
C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy
integration (2nd ed., pp. 105--120). New York: Oxford University Press.
LAZARUS, A. A. (2006). Multimodal therapy: A seven-point integration. In
G. Stricker & J. Gold (Eds.), A casebook of psychotherapy integration
(pp. 17--28). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.*
LAZARUS, A. A. (2008). Multimodal therapy. In R. J. Corsini & D. Wedding
(Eds.), Current psychotherapies (8th ed., pp. 368--401). Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole. *LEDLEY, D. R., MARX, B. P., & HEIMBERG, R. G. (2005).
Making cognitive-behavioral therapy work: Clinical processes for new
practitioners. New York: Guilford Press. LEE, C. C. (2006). Entering the
cross-cultural zone: Meeting the challenges of culturally responsive
counseling. In C. C. Lee (Ed.), Multicultural issues in counseling: New
approaches to diversity (3rd ed., pp. 13--22). Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association. MILLER, S. D., DUNCAN, B. L., & HUBBLE, M. A.
(2005). Outcome-informed clinical work. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 84--102). New York: Oxford University Press. MORENO, Z. T. (1987).
Psychodrama, role theory, and the concept of the social atom. In J. K.
Zeig (Ed.), The evolution of psychotherapy (pp. 341--366). New York:
Brunner/Mazel.* MORENO, Z. T., BLOMKVIST, L. D., & RUTZEL, T. (2000).
Psychodrama, surplus reality and the art of healing. Philadelphia:
Routledge (Taylor & Francis). *NORCROSS, J. C. (2002). Empirically
supported therapy relationships. In J. C. Norcross, (Ed.), Psychotherapy
relationships that work: Therapist contributions and responsiveness to
patient needs (pp. 3--16). New York: Oxford University Press.* NORCROSS,
J. C. (Ed.). (2003). Psychotherapy relationships that work: Therapist
contributions and responsiveness to patient needs. New York: Oxford
University Press. *NORCROSS, J. C. (2005). A primer on psychotherapy
integration. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 3--23). New York: Oxford
University Press.* NORCROSS, J. C., BEUTLER, L. E., & LEVANT, R. F.
(Eds.). (2006). Evidence-based practice in mental health: Debate and
dialogue on the fundamental questions. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association. *NORCROSS, J. C., & GOLDFRIED, M. R. (Eds.).
(2005). Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.). New York:
Oxford University Press.* NORCROSS, J. C., & GUY, J. D. (2007). Leaving
it at the ofﬁce: A guide to psychotherapist self-care. New York:
Guilford Press. \*NORCROSS, J. C., KARPIAK, C. P., & LISTER, K. M.
(2005). What's an integrationist? A study of self-identiﬁed integrative
and (occasionally) eclectic psychologists. Journal of Clinical
Psychology, 61, 1587--1594. NYSTUL, M. (1999). An interview with Paul
Pedersen. The Journal of Individual Psychology, 55(2), 216--224.
ORLINSKY, D. E., NORCROSS, J. C., RONNESTAD, M. H., & WISEMAN, H.
(2005). Outcomes and impacts of the psychotherapists' own psychotherapy.
In J. D. Geller, J. C. Norcross, & D. E. Orlinsky (Eds.), The
psychotherapist's own psychotherapy: Patient and clinician perspectives
(pp. 214--230). New York: Oxford University Press. PAUL, G. L. (1967).
Outcome research in psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 31,
109--188.

References and Suggested Readings

143

PEDERSEN, P. (1997). Culture-centered counseling interventions: Striving
for accuracy. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. PEDERSEN, P. (2000). A handbook
for developing multicultural awareness (3rd ed.). Alexandria, VA:
American Counseling Association. PEDERSEN, P. B. (2008). Ethics,
competence, and professional issues in cross-cultural counseling. In P.
B. Pedersen, J. G. Draguns, W. E. Lonner, & J. E. Trimble (Eds.),
Counseling across cultures (6th ed., pp. 5--20). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage. POLSTER, E. (1987). Escape from the present: Transition and
storyline. In J. K. Zeig (Ed.), The evolution of psychotherapy
(pp. 326--340). New York: Brunner/Mazel. *PRESTON, J. (1998).
Integrative brief therapy: Cognitive, psychodynamic, humanistic and
neurobehavioral approaches. San Luis Obispo, CA: Impact Publishers.
PROCHASKA, J. O., & DICLEMENTE, C. C. (2005). The transtheoretical
approach. In J. C. Norcross & M. R. Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of
psychotherapy integration (2nd ed., pp. 147--171). New York: Oxford
University Press.* PROCHASKA, J. O., & NORCROSS, J. C. (2007). Systems
of psychotherapy: A transtheoretical analysis (6th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Brooks/Cole. RICHARDS, P. S., & BERGIN, A. E. (2005). A spiritual
strategy for counseling and psychotherapy (2nd ed.). Washington, DC:
American Psychological Association. RICHARDS, P. S., RECTOR, J. M., &
TJELTVEIT, A. C. (1999). Values, spirituality, and psychotherapy. In W.
R. Miller (Ed.), Integrating spirituality into treatment: Resources for
practitioners (pp. 133--160). Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association. ROGERS, C. (1957). The necessary and sufﬁcient conditions
of therapeutic personality change. Journal of Consulting Psychology, 21,
95--103. ROGERS, C. (1961). On becoming a person. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ
in. ROGERS, C. (1980). A way of being. Boston: Houghton Mifﬂ in. ST.
CLAIR, M. (with WIGREN, J.). (2004). Object relations and self
psychology: An introduction (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. *SHARF,
R. S. (2008). Theories of psychotherapy and counseling: Concepts and
cases (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. SOLLOD, R. N. (2005).
Integrating spirituality with psychotherapy. In J. C. Norcross & M. R.
Goldfried (Eds.), Handbook of psychotherapy integration (2nd ed.,
pp. 403--416). New York: Oxford University Press.* SPERRY, L., &
SHAFRANSKE, E. P. (2005). (Eds.). Spiritually oriented psychotherapy.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. *STRICKER, G., &
GOLD, J. (Eds.). (2006). A casebook of psychotherapy integration.
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.* SUE, D. W., & SUE,
D. (2008). Counseling the culturally diverse: Theory and practice (5th
ed.). New York: Wiley. *TEYBER, E. (2006). Interpersonal process in
psychotherapy: An integrative model (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole.
THE TOP 10: The most inﬂuential therapists of the past quarter-century.
(2007, March/ April). Psychotherapy Networker, 31(1), 24--68. VAN
DEURZEN, E. (2002). Existential counselling and psychotherapy (2nd ed.).
London: Sage. VONTRESS, C. E., JOHNSON, J. A., & EPP, L. R. (1999).
Cross-cultural counseling: A casebook. Alexandria, VA: American
Counseling Association.* WOLDT, A., & TOMAN, S. (Eds.). (2005). Gestalt
therapy: History, theory, and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
WUBBOLDING, R. E. (2000). Reality therapy for the 21st century. Muncie,
IN: Accelerated Development (Taylor & Francis Group).

This page intentionally left blank

TO THE OWNER OF THIS BOOK: I hope that you have found The Art of
Integrative Counseling (Second Edition) useful. So that this book can be
improved in a future edition, would you take the time to complete this
sheet and return it? Thank you. School and address:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Department:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Instructor's
name:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 1.
What I like most about this book
is:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
2. What I like least about this book
is:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
3. My general reaction to this book
is:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
4. The name of the course in which I used this book
is:\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
5. Were all of the chapters of the book assigned for you to
read?\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ If not, which ones
weren't? \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ 6. Did you
use CD-ROM for Integrative Counseling with this book? If so, what was
your reaction to the CD-ROM program?
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
7. In the space below, or on a separate sheet of paper, please write
specific suggestions for improving this book and anything else you'd
care to share about your experience in using this book.
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

OPTIONAL: Your name:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_
Date: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ May we quote you, either in promotion for
The Art of Integrative Counseling, or in future publishing ventures?
Yes: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ No: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Sincerely yours,
Gerald Corey

FOLD HERE

NO POSTAGE NECESSARY IF MAILED IN THE UNITED STATES

BUSINESS REPLY MAIL FIRST CLASS

PERMIT NO. 358

PACIFIC GROVE, CA

POSTAGE WILL BE PAID BY ADDRESSEE

ATTN: Counseling Editor

BROOKS/COLE/THOMSON LEARNING 511 FOREST LODGE ROAD PACIFIC GROVE, CA
93950-9968

FOLD HERE


