The Gift of

Therapy an open letter to a new generation of therapists and their
patients

Irvin D. Yalom, M.D.

to Marilyn, soul mate for over ﬁfty years. still counting.

contents Introduction x Acknowledgments xx chapter 1

Remove the Obstacles to Growth, 1

chapter 2

Avoid Diagnosis (Except for Insurance Companies), 4

chapter 3

Therapist and Patient as "Fellow Travelers," 6

chapter 4

Engage the Patient, 11

chapter 5

Be Supportive, 13

chapter 6

Empathy: Looking Out the Patient's Window, 17

chapter 7

Teach Empathy, 23

chapter 8

Let the Patient Matter to You, 26

chapter 9

Acknowledge Your Errors, 30

chapter 10 Create a New Therapy for Each Patient, 33 chapter 11 The
Therapeutic Act, Not the Therapeutic Word, 37 chapter 12 Engage in
Personal Therapy, 40

v

contents

chapter 13 The Therapist Has Many Patients; The Patient, One Therapist,
44 chapter 14 The Here-and-Now---Use It, Use It, Use It, 46 chapter 15
Why Use the Here-and-Now?, 47 chapter 16 Using the Here-and-Now--- Grow
Rabbit Ears, 49 chapter 17 Search for Here-and-Now Equivalents, 52
chapter 18 Working Through Issues in the Here-and-Now, 58 chapter 19 The
Here-and-Now Energizes Therapy, 62 chapter 20 Use Your Own Feelings as
Data, 65 chapter 21 Frame Here-and-Now Comments Carefully, 68 chapter 22
All Is Grist for the Here-and-Now Mill, 70 chapter 23 Check into the
Here-and-Now Each Hour, 72 chapter 24 What Lies Have You Told Me?, 74
chapter 25 Blank Screen? Forget It! Be Real, 75 chapter 26 Three Kinds
of Therapist Self-Disclosure, 83 chapter 27 The Mechanism of Therapy---
Be Transparent, 84 chapter 28 Revealing Here-and-Now Feelings--- Use
Discretion, 87 chapter 29 Revealing the Therapist's Personal Life--- Use
Caution, 90

vi

contents

chapter 30 Revealing Your Personal Life---Caveats, 94 chapter 31
Therapist Transparency and Universality, 97 chapter 32 Patients Will
Resist Your Disclosure, 99 chapter 33 Avoid the Crooked Cure, 102
chapter 34 On Taking Patients Further Than You Have Gone, 104 chapter 35
On Being Helped by Your Patient, 106 chapter 36 Encourage Patient
Self-Disclosure, 109 chapter 37 Feedback in Psychotherapy,

112

chapter 38 Provide Feedback Effectively and Gently, 115 chapter 39
Increase Receptiveness to Feedback by Using "Parts," 119 chapter 40
Feedback: Strike When the Iron Is Cold, 121 chapter 41 Talk About Death,
124 chapter 42 Death and Life Enhancement, 126 chapter 43 How to Talk
About Death, 129 chapter 44 Talk About Life Meaning, 133 chapter 45
Freedom, 137 chapter 46 Helping Patients Assume Responsibility, 139
chapter 47 Never (Almost Never) Make Decisions for the Patient, 142
chapter 48 Decisions: A Via Regia into Existential Bedrock, 146 chapter
49 Focus on Resistance to Decision, 148 chapter 50 Facilitating
Awareness by Advice Giving, 150

vii

contents

chapter 51 Facilitating Decisions---Other Devices, 155 chapter 52
Conduct Therapy as a Continuous Session, 158 chapter 53 Take Notes of
Each Session, 160 chapter 54 Encourage Self-Monitoring, 162 chapter 55
When Your Patient Weeps,

164

chapter 56 Give Yourself Time Between Patients, 166 chapter 57 Express
Your Dilemmas Openly, 168 chapter 58 Do Home Visits, 171 chapter 59
Don't Take Explanation Too Seriously, 174 chapter 60
Therapy-Accelerating Devices, 179 chapter 61 Therapy as a Dress
Rehearsal for Life, 182 chapter 62 Use the Initial Complaint as
Leverage, 184 chapter 63 Don't Be Afraid of Touching Your Patient, 187
chapter 64 Never Be Sexual with Patients, 191 chapter 65 Look for
Anniversary and Life-Stage Issues, 195 chapter 66 Never Ignore "Therapy
Anxiety," 197 chapter 67 Doctor, Take Away My Anxiety, 200 chapter 68 On
Being Love's Executioner,

201

chapter 69 Taking a History, 206 chapter 70 A History of the Patient's
Daily Schedule, 208 chapter 71 How Is the Patient's Life Peopled?,

210

chapter 72 Interview the Signiﬁcant Other, 211

viii

contents

chapter 73 Explore Previous Therapy,

213

chapter 74 Sharing the Shade of the Shadow, 215 chapter 75 Freud Was Not
Always Wrong, 217 chapter 76 CBT Is Not What It's Cracked Up to Be . . .
Or, Don't Be Afraid of the EVT Bogeyman, 222 chapter 77 Dreams---Use
Them, Use Them, Use Them, 225 chapter 78 Full Interpretation of a Dream?
Forget It! 227 chapter 79 Use Dreams Pragmatically: Pillage and Loot,
228 chapter 80 Master Some Dream Navigational Skills, 235 chapter 81
Learn About the Patient's Life from Dreams, 238 chapter 82 Pay Attention
to the First Dream, 243 chapter 83 Attend Carefully to Dreams About the
Therapist, 246 chapter 84 Beware the Occupational Hazards, 251 chapter
85 Cherish the Occupational Privileges, 256 Notes 261

About the Author Other Books by Irvin D. Yalom, M.D. Credits Cover
Copyright About the Publisher

Introduction It is dark. I come to your ofﬁce but can't ﬁnd you. Your
ofﬁce is empty. I enter and look around. The only thing there is your
Panama hat. And it is all ﬁlled with cobwebs.

M

y patients' dreams have changed. Cobwebs ﬁll my hat. My ofﬁce is dark
and deserted. I am nowhere to be found. My patients worry about my
health: Will I be there for the long haul of therapy? When I leave for
vacation, they fear I will never return. They imagine attending my
funeral or visiting my grave. My patients do not let me forget that I
grow old. But they are only doing their job: Have I not asked them to
disclose all feelings, thoughts, and dreams? Even potential new patients
join the chorus and, without fail, greet me with the question: "Are you
still taking on patients?" One of our chief modes of death denial is a
belief in personal specialness, a conviction that we are exempt from
biologi-

xi

introduction

cal necessity and that life will not deal with us in the same harsh way
it deals with everyone else. I remember, many years ago, visiting an
optometrist because of diminishing vision. He asked my age and then
responded: "Forty-eight, eh? Yep, you're right on schedule!" Of course I
knew, consciously, that he was entirely correct, but a cry welled up
from deep within: "What schedule? Who's on schedule? It is altogether
right that you and others may be on schedule, but certainly not I!" And
so it is daunting to realize that I am entering a designated later era
of life. My goals, interests, and ambitions are changing in predictable
fashion. Erik Erikson, in his study of the life cycle, described this
late-life stage as generativity, a post-narcissism era when attention
turns from expansion of oneself toward care and concern for succeeding
generations. Now, as I have reached seventy, I can appreciate the
clarity of Erikson's vision. His concept of generativity feels right to
me. I want to pass on what I have learned. And as soon as possible. But
offering guidance and inspiration to the next generation of
psychotherapists is exceedingly problematic today, because our ﬁeld is
in such crisis. An economically driven health-care system mandates a
radical modiﬁcation in psychological treatment, and psychotherapy is now
obliged to be streamlined--- that is, above all, inexpensive and,
perforce, brief, superﬁcial, and insubstantial. I worry where the next
generation of effective psychotherapists will be trained. Not in
psychiatry residency training programs. Psychiatry is on the verge of
abandoning the ﬁeld of psychotherapy. Young psychiatrists are forced to
specialize in psychopharmacology because third-party payers now
reimburse for psychotherapy only if it is delivered by low-fee (in other
words, minimally trained) practitioners. It seems certain that the
present generation of psychiatric clinicians, skilled in

introduction

xii

both dynamic psychotherapy and in pharmacological treatment, is an
endangered species. What about clinical psychology training
programs---the obvious choice to ﬁll the gap? Unfortunately, clinical
psychologists face the same market pressures, and most
doctorate-granting schools of psychology are responding by teaching a
therapy that is symptom-oriented, brief, and, hence, reimbursable. So I
worry about psychotherapy---about how it may be deformed by economic
pressures and impoverished by radically abbreviated training programs.
Nonetheless, I am conﬁdent that, in the future, a cohort of therapists
coming from a variety of educational disciplines (psychology,
counseling, social work, pastoral counseling, clinical philosophy) will
continue to pursue rigorous postgraduate training and, even in the crush
of HMO reality, will ﬁnd patients desiring extensive growth and change
willing to make an open-ended commitment to therapy. It is for these
therapists and these patients that I write The Gift of Therapy.

throughout these pages I advise students against sectarianism and
suggest a therapeutic pluralism in which effective interventions are
drawn from several different therapy approaches. Still, for the most
part, I work from an interpersonal and existential frame of reference.
Hence, the bulk of the advice that follows issues from one or the other
of these two perspectives. Since ﬁrst entering the ﬁeld of psychiatry, I
have had two abiding interests: group therapy and existential therapy.
These are parallel but separate interests: I do not practice
"existential group therapy"---in fact, I don't know what that would be.
The two modes are different not only because of the format (that is, a
group of approximately six to nine members versus a one-toone setting
for existential psychotherapy) but in their funda-

xiii

introduction

mental frame of reference. When I see patients in group therapy I work
from an interpersonal frame of reference and make the assumption that
patients fall into despair because of their inability to develop and
sustain gratifying interpersonal relationships. However, when I operate
from an existential frame of reference, I make a very different
assumption: patients fall into despair as a result of a confrontation
with harsh facts of the human condition---the "givens" of existence.
Since many of the offerings in this book issue from an existential
framework that is unfamiliar to many readers, a brief introduction is in
order. Deﬁnition of existential psychotherapy: Existential psychotherapy
is a dynamic therapeutic approach that focuses on concerns rooted in
existence. Let me dilate this terse deﬁnition by clarifying the phrase
"dynamic approach." Dynamic has both a lay and technical definition. The
lay meaning of dynamic (derived from the Greek root dynasthai, to have
power or strength) implying forcefulness or vitality (to wit, dynamo, a
dynamic football runner or political orator) is obviously not relevant
here. But if that were the meaning, applied to our profession, then
where is the therapist who would claim to be other than a dynamic
therapist, in other words, a sluggish or inert therapist? No, I use
"dynamic" in its technical sense, which retains the idea of force but is
rooted in Freud's model of mental functioning, positing that forces in
conﬂict within the individual generate the individual's thought,
emotion, and behavior. Furthermore---and this is a crucial point---these
conﬂicting forces exist at varying levels of awareness; indeed some are
entirely unconscious. So existential psychotherapy is a dynamic therapy
that, like the various psychoanalytic therapies, assumes that
unconscious forces inﬂuence conscious functioning. However, it

introduction

xiv

parts company from the various psychoanalytic ideologies when we ask the
next question: What is the nature of the conﬂicting internal forces? The
existential psychotherapy approach posits that the inner conﬂict
bedeviling us issues not only from our struggle with suppressed
instinctual strivings or internalized signiﬁcant adults or shards of
forgotten traumatic memories, but also from our confrontation with the
"givens" of existence. And what are these "givens" of existence? If we
permit ourselves to screen out or "bracket" the everyday concerns of
life and reﬂect deeply upon our situation in the world, we inevitably
arrive at the deep structures of existence (the "ultimate concerns," to
use theologian Paul Tillich's term). Four ultimate concerns, to my view,
are highly salient to psychotherapy: death, isolation, meaning in life,
and freedom. (Each of these ultimate concerns will be deﬁned and
discussed in a designated section.) Students have often asked why I
don't advocate training programs in existential psychotherapy. The
reason is that I've never considered existential psychotherapy to be a
discrete, freestanding ideological school. Rather than attempt to
develop existential psychotherapy curricula, I prefer to supplement the
education of all well-trained dynamic therapists by increasing their
sensibility to existential issues.

Process and content. What does existential therapy look like in
practice? To answer that question one must attend to both "content" and
"process," the two major aspects of therapy discourse. "Content" is just
what it says---the precise words spoken, the substantive issues
addressed. "Process" refers to an entirely different and enormously
important dimension: the interpersonal relationship between the patient
and therapist.

xv

introduction

When we ask about the "process" of an interaction, we mean: What do the
words (and the nonverbal behavior as well) tell us about the nature of
the relationship between the parties engaged in the interaction? If my
therapy sessions were observed, one might often look in vain for lengthy
explicit discussions of death, freedom, meaning, or existential
isolation. Such existential content may be salient for only some (but
not all) patients at some (but not all) stages of therapy. In fact, the
effective therapist should never try to force discussion of any content
area: Therapy should not be theory-driven but relationship-driven. But
observe these same sessions for some characteristic process deriving
from an existential orientation and one will encounter another story
entirely. A heightened sensibility to existential issues deeply
inﬂuences the nature of the relationship of the therapist and patient
and affects every single therapy session. I myself am surprised by the
particular form this book has taken. I never expected to author a book
containing a sequence of tips for therapists. Yet, looking back, I know
the precise moment of inception. Two years ago, after viewing the
Huntington Japanese gardens in Pasadena, I noted the Huntington
Library's exhibit of best-selling books from the Renaissance in Great
Britain and wandered in. Three of the ten exhibited volumes were books
of numbered "tips"---on animal husbandry, sewing, gardening. I was
struck that even then, hundreds of years ago, just after the
introduction of the printing press, lists of tips attracted the
attention of the multitudes. Years ago, I treated a writer who, having
ﬂagged in the writing of two consecutive novels, resolved never to
undertake another book until one came along and bit her on the ass. I
chuckled at her remark but didn't really comprehend what she meant until
that moment in the Huntington Library when the idea of a book of tips
bit me on the ass. On the spot, I resolved

introduction

xvi

to put away other writing projects, to begin looting my clinical notes
and journals, and to write an open letter to beginning therapists.
Rainer Maria Rilke's ghost hovered over the writing of this volume.
Shortly before my experience in the Huntington Library, I had reread his
Letters to a Young Poet and I have consciously attempted to raise myself
to his standards of honesty, inclusiveness, and generosity of spirit.
The advice in this book is drawn from notes of forty-ﬁve years of
clinical practice. It is an idiosyncratic mélange of ideas and
techniques that I have found useful in my work. These ideas are so
personal, opinionated, and occasionally original that the reader is
unlikely to encounter them elsewhere. Hence, this volume is in no way
meant to be a systematic manual; I intend it instead as a supplement to
a comprehensive training program. I selected the eighty-ﬁve categories
in this volume randomly, guided by my passion for the task rather than
by any particular order or system. I began with a list of more than two
hundred pieces of advice, and ultimately pruned away those for which I
felt too little enthusiasm. One other factor inﬂuenced my selection of
these eightyﬁve items. My recent novels and stories contain many
descriptions of therapy procedures I've found useful in my clinical work
but, since my ﬁction has a comic, often burlesque tone, it is unclear to
many readers whether I am serious about the therapy procedures I
describe. The Gift of Therapy offers me an opportunity to set the record
straight. As a nuts-and-bolts collection of favorite interventions or
statements, this volume is long on technique and short on theory.
Readers seeking more theoretical background may wish to read my texts
Existential Psychotherapy and The Theory and Practice of Group
Psychotherapy, the mother books for this work. Being trained in medicine
and psychiatry, I have grown

xvii

introduction

accustomed to the term patient (from the Latin patiens---one who suffers
or endures) but I use it synonymously with client, the common
appellation of psychology and counseling traditions. To some, the term
patient suggests an aloof, disinterested, unengaged, authoritarian
therapist stance. But read on---I intend to encourage throughout a
therapeutic relationship based on engagement, openness, and
egalitarianism. Many books, my own included, consist of a limited number
of substantive points and then considerable ﬁller to connect the points
in a graceful manner. Because I have selected a large number of
suggestions, many freestanding, and omitted much ﬁller and transitions,
the text will have an episodic, lurching quality. Though I selected
these suggestions haphazardly and expect many readers to sample these
offerings in an unsystematic manner, I have tried, as an afterthought,
to group them in a readerfriendly fashion. The ﬁrst section (1--40)
addresses the nature of the therapist-patient relationship, with
particular emphasis on the here-and-now, the therapist's use of the
self, and therapist selfdisclosure. The next section (41--51) turns from
process to content and suggests methods of exploring the ultimate
concerns of death, meaning in life, and freedom (encompassing
responsibility and decision). The third section (52--76) addresses a
variety of issues arising in the everyday conduct of therapy. In the
fourth section (77--83) I address the use of dreams in therapy. The ﬁnal
section (84--85) discusses the hazards and privileges of being a
therapist. This text is sprinkled with many of my favorite speciﬁc

introduction

xviii

phrases and interventions. At the same time I encourage spontaneity and
creativity. Hence do not view my idiosyncratic interventions as a
speciﬁc procedural recipe; they represent my own perspective and my
attempt to reach inside to ﬁnd my own style and voice. Many students
will ﬁnd that other theoretical positions and technical styles will
prove more compatible for them. The advice in this book derives from my
clinical practice with moderately high- to high-functioning patients
(rather than those who are psychotic or markedly disabled) meeting once
or, less commonly, twice a week, for a few months to two to three years.
My therapy goals with these patients are ambitious: in addition to
symptom removal and alleviation of pain, I strive to facilitate personal
growth and basic character change. I know that many of my readers may
have a different clinical situation: a different setting with a
different patient population and a briefer duration of therapy. Still it
is my hope that readers ﬁnd their own creative way to adapt and apply
what I have learned to their own particular work situation.

Acknowledgments

M

any have assisted me in the writing of this book. First, as always, I am
much indebted to my wife, Marilyn, always my ﬁrst and most thorough
reader. Several colleagues read and expertly critiqued the entire
manuscript: Murray Bilmes, Peter Rosenbaum, David Spiegel, Ruthellen
Josselson, and Saul Spiro. A number of colleagues and students critiqued
parts of the manuscript: Neil Brast, Rick Van Rheenen, Martel Bryant,
Ivan Gendzel, Randy Weingarten, Ines Roe, Evelyn Beck, Susan Goldberg,
Tracy Larue Yalom, and Scott Haigley. Members of my professional support
group generously granted me considerable air time to discuss sections of
this book. Several of my patients permitted me to include incidents and
dreams from their therapy. To all, my gratitude.

chapter 1

Remove the Obstacles to Growth

W

hen I was ﬁnding my way as a young psychotherapy student, the most
useful book I read was Karen Horney's Neurosis and Human Growth. And the
single most useful concept in that book was the notion that the human
being has an inbuilt propensity toward self-realization. If obstacles
are removed, Horney believed, the individual will develop into a mature,
fully realized adult, just as an acorn will develop into an oak tree.
"Just as an acorn develops into an oak . . ." What a wonderfully
liberating and clarifying image! It forever changed my approach to
psychotherapy by offering me a new vision of my work: My task was to
remove obstacles blocking my patient's path. I did not have to do the
entire job; I did not have to inspirit the patient with the desire to
grow, with curiosity, will, zest for life, caring, loyalty, or any of
the myriad of characteristics that make us fully human. No, what I had
to do was to identify and remove obstacles. The rest would follow
automatically, fueled by the self-actualizing forces within the patient.

2

the

gift

of

therapy

I remember a young widow with, as she put it, a "failed heart"---an
inability ever to love again. It felt daunting to address the inability
to love. I didn't know how to do that. But dedicating myself to
identifying and uprooting her many blocks to loving? I could do that. I
soon learned that love felt treasonous to her. To love another was to
betray her dead husband; it felt to her like pounding the ﬁnal nails in
her husband's cofﬁn. To love another as deeply as she did her husband
(and she would settle for nothing less) meant that her love for her
husband had been in some way insufﬁcient or ﬂawed. To love another would
be selfdestructive because loss, and the searing pain of loss, was
inevitable. To love again felt irresponsible: she was evil and jinxed,
and her kiss was the kiss of death. We worked hard for many months to
identify all these obstacles to her loving another man. For months we
wrestled with each irrational obstacle in turn. But once that was done,
the patient's internal processes took over: she met a man, she fell in
love, she married again. I didn't have to teach her to search, to give,
to cherish, to love---I wouldn't have known how to do that. A few words
about Karen Horney: Her name is unfamiliar to most young therapists.
Because the shelf life of eminent theorists in our ﬁeld has grown so
short, I shall, from time to time, lapse into reminiscence---not merely
for the sake of paying homage but to emphasize the point that our ﬁeld
has a long history of remarkably able contributors who have laid deep
foundations for our therapy work today. One uniquely American addition
to psychodynamic theory is embodied in the "neo-Freudian" movement---a
group of clinicians and theorists who reacted against Freud's original
focus on drive theory, that is, the notion that the developing
individual is largely controlled by the unfolding and expression of
inbuilt drives.

Remove the Obstacles to Growth

3

Instead, the neo-Freudians emphasized that we consider the vast inﬂuence
of the interpersonal environment that envelops the individual and that,
throughout life, shapes character structure. The best-known
interpersonal theorists, Harry Stack Sullivan, Erich Fromm, and Karen
Horney, have been so deeply integrated and assimilated into our therapy
language and practice that we are all, without knowing it,
neo-Freudians. One is reminded of Monsieur Jourdain in Molière's Le
Bourgeois Gentilhomme, who, upon learning the deﬁnition of "prose,"
exclaims with wonderment, "To think that all my life I've been speaking
prose without knowing it."

chapter 2

Avoid Diagnosis (Except for Insurance Companies)

T

oday's psychotherapy students are exposed to too much emphasis on
diagnosis. Managed-care administrators demand that therapists arrive
quickly at a precise diagnosis and then proceed upon a course of brief,
focused therapy that matches that particular diagnosis. Sounds good.
Sounds logical and efﬁcient. But it has precious little to do with
reality. It represents instead an illusory attempt to legislate
scientiﬁc precision into being when it is neither possible nor
desirable. Though diagnosis is unquestionably critical in treatment
considerations for many severe conditions with a biological substrate
(for example, schizophrenia, bipolar disorders, major affective
disorders, temporal lobe epilepsy, drug toxicity, organic or brain
disease from toxins, degenerative causes, or infectious agents),
diagnosis is often counterproductive in the everyday psychotherapy of
less severely impaired patients. Why? For one thing, psychotherapy
consists of a gradual unfolding process wherein the therapist attempts
to know the patient as fully as possible. A diagnosis limits vision; it
dimin-

Av o i d D i a g n o s i s

5

ishes ability to relate to the other as a person. Once we make a
diagnosis, we tend to selectively inattend to aspects of the patient
that do not ﬁt into that particular diagnosis, and correspondingly
overattend to subtle features that appear to conﬁrm an initial
diagnosis. What's more, a diagnosis may act as a selffulﬁlling prophecy.
Relating to a patient as a "borderline" or a "hysteric" may serve to
stimulate and perpetuate those very traits. Indeed, there is a long
history of iatrogenic inﬂuence on the shape of clinical entities,
including the current controversy about multiple-personality disorder
and repressed memories of sexual abuse. And keep in mind, too, the low
reliability of the DSM personality disorder category (the very patients
often engaging in longer-term psychotherapy). And what therapist has not
been struck by how much easier it is to make a DSM-IV diagnosis
following the ﬁrst interview than much later, let us say, after the
tenth session, when we know a great deal more about the individual? Is
this not a strange kind of science? A colleague of mine brings this
point home to his psychiatric residents by asking, "If you are in
personal psychotherapy or are considering it, what DSM-IV diagnosis do
you think your therapist could justiﬁably use to describe someone as
complicated as you?" In the therapeutic enterprise we must tread a ﬁne
line between some, but not too much, objectivity; if we take the DSM
diagnostic system too seriously, if we really believe we are truly
carving at the joints of nature, then we may threaten the human, the
spontaneous, the creative and uncertain nature of the therapeutic
venture. Remember that the clinicians involved in formulating previous,
now discarded, diagnostic systems were competent, proud, and just as
conﬁdent as the current members of the DSM committees. Undoubtedly the
time will come when the DSM-IV Chinese restaurant menu format will
appear ludicrous to mental health professionals.

chapter 3

Therapist and Patient as "Fellow Travelers"

A

ndré Malraux, the French novelist, described a country priest who had
taken confession for many decades and summed up what he had learned
about human nature in this manner: "First of all, people are much more
unhappy than one thinks . . . and there is no such thing as a grown-up
person." Everyone---and that includes therapists as well as
patients---is destined to experience not only the exhilaration of life,
but also its inevitable darkness: disillusionment, aging, illness,
isolation, loss, meaninglessness, painful choices, and death. No one put
things more starkly and more bleakly than the German philosopher Arthur
Schopenhauer: In early youth, as we contemplate our coming life, we are
like children in a theater before the curtain is raised, sitting there
in high spirits and eagerly waiting for the play to begin. It is a
blessing that we do not know what is really going to happen. Could we
foresee it, there are

T h e r a p i s t a n d Pa t i e n t a s " Fe l l o w Tr a v e l e r s "

7

times when children might seem like condemned prisoners, condemned, not
to death, but to life, and as yet all unconscious of what their sentence
means. Or again: We are like lambs in the ﬁeld, disporting themselves
under the eyes of the butcher, who picks out one ﬁrst and then another
for his prey. So it is that in our good days we are all unconscious of
the evil that Fate may have presently in store for us---sickness,
poverty, mutilation, loss of sight or reason. Though Schopenhauer's view
is colored heavily by his own personal unhappiness, still it is difﬁcult
to deny the inbuilt despair in the life of every self-conscious
individual. My wife and I have sometimes amused ourselves by planning
imaginary dinner parties for groups of people sharing similar
propensities--- for example, a party for monopolists, or ﬂaming
narcissists, or artful passive-aggressives we have known or, conversely,
a "happy" party to which we invite only the truly happy people we have
encountered. Though we've encountered no problems ﬁlling all sorts of
other whimsical tables, we've never been able to populate a full table
for our "happy people" party. Each time we identify a few
characterologically cheerful people and place them on a waiting list
while we continue our search to complete the table, we ﬁnd that one or
another of our happy guests is eventually stricken by some major life
adversity---often a severe illness or that of a child or spouse. This
tragic but realistic view of life has long inﬂuenced my relationship to
those who seek my help. Though there are many phrases for the
therapeutic relationship (patient/therapist, client/counselor,
analysand/analyst, client/facilitator, and the

8

the

gift

of

therapy

latest---and, by far, the most repulsive---user/provider), none of these
phrases accurately convey my sense of the therapeutic relationship.
Instead I prefer to think of my patients and myself as fellow travelers,
a term that abolishes distinctions between "them" (the afﬂicted) and
"us" (the healers). During my training I was often exposed to the idea
of the fully analyzed therapist, but as I have progressed through life,
formed intimate relationships with a good many of my therapist
colleagues, met the senior ﬁgures in the ﬁeld, been called upon to
render help to my former therapists and teachers, and myself become a
teacher and an elder, I have come to realize the mythic nature of this
idea. We are all in this together and there is no therapist and no
person immune to the inherent tragedies of existence. One of my favorite
tales of healing, found in Hermann Hesse's Magister Ludi, involves
Joseph and Dion, two renowned healers, who lived in biblical times.
Though both were highly effective, they worked in different ways. The
younger healer, Joseph, healed through quiet, inspired listening.
Pilgrims trusted Joseph. Suffering and anxiety poured into his ears
vanished like water on the desert sand and penitents left his presence
emptied and calmed. On the other hand, Dion, the older healer, actively
confronted those who sought his help. He divined their unconfessed sins.
He was a great judge, chastiser, scolder, and rectiﬁer, and he healed
through active intervention. Treating the penitents as children, he gave
advice, punished by assigning penance, ordered pilgrimages and
marriages, and compelled enemies to make up. The two healers never met,
and they worked as rivals for many years until Joseph grew spiritually
ill, fell into dark despair, and was assailed with ideas of
self-destruction. Unable to heal himself with his own therapeutic
methods, he set out on a journey to the south to seek help from Dion.

T h e r a p i s t a n d Pa t i e n t a s " Fe l l o w Tr a v e l e r s "

9

On his pilgrimage, Joseph rested one evening at an oasis, where he fell
into a conversation with an older traveler. When Joseph described the
purpose and destination of his pilgrimage, the traveler offered himself
as a guide to assist in the search for Dion. Later, in the midst of
their long journey together the old traveler revealed his identity to
Joseph. Mirabile dictu: he himself was Dion---the very man Joseph
sought. Without hesitation Dion invited his younger, despairing rival
into his home, where they lived and worked together for many years. Dion
ﬁrst asked Joseph to be a servant. Later he elevated him to a student
and, ﬁnally, to full colleagueship. Years later, Dion fell ill and on
his deathbed called his young colleague to him in order to hear a
confession. He spoke of Joseph's earlier terrible illness and his
journey to old Dion to plead for help. He spoke of how Joseph had felt
it was a miracle that his fellow traveler and guide turned out to be
Dion himself. Now that he was dying, the hour had come, Dion told
Joseph, to break his silence about that miracle. Dion confessed that at
the time it had seemed a miracle to him as well, for he, too, had fallen
into despair. He, too, felt empty and spiritually dead and, unable to
help himself, had set off on a journey to seek help. On the very night
that they had met at the oasis he was on a pilgrimage to a famous healer
named Joseph.

hesse's tale has always moved me in a preternatural way. It strikes me
as a deeply illuminating statement about giving and receiving help,
about honesty and duplicity, and about the relationship between healer
and patient. The two men received powerful help but in very different
ways. The younger healer was nurtured, nursed, taught, mentored, and
parented. The

10

the

gift

of

therapy

older healer, on the other hand, was helped through serving another,
through obtaining a disciple from whom he received ﬁlial love, respect,
and salve for his isolation. But now, reconsidering the story, I
question whether these two wounded healers could not have been of even
more service to one another. Perhaps they missed the opportunity for
something deeper, more authentic, more powerfully mutative. Perhaps the
real therapy occurred at the deathbed scene, when they moved into
honesty with the revelation that they were fellow travelers, both simply
human, all too human. The twenty years of secrecy, helpful as they were,
may have obstructed and prevented a more profound kind of help. What
might have happened if Dion's deathbed confession had occurred twenty
years earlier, if healer and seeker had joined together in facing the
questions that have no answers? All of this echoes Rilke's letters to a
young poet in which he advises, "Have patience with everything
unresolved and try to love the questions themselves." I would add: "Try
to love the questioners as well."

chapter 4

Engage the Patient

A

great many of our patients have conﬂicts in the realm of intimacy, and
obtain help in therapy sheerly through experiencing an intimate
relationship with the therapist. Some fear intimacy because they believe
there is something basically unacceptable about them, something
repugnant and unforgivable. Given this, the act of revealing oneself
fully to another and still being accepted may be the major vehicle of
therapeutic help. Others may avoid intimacy because of fears of
exploitation, colonization, or abandonment; for them, too, the intimate
and caring therapeutic relationship that does not result in the
anticipated catastrophe becomes a corrective emotional experience.
Hence, nothing takes precedence over the care and maintenance of my
relationship to the patient, and I attend carefully to every nuance of
how we regard each other. Does the patient seem distant today?
Competitive? Inattentive to my comments? Does he make use of what I say
in private but refuse to acknowledge my help openly? Is she overly
respectful? Obse-

12

the

gift

of

therapy

quious? Too rarely voicing any objection or disagreements? Detached or
suspicious? Do I enter his dreams or daydreams? What are the words of
imaginary conversations with me? All these things I want to know, and
more. I never let an hour go by without checking into our relationship,
sometimes with a simple statement like: "How are you and I doing today?"
or "How are you experiencing the space between us today?" Sometimes I
ask the patient to project herself into the future: "Imagine a half hour
from now---you're on your drive home, looking back upon our session. How
will you feel about you and me today? What will be the unspoken
statements or unasked questions about our relationship today?"

chapter 5

Be Supportive

O

ne of the great values of obtaining intensive personal therapy is to
experience for oneself the great value of positive support. Question:
What do patients recall when they look back, years later, on their
experience in therapy? Answer: Not insight, not the therapist's
interpretations. More often than not, they remember the positive
supportive statements of their therapist. I make a point of regularly
expressing my positive thoughts and feelings about my patients, along a
wide range of attributes--- for example, their social skills,
intellectual curiosity, warmth, loyalty to their friends,
articulateness, courage in facing their inner demons, dedication to
change, willingness to selfdisclose, loving gentleness with their
children, commitment to breaking the cycle of abuse, and decision not to
pass on the "hot potato" to the next generation. Don't be
stingy---there's no point to it; there is every reason to express these
observations and your positive sentiments. And beware of empty
compliments---make your support as incisive as your feedback or

14

the

gift

of

therapy

interpretations. Keep in mind the therapist's great power--- power that,
in part, stems from our having been privy to our patients' most intimate
life events, thoughts, and fantasies. Acceptance and support from one
who knows you so intimately is enormously afﬁrming. If patients make an
important and courageous therapeutic step, compliment them on it. If
I've been deeply engaged in the hour and regret that it's come to an
end, I say that I hate to bring this hour to an end. And (a
confession---every therapist has a store of small secret
transgressions!) I do not hesitate to express this nonverbally by
running over the hour a few minutes. Often the therapist is the only
audience viewing great dramas and acts of courage. Such privilege
demands a response to the actor. Though patients may have other
conﬁdants, none is likely to have the therapist's comprehensive
appreciation of certain momentous acts. For example, years ago a
patient, Michael, a novelist, informed me one day that he had just
closed his secret post ofﬁce box. For years this mailbox had been his
method of communication in a long series of clandestine extramarital
affairs. Hence, closing the box was a momentous act, and I considered it
my responsibility to appreciate the great courage of his act and made a
point of expressing to him my admiration for his action. A few months
later he was still tormented by recurring images and cravings for his
last lover. I offered support. "You know, Michael, the type of passion
you experienced doesn't ever evaporate quickly. Of course you're going
to be revisited with longings. It's inevitable---that's part of your
humanity." "Part of my weakness, you mean. I wish I were a man of steel
and could put her aside for good." "We have a name for such men of
steel: robots. And a

Be Supportive

15

robot, thank God, is what you are not. We've talked often about your
sensitivity and your creativity---these are your richest assets---that's
why your writing is so powerful and that's why others are drawn to you.
But these very traits have a dark side---anxiety---they make it
impossible for you to live through such circumstances with equanimity."
A lovely example of a reframed comment that provided much comfort to me
occurred some time ago when I expressed my disappointment at a bad
review of one of my books to a friend, William Blatty, the author of The
Exorcist. He responded in a wonderfully supportive manner, which
instantaneously healed my wound. "Irv, of course you're upset by the
review. Thank God for it! If you weren't so sensitive, you wouldn't be
such a good writer." All therapists will discover their own way of
supporting patients. I have an indelible image in my mind of Ram Dass
describing his leave-taking from a guru with whom he had studied at an
ashram in India for many years. When Ram Dass lamented that he was not
ready to leave because of his many ﬂaws and imperfections, his guru rose
and slowly and very solemnly circled him in a close-inspection tour,
which he concluded with an ofﬁcial pronouncement: "I see no
imperfections." I've never literally circled patients, visually
inspecting them, and I never feel that the process of growth ever ends,
but nonetheless this image has often guided my comments. Support may
include comments about appearance: some article of clothing, a
well-rested, suntanned countenance, a new hairstyle. If a patient
obsesses about physical unattractiveness I believe the human thing to do
is to comment (if one feels this way) that you consider him/her to be
attractive and to wonder about the origins of the myth of his/her
unattractiveness. In a story about psychotherapy in Momma and the
Meaning

16

the

gift

of

therapy

of Life, my protagonist, Dr. Ernest Lash, is cornered by an
exceptionally attractive female patient, who presses him with explicit
questions: "Am I appealing to men? To you? If you weren't my therapist
would you respond sexually to me?" These are the ultimate nightmarish
questions---the questions therapists dread above all others. It is the
fear of such questions that causes many therapists to give too little of
themselves. But I believe the fear is unwarranted. If you deem it in the
patient's best interests, why not simply say, as my ﬁctional character
did, "If everything were different, we met in another world, I were
single, I weren't your therapist, then yes, I would ﬁnd you very
attractive and sure would make an effort to know you better." What's the
risk? In my view such candor simply increases the patient's trust in you
and in the process of therapy. Of course, this does not preclude other
types of inquiry about the question---about, for example, the patient's
motivation or timing (the standard "Why now?" question) or inordinate
preoccupation with physicality or seduction, which may be obscuring even
more signiﬁcant questions.

chapter 6

Empathy: Looking Out the Patient's Window

I

t's strange how certain phrases or events lodge in one's mind and offer
ongoing guidance or comfort. Decades ago I saw a patient with breast
cancer, who had, throughout adolescence, been locked in a long, bitter
struggle with her naysaying father. Yearning for some form of
reconciliation, for a new, fresh beginning to their relationship, she
looked forward to her father's driving her to college---a time when she
would be alone with him for several hours. But the long-anticipated trip
proved a disaster: her father behaved true to form by grousing at length
about the ugly, garbage-littered creek by the side of the road. She, on
the other hand, saw no litter whatsoever in the beautiful, rustic,
unspoiled stream. She could ﬁnd no way to respond and eventually,
lapsing into silence, they spent the remainder of the trip looking away
from each other. Later, she made the same trip alone and was astounded
to note that there were two streams---one on each side of the road.
"This time I was the driver," she said sadly, "and the stream I

18

the

gift

of

therapy

saw through my window on the driver's side was just as ugly and polluted
as my father had described it." But by the time she had learned to look
out her father's window, it was too late---her father was dead and
buried. That story has remained with me, and on many occasions I have
reminded myself and my students, "Look out the other's window. Try to
see the world as your patient sees it." The woman who told me this story
died a short time later of breast cancer, and I regret that I cannot
tell her how useful her story has been over the years, to me, my
students, and many patients. Fifty years ago Carl Rogers identiﬁed
"accurate empathy" as one of the three essential characteristics of the
effective therapist (along with "unconditional positive regard" and
"genuineness") and launched the ﬁeld of psychotherapy research, which
ultimately marshaled considerable evidence to support the effectiveness
of empathy. Therapy is enhanced if the therapist enters accurately into
the patient's world. Patients proﬁt enormously simply from the
experience of being fully seen and fully understood. Hence, it is
important for us to appreciate how our patient experiences the past,
present, and future. I make a point of repeatedly checking out my
assumptions. For example: "Bob, when I think about your relationship to
Mary, this is what I understand. You say you are convinced that you and
she are incompatible, that you want very much to separate from her, that
you feel bored in her company and avoid spending entire evenings with
her. Yet now, when she has made the move you wanted and has pulled away,
you once again yearn for her. I think I hear you saying that you don't
want to be with her, yet you cannot

E m p a t h y : L o o k i n g O u t t h e Pa t i e n t ' s W i n d o w

19

bear the idea of her not being available when you might need her. Am I
right so far?" Accurate empathy is most important in the domain of the
immediate present---that is, the here-and-now of the therapy hour. Keep
in mind that patients view the therapy hours very differently from
therapists. Again and again, therapists, even highly experienced ones,
are greatly surprised to rediscover this phenomenon. Not uncommonly, one
of my patients begins an hour by describing an intense emotional
reaction to something that occurred during the previous hour, and I feel
bafﬂed and cannot for the life of me imagine what it was that happened
in that hour to elicit such a powerful response. Such divergent views
between patient and therapist ﬁrst came to my attention years ago, when
I was conducting research on the experience of group members in both
therapy groups and encounter groups. I asked a great many group members
to ﬁll out a questionnaire in which they identiﬁed critical incidents
for each meeting. The rich and varied incidents described differed
greatly from their group leaders' assessments of each meeting's critical
incidents, and a similar difference existed between members' and
leaders' selection of the most critical incidents for the entire group
experience. My next encounter with differences in patient and therapist
perspectives occurred in an informal experiment, in which a patient and
I each wrote summaries of each therapy hour. The experiment has a
curious history. The patient, Ginny, was a gifted creative writer who
suffered from not only a severe writing block, but a block in all forms
of expressiveness. A year's attendance in my therapy group was
relatively unproductive: She revealed little of herself, gave little of
herself to the other members, and idealized me so greatly that any
genuine

20

the

gift

of

therapy

encounter was not possible. Then, when Ginny had to leave the group
because of ﬁnancial pressures, I proposed an unusual experiment. I
offered to see her in individual therapy with the proviso that, in lieu
of payment, she write a freeflowing, uncensored summary of each therapy
hour expressing all the feelings and thoughts she had not verbalized
during our session. I, for my part, proposed to do exactly the same and
suggested we each hand in our sealed weekly reports to my secretary and
that every few months we would read each other's notes. My proposal was
overdetermined. I hoped that the writing assignment might not only
liberate my patient's writing, but encourage her to express herself more
freely in therapy. Perhaps, I hoped, her reading my notes might improve
our relationship. I intended to write uncensored notes revealing my own
experiences during the hour: my pleasures, frustrations, distractions.
It was possible that, if Ginny could see me more realistically, she
could begin to de-idealize me and relate to me on a more human basis.
(As an aside, not germane to this discussion of empathy, I would add
that this experience occurred at a time when I was attempting to develop
my voice as a writer, and my offer to write in parallel with my patient
had also a self-serving motive: It afforded me an unusual writing
exercise and an opportunity to break my professional shackles, to
liberate my voice by writing all that came to mind immediately following
each hour.) The exchange of notes every few months provided a
Rashomon-like experience: Though we had shared the hour, we experienced
and remembered it idiosyncratically. For one thing, we valued very
different parts of the session. My elegant and brilliant
interpretations? She never even heard them. Instead, she valued the
small personal acts I barely noticed: my

E m p a t h y : L o o k i n g O u t t h e Pa t i e n t ' s W i n d o w

21

complimenting her clothing or appearance or writing, my awkward
apologies for arriving a couple of minutes late, my chuckling at her
satire, my teasing her when we role-played. *All these experiences have
taught me not to assume that the patient and I have the same experience
during the hour. When patients discuss feelings they had the previous
session, I make a point of inquiring about their experience and almost
always learn something new and unexpected. Being empathic is so much a
part of everyday discourse---popular singers warble platitudes about
being in the other's skin, walking in the other's moccasins---that we
tend to forget the complexity of the process. It is extraordinarily
difﬁcult to know really what the other feels; far too often we project
our own feelings onto the other. When teaching students about empathy,
Erich Fromm often cited Terence's statement from two thousand years
ago---"I am human and let nothing human be alien to me"---and urged us
to be open to that part of ourselves that corresponds to any deed or
fantasy offered by patients, no matter how heinous, violent, lustful,
masochistic, or sadistic. If we didn't, he suggested we investigate why
we have chosen to close that part of ourselves. Of course, a knowledge
of the patient's past vastly enhances your ability to look out the
patient's window. If, for example, patients have suffered a long series
of losses, then they will view the world through the spectacles of loss.
They may be dis*Later, I used the session summaries in psychotherapy
teaching and was struck by their pedagogical value. Students reported
that our joint notes took on the characteristics of an epistolary novel
and eventually, in 1974, the patient, Ginny Elkin (a pseudonym), and I
published them under the title Every Day Gets a Little Closer. Twenty
years later, the book was released in paperback and began a new life. In
retrospect the subtitle, A Twice-Told Therapy, would have been more apt,
but Ginny loved the old Buddy Holly song and wanted to get married to
its tune.

22

the

gift

of

therapy

inclined, for example, to let you matter or get too close because of
fear of suffering yet another loss. Hence the investigation of the past
may be important not for the sake of constructing causal chains but
because it permits us to be more accurately empathic.

chapter 7

Teach Empathy

A

ccurate empathy is an essential trait not only for therapists but for
patients, and we must help patients develop empathy for others. Keep in
mind that our patients generally come to see us because of their lack of
success in developing and maintaining gratifying interpersonal
relationships. Many fail to empathize with the feelings and experiences
of others. I believe that the here-and-now offers therapists a powerful
way to help patients develop empathy. The strategy is straightforward:
Help patients experience empathy with you, and they will automatically
make the necessary extrapolations to other important ﬁgures in their
lives. It is quite common for therapists to ask patients how a certain
statement or action of theirs might affect others. I suggest simply that
the therapist include himself in that question. When patients venture a
guess about how I feel, I generally hone in on it. If, for example, a
patient interprets some gesture

24

the

gift

of

therapy

or comment and says, "You must be very tired of seeing me," or "I know
you're sorry you ever got involved with me," or "I've got to be your
most unpleasant hour of the day," I will do some reality testing and
comment, "Is there a question in there for me?" This is, of course,
simple social-skills training: I urge the patient to address or question
me directly, and I endeavor to answer in a manner that is direct and
helpful. For example, I might respond: "You're reading me entirely
wrong. I don't have any of those feelings. I've been pleased with our
work. You've shown a lot of courage, you work hard, you've never missed
a session, you've never been late, you've taken chances by sharing so
many intimate things with me. In every way here, you do your job. But I
do notice that whenever you venture a guess about how I feel about you,
it often does not jibe with my inner experience, and the error is always
in the same direction: You read me as caring for you much less than I
do." Another example: "I know you've heard this story before but . . ."
(and the patient proceeded to tell a long story). "I'm struck by how
often you say that I've heard the story before and then proceed to tell
it." "It's a bad habit, I know. I don't understand it." "What's your
hunch about how I feel listening to the same story over again?" "Must be
tedious. You probably want the hour to end---you're probably checking
the clock." "Is there a question in there for me?" "Well, do you?" "I am
impatient hearing the same story again. I feel it

Te a c h E m p a t h y

gets interposed between the two of us, as though you're not really
talking to me. You were right about my checking the clock. I did---but
it was with the hope that when your story ended we would still have time
to make contact before the end of the session."

25

chapter 8

Let the Patient Matter to You

I

t was more than thirty years ago that I heard the saddest of
psychotherapy tales. I was spending a year's fellowship in London at the
redoubtable Tavistock Clinic and met with a prominent British
psychoanalyst and group therapist who was retiring at the age of seventy
and the evening before had held the ﬁnal meeting of a long-term therapy
group. The members, many of whom had been in the group for more than a
decade, had reﬂected upon the many changes they had seen in one another,
and all had agreed that there was one person who had not changed
whatsoever: the therapist! In fact, they said he was exactly the same
after ten years. He then looked up at me and, tapping on his desk for
emphasis, said in his most teacherly voice: "That, my boy, is good
technique." I've always been saddened as I recall this incident. It is
sad to think of being together with others for so long and yet never to
have let them matter enough to be inﬂuenced and changed by them. I urge
you to let your patients matter to you, to let

L e t t h e Pa t i e n t M a t t e r t o Yo u

27

them enter your mind, inﬂuence you, change you---and not to conceal this
from them. Years ago I listened to a patient vilifying several of her
friends for "sleeping around." This was typical of her: she was highly
critical of everyone she described to me. I wondered aloud about the
impact of her judgmentalism on her friends: "What do you mean?" she
responded. "Does my judging others have an impact on you?" "I think it
makes me wary of revealing too much of myself. If we were involved as
friends, I'd be cautious about showing you my darker side." "Well, this
issue seems pretty black-and-white to me. What's your opinion about such
casual sex? Can you personally possibly imagine separating sex from
love?" "Of course I can. That's part of our human nature." "That
repulses me." The hour ended on that note and for days afterward I felt
unsettled by our interaction, and I began the following session by
telling her that it had been very uncomfortable for me to think that she
was repulsed by me. She was startled by my reaction and told me I had
entirely misunderstood her: what she had meant was that she was repulsed
at human nature and at her own sexual wishes, not repulsed by me or my
words. Later in the session she returned to the incident and said that
though she regretted being the cause of discomfort for me, she was
nonetheless moved---and pleased---at having mattered to me. The
interchange dramatically catalyzed therapy: in subsequent sessions she
trusted me more and took much greater risks. Recently one of my patients
sent me an E-mail:

28

the

gift

of

therapy

I love you but I also hate you because you leave, not just to Argentina
and New York and for all I know, to Tibet and Timbuktu, but because
every week you leave, you close the door, you probably just go turn on
the baseball game or check the Dow and make a cup of tea whistling a
happy tune and don't think of me at all and why should you? This
statement gives voice to the great unasked question for many patients:
"Do you ever think about me between sessions or do I just drop out of
your life for the rest of the week?" My experience is that often
patients do not vanish from my mind for the week, and if I've had
thoughts since the last session that might be helpful for them to hear,
I make sure to share them. If I feel I've made an error in the session,
I believe it is always best to acknowledge it directly. Once a patient
described a dream: "I'm in my old elementary school and I speak to a
little girl who is crying and has run out of her classroom. I say, 'You
must remember that there are many who love you and it would be best not
to run away from everyone.' " I suggested that she was both the speaker
and the little girl and that the dream paralleled and echoed the very
thing we had been discussing in our last session. She responded, "Of
course." That nettled me: she characteristically failed to acknowledge
my helpful comments and therefore I insisted on analyzing her comment,
"Of course." Later, as I thought about this unsatisfying session, I
realized the problem between us had been due largely to my stubborn
determination to crack the "of course" in order to obtain full credit
for my insight into the dream.

L e t t h e Pa t i e n t M a t t e r t o Yo u

29

I opened the following session by acknowledging my immature behavior,
and then we proceeded to have one of our most productive sessions, in
which she revealed several important secrets she had long withheld.
Therapist disclosure begets patient disclosure. Patients sometimes
matter enough to enter into my dreams and, if I believe that it will in
some way facilitate therapy, I do not hesitate to share the dream. I
once dreamed that I met a patient in an airport and attempted to give
her a hug but was obstructed by the large purse she was holding. I
related the dream to her and connected it to our discussion in our
previous session about the "baggage" she brought into her relationship
with me---that is, her strong and ambivalent feelings toward her father.
She was moved by my sharing the dream and acknowledged the logic of my
connecting it to her conﬂation of her father and me, but suggested
another, cogent meaning to the dream---namely, that the dream expresses
my regrets that our professional contract (symbolized by the purse, a
container for money, to wit, the therapy fees) precluded a fully
consummated relationship. I couldn't deny that her interpretation made
compelling sense and that it reﬂected feelings lurking somewhere deep
within me.

chapter 9

Acknowledge Your Errors

I

t was the analyst D. W. Winnicott who once made the trenchant
observation that the difference between good mothers and bad mothers is
not the commission of errors but what they do with them. I saw one
patient who had left her previous therapist for what might appear a
trivial reason. In their third meeting she had wept copiously and
reached for the Kleenex only to ﬁnd an empty box. The therapist had then
begun searching his ofﬁce in vain for a tissue or a handkerchief and
ﬁnally scurried down the hall to the washroom to return with a handful
of toilet tissue. In the following session she commented that the
incident must have been embarrassing for him, whereupon he denied any
embarrassment whatsoever. The more she pressed, the more he dug in and
turned the questions back to why she persisted in doubting his answer.
Eventually she concluded (rightly, it seemed to me) that he had not
dealt with her in an authentic manner and decided that she could not
trust him for the long work ahead.

A c k n o w l e d g e Yo u r E r r o r s

31

An example of acknowledged error: A patient who had suffered many
earlier losses and was dealing with the impending loss of her husband,
who was dying of a brain tumor, once asked me whether I ever thought
about her between sessions. I responded, "I often think about your
situation." Wrong answer! My words outraged her. "How could you say
this," she asked, "you, who were supposed to help---you, who ask me to
share my innermost personal feelings. Those words reinforce my fears
that I have no self---that everyone thinks about my situation and no one
thinks about me." Later she added that not only does she have no self,
but that I also avoided bringing my own self into my meetings with her.
I brooded about her words during the following week and, concluding that
she was absolutely correct, began the next session by owning up to my
error and by asking her to help me identify and understand my own blind
spots in this matter. (Many years ago I read an article by Sándor
Ferenczi, a gifted analyst, in which he reported saying to a patient,
"Perhaps you can help me locate some of my own blind spots." This is
another one of those phrases that have taken up lodging in my mind and
that I often make use of in my clinical work.) Together we looked at my
alarm at the depth of her anguish and my deep desire to ﬁnd some way,
any way short of physical holding, to comfort her. Perhaps, I suggested,
I had been backing away from her in recent sessions because of concern
that I had been too seductive by promising much more relief than I would
ever be able to deliver. I believed that this was the context for my
impersonal statement about her "situation." It would have been so much
better, I told her, to have simply been honest about my aching to
console her and my confusion about how to proceed.

32

the

gift

of

therapy

If you make a mistake, admit it. Any attempt at cover-up will ultimately
backﬁre. At some level the patient will sense you are acting in bad
faith, and therapy will suffer. Furthermore, an open admission of error
is good model-setting for patients and another sign that they matter to
you.

chapter 10

Create a New Therapy for Each Patient

T

here is a great paradox inherent in much contemporary psychotherapy
research. Because researchers have a legitimate need to compare one form
of psychotherapy treatment with some other treatment (pharmacological or
another form of psychotherapy), they must offer a "standardized"
therapy---that is, a uniform therapy for all the subjects in the project
that can in the future be replicated by other researchers and
therapists. (In other words, the same standards hold as in testing the
effects of a pharmacological agent: namely, that all the subjects
receive the same purity and potency of a drug and that the exact same
drug will be available for future patients.) And yet that very act of
standardization renders the therapy less real and less effective. Pair
that problem with the fact that so much psychotherapy research uses
inexperienced therapists or student therapists, and it is not hard to
understand why such research has, at best, a most tenuous connection
with reality. Consider the task of experienced therapists. They must

34

the

gift

of

therapy

establish a relationship with the patient characterized by genuineness,
positive unconditional regard, and spontaneity. They urge patients to
begin each session with their "point of urgency" (as Melanie Klein put
it) and to explore with ever greater depth their important issues as
they unfold in the moment of encounter. What issues? Perhaps some
feeling about the therapist. Or some issue that may have emerged as a
result of the previous session, or from one's dreams the night before
the session. My point is that therapy is spontaneous, the relationship
is dynamic and ever-evolving, and there is a continuous sequence of
experiencing and then examining the process. At its very core, the ﬂow
of therapy should be spontaneous, forever following unanticipated
riverbeds; it is grotesquely distorted by being packaged into a formula
that enables inexperienced, inadequately trained therapists (or
computers) to deliver a uniform course of therapy. One of the true
abominations spawned by the managed-care movement is the ever greater
reliance on protocol therapy in which therapists are required to adhere
to a prescribed sequence, a schedule of topics and exercises to be
followed each week. In his autobiography, Jung describes his
appreciation of the uniqueness of each patient's inner world and
language, a uniqueness that requires the therapist to invent a new
therapy language for each patient. Perhaps I am overstating the case,
but I believe the present crisis in psychotherapy is so serious and
therapist spontaneity so endangered that a radical corrective is
demanded. We need to go even further: the therapist must strive to
create a new therapy for each patient. Therapists must convey to the
patient that their paramount task is to build a relationship together
that will itself become the agent of change. It is extremely difﬁcult to
teach this skill in a crash course using a protocol. Above all, the
therapist must

C r e a t e a N e w T h e r a p y f o r E a c h Pa t i e n t

35

be prepared to go wherever the patient goes, do all that is necessary to
continue building trust and safety in the relationship. I try to tailor
the therapy for each patient, to ﬁnd the best way to work, and I
consider the process of shaping the therapy not the groundwork or
prelude but the essence of the work. These remarks have relevance even
for brief-therapy patients but pertain primarily to therapy with
patients in a position to afford (or qualify for) open-ended therapy. I
try to avoid technique that is prefabricated and do best if I allow my
choices to ﬂow spontaneously from the demands of the immediate clinical
situation. I believe "technique" is facilitative when it emanates from
the therapist's unique encounter with the patient. Whenever I suggest
some intervention to my supervisees they often try to cram it into the
next session and it always bombs. Hence I have learned to preface my
comments with: "Do not try this in your next session, but in this
situation I might have said something like this. . . ." My point is that
every course of therapy consists of small and large spontaneously
generated responses or techniques that are impossible to program in
advance. Of course, technique has a different meaning for the novice
than for the expert. One needs technique in learning to play the piano
but eventually, if one is to make music, one must transcend learned
technique and trust one's spontaneous moves. For example, a patient who
had suffered a series of painful losses appeared one day at her session
in great despair, having just learned of her father's death. She was
already so deep in grief from her husband's death a few months earlier
that she could not bear to think of ﬂying back to her parents' home for
the funeral and of seeing her father's grave next to the grave of her
brother, who had died at a young age. Nor, on the other hand, could she
deal with the guilt of not attending her own

36

the

gift

of

therapy

father's funeral. Usually she was an extraordinarily resourceful and
effective individual, who had often been critical of me and others for
trying to "ﬁx" things for her. But now she needed something from
me---something tangible, something guiltabsolving. I responded by
instructing her not to go to the funeral ("doctor's orders," I put it).
Instead I scheduled our next meeting at the precise time of the funeral
and devoted it entirely to reminiscences of her father. Two years later,
when terminating therapy, she described how helpful this session had
been. Another patient felt so overwhelmed with stress in her life that
during one session she could barely speak but simply hugged herself and
rocked gently. I experienced a powerful urge to comfort her, to hold her
and tell her that everything was going to be all right. I dismissed the
notion of a hug---she had been sexually abused by a stepfather and I had
to be particularly attentive to maintaining the feeling of safety of our
relationship. Instead, at the end of the session, I impulsively offered
to change the time of her next session to make it more convenient for
her. Ordinarily she had to take off work to visit me and this one time I
offered to see her before work, early in the morning. The intervention
did not provide the comfort I had hoped but still proved useful. Recall
the fundamental therapy principle that all that happens is grist for the
mill. In this instance the patient felt suspicious and threatened by my
offer. She was convinced that I did not really want to meet with her,
that our hours together were my low point of the week, and that I was
changing her appointment time for my own, not her, convenience. That led
us into the fertile territory of her self-contempt and the projection of
her self-hatred onto me.

chapter 11

The Therapeutic Act, Not the Therapeutic Word

T

ake advantage of opportunities to learn from patients. Make a point of
inquiring often into the patient's view of what is helpful about the
therapy process. Earlier I stressed that therapists and patients do not
often concur in their conclusions about the useful aspects of therapy.
The patients' views of helpful events in therapy are generally
relational, often involving some act of the therapist that stretched
outside the frame of therapy or some graphic example of the therapist's
consistency and presence. For example, one patient cited my willingness
to meet with him even after he informed me by phone that he was sick
with the ﬂu. (Recently his couples therapist, fearing contagion, had cut
short a session when he began sneezing and coughing.) Another patient,
who had been convinced that I would ultimately abandon her because of
her chronic rage, told me at the end of therapy that my single most
helpful intervention was my making a rule to schedule an extra session
automatically whenever she had angry outbursts toward me.

38

the

gift

of

therapy

In another end-of-therapy debrieﬁng a patient cited an incident when, in
a session just before I left on a trip, she had handed me a story she
had written and I had sent her a note to tell her how much I liked her
writing. The letter was concrete evidence of my caring and she often
turned to it for support during my absence. Checking in by phone to a
highly distressed or suicidal patient takes little time and is highly
meaningful to the patient. One patient, a compulsive shoplifter who had
already served jail time, told me that the most important gesture in a
long course of therapy was a supportive phone call I made when I was out
of town during the Christmas shopping season---a time when she was often
out of control. She felt she could not possibly be so ungrateful as to
steal when I had gone out of my way to demonstrate my concern. If
therapists have a concern about fostering dependency, they may ask the
patient to participate in devising a strategy of how they can be most
supported during critical periods. On another occasion the same patient
was compulsively shoplifting but had so changed her behavior that she
was now stealing inexpensive items---for example, candy bars or
cigarettes. Her rationale for stealing was, as always, that she needed
to help balance the family budget. This belief was patently irrational:
for one thing, she was wealthy (but refused to acquaint herself with her
husband's holdings); furthermore, the amount she saved by stealing was
insigniﬁcant. "What can I do to help you now?" I asked. "How do we help
you get past the feeling of being poor?" "We could start with you giving
me some money," she said mischievously. Whereupon I took out my wallet
and gave her ﬁfty dollars in an envelope with instructions to take out
of it the value of the item that she was about to steal. In other words,
she was to steal from me rather than the storekeeper. The intervention
permitted her to cut short the compulsive spree that had taken control
of her,

T h e T h e r a p e u t i c A c t , N o t t h e T h e r a p e u t i c Wo
r d

39

and a month later she returned the ﬁfty dollars to me. From that point
on we referred often to the incident whenever she used the
rationalization of poverty. A colleague told me that he had once treated
a dancer who told him at the end of therapy that the most meaningful act
of therapy was his attending one of her dance recitals. Another patient,
at the end of therapy, cited my willingness to perform aura therapy. A
believer in New Age concepts, she entered my ofﬁce one day convinced
that she was feeling ill because of a rupture in her aura. She lay down
on my carpet and I followed her instructions and attempted to heal the
rupture by passing my hands from head to toe a few inches above her
body. I had often expressed skepticism about various New Age approaches
and she regarded my agreeing to accede to her request as a sign of
loving respect.

chapter 12

Engage in Personal Therapy

T

o my mind, personal psychotherapy is, by far, the most important part of
psychotherapy training. Question: What is the therapist's most valuable
instrument? Answer (and no one misses this one): the therapist's own
self. I will discuss the rationale and the technique of the therapist's
use of self from many perspectives throughout this text. Let me begin by
simply stating that therapists must show the way to patients by personal
modeling. We must demonstrate our willingness to enter into a deep
intimacy with our patient, a process that requires us to be adept at
mining the best source of reliable data about our patient---our own
feelings. Therapists must be familiar with their own dark side and be
able to empathize with all human wishes and impulses. A personal therapy
experience permits the student therapist to experience many aspects of
the therapeutic process from the patient's seat: the tendency to
idealize the therapist, the yearning for dependency, the gratitude
toward a caring and attentive listener, the power granted to the
therapist. Young therapists

E n g a g e i n Pe r s o n a l T h e r a p y

41

must work through their own neurotic issues; they must learn to accept
feedback, discover their own blind spots, and see themselves as others
see them; they must appreciate their impact upon others and learn how to
provide accurate feedback. Lastly, psychotherapy is a psychologically
demanding enterprise, and therapists must develop the awareness and
inner strength to cope with the many occupational hazards inherent in
it. Many training programs insist that students have a course of
personal psychotherapy: for example, some California graduate psychology
schools now require sixteen to thirty hours of individual therapy.
That's a good start---but only a start. Selfexploration is a lifelong
process, and I recommend that therapy be as deep and prolonged as
possible---and that the therapist enter therapy at many different stages
of life. My own odyssey of therapy, over my forty-ﬁve-year career, is as
follows: a 750-hour, ﬁve-time-a-week orthodox Freudian psychoanalysis in
my psychiatric residency (with a training analyst in the conservative
Baltimore Washington School), a year's analysis with Charles Rycroft (an
analyst in the "middle school" of the British Psychoanalytic Institute),
two years with Pat Baumgartner (a gestalt therapist), three years of
psychotherapy with Rollo May (an interpersonally and existentially
oriented analyst of the William Alanson White Institute), and numerous
briefer stints with therapists from a variety of disciplines, including
behavioral therapy, bioenergetics, Rolﬁng, maritalcouples work, an
ongoing ten-year (at this writing) leaderless support group of male
therapists, and, in the 1960s, encounter groups of a whole rainbow of
ﬂavors, including a nude marathon group. Note two aspects of this list.
First, the diversity of approaches. It is important for the young
therapist to avoid sectarianism and to gain an appreciation of the
strengths of all the varying thera-

42

the

gift

of

therapy

peutic approaches. Though students may have to sacriﬁce the certainty
that accompanies orthodoxy, they obtain something quite precious---a
greater appreciation of the complexity and uncertainty underlying the
therapeutic enterprise. I believe there is no better way to learn about
a psychotherapy approach than to enter into it as a patient. Hence, I
have considered a period of discomfort in my life as an educational
opportunity to explore what various approaches have to offer. Of course,
the particular type of discomfort has to ﬁt the method; for example,
behavioral therapy is best suited to treat a discrete symptom---hence I
turned to a behaviorist to help with insomnia, which occurred when I
traveled to give lectures or workshops. Secondly, I entered therapy at
many different stages of my life. Despite an excellent and extensive
course of therapy at the onset of one's career, an entirely different
set of issues may arrive at different junctures of the life cycle. It
was only when I began working extensively with dying patients (in my
fourth decade) that I experienced considerable explicit death anxiety.
No one enjoys anxiety---and certainly not I---but I welcomed the
opportunity to explore this inner domain with a good therapist.
Furthermore, at the time I was engaged in writing a textbook,
Existential Psychotherapy, and I knew that deep personal exploration
would broaden my knowledge of existential issues. And so I began a
fruitful and enlightening course of therapy with Rollo May. Many
training programs offer, as part of the curriculum, an experiential
training group---that is, a group that focuses on its own process. These
groups have much to teach, though they are often anxiety-provoking for
participants (and not easy for the leaders, either---they have to get a
handle on the student members' competitiveness and their complex
relationships outside the group). I believe that the young
psychotherapist

E n g a g e i n Pe r s o n a l T h e r a p y

43

generally proﬁts even more from a "stranger" experiential group or,
better yet, an ongoing high-functioning psychotherapy group. Only by
being a member of a group can one truly appreciate such phenomena as
group pressure, the relief of catharsis, the power inherent in the
group-leader role, the painful but valuable process of obtaining valid
feedback about one's interpersonal presentation. Last, if you are
fortunate enough to be in a cohesive, hardworking group, I assure you
that you will never forget it and will endeavor to provide such a
therapeutic group experience for your future patients.

chapter 13

The Therapist Has Many Patients; The Patient, One Therapist

T

here are times when my patients lament the inequality of the
psychotherapy situation. They think about me far more than I think about
them. I loom far larger in their lives than they do in mine. If patients
could ask any question they wished, I am certain that, for many, that
question would be: Do you ever think about me? There are many ways to
address this situation. For one, keep in mind that, though the
inequality may be irritating for many patients, it is at the same time
important and necessary. We want to loom large in the patient's mind.
Freud once pointed out that it is important for the therapist to loom so
large in the patient's mind that the interactions between the patient
and therapist begin to inﬂuence the course of the patient's
symptomatology (that is, the psychoneurosis becomes gradually replaced
by a transference neurosis). We want the therapy hour to be one of the
most important events in the patient's life. Though it is not our goal
to do away with all powerful feelings toward the therapist, there are
times when the transfer-

T h e T h e r a p i s t H a s M a n y Pa t i e n t s

45

ence feelings are too dysphoric, times when the patient is so tormented
by feelings about the therapist that some decompression is necessary. I
am apt to enhance reality testing by commenting upon the inherent
cruelty of the therapy situation---the basic nature of the arrangement
dictates that the patient think more about the therapist than vice
versa: The patient has only one therapist while the therapist has many
patients. Often I ﬁnd the teacher analogy useful, and point out that the
teacher has many students but the students have only one teacher and, of
course, students think more about their teacher than she about them. If
the patient has had teaching experience, this may be particularly
relevant. Other relevant professions---for example, physician, nurse,
supervisor---also may be cited. Another aid I have often used is to
refer to my personal experience as a psychotherapy patient by saying
something like: "I know it feels unfair and unequal for you to be
thinking of me more than I of you, for you to be carrying on long
conversations with me between sessions, knowing that I do not similarly
speak in fantasy to you. But that's simply the nature of the process. I
had exactly the same experience during my own time in therapy, when I
sat in the patient's chair and yearned to have my therapist think more
about me."

chapter 14

The Here-and-Now---Use It, Use It, Use It

T

he here-and-now is the major source of therapeutic power, the pay dirt
of therapy, the therapist's (and hence the patient's) best friend. So
vital for effective therapy is the here-and-now that I shall discuss it
more extensively than any other topic in this text. The here-and-now
refers to the immediate events of the therapeutic hour, to what is
happening here (in this ofﬁce, in this relationship, in the
in-betweenness---the space between me and you) and now, in this
immediate hour. It is basically an ahistoric approach and de-emphasizes
(but does not negate the importance of) the patient's historical past or
events of his or her outside life.

chapter 15

Why Use the Here-and-Now?

T

he rationale for using the here-and-now rests upon a couple of basic
assumptions: (1) the importance of interpersonal relationships and (2)
the idea of therapy as a social microcosm. To the social scientist and
the contemporary therapist, interpersonal relationships are so obviously
and monumentally important that to belabor the issue is to run the risk
of preaching to the converted. Sufﬁce it to say that regardless of our
professional perspective---whether we study our nonhuman primate
relatives, primitive cultures, the individual's developmental history,
or current life patterns---it is apparent that we are intrinsically
social creatures. Throughout life, our surrounding interpersonal
environment---peers, friends, teachers, as well as family---has enormous
inﬂuence over the kind of individual we become. Our self-image is
formulated to a large degree upon the reﬂected appraisals we perceive in
the eyes of the important ﬁgures in our life. Furthermore the great
majority of individuals seeking therapy

48

the

gift

of

therapy

have fundamental problems in their relationships; by and large people
fall into despair because of their inability to form and maintain
enduring and gratifying interpersonal relationships. Psychotherapy based
on the interpersonal model is directed toward removing the obstacles to
satisfying relationships. The second postulate---that therapy is a
social microcosm--- means that eventually (provided we do not structure
it too heavily) the interpersonal problems of the patient will manifest
themselves in the here-and-now of the therapy relationship. If, in his
or her life, the patient is demanding or fearful or arrogant or
self-effacing or seductive or controlling or judgmental or maladaptive
interpersonally in any other way, then these traits will enter into the
patient's relationship with the therapist. Again, this approach is
basically ahistoric: There is little need of extensive history-taking to
apprehend the nature of maladaptive patterns because they will soon
enough be displayed in living color in the here-and-now of the therapy
hour. To summarize, the rationale for using the here-and-now is that
human problems are largely relational and that an individual's
interpersonal problems will ultimately be manifested in the here-and-now
of the therapy encounter.

chapter 16

Using the Here-and-Now--- Grow Rabbit Ears

O

ne of the ﬁrst steps in therapy is to identify the hereand-now
equivalents of your patient's interpersonal problems. An essential part
of your education is to learn to focus on the here-and-now. You must
develop here-andnow rabbit ears. The everyday events of each therapy
hour are rich with data: consider how patients greet you, take a seat,
inspect or fail to inspect their surroundings, begin and end the
session, recount their history, relate to you. My ofﬁce is in a separate
cottage about a hundred feet down a winding garden path from my house.
Since every patient walks down the same path, I have over the years
accumulated much comparison data. Most patients comment about the
garden---the profusion of ﬂeecy lavender blossoms; the sweet, heavy
wisteria fragrance; the riot of purple, pink, coral, and crimson---but
some do not. One man never failed to make some negative comment: the mud
on the path, the need for guardrails in the rain, or the sound of
leaf-blowers from a neighboring house. I give all patients the same
directions to my

50

the

gift

of

therapy

ofﬁce for their ﬁrst visit: Drive down X street a half mile past XX
Road, make a right turn at XXX Avenue, at which there's a sign for
Fresca (a local attractive restaurant) on the corner. Some patients
comment on the directions, some do not. One particular patient (the same
one who complained about the muddy path) confronted me in an early
session: "How come you chose Fresca as your landmark rather than Taco
Tio?" (Taco Tio is a Mexican fast-food eyesore on the opposite corner.)
To grow rabbit ears, keep in mind this principle: One stimulus, many
reactions. If individuals are exposed to a common complex stimulus, they
are likely to have very different responses. This phenomenon is
particularly evident in group therapy, in which group members
simultaneously experience the same stimulus---for example, a member's
weeping, or late arrival, or confrontation with the therapist---and yet
each of them has a very different response to the event. Why does that
happen? There is only one possible explanation: Each individual has a
different internal world and the stimulus has a different meaning to
each. In individual therapy the same principle obtains, only the events
occur sequentially rather than simultaneously (that is, many patients of
one therapist are, over time, exposed to the same stimulus. Therapy is
like a living Rorschach test---patients project onto it perceptions,
attitudes, and meanings from their own unconscious). I develop certain
baseline expectations because all my patients encounter the same person
(assuming I am reasonably stable), receive the same directions to my
ofﬁce, walk down the same path to get there, enter the same room with
the same furnishings. Thus the patient's idiosyncratic response is
deeply informative---a via regia permitting you to understand the
patient's inner world. When the latch on my screen door was broken,
preventing the door from closing snugly, my patients responded in a num-

Using the Here-and-Now---Grow Rabbit Ears

51

ber of ways. One patient invariably spent much time ﬁddling with it and
each week apologized for it as though she had broken it. Many ignored
it, while others never failed to point out the defect and suggest I
should get it ﬁxed. Some wondered why I delayed so long. Even the banal
Kleenex box may be a rich source of data. One patient apologized if she
moved the box slightly when extracting a tissue. Another refused to take
the last tissue in the box. Another wouldn't let me hand her one, saying
she could do it herself. Once, when I had failed to replace an empty
box, a patient joked about it for weeks ("So you remembered this time."
Or, "A new box! You must be expecting a heavy session today."). Another
brought me a present of two boxes of Kleenex. Most of my patients have
read some of my books, and their responses to my writing constitute a
rich source of material. Some are intimidated by my having written so
much. Some express concern that they will not prove interesting to me.
One patient told me that he read a book of mine in snatches in the
bookstore and didn't want to buy it, since he had "already given a
donation at the ofﬁce." Others, who make the assumption of an economy of
scarcity, hate the books because my descriptions of close relationships
to other patients suggest that there will be little love left for them.
In addition to responses to ofﬁce surroundings, therapists have a
variety of other standard reference points (for example, beginnings and
endings of hours, bill payments) that generate comparative data. And
then of course there is that most elegant and complex instrument of
all---the Stradivarius of psychotherapy practice---the therapist's own
self. I shall have much more to say about the use and care of this
instrument.

chapter 17

Search for Here-and-Now Equivalents

W

hat should the therapist do when a patient brings up an issue involving
some unhappy interaction with another person? Generally therapists
explore the situation at great depth and try to help the patient
understand his/her role in the transaction, explore options for
alternative behaviors, investigate unconscious motivation, guess at the
motivations of the other person, and search for patterns---that is,
similar situations that the patient has created in the past. This
time-honored strategy has limitations: not only is the work apt to be
intellectualized but all too often it is based on inaccurate data
suppled by the patient. The here-and-now offers a far better way to
work. The general strategy is to ﬁnd a here-and-now equivalent of the
dysfunctional interaction. Once this is done, the work becomes much more
accurate and immediate. Some examples:

Search for Here-and-Now Equivalents

53

Keith and permanent grudges. Keith, a long-term patient and a practicing
psychotherapist, reported a highly vitriolic interaction with his adult
son. The son, for the ﬁrst time, had decided to make the arrangements
for the family's annual ﬁshing and camping trip. Though pleased at his
son's coming of age and at being relieved of the burden, Keith could not
relinquish control, and when he attempted to override his son's planning
by forcefully insisting upon a slightly earlier date and different
locale, his son exploded, calling his father intrusive and controlling.
Keith was devastated and absolutely convinced that he had permanently
lost his son's love and respect. What are my tasks in this situation? A
long-range task, to which we would return in the future, was to explore
Keith's inability to relinquish control. A more immediate task was to
offer some immediate comfort and assist Keith to reestablish
equilibrium. I sought to help Keith gain perspective so that he could
understand that this contretemps was but one ﬂeeting episode against the
horizon of a lifetime of loving interactions with his son. I deemed it
inefﬁcient for me to analyze in great and endless depth this episode
between Keith and his son, whom I had never met and whose true feelings
I could only surmise. Far better, I thought, to identify and work
through a here-and-now equivalent of the unsettling event. But what
here-and-now event? That's where rabbit ears are needed. As it happened,
I had recently referred to Keith a patient who, after a couple of
sessions with him, did not return. Keith had experienced great anxiety
about losing this patient and agonized for a long time before
"confessing" it in the previous session. Keith was convinced that I
would judge him harshly, that I would not forgive him for failing, and
that I would never again refer another patient to him. Note the symbolic
equivalence of these two events---in each one, Keith presumed that a
single act would forever blemish him in the eyes of someone he
treasured.

54

the

gift

of

therapy

I chose to pursue the here-and-now episode because of its greater
immediacy and accuracy. I was the subject of Keith's apprehension and
could access my own feelings rather than be limited to conjecture about
how his son felt. I told him that he was misreading me entirely, that I
had no doubts about his sensitivity and compassion and was certain he
did excellent clinical work. It was unthinkable for me to ignore all my
long experience with him on the basis of this one episode, and I said
that I would refer him other patients in the future. In the ﬁnal
analysis I feel certain that this here-and-now therapeutic work was far
more powerful than a "then-and-there" investigation of the crisis with
his son and that he would remember our encounter long after he forgot
any intellectual analysis of the episode with his son.

Alice and crudity. Alice, a sixty-year-old widow desperately searching
for another husband, complained of a series of failed relationships with
men who often vanished without explanation from her life. In our third
month of therapy she took a cruise with her latest beau, Morris, who
expressed his chagrin at her haggling over prices, shamelessly pushing
her way to the front of lines, and sprinting for the best seats in tour
buses. After their trip Morris disappeared and refused to return her
calls. Rather than embark on an analysis of her relationship with
Morris, I turned to my own relationship with Alice. I was aware that I,
too, wanted out and had pleasurable fantasies in which she announced she
had decided to terminate. Even though she brashly (and successfully)
negotiated a considerably lower therapy fee, she continued to tell me
how unfair it was that I should charge her so much. She never failed to
make some comment on the fee---about whether I had earned it that day,

Search for Here-and-Now Equivalents

55

or about my unwillingness to give her an even lower seniorcitizen fee.
Moreover, she pressed for extra time by bringing up urgent issues just
as the hour was ending or giving me items to read ("on your own time,"
as she put it)---her dream journal; articles on widowhood, journaling
therapy, or the fallacy of Freud's beliefs. Overall, she was without
delicacy and, just as she had done with Morris, turned our relationship
into something crude. I knew that this here-and-now reality was where we
needed to work, and the gentle exploration of how she had coarsened her
relationship with me proved so useful that months later some very
astonished elderly gentlemen received her phone calls of apology.

Mildred and the lack of presence. Mildred had been abused sexually as a
child and had such difﬁculty in her physical relationship with her
husband that her marriage was in jeopardy. As soon as her husband
touched her sexually she began to reexperience traumatic events from her
past. This paradigm made it very difﬁcult to work on her relationship to
her husband because it demanded that she ﬁrst be liberated from the
past---a daunting process. As I examined the here-and-now relationship
between the two of us I could appreciate many similarities between the
way she related to me and the way she related to her husband. I often
felt ignored in the sessions. Though she was an engaging storyteller and
had the capacity to entertain me at great length, I found it difﬁcult to
be "present" with her---that is, linked, engaged, close to her, with
some sense of mutuality. She rambled, never asked me about myself,
appeared to have little sense or curiosity about my experience in the
hour, was never "there" relating to me. Gradually, as I persisted in
focusing on the "in-betweenness" of our relationship and the extent of
her

56

the

gift

of

therapy

absence and how shut out I felt by her, Mildred began to appreciate the
extent to which she exiled her husband, and one day she started a
session by saying, "For some reason, I'm not sure why, I've just made a
great discovery: I never look my husband in the eyes when we have sex."

Albert and swallowed rage. Albert, who commuted over an hour to my
ofﬁce, had often experienced panic at times when he felt he had been
exploited. He knew he was suffused with anger but could ﬁnd no way to
express it. In one session he described a frustrating encounter with a
girlfriend who, in his view, was obviously jerking him around, yet he
was paralyzed with fear about confronting her. The session felt
repetitious to me; we had spent considerable time in many sessions
discussing the same material and I always felt I had offered him little
help. I could sense his frustration with me: he implied that he had
spoken to many friends who had covered all the same bases I had and had
ultimately advised him to tell her off or get out of the relationship. I
tried to speak for him: "Albert, let me see if I can guess at what you
might be experiencing in this session. You travel an hour to see me and
you pay me a good deal of money. Yet we seem to be repeating ourselves.
You feel I don't give you much of value. I say the same things as your
friends, who give it to you free. You have got to be disappointed in me,
even feeling ripped off and angry at me for giving you so little." He
gave a thin smile and acknowledged that my assessment was fairly
accurate. I was pretty close. I asked him to repeat it in his own words.
He did that with some trepidation, and I responded that, though I
couldn't be happy with not having

Search for Here-and-Now Equivalents

57

given him what he wanted, I liked very much his stating these things
directly to me: It felt better to be straighter with each other, and he
had been indirectly conveying these sentiments anyway. The whole
interchange proved useful to Albert. His feelings toward me were an
analog of his feelings toward his girlfriend, and the experience of
expressing them without a calamitous outcome was powerfully instructive.

chapter 18

Working Through Issues in the Here-and-Now

S

o far we have considered how to recognize patients' major problems in
the here-and-now. But once that is accomplished, how then do we proceed?
How can we use these here-and-now observations in the work of therapy?

Example. Return to the scene I described earlier---the screen door with
the faulty latch, and my patient who ﬁddled with it every week and
always apologized, too many times, for not being able to close the door.
"Nancy," I said, "I'm curious about your apologizing to me. It's as
though my broken door, and my laxity in getting it ﬁxed, is somehow your
fault." "You're right. I know that. And yet I keep on doing it." "Any
hunches about why?" "I think it's got to do with how important you are
and

Wo r k i n g T h r o u g h I s s u e s i n t h e H e r e - a n d - N o w

59

how important therapy is to me and my wanting to make sure I don't
offend you in any way." "Nancy, can you take a guess about how I feel
every time you apologize?" "It's probably irritating for you." I nod. "I
can't deny it. But you're quick to say that---as though it is a familiar
experience to you. Is there a history to this?" "I've heard it before,
many times," she says. "I can tell you it drives my husband crazy. I
know I irritate a lot of people and yet I keep doing it." "So, in the
guise of apologizing and being polite, you end up irritating others.
Moreover, even though you know that, you still have difﬁculty in
stopping. There must be some kind of payoff for you. I wonder, what is
it?" That interview and subsequent sessions then took off in a number of
fruitful directions, particularly in the area of her rage toward
everyone---her husband, parents, children, and me. Fastidious in her
habits, she revealed how unnerved the faulty screen door made her. And
not only the door, but also my cluttered desk, heaped high with untidy
stacks of books. She also stated how very impatient she was with me for
not working faster with her.

Example. Several months into therapy, Louise, a patient who was highly
critical of me---of the ofﬁce furnishings, the poor color scheme, the
general untidiness of my desk, my clothing, the informality and
incompleteness of my bills---told me about a new romantic relationship
she had formed. During the course of her account she remarked:

60

the

gift

of

therapy

"Well, grudgingly, I have to admit I'm doing better." "I'm struck by
your word 'grudgingly.' Why 'grudgingly'? It seems hard for you to say
positive things about me and about our work together. What do you know
about that?" No answer. Louise silently shook her head. "Just think out
loud, Louise, anything that comes to mind." "Well, you'll get a swelled
head. Can't have that." "Keep going." "You'll win. I'll lose." "Win and
lose? We're in a battle? And what's the battle about? And the underlying
war?" "Don't know, just a part of me that's always been there, always
mocking people, looking for their bad side, seeing them sitting on a
pile of their own shit." "And with me? I'm thinking of how critical you
are of my ofﬁce. And of the path as well. You never fail to mention the
mud but never the ﬂowers blossoming." "Happens with my boyfriend all the
time---he'll bring me presents and I can't help focusing on how little
care he has taken with the wrapping. We got in a ﬁght last week when he
baked me a loaf of bread and I made a teasing comment on the slightly
burnt corner of the crust." "You always give that side of you a voice
and you keep the other side mute---the side that appreciates his making
you bread, the side that likes and values me. Louise, go back to the
beginning of this discussion---your comment about 'grudgingly' admitting
you are better. Tell me, what would it be like if you were to unfetter
the positive part of you and speak straight out, without the
'grudgingly'?"

Wo r k i n g T h r o u g h I s s u e s i n t h e H e r e - a n d - N o w

61

"I see sharks circling." "Just think of speaking to me. What do you
imagine?" "Kissing you on the lips." For several sessions thereafter we
explored her fears of closeness, of wanting too much, of unﬁlled,
insatiable yearnings, of her love for her father, and her fears that I
would bolt if I really knew how much she wanted from me. Note in this
vignette that I drew upon incidents that had occurred in the past,
earlier in our therapy. Here-and-now work is not strictly ahistoric,
since it may include any events that have occurred throughout one's
relationship with the patient. As Sartre put it, "Introspection is
always retrospection."

chapter 19

The Here-and-Now Energizes Therapy

W

ork in the here-and-now is always more exciting than work with a more
abstract or historical focus. This is particularly evident in group
therapy. Consider, for example, an historical episode in group work. In
1946, the state of Connecticut sponsored a workshop to deal with racial
tensions in the workplace. Small groups led by the eminent psychologist
Kurt Lewin and a team of social psychologists engaged in a discussion of
the "back home" problems brought up by the participants. The leaders and
observers of the groups (without the group members) held nightly
post-group meetings in which they discussed not only the content, but
also the "process" of the sessions. (Nota bene: The content refers to
the actual words and concepts expressed. The "process" refers to the
nature of the relationship between the individuals who express the words
and concepts.) News spread about these evening staff meetings, and two
days later the members of the groups asked to attend. After

The Here-and-Now Energizes Therapy

63

much hesitation (such a procedure was entirely novel) approval was
granted, and the group members observed themselves being discussed by
the leaders and researchers. There are several published accounts of
this momentous session at which the importance of the here-and-now was
discovered. All agree that the meeting was electrifying; members were
fascinated by hearing themselves and their behavior discussed. Soon they
could stay silent no longer and interjected such comments as "No, that
wasn't what I said," or "how I said it," or "what I meant." The social
scientists realized that they had stumbled onto an important axiom for
education (and for therapy as well): namely that we learn best about
ourselves and our behavior through personal participation in interaction
combined with observation and analysis of that interaction. In group
therapy the difference between a group discussing "back home" problems
of the members and a group engaged in the here-and-now---that is, a
discussion of their own process--- is very evident: The here-and-now
group is energized, members are engaged, and they will always, if
questioned (either through interviews or research instruments), remark
that the group comes alive when it focuses on process. In the two-week
group laboratories held for decades at Bethel, Maine, it was soon
evident to all that the power and allure of process groups---ﬁrst called
sensitivity-training groups (that is, interpersonal sensitivity) and
later "T-groups" (training) and still later "encounter groups" (Carl
Rogers's term)--- immediately dwarfed other groups the laboratory
offered (for example, theory groups, application groups, or
problem-solving groups) in terms of members' interest and enthusiasm. In
fact, it was often said that the T-groups "ate up the rest of the
laboratory." People want to interact with others, are excited by giving
and receiving direct feedback, yearn to learn how they are

64

the

gift

of

therapy

perceived by others, want to slough off their facades and become
intimate. Many years ago, when I was attempting to develop a more
effective mode to lead brief-therapy groups on the acute inpatient ward,
I visited dozens of groups in hospitals throughout the country and found
every group to be ineffective---and for precisely the same reason. Each
group meeting used a "taketurns" or "check-in" format consisting of
members' sequentially discussing some then-and-there event---for
example, hallucinatory experiences or past suicidal inclinations or the
reasons for their hospitalization---while the other members listened
silently and often disinterestedly. I ultimately formulated, in a text
on inpatient group therapy, a here-and-now approach for such acutely
disturbed patients, which, I believe, vastly increased the degree of
member engagement. The same observation holds for individual therapy.
Therapy is invariably energized when it focuses on the relationship
between therapist and patient. Every Day Gets a Little Closer describes
an experiment in which a patient and I each wrote summaries of the
therapy hour. It was striking that whenever we read and discussed each
other's observations---that is, whenever we focused on the
here-and-now---the ensuing therapy sessions came alive.

chapter 20

Use Your Own Feelings as Data

O

ne of our major tasks in therapy is to pay attention to our immediate
feelings---they represent precious data. If in the session you feel
bored or irritated, confused, sexually aroused, or shut out by your
patient, then regard that as valuable information. This is precisely why
I so emphasize personal therapy for therapists. If you develop a deep
knowledge of yourself, eliminate the majority of your blind spots, and
have a good base of patient experience, you will begin to know how much
of the boredom or confusion is yours and how much is evoked by the
patient. It is important to make that distinction, because if it is the
patient who evokes your boredom in the therapy hour, then we may
conﬁdently assume that he is boring to others in other settings. So
rather than be dismayed at boredom, welcome it and search for a way to
turn it to therapeutic advantage. When did it begin? What exactly does
the patient do that bores you? When I encounter boredom I might say
something like this:

66

the

gift

of

therapy

"Mary, let me tell you something. For the last several minutes I notice
that I've been feeling disconnected from you, somewhat distanced. I'm
not sure why, but I know I'm feeling different now than at the beginning
of the session, when you were describing your feelings of not having
gotten what you wanted from me, or last session, when you spoke more
from the heart. I wonder, what is your level of connection to me today?
Is your feeling similar to mine? Let's try to understand what's
happening." Some years ago I treated Martin, a successful merchant, who
had to take a business trip on the day of therapy and asked me to
reschedule his hour to another day in the week. I couldn't arrange this
without inconveniencing my schedule and told Martin we'd have to miss
the session and meet at our regular hour the following week. But later,
as I thought about it, I realized I would not have hesitated to
rearrange my schedule for any of my other patients. Why couldn't I do
this for Martin? It was because I did not look forward to seeing him.
There was something about his mean-spiritedness that had worn me down.
He was unceasingly critical of me, my ofﬁce furniture, the lack of
parking, my secretary, my fee, and generally began sessions by referring
to my errors of the previous week. My feeling worn down by Martin had
vast implications. He had initially entered therapy because of a series
of failed relationships with women, none of whom, he thought, had ever
given him enough---none was sufﬁciently forthcoming with her proper
share of restaurant or grocery bills or birthday gifts equivalent in
value to the ones he had given to them (his income, mind you, was
several times greater than theirs). When they took trips together, he
insisted that they each put the same amount of cash into a "travel jar,"
and all traveling

U s e Yo u r O w n Fe e l i n g s a s D a t a

67

expenses, including gasoline, parking, car maintenance, tips, even
newspapers, be paid for out of travel-jar cash. Furthermore, he groused
often because his girlfriends did not do their full share of driving,
trip planning, or map reading. Eventually Martin's lack of generosity,
his obsession with absolute fairness, and his relentless criticism wore
out the women in his life. And he was doing exactly the same to me! It
was a good example of a self-fulﬁlling prophecy---he so dreaded being
uncared for that his behavior brought that very thing to pass. It was my
recognition of this process that permitted me to avoid responding
critically (that is, take it personally) but to realize this was a
pattern that he had repeated many times and that he, at bottom, wanted
to change.

chapter 21

Frame Here-and-Now Comments Carefully

C

ommentary on the here-and-now is a unique aspect of the therapeutic
relationship. There are few human situations in which we are permitted,
let alone encouraged, to comment upon the immediate behavior of the
other. It feels liberating, even exhilarating---that is precisely why
the encounter-group experience was so compelling. But it also feels
risky, since we are not accustomed to giving and receiving feedback.
Therapists must learn to package their comments in ways that feel caring
and acceptable to patients. Consider the feedback about boredom I gave
in the last tip: I avoided using the word "boring" to my patient; it is
not a productive word; it feels like an accusation, and may (or should)
elicit some spoken or unspoken sentiment such as, "I'm not paying you to
be entertained." It is far preferable to employ terms like "distanced,"

Fr a m e H e r e - a n d - N o w C o m m e n t s C a r e f u l l y

69

"shut out," or "disconnected"; they give voice to your wish to be
closer, more connected, and more engaged, and it is difﬁcult for our
clients to take umbrage at that. In other words, talk about how you
feel, not about what the patient is doing.

chapter 22

All Is Grist for the Here-and-Now Mill

E

verything that happens in the here-and-now is grist for the therapy
mill. Sometimes it is best to offer commentary at the moment; other
times it is best simply to store the incident and return to it later.
If, for example, a patient weeps in anguish, it is best to store a
here-and-now inquiry until some other time when one can return to the
incident and make a comment to this effect: "Tom, I'd like to return to
last week. Something unusual happened: You trusted me with a lot more of
your feelings and wept deeply, for the ﬁrst time, in front of me. Tell
me, what was that like for you? How did it feel to let down barriers
here? To allow me to see your tears?" Remember, patients don't just cry
or display feelings in a vacuum---they do so in your presence, and it is
a here-and-now exploration that allows one to grasp the full meaning of
the expression of feelings. Or consider a patient who may have been very
shaken during a session and, uncharacteristically, asks for a hug at the
end. If I feel it is the right thing to do, I hug the patient but

All Is Grist for the Here-and-Now Mill

71

never fail at some point, generally in the following session, to return
to the request and the hug. Keep in mind that effective therapy consists
of an alternating sequence: evocation and experiencing of affect
followed by analysis and integration of affect. How long one waits until
one initiates an analysis of the affective event is a function of
clinical experience. Often, when there is deep feeling
involved---anguish, grief, anger, love---it is best to wait until the
feeling simmers down and defensiveness diminishes. (See chapter 40,
"Feedback: Strike When the Iron Is Cold.") Jane was an angry, deeply
demoralized woman who after several months developed enough trust in me
to reveal the depth of her despair. Again and again I was so moved that
I sought to offer her some comfort. But I never succeeded. Every time I
tried I got bitten. But she was so brittle and so hypersensitive to
perceived criticism that I waited for many weeks before I shared that
observation. Everything---especially episodes containing heightened
emotion---is grist for the mill. Many unexpected events or reactions
occur in therapy: Therapists may receive angry E-mail or calls from
patients, they may not be able to offer the comfort desired by the
patient, they may be deemed omniscient, they are never questioned, or
always challenged, they may be late, make an error in billing, even
schedule two patients for the same hour. Though I feel uncomfortable
going through some of these experiences, I also feel conﬁdent that, if I
address them properly, I can turn them into something useful in the
therapeutic work.

chapter 23

Check into the Here-and-Now Each Hour

I

make an effort to inquire about the here-and-now at each session even if
it has been productive and nonproblematic. I always say toward the end
of the hour: "Let's take a minute to look at how you and I are doing
today." Or, "Any feelings about the way we are working and relating?"
Or, "Before we stop, shall we take a look at what's going on in this
space between us?" Or if I perceive difﬁculties, I might say something
like: "Before we stop, let's check into our relationship today. You've
talked about feeling miles away from me at times, and at other times
very close. What about today? How much distance between us today?"
Depending on the answer, I might proceed to explore any barriers in the
relationship or unspoken feelings about me. I begin this pattern even in
the very ﬁrst hour, before a great deal of history has been built into
the relationship. In fact, it is particularly important to start setting
norms in the early sessions. In the initial session, I make certain to
inquire about how patients chose to come to me. If they've been referred
by some-

Check into the Here-and-Now Each Hour

73

one, a colleague or friend, I want to know what they were told about me,
what their expectations were, and then how their experience of me even
in this ﬁrst session has matched those expectations. I generally say
something to this effect: "The initial session is a two-way interview. I
interview you but it is also an opportunity for you to size me up and
develop opinions about how it would be to work with me." This makes
eminently good sense, and the patient usually nods at this. Then I
always follow up with: "Could we take a look at what you've come up with
so far?" Many of my patients come to me after having read one of my
books and, consequently, it is a part of the here-and-now to inquire
about that. "What speciﬁcally was there about this book that brought you
to me? How does the reality of seeing me match those expectations? Any
concerns about a therapist who is also a writer? What questions do you
wish to ask me about that?" Ever since I wrote about patients' stories
in a book (Love's Executioner) many years ago, I assumed that new
patients consulting me might be wary of being written about. Hence I've
reassured patients about conﬁdentiality and assured them that I've never
written about patients without ﬁrst obtaining permission and without
using deep identity disguise. But in time I have observed that patients'
concerns were quite different---in general they were less concerned with
being written about than with not being interesting enough to be
selected.

chapter 24

What Lies Have You Told Me?

O

ften during the course of therapy patients may describe examples of
deception in their life---some incident when they have either concealed
or distorted information about themselves. Using here-and-now rabbit
ears, I ﬁnd such an admission an excellent opportunity to inquire about
what lies they have told me during the course of therapy. There is
always some concealment, some information withheld because of shame,
because of some particular way they wish me to regard them. A discussion
of such concealments almost invariably provokes a fruitful discussion in
therapy--- often a review of the history of the therapy relationship and
an opportunity to rework and ﬁne-tune not only the relationship but
other important themes that have previously emerged in therapy. The
general rabbit-ears strategy is simply to scan all material in the
session for here-and-now implications and, whenever possible, to take
the opportunity to swing into an examination of the therapy
relationship.

chapter 25

Blank Screen? Forget It! Be Real

T

he ﬁrst model posited of the ideal therapist-patient relationship was
the now superannuated "blank screen," in which the therapist remained
neutral and more or less anonymous in the hopes that patients would
project onto this blank screen major transference distortions. Once the
transference (the living manifestation of earlier parental
relationships) was available for study in the analysis, the therapist
might more accurately reconstruct the early life of the patient. If the
therapist were to manifest him-/herself as a distinct individual, it
would be more difﬁcult (so it was thought) for the projection to take
place. But forget the blank screen! It is not now, nor was it ever, a
good model for effective therapy. The idea of using current distortions
to re-create the past was part of an old, now abandoned, vision of the
therapist as archaeologist, patiently scraping off the dust of decades
to understand (and thus, in some mysterious manner, undo) the original
trauma. It is a far better model to think of understanding the past in
order to

76

the

gift

of

therapy

apprehend the present therapist-patient relationship. But neither of
these considerations merits the sacriﬁce of an authentic human encounter
in psychotherapy. Did Freud himself generally follow the blank-screen
model? Often, perhaps generally, not. We know this from reading his
accounts of therapy (see, for example, the descriptions of therapy in
Studies in Hysteria) or his analysands' descriptions of their analysis
with Freud. Think of Freud offering his patient a "celebratory" or
"victory" cigar after making a particularly trenchant interpretation.
Think of him stopping patients from rushing on to other topics and
instead slowing them down to bask with him in the afterglow of an
enlightening insight. The psychiatrist Roy Grinker described to me an
incident in his analysis with Freud in which Freud's dog, who always
attended the therapy, walked over to the door in the midst of a session.
Freud rose and let the dog out. A few minutes later the dog scratched on
the door for reentry and Freud rose, opened the door, and said, "You
see, he couldn't stand listening to all that resistance garbage. Now he
is coming back to give you a second chance." In the case histories in
Studies in Hysteria Freud entered personally and boldly into the lives
of his patients. He made strong suggestions to them, he intervened on
their behalf with family members, he contrived to attend social
functions to see his patients in other settings, he instructed a patient
to visit the cemetery and meditate upon the tombstone of a dead sibling.
The early blank-screen model got reinforcement from an unexpected source
in the 1950s, when Carl Rogers's model of nondirective therapy
instructed therapists to offer minimal direction, often limiting
interventions to the echoing of the patient's last phrase. As Carl
Rogers matured as a therapist he soon totally abandoned this unengaged
stance with the "lastline" interview technique in favor of a far more
humanistic

B l a n k S c r e e n ? Fo r g e t I t ! B e R e a l

77

interactive style. Nonetheless, jokes, parodies, and misunderstandings
of the nondirective approach hounded him till the end of his life. In
group therapy it is exceedingly evident that one of the tasks of the
group therapist is to demonstrate behavior that the group members
gradually model themselves after. It is the same, though less dramatic,
in individual therapy. The psychotherapy outcome literature heavily
supports the view that therapist disclosure begets client disclosure. I
have long been fascinated with therapist transparency and have
experimented with self-disclosure in many different formats. Perhaps my
interest has its roots in my group-therapy experience, in which the
demands on the therapist to be transparent are especially great. Group
therapists have a particularly complex set of tasks because they must
attend to not only the needs of each individual patient in the group,
but to the creation and maintenance of the enveloping social
system---the small group. Hence, they must attend to norm development---
particularly the norms of self-disclosure so necessary for the
successful small-group experience. The therapist has no more potent
method to build behavioral norms than personal modeling. Many of my own
experiments in therapist self-disclosure originated as a response to the
observation of therapy groups by students. Psychotherapy training
programs rarely offer students an opportunity to observe individual
psychotherapy sessions--- therapists insist on the privacy and intimacy
so integral to the individual therapy process. But almost every group
training program provides for group observation either through a one-way
mirror or video playback. The group therapists, of course, must obtain
permission for observation, and group members will generally grant that
permission but do so grudgingly. Characteristically, members resent the
observers and often report feeling

78

the

gift

of

therapy

like "guinea pigs." They question whether the primary allegiance of the
therapist is to the group members or to the student observers, and they
have great curiosity about the observers' (and leader's) comments about
them in the postgroup discussion. To eliminate these disadvantages of
group observation, I asked the group members and the students to switch
rooms after each group meeting: the group members move into the
observation room, where they observe the students and me discussing the
group. Group members, at the following meeting, had such strong
reactions to observing the post-group meeting that I soon modiﬁed the
format by inviting the members into the conference room to observe the
discussion and to respond to the student observations. Soon the group
members were giving feedback to students, not only about the content of
the students' observations but about their process---for example, their
being too deferential to the leader, or more cautious, stiff, and
uptight than the therapy group. I've used exactly the same model in
daily groups on the acute inpatient ward, where I divide the group
meeting into three parts: (1) a one-hour patient meeting; (2) a
ten-minute "ﬁshbowl" session (the leaders and observers rehashing the
group while seated in an inner circle surrounded by the observing group
members); and (3) a ﬁnal ten-minute large circle in which members react
to the observers' comments. Debrieﬁng research indicates that most group
members regard the ﬁnal twenty minutes as the most rewarding part of the
meeting. In another format for personal transparency, I routinely write
a detailed and impressionistic summary of outpatient group meetings and
mail it to members before the next meeting. This technique had its
origins in the 1970s when I began leading groups for alcoholic patients.
All that time dynamic group therapy for alcoholic patients had a bad
reputation, and

B l a n k S c r e e n ? Fo r g e t I t ! B e R e a l

79

most alcohol counselors had decided that it was best to leave alcoholic
group treatment in the hands of AA. I decided to try once again but to
employ an intensive here-and-now format and to shift the focus from the
alcohol addiction to the underlying interpersonal problems that fueled
the urge to drink. (All group members were required to participate in AA
or some other program to control their drinking.) The here-and-now focus
galvanized the group. Meetings were electric and intensive.
Unfortunately, far too intensive! Too much anxiety was aroused for
members who, as many alcoholics do, had great difﬁculty binding and
tolerating anxiety in any other manner but acting out. Members of the
group soon began craving a drink after meetings and announcing, "If I
ever have to sit through a meeting like the last one, I'll stop in the
bar on the way home." Since it seemed that the here-and-now meetings
were on target and dealt with rich relevant issues for each group
member, I sought to develop some method to help diminish the threat and
anxiety of the sessions. I employed a series of techniques. First, a
here-and-now agenda written for each meeting on the blackboard
containing such items as the following: To enable John and Mary to
continue examining their differences but to deal with each other in a
less threatening and hurtful manner. To help Paul request some group
time to talk about himself. Second, we used video playbacks of selected
portions of the meetings. Third, after each meeting I dictated and
mailed to the members a weekly summary which was not only a narrative of
the content of each session but also self-revealing. I described my

80

the

gift

of

therapy

experience in the group---my puzzlement, my pleasure with certain of my
contributions, my chagrin at errors I had made, or issues I had
overlooked, or members I felt I had neglected. Of all these methods, the
weekly summary was by far the most effective, and since then I have made
a regular practice in my once-a-week groups to mail a detailed summary
to the group members before the following meeting. (If I have a
coleader, we alternate responsibility for the summary.) The summary has
many and diverse beneﬁts---for example, it increases the continuity of
the therapy work by plunging the group back into the themes of the
previous meeting---but I cite it here because it provides a vehicle for
therapist disclosure. "Multiple therapy" is another disclosure-based
teaching format I employed for several years, and in it two instructors
and ﬁve students (psychiatric residents) interview a single patient for
a series of six sessions. But rather than focus solely on the patient,
we made a point to examine our own group process, including such issues
as the students' style of asking questions, their relationship to one
another and to the faculty leaders, the degree of competitiveness or
empathy in the group. Obviously, given the economic crunch of health
care today, multiple therapy has no economic future, but, as a teaching
device, it demonstrated several effects of therapists' personal
disclosure: it is good modeling for patients and encourages their own
disclosure, it accelerates the therapy process, it demonstrates
therapists' respect for the therapy process by their willingness to
engage personally in it. Recall the experiment in which I and a patient
named Ginny exchanged our impressionistic summaries of each session.
This format was also a challenging exercise in therapist transparency.
The patient had so idealized me, had placed me on such an elevated
pedestal, that a true meeting between us was not possible. Therefore, in
my notes I deliberately

B l a n k S c r e e n ? Fo r g e t I t ! B e R e a l

81

attempted to reveal the very human feelings and experiences I had: my
frustrations, my irritations, my insomnia, my vanity. This exercise,
done early in my career, facilitated therapy and liberated me a good
deal in subsequent therapeutic work. A bold experiment in therapist
transparency that has long intrigued me was conducted by Sándor Ferenczi
(1873--1933), a Hungarian psychoanalyst who was a member of Freud's
inner psychoanalytic circle and perhaps Freud's closest professional and
personal conﬁdant. Freud, more drawn to speculative questions about the
application of psychoanalysis to the understanding of culture, was
basically pessimistic about therapy and rarely tinkered with methods to
improve therapy technique. Of all the analysts in the inner circle, it
was Sándor Ferenczi who relentlessly and boldly sought out technical
innovation. He was never more bold than in his radical 1932 transparency
experiment described in his Clinical Diaries, where he pushed therapist
self-disclosure to the limit by engaging in "mutual analysis"---a format
in which he and one of his patients (a female psychotherapist whom he
had been analyzing for some time) alternated hours analyzing one
another. Ultimately Ferenczi grew discouraged and abandoned the
experiment because of two major concerns: (1) conﬁdentiality--- a
problem because true engagement in free association would require him to
share any passing thoughts about his other patients and (2)
fees---Ferenczi fretted about payment. Who should pay whom? His patient
did not share Ferenczi's discouragement. She felt the procedure had
facilitated therapy and that Ferenczi was unwilling to continue because
he feared having to acknowledge that he was in love with her. Ferenczi
held a contrary opinion. "No, no, no," he opined; his real reason was
that he was unwilling to express the fact that he hated her. Ferenczi's
negative reactions to his attempts at self-

82

the

gift

of

therapy

disclosure seem arbitrary and highly dated. My novel Lying on the Couch
attempts to rerun his experiment in contemporary therapy. The
protagonist, a psychiatrist, resolved to be totally transparent with a
patient who, as it happened in this ﬁctional tale, was committed to
duplicity. One of my major intentions in the novel is to afﬁrm that
therapist authenticity will ultimately be redemptive even under the
worst circumstances---that is, a clinical encounter with a scheming
pseudo-patient.

chapter 26

Three Kinds of Therapist Self-Disclosure

I

t is counterproductive for the therapist to remain opaque and hidden
from the patient. There is every reason to reveal oneself to the patient
and no good reason for concealment. Yet whenever I begin to address
therapists on this issue, I observe considerable discomfort, which stems
in part from the imprecision of the term self-disclosure. Therapist
selfdisclosure is not a single entity but a cluster of behaviors, some
of which invariably facilitate therapy and some of which are problematic
and potentially counterproductive. Some clarity may be provided by
delineating three realms of therapist disclosure: (1) the mechanism of
therapy; (2) here-and-now feelings; and (3) the therapist's personal
life. Let us examine each in turn.

chapter 27

The Mechanism of Therapy--- Be Transparent

T

he grand inquisitor in Dostoevsky's Brothers Karamazov proclaimed that
men have always wanted "magic, mystery, and authority." Throughout
history, healers have known this and cloaked their healing practice in a
shroud of secrecy. Shamanistic training and practices have always been
veiled in mystery, whereas Western physicians have, for centuries, used
accoutrements designed to inspire awe and maximize a placebo effect:
white coats, walls studded with prestigious diplomas, and prescriptions
written in Latin. I propose a diametrically opposed view of the healing
process throughout this text. The establishment of an authentic
relationship with patients, by its very nature, demands that we forgo
the power of the triumvirate of magic, mystery, and authority.
Psychotherapy is intrinsically so robust that it gains a great deal by
full disclosure of the process and rationale of treatment. A persuasive
body of psychotherapy research demonstrates that the therapist should
carefully prepare new patients by informing them about
psychotherapy---its basic

T h e M e c h a n i s m o f T h e r a p y --- B e Tr a n s p a r e n t

85

assumptions, rationale, and what each client can do to maximize his or
her own progress. Patients are already burdened with the primary anxiety
that brings them to therapy and it makes little sense to plunge them
into a process that may create secondary anxiety---anxiety from exposure
to an ambiguous social situation without guidelines for proper behavior
or participation. Therefore it is wise to prepare patients
systematically for the process of psychotherapy. Preparation of new
patients is particularly effective in group therapy because the
interactional group situation is so intrinsically alien and frightening.
New group members, especially those without previous group experience,
are often made anxious by the power of the small group---the group
pressure, the degree of intimacy, the overall intensity. The provision
of anxiety-relieving structure and the clariﬁcation of procedural
guidelines are absolutely essential in group therapy. Preparation for
individual psychotherapy is also essential. Though individuals are
likely to have had experience with intense relationships, it is highly
unlikely that they have been in a relationship requiring them to trust
fully, to reveal all, to hold nothing back, to examine all nuances of
their feelings to another, and to receive nonjudgmental acceptance. In
initial interviews I cover important ground rules, including
conﬁdentiality, the necessity for full disclosure, the importance of
dreams, the need for patience. Because the here-and-now focus may seem
unusual to patients I present its rationale. If a new patient has
described relationship difﬁculties (and that means just about every
patient), I might say, for example: "It's clear that one of the areas we
need to address is your relationship with others. It is difﬁcult for me
to know the precise nature of your difﬁculties in relationships because
I, of course, know the other persons in

86

the

gift

of

therapy

your life only through your own eyes. Sometimes your descriptions may be
unintentionally biased, and I've found that I can be more helpful to you
by focusing on the one relationship where I have the most accurate
information---the relationship between you and me. It is for this reason
I shall often ask you to examine what is happening between the two of
us." In short I suggest total disclosure about the mechanism of therapy.

chapter 28

Revealing Here-and-Now Feelings--- Use Discretion

T

o engage in a genuine relationship with one's patient, it is essential
to disclose your feelings toward the patient in the immediate present.
But here-and-now disclosure should not be indiscriminate; transparency
should not be pursued for its own sake. All comments must pass one test:
Is this disclosure in the best interests of the patient? Over and again
in this text I shall emphasize that your most valuable source of data is
your own feelings. If during an hour you feel that the patient is
distant, shy, ﬂirtatious, scornful, fearful, challenging, childlike, or
exhibiting any of a myriad of behaviors one person can with another,
then that is data, valuable data, and you must seek a way to turn that
information to therapeutic advantage, as shown in examples of my
revealing that I felt shut out by a patient, or closer and more
involved, or irritated at repetitive apologies for moving a Kleenex box.

88

the

gift

of

therapy

Clinical illustration. A patient customarily described problematic
incidents in his life but rarely gave me a follow-up. I often felt shut
out and curious. I wondered what happened, for example, when he
confronted his boss for a raise? What was his friend's reaction when he
refused to give him the loan he requested? Did he follow through with
his plan of asking his exgirlfriend's roommate for a date? Perhaps some
of my curiosity was voyeuristic, emanating from my desire to know the
ends of stories. But I felt also my reactions contained important
information about the patient. Did he never put himself in my position?
Did he not think I had any curiosity about his life? Perhaps he felt he
didn't matter to me. Perhaps he thought of me as a machine without any
of my own curiosity and desires. Ultimately I discussed all of these
feelings (and conjectures), and my disclosure led him into revealing his
preference that I not be a real person lest he discover my shortcomings
and consequently lose conﬁdence in me. Clinical illustration. A patient
experienced a sense of pervasive illegitimacy and shame in all his
personal and business transactions. In the here-and-now of our therapy
hours his free-ﬂoating guilt often emerged as he castigated himself for
his inauthentic behavior in our relationship. He hated the way he tried
to impress me with his cleverness and his intelligence. For example, he
loved languages and, though English was his second language, he reveled
in mastering its nuances and confessed that he had often searched the
dictionary before sessions for esoteric words to use in our discussion.
I felt dismayed at his self-castigation. For a moment I could experience
the force of his guilt and self-criticism, since I was a full
accomplice: I had always taken great delight in his wordplay and,
without doubt, had encouraged his behavior. I shared that

R e v e a l i n g H e r e - a n d - N o w Fe e l i n g s

89

and then treated us both by exclaiming, "But I'm not buying into this.
After all, where's the crime? We're working well together and what is
the harm in our enjoying our shared intellectual play?" A gifted
therapist (Peter Lomas) describes the following interaction with a
patient who began the session in his characteristic manner by speaking
in a withdrawn and hopeless manner about his loneliness. therapist:
"Don't you think that I, too, might be lonely? Here I am sitting with
you in this room and you are withdrawn from me. Don't you recognize that
I don't want this, that I want to get to know you better?" patient: "No,
how could you? I can't believe it. You are self-sufﬁcient. You don't
want me." therapist: "What makes you think I'm self-sufﬁcient? Why
should I be different from you? I need people like you do. And I need
you to stop keeping away from me." patient: "What could I give you? I
can't imagine it. I feel so much a nothing. I never do anything in my
life." therapist: "But in any case one doesn't like people just because
of their achievements but for what they are. Don't you?" patient: "Yes,
that's true for me." therapist: "So why don't you believe that others
might like you for what you are?" The therapist reported that this
interaction dramatically decreased the gulf between himself and the
patient. The patient ended the hour saying, "It's a hard world," but his
statement was delivered not in the sense of "poor unhappy me," but in
the sense of "It's a hard world for you and me, isn't it, for you and me
and all others who live in it?"

chapter 29

Revealing the Therapist's Personal Life---Use Caution

D

isclosure in the ﬁrst two realms---the mechanism of therapy and the
here-and-now (properly framed)--- seems straightforward and
nonproblematic. But around the third type of disclosure, the personal
life of the therapist, there swirls considerable controversy. If
therapist disclosure were to be graded on a continuum, I am certain that
I would be placed on the high end. Yet I have never had the experience
of disclosing too much. On the contrary, I have always facilitated
therapy when I have shared some facet of myself. Many years ago my
mother died, and I ﬂew to Washington for her funeral and to spend time
with my sister. I was leading an outpatient group at the time, and my
co-therapist, a young psychiatric resident, was uncertain what to do and
simply informed the group that I would be absent because of a death in
my family. The group meetings were being videotaped for research and
teaching purposes, and upon my return a week later I viewed the tape of
the meeting---a productive, highly energized session.

R e v e a l i n g t h e T h e r a p i s t ' s Pe r s o n a l L i f e

91

What to do in the next meeting? Since I had no doubt that concealment of
my mother's death would be deleterious to the group process, I decided
to be entirely transparent and give the group everything they requested.
It is axiomatic that if a group actively avoids some major issue, then
no other issue will be addressed effectively. I opened the meeting by
informing them of my mother's death and responded to all inquiries. Some
wanted to know details of the death and funeral, others asked about how
I was handling it, others inquired about my relationship to my mother
and sister. I answered all with great candor and told them, for example,
of my fractious relationship with my mother and how I had chosen to live
in California partly in order to put three thousand miles between my
mother and me. She had been a dragon in many ways, I told them, but she
had lost her fangs as she had aged and in the last several years our
relationship had grown much closer and I had been a dutiful son. Finally
the group asked whether there was anything they could do for me in the
meeting. I responded that I didn't believe so because I had been dealing
nonstop with my mother's death by talking intensively with friends and
family. Finally, I said that I believed that I now had the energy to
work effectively in the group, whereupon the group turned back to group
business and had an extremely productive meeting. For years afterward, I
used the videotape of this meeting to teach group process. I feel
certain that my disclosure not only removed a potential roadblock to the
group but that my modeling self-disclosure was a liberating event for
it. Another example, which I described in a story, "Seven Advanced
Lessons in the Therapy of Grief" (Momma and the Meaning of Life),
involves a similar incident. Shortly before I was to meet with a
bereaved patient, I received a call informing me of my brother-in-law's
death. Since my patient was a sur-

92

the

gift

of

therapy

geon in crisis (over the death of both her husband and her father), and
I had time before leaving for the airport, I decided to keep my
appointment with her, and opened the hour by informing her of what had
happened and telling her that I had nonetheless decided to keep the
appointment with her. She exploded with great fury and accused me of
attempting to compare my grief with hers. "And let me tell you," she
added, "if I can show up in the operating room for my patients, then you
sure as hell can show up to see me." The incident proved very
instrumental for therapy---my revelation enabled her to reveal her grief
rage, which opened a new fertile period in our work. Long ago a
colleague worked with a patient whose child had died of cancer. The long
course of therapy had been helpful but not entirely successful. My
colleague, who had also lost a young child twenty years earlier, chose
not to share that information with his patient. Many years later the
patient contacted him again and they resumed therapy. The therapist, who
had continued to be haunted by his own loss and had spent years writing
a long article on his child's death, decided to share the writing with
the patient. This disclosure, which was novel for him, proved vastly
instrumental in accelerating the therapy work. If patients want to know
whether I am married, have children, liked a certain movie, read a
certain book, or felt awkward at our meeting at some social event, I
always answer them directly. Why not? What's the big deal? How can one
have a genuine encounter with another person while remaining so opaque?
Return, one ﬁnal time, to the patient who was critical of me for using
an upscale restaurant as a landmark for directions to my ofﬁce while
failing to mention the neighboring fast-food taco stand. I chose to
respond candidly, "Well, Bob, you're right! Instead of saying turn right
at Fresca, I could have said

R e v e a l i n g t h e T h e r a p i s t ' s Pe r s o n a l L i f e

93

turn right when you reach the taco stand. And why did I make the choice
I did? I'm sure it's because I'd rather associate myself with the more
reﬁned restaurant. I'd feel uncomfortable saying, 'Turn at the taco
stand.' " Again, what's the risk? I'm only acknowledging something he
obviously knew. And only when we got my admission out of the way could
we turn to the important business of exploring his desire to embarrass
me. Thus, by no means does therapist self-disclosure replace the
exploration of the process of the patient's personal inquiries. Do both!
Some therapists make a point of responding to questions with: "I'll be
glad to answer that, but ﬁrst I'd like to know as much as possible about
the asking of that question." Sometimes I use that approach, but I've
rarely found particular advantage in insisting on any particular order
("You go ﬁrst and then I'll respond"). If it is a new patient I often
choose simply to model disclosure and to store the incident in my mind
to return to later. If it is unusual for the patient to ask you
questions, then consider their act of questioning as grist for the mill
and make certain you return to it. Timing must be considered. Often the
therapist may choose to wait until the interaction is over, perhaps even
until the next session, then remark to this effect: "It seems to me that
something unusual happened last week: you asked me some personal
questions. Can we revisit that? What was the exchange like for you? What
enabled you to approach me in a different way? How did you feel about my
response?"

chapter 30

Revealing Your Personal Life---Caveats

O

ne of the deepest fears therapists have about personal disclosure is
that there will be no end to it, that once they open the door, the
patient will demand more and more until they are being grilled about
their deepest and most embarrassing secrets. This is a groundless fear.
In my experience the overwhelming majority of patients accept what I
offer, do not press for more or for uncomfortable disclosure, then go
about the business of therapy, as the therapy group did upon learning of
my mother's death. However, there are caveats: Keep in mind that, though
the patients have conﬁdentiality, therapists do not. Nor can one request
it of patients, who may in the future consult another therapist and must
feel unencumbered in what they may discuss. If there is certain
information that you strongly do not wish to become public, do not share
it in therapy. Many therapists are even more cautious and take care not
to share any personal material that, out of context, might be
misconstrued and prove embarrassing.

R e v e a l i n g Yo u r Pe r s o n a l L i f e --- C a v e a t s

95

But do not permit this concern to restrict your work and make you so
overcautious and self-protective that you lose your effectiveness. You
cannot protect yourself from patients' presenting you in distorted
fashion to their next therapist. Keep this in mind the next time you
hear patients describe the outrageous behavior of previous therapists.
Don't automatically leap to the conclusion that the previous therapist
was foolish or malfeasant. It is best to listen, empathize, and wait.
Very often the patient will eventually provide the context of the
therapist's act, which often throws it into a very different light. I
once referred a wife of a patient to a colleague, a close friend. But a
couple of months later, my patient asked me for another referral because
my colleague had acted badly: he had persisted in smelling my patient's
wife and commenting upon her odor. Smelling patients? It sounded so
bizarre that I felt concerned about my friend and as gently as possible
inquired about the incident. He informed me that there had indeed been
an odor problem with his patient: she customarily wore perfume that,
though pleasing, was so powerful and pervasive that some of his other
patients had complained and insisted on being seen some other day or in
another ofﬁce! There are times when, in order to save the therapy, one
is forced into tough choices. A colleague once told me of an incident in
which a long-term patient came into a session highly distressed because
a friend of hers had claimed to have had an affair with the therapist.
How should the therapist respond? My colleague, who was committed to
honesty, bit the bullet and told his patient that he had indeed had a
weekend "convention affair" with this woman more than twenty years ago
and that they had had no contact since. His disclosure had a
considerable impact on her and galvanized subsequent therapy. He and his
patient plunged into important, previously undiscussed issues such as
her hatred of his other patients, whom she saw

96

the

gift

of

therapy

as competitors for his attention, and her lifelong view of herself as
being unchosen, unfeminine, and unattractive. Another example: A
supervisee of mine, who was gay but had not come out, reported a vexing
problem that arose in the ﬁrst month of therapy. One of his gay patients
who had seen him working out in a gym largely used by gay men confronted
him directly about his sexual orientation. My student, highly
uncomfortable, avoided the question by focusing upon the issue of why
the patient was asking. Not surprisingly, the patient canceled his next
session and never returned to therapy. Big, unconcealable secrets are
inimical to the therapeutic process. The accomplished gay therapists I
know are open about their sexual orientation with their gay clientele
and are willing to be open with their straight clients if it seems
important to the therapy.

chapter 31

Therapist Transparency and Universality

A

key therapeutic factor in group therapy is universality. Many patients
begin therapy feeling unique in their wretchedness; they believe they
alone have thoughts and fantasies that are awful, forbidden, tabooed,
sadistic, selﬁsh, and sexually perverse. The self-disclosure of similar
thoughts by other group members is wonderfully comforting and provides a
"welcome to the human race" experience. In individual therapy our
patients disclose many feelings that we therapists have also
experienced, and there is a place and a time in therapy for sharing
these. If, for example, a patient expresses guilt over the fact that
whenever she visits an aged parent she feels crawly with impatience
after a couple hours, I may share that my personal limit for a sitting
visit with my mother was about three hours. Or, if a patient is
discouraged about feeling no better after twenty hours of therapy, I do

98

the

gift

of

therapy

not hesitate referring to that amount as a "drop in the bucket,"
considering my own hundreds of hours of treatment over several courses
of therapy. Or if patients are bewildered by the intensity of
transference, I tell them of my similar feelings when I was in therapy.

chapter 32

Patients Will Resist Your Disclosure

M

y earlier comment that the therapist's self-disclosure does not whet
patients' appetites and cause them to escalate their demands for further
disclosure is, in fact, an understatement. Very often the opposite takes
place--- patients make it clear they are opposed to learning much more
about the personal life of the therapist. Those who desire magic,
mystery, and authority are loath to look beneath the trappings of the
therapist. They are much comforted by the thought that there is a wise
and omniscient ﬁgure to help them. More than one of my patients have
invoked the metaphor of the Wizard of Oz to describe their preference
for the happy belief that the therapist knows the way home---a clear,
sure path out of pain. By no means do they want to look behind the
curtain and see a lost and confused faux-wizard. One patient, who
vacillated between "wizarding" and humanizing me, described the Oz
dilemma in this poem entitled "Dorothy Surrenders":

100

the

gift

of

therapy

My ﬂight crash-landed on the Kansas plain I woke to home-truths slashed
in black and white. Felt slippers, a life cutting along the grain, And
empty crystal. I tried. But neon nights I'd searched for emeralds inside
green glass, For wizards behind straw men, I'd see That horse of many
colors gallop past--- And I grew old, he raced too fast for me. The
raging winds I've ﬂown within have scraped Me bare. Now on my knees I'd
make the choice To leave the witch her broom, replace the drape, Refuse
to see the man behind the voice Forever following that magic road That
leads me to a place no place like home. Patients want the therapist to
be omniscient, inﬁnitely dependable, and imperishable. Some of my female
patients who have had many encounters with undependable men fear my (and
all male) frailty. Others fear that I will wind up becoming the patient.
One patient, whose course of therapy I described in depth in Momma and
the Meaning of Life, avoided looking at me or asking me anything
personal, even, for example, when I appeared at a session on crutches
after knee surgery. When I inquired she explained: "I don't want you to
have a narrative to your life." "A narrative?" I asked. "What do you
mean?" "I want to keep you outside time. A narrative has a beginning, a
middle, and an end---especially an end." She had suffered the death of
several important men in her life---her husband, brother, father,
godson---and was terriﬁed at the prospect of another loss. I responded
that I could not

Pa t i e n t s W i l l R e s i s t Yo u r D i s c l o s u r e

101

help her without our having a human encounter; I needed for her to
regard me as a real person and prodded her into asking me questions
about my life and my health. After leaving my ofﬁce that day, she had an
obsessive thought: The next funeral I attend will be Irv's.

chapter 33

Avoid the Crooked Cure

W

hat is the crooked cure? It is a term used in the early days of
psychoanalysis to refer to a transference cure---a sudden radical
improvement in the patient based on magic, emanating from an illusory
view of the power of the therapist. A forty-ﬁve-year-old single,
isolated woman often left my ofﬁce glowing with a deep sense of
well-being that persisted for days after each session. At ﬁrst I could
only welcome her relief from months of black despair. And welcome also
her heady comments about me: the many insights I offered her, my
extraordinary prescience. But soon, as she described how between therapy
hours she draped me around her like a magic protective cloak, how she
ﬁlled herself with courage and peace merely by hearing my taped voice on
my answering machine, I grew more and more uncomfortable with shaman
powers. Why? For one thing, I knew I was encouraging regression by
ignoring that her improvement was built on shifting sand, and that as
soon as I disappeared from her life, her improvement

Av o i d t h e C r o o k e d C u r e

103

would evaporate. I also grew uncomfortable with the unreal and
inauthentic nature of our relationship. The more her symptoms receded,
the broader and deeper the ﬁssure between us grew. Eventually I
confronted the issue and explained that much of her experience in our
relationship was of her own construction---that is, I was not privy to
it. I told her everything: that I was not really draped around her
shoulders like a magic cloak, that I did not share in many of the
epiphanies she had experienced in our hours, that I liked being so
important to her but at the same time felt fraudulent. All the magical
help she had obtained from me? Well, it was she, not I, who was the
magician, she who had really given this help to herself. My comments,
she told me later, felt powerful, cruel, and disorienting. However, she
had by that time changed enough to integrate the idea that her
improvement came not from my power but from sources within herself.
Moreover, she ultimately came to an understanding that my comments were
not a rejection but, on the contrary, an invitation to relate to me more
closely and more honestly. Perhaps there are times when we must provide
"magic, mystery, and authority"---times of great crisis or times when
our chief priority is to ease the patient into therapy. But if we must
ﬂirt with the role of wizard I advise that we keep the ﬂirtation brief
and set about helping the patient quickly make the transition into a
more genuine therapeutic relationship. A patient who had idealized me
early in therapy dreamed two dreams one night: In the ﬁrst, a tornado
approached and I led her and others up a ﬁre escape that ultimately
dead-ended against a brick wall. In the second dream she and I were
taking an examination and neither of us knew the answers. I welcomed
these dreams because they informed the patient of my limits, my
humanness, my having to grapple with the same fundamental problems of
life that she did.

chapter 34

On Taking Patients Further Than You Have Gone

O

ften when I encounter a patient struggling with some of the same
neurotic issues that have hounded me throughout life, I question whether
I can take my patient further than I myself have come. There are two
opposing points of view: An older, traditional analytic view, less in
evidence today, holds that only the thoroughly analyzed therapist can
escort patients to a complete resolution of neurotic problems, whereas
the blind spots of clinicians with unresolved neurotic issues limit the
amount of help they are able to provide. One of Nietzsche's aphorisms
expresses an opposing view: "Some cannot loosen their own chains yet can
nonetheless redeem their friends." Karen Horney's view of the
selfactualizing drive (undoubtedly emerging from Nietzsche's work) is
relevant: if the therapist removes obstacles, patients will naturally
mature and realize their potential, even attaining a level of
integration beyond that of the facilitating therapist. I ﬁnd this view
far more consonant with my experience in work-

O n Ta k i n g Pa t i e n t s F u r t h e r

105

ing with patients. Indeed I have often had patients whose change and
whose courage have left me gaping in admiration. There exists in the
world of letters considerable analogous data. Some of the most important
lebens-philosophers (philosophers dealing with problems inherent in
existence) were singularly tormented individuals. For starters, consider
Nietzsche and Schopenhauer (extraordinarily isolated, anguished souls),
Sartre (alcohol and drug abuser, interpersonally exploitative and
insensitive), and Heidegger (who wrote so profoundly on authenticity yet
supported the Nazi cause and betrayed his own colleagues, including
Husserl, his teacher). The same point may be made for many of the early
psychologists whose substantial contributions have been so useful to so
many: Jung, no paragon of interpersonal skills, was sexually
exploitative of patients, as were many of the members of Freud's inner
circle---for example, Ernest Jones, Otto Rank, and Sándor Ferenczi.
Consider, too, the astounding amount of discord characteristic of all
the major psychoanalytic institutes, whose members, despite their
expertise in assisting others, have at the same time characteristically
displayed so much immaturity, mutual acrimony, and disrespect that
schism after schism has occurred, with new---and often
feuding---institutes spinning wildly off from mother institutes.

chapter 35

On Being Helped by Your Patient

I

n a play fragment, Emergency, the psychoanalyst Helmut Kaiser tells the
story of a wife who visits a therapist and pleads with him to help her
husband, a psychiatrist who is deeply depressed and likely to kill
himself. The therapist responds that of course he would be glad to help
and suggests that her husband call for an appointment. The woman
responds that therein lies the problem: Her husband denies his
depression and rejects all suggestions to obtain help. The therapist is
bafﬂed. He tells the woman that he cannot imagine how he can be of help
to someone unwilling to consult him. The woman replies that she has a
plan. She urges the psychiatrist to consult her husband, while
pretending to be a patient, and gradually, as they continue to meet, ﬁnd
a way to help him. These and other tales as well as my clinical
experience informed the plot of my novel When Nietzsche Wept, in which
Friedrich Nietzsche and Josef Breuer served simultaneously (and
surreptitiously) as each other's therapist and patient. I believe it is
commonplace for therapists to be helped by

O n B e i n g H e l p e d b y Yo u r Pa t i e n t

107

their patients. Jung often spoke of the increased efﬁcacy of the wounded
healer. He even claimed that therapy worked best when the patient
brought the perfect salve for the therapist's wound and that if the
therapist doesn't change, then the patient doesn't, either. Perhaps
wounded healers are effective because they are more able to empathize
with the wounds of the patient; perhaps it is because they participate
more deeply and personally in the healing process. I know that I have,
countless times, begun a therapy hour in a state of personal disquiet
and ended the hour feeling considerably better without commenting
explicitly on my inner state. I think help has come to me in many forms.
Sometimes it is the result of sheerly being effective in my work, of
feeling better about myself through using my skills and expertise to
help another. Sometimes it ensues from being drawn out of myself and
into contact with another. Intimate interaction is always salutary. I
have especially encountered this phenomenon in my group-therapy
practice. Many times I have started a therapygroup session feeling
troubled about some personal issue and ﬁnished the meeting feeling
considerably relieved. The intimate healing ambiance of a good therapy
group is almost tangible, and good things occur when one enters into its
aura. Scott Rutan, an eminent group therapist, once compared the therapy
group to a bridge built during a battle. Though there may be some
casualties sustained during the stage of building (i.e., group-therapy
dropouts), the bridge, once in place, can transport a great many people
to a better place. These are by-products of healers' doing their job,
times when the healer is surreptitiously taking in some of that good
stuff of therapy. Sometimes the healer's therapy is more explicit and
transparent. Even though the patient is not there to treat the
therapist, times may arise when the therapist is burdened

108

the

gift

of

therapy

with sorrows that are difﬁcult to conceal. Bereavement is perhaps the
most common sorrow, and many a patient has sought to bolster the spirits
of the bereaved therapist, as in the example I cited earlier of my
therapy group's response to my mother's death. I also remember each of
my individual patients at that time reaching out to me in a human
fashion---and not just to help tune me up so that I could more
efﬁciently attend to their therapy. After the publication of Love's
Executioner I received a critical review in The New York Times Book
Review and a very positive review later in the week in the daily New
York Times. Several of my patients left messages for me or began their
next session by asking me if I had seen the positive review and
commiserating with me about the negative one. On another occasion,
following a particularly mean-spirited newspaper interview, one patient
reminded me that the newspaper would be used to wrap ﬁsh the following
day. Harry Stack Sullivan, an inﬂuential American psychiatric theorist,
is reputed to have once described psychotherapy as a discussion of
personal issues between two people, one of them more anxious than the
other. And if the therapist develops more anxiety than the patient, he
becomes the patient and the patient becomes the therapist. Furthermore,
the patient's selfesteem is radically boosted by being of help to the
therapist. I have had several opportunities to minister to important
ﬁgures in my life. In one case I was able to offer consolation to a
despairing mentor and was then called upon to treat his son. In another,
I often advised and comforted an elderly former therapist, saw him
through a lengthy illness, and was privileged to be at his side at the
moment of his death. Despite revealing the frailty of my elders, these
experiences served to enrich and strengthen me.

chapter 36

Encourage Patient Self-Disclosure

S

elf-disclosure is an absolutely essential ingredient in psychotherapy.
No patient proﬁts from therapy without selfrevelation. It is one of
those automatic occurrences in therapy of which we take note only in its
absence. So much of what we do in therapy---providing a safe
environment, establishing trust, exploring fantasies and dreams---serves
the purpose of encouraging self-revelation. When a patient takes the
plunge, breaks signiﬁcant new ground, and reveals something new,
something particularly difﬁcult to discuss---something potentially
embarrassing, shameful, or incriminating---then I make a point of
focusing on the process of the comment as well as its content. (Keep in
mind that process refers to the nature of the relationship between the
people in the interaction.) In other words, at some point, often after a
full discussion of the content, I make sure to turn my attention to the
patient's act of disclosure. First I take care to treat such a
disclosure tenderly and comment on how I feel

110

the

gift

of

therapy

about the patient's willingness to trust me. I then turn my attention to
the decision to share this material with me at this time. The construct
of "vertical disclosure versus horizontal disclosure" may help to
clarify this point. Vertical disclosure refers to in-depth disclosure
about the content of the disclosure. If the disclosure has to do, let us
say, with sexual stimulation from cross-dressing, then the therapist
might encourage vertical disclosure by inquiring about the historical
development of the cross-dressing or the particular details and
circumstances of the practice---that is, what the patient wears, what
fantasies are used, whether it is solitary or shared, and so on.
Horizontal disclosure, on the other hand, is disclosure about the act of
disclosure. To facilitate horizontal disclosure we ask such questions as
"What made it possible to discuss this today? How hard was it for you?
Had you been wanting to share this in earlier sessions? What stopped
you? I imagine that since there is just you and me here it must have
something to do with how you anticipate I would respond to you.
\[Patients usually agree with this self-evident truth.\] How did you
anticipate I'd respond? What response have you seen from me today? Are
there any questions about my response you'd like to ask me?" In group
therapy the process of self-disclosure enters into particularly sharp
focus because differences between the group members are so evident. With
considerable consensus, group members can rank their fellow members
according to transparency. Ultimately groups become impatient with
withholding members, and the unwillingness to disclose becomes a major
focus in the group. Often members respond impatiently to long-delayed
disclosures. "Now you tell us about the affair you've been having the
last three years," they say. "But what about that wild-goose chase you
took us on the last six months? Look at the time we wasted---all those
meetings in which we assumed your mar-

E n c o u r a g e Pa t i e n t S e l f - D i s c l o s u r e

111

riage was falling apart solely because of your wife's coldness and
disinterest in you. This process requires active intervention by the
therapist because patients should not be punished for self-revelation,
no matter how delayed. It is the same for individual therapy. Anytime
you feel like saying, "Dammit, all these wasted hours, why didn't you
tell me this before," that is just the time to bite your tongue and
shift the focus onto the fact that the patient did ﬁnally develop the
trust to reveal this information.

chapter 37

Feedback in Psychotherapy

T

he Johari window, a venerable personality paradigm used in teaching
group leaders and group members about self-disclosure and feedback, has
much to offer in individual therapy as well. Its odd name is a conﬂation
(Joe + Harry) of the two individuals who ﬁrst described it---Joe Luft
and Harry Ingram. Note the four quadrants: public, blind, secret,
unconscious.

Known to Self

Unknown to Self

Known to Others

1.  public

2.  blind

Unknown to Others

3.  secret

4.  unconscious

Fe e d b a c k i n P s y c h o t h e r a p y

113

Quadrant 1 (known to myself and to others) is the public self. Quadrant
2 (unknown to self and known by others) is the blind self. Quadrant 3
(known to self and unknown to others) is the secret self. Quadrant 4
(unknown to self and to others) is the unconscious self. The quadrants
vary in size between individuals: Some cells are large in some
individuals, shrunken in others. In therapy we attempt to change the
size of the four cells. We try to help the public cell grow larger at
the expense of the other three and the secret self to shrink, as
patients, through the process of selfdisclosure, share more of
themselves---at ﬁrst to the therapist and then judiciously to other
appropriate ﬁgures in their lives. And, of course, we hope to diminish
the size of the unconscious self by helping patients explore and become
acquainted with deeper layers of themselves. But it is cell 2, the blind
self, that we particularly target--- both in individual and group
therapy. A goal of therapy is to increase reality testing and to help
individuals see themselves as others see them. It is through the agency
of feedback that the blind self cell grows appreciably smaller. In group
therapy, feedback for the most part is from member to member. In group
sessions members interact a great deal with others, and considerable
data is generated about interpersonal patterns. If the group is
conducted properly, members receive much feedback from the other group
members about how they are perceived by them. But feedback is a delicate
tool and members soon learn that it is most useful if:

114

the

gift

of

therapy

1.  It stems from here-and-now observations.
2.  It follows the generating event as closely as possible.
3.  It focuses on the speciﬁc observations and feelings generated in the
    listener rather than guesses or interpretations about the speaker's
    motivation.
4.  The recipient checks out the feedback with other members to obtain
    consensual validation. In the two-person system of individual
    therapy, feedback is less variegated and voluminous but is
    nonetheless an instrumental part of the therapy process. It is
    through feedback that patients become better witnesses to their own
    behavior and learn to appreciate the impact of their behavior upon
    the feelings of others.

chapter 38

Provide Feedback Effectively and Gently

I

f you have some clear here-and-now impressions that seem germane to the
central issues of your patient, you must develop modes of delivering
these observations in a manner the patient can accept. There are steps I
ﬁnd useful early in the course of therapy. First, I enlist the patient
as an ally and request his permission to offer my here-and-now
observations. Then I make it clear that these observations are highly
relevant to the patient's reasons for being in therapy. For example, in
one of the ﬁrst sessions I might say: "Perhaps I can help you understand
what goes wrong with relationships in your life by examining our
relationship as it is occurring. Even though our relationship is not the
same as a friendship, there is, nonetheless, much overlap, particularly
the intimate nature of our discussion. If I can make observations about
you that might

116

the

gift

of

therapy

throw light on what happens between you and others, I'd like to point
them out. Is that okay?" It is hardly possible for the patient to reject
this offer, and once we have nailed down this contract, I feel bolder
and less intrusive when giving feedback. As a general rule, such an
agreement is a good idea, and I may remind the patient of our contract
if awkwardness should arise about feedback. Consider, for example, these
three patients: Ted who for months speaks in a soft voice and refuses to
meet my glance. Bob, an efﬁcient, high-powered CEO, who comes to each
session with a written agenda, takes notes during the session, and asks
me to repeat many of my statements so as not to miss a word. Sam, who
rambles and continually spins long, tangential, pointless tales. Each of
these three patients reported great difﬁculty in forming intimate
relationships, and in each instance their hereand-now behavior was
obviously relevant to their relationship problems. The task, in each
instance, was to ﬁnd a suitable method of sharing my impressions. "Ted,
I'm very much aware of the fact that you never meet my glance. I don't,
of course, know why you look away, but I am aware that it prompts me to
speak to you very gently, almost as though you are fragile and that
sense of your fragility prompts me to weigh carefully everything I say
to you. I believe this caution prevents me from being spontaneous and
feeling close to you. Do my

P r o v i d e Fe e d b a c k E f f e c t i v e l y a n d G e n t l y

117

comments surprise you? Perhaps you've heard this before?" "Bob, let me
share a couple of feelings. Your notetaking and the agendas you bring to
sessions signify to me how hard you're working to make good use of this
time. I appreciate your dedication and preparation but at the same time
these activities have a deﬁnite impact on me. I'm aware of a highly
businesslike, rather than a personal, atmosphere in our meetings, and
also I often feel so closely scrutinized and evaluated that my
spontaneity is stiﬂed. I ﬁnd that I am more cautious with you than I'd
like to be. Is it possible you affect others in the same way?" "Sam, let
me interrupt you. You're into a long tale and I'm beginning to feel
lost---I'm losing sight of its relevance to our work. Many of your
stories are tremendously interesting. You're a very good storyteller and
I get involved in your narratives but at the same time they operate as a
barrier between us. The stories keep me away from you and they prevent a
deeper encounter. Is this something that you've heard before from
others?" Note carefully the wording in these responses. In each I stick
to my observations of the behavior I see and how that behavior makes me
feel. I take care to avoid guesses about what the patient is attempting
to do---that is, I do not comment that the patient is attempting to
avoid me by not looking at me, or control me by the written agendas, or
entertain me by the long stories. If I focus upon my own feelings, then
I am far less

118

the

gift

of

therapy

likely to evoke defensiveness---after all, they are my feelings and
cannot be challenged. In each instance I also introduce the idea that it
is my wish to be closer to these patients and to know them better, that
the behavior in question distances me and may distance others as well.

chapter 39

Increase Receptiveness to Feedback by Using "Parts"

A

few other suggestions about feedback. Avoid giving generalized feedback;
instead make it focused and explicit. Avoid simply responding
afﬁrmatively to general questions from patients about whether you like
them. Instead, increase the usefulness of your response by reframing the
question and discussing the aspects of the patient that draw you closer
and those that push you away. Using "parts" is often a helpful device to
decrease defensiveness. Consider, for example, a patient who is almost
always late in paying his bill. Whenever discussing it he is painfully
embarrassed and offers many lame excuses. I've found formulations like
the following useful: "Dave, I understand there may be realistic reasons
for your not paying my bill on time. I do realize that you work hard in
therapy, that you value me, and that you have found our work valuable.
But I also think there is some

120

the

gift

of

therapy

small resistant part of you that has some strong feelings about paying
me. Please, I'd like to speak to that part." Using "parts" is a useful
concept to undermine denial and resistance in many phases of therapy and
is often a gracious and gentle way to explore ambivalence. Furthermore,
for patients who cannot tolerate ambivalence and tend to see life in
black-and-white terms, it is an effective introduction to the notion of
shades of gray. For example, consider one of my gay patients who is
reckless about unprotected sex and offers a number of rationalizations.
My approach was, "John, I understand that you believe that in this
situation your chance of getting HIV is only one in ﬁfteen hundred. But
I also know there is some particularly reckless or careless part of you.
I want to meet and to converse with that part---that ﬁfteen hundredth
part of you." Or to a despondent or suicidal patient: "I understand that
you feel deeply discouraged, that at times you feel like giving up, that
right now you even feel like taking your life. But you are nonetheless
here today. Some part of you has brought the rest of you into my ofﬁce.
Now, please, I want to talk to that part of you---the part that wants to
live."

chapter 40

Feedback: Strike When the Iron Is Cold

A

new patient, Bonny, enters my ofﬁce. She is forty, attractive, and has a
face that is angelic and gleams as though it has just been freshly
scrubbed. Though she is popular and has many friends, she tells me she
is always left behind. Men are glad to go to bed with her but invariably
choose to pass out of her life in a few weeks. "Why?" she asks. "Why
does no one take me seriously?" In my ofﬁce she is always bubbly and
enthusiastic and reminds me of a lively tour guide or an adorable
tail-wagging puppy. She seems a young kid---clean, fun-loving,
uncomplicated, but most unreal and uninteresting. It is not difﬁcult to
understand why others fail to take her seriously. I am certain my
observations are important and that I should make use of them in
therapy. But how? How can I avoid hurting her and causing her to close
down and become defensive? One principle that has proved useful to me
time and again is to strike when the iron is cold---that is, give her
the feedback about this behavior when she is behaving differently.

122

the

gift

of

therapy

For example, one day she wept bitterly in my ofﬁce as she spoke about
attending the wedding of her younger sister. Life was passing her by;
her friends were all marrying while she did nothing but age. Quickly
composing herself, she beamed a huge smile and apologized for "being a
baby" and letting herself get so down in my ofﬁce. I took the
opportunity to tell her that not only were apologies unnecessary but, on
the contrary, it was particularly important for her to share with me her
times of despair. "I feel," I said, "much closer to you today. You seem
much more real. It's as though I really know you now--- better than ever
before." Silence. "Your thoughts, Bonny?" "You mean, I've got to break
down for you to feel you know me?" "I can see how you'd think that. Let
me explain. There are many times when you come into my ofﬁce and I have
the sense of you being sparkling and entertaining; yet somehow I feel
far away from the real you. There is a certain effervescence you have at
these times that is very charming but it also acts as a barrier, keeping
us apart. Today it's different. Today I feel really connected to
you---and my hunch is this is the type of connection you yearn for in
your social relationships. Tell me, does my reaction feel bizarre? Or
familiar? Anyone else ever said this to you? Is it possible that what
I'm saying might have some relevance to what goes on with you in other
relationships?" Another related technique employs age states. Sometimes
I experience a patient as being in one age state, sometimes another, and
I try to ﬁnd an acceptable way to share this with

Fe e d b a c k : S t r i k e W h e n t h e I r o n I s C o l d

123

the patient, usually commenting upon it when I experience the patient in
an age-appropriate state. Some patients ﬁnd this concept particularly
important and may monitor themselves frequently and speak about what age
they feel during a given session.

chapter 41

Talk About Death

T

he fear of death always percolates beneath the surface. It haunts us
throughout life and we erect defenses--- many based on denial---to help
cope with the awareness of death. But we cannot keep it out of mind. It
spills over into our fantasies and dreams. It bursts loose in every
nightmare. When we were children we were preoccupied with death and one
of our major developmental tasks has been to cope with the fear of
obliteration. Death is a visitor in every course of therapy. To ignore
its presence gives the message that it is too terrible to discuss. Yet
most therapists avoid direct discussion of death. Why? Some therapists
avoid it because they don't know what to do with death. "What's the
point?" they say. "Let's get back to the neurotic process, something we
can do something about." Other therapists question the relevance of
death to the therapy process and follow the counsel of the great Adolph
Meyer, who advised not scratching where it doesn't itch. Still others
decline

Ta l k A b o u t D e a t h

125

to bring up a subject that inspires great anxiety in an already anxious
patient (and in the therapist as well). Yet there are several good
reasons we should confront death in the course of therapy. First, keep
in mind that therapy is a deep and comprehensive exploration into the
course and meaning of one's life; given the centrality of death in our
existence, given that life and death are interdependent, how can we
possibly ignore it? From the beginning of written thought humans have
realized that everything fades, that we fear the fading, and that we
must ﬁnd a way to live despite the fear and the fading. Psychotherapists
cannot afford to ignore the many great thinkers who have concluded that
learning to live well is to learn to die well.

chapter 42

Death and Life Enhancement

M

ost mental health workers who tend to the dying have, during their
training, been advised to read Tolstoy's story "The Death of Ivan
Ilyich." Ivan Ilyich, a mean-spirited bureaucrat dying in agony,
stumbles upon a stunning insight at the very end of his life: he
realizes he is dying so badly because he has lived so badly. His insight
begets great personal change, and in his last days Ivan Ilyich's life is
ﬂooded with a peace and meaningfulness that he had never achieved
previously. Many other great works of literature contain a similar
message. For example, in War and Peace, Pierre, the protagonist, is
transformed after a last-second reprieve from a ﬁring squad. Scrooge in
A Christmas Carol does not suddenly become a new man because of Yuletide
cheer; rather his transformation occurs when the spirit of the future
permits him to witness his own death and the strangers squabbling over
his possessions. The message in all these works is simple and profound:
Though the physicality of death destroys us, the idea of death may save
us.

Death and Life Enhancement

127

In the years I worked with terminally ill patients, I saw a great many
patients who, facing death, underwent signiﬁcant and positive personal
change. Patients felt they had grown wise; they re-prioritized their
values and began to trivialize the trivia in their lives. It was as
though cancer cured neurosis---phobias and crippling interpersonal
concerns seemed to melt away. I always had students observe my groups of
cancer patients. Ordinarily, in a teaching institution, groups will
permit student observation but do so grudgingly and often with some
smoldering resentment. But not my groups of patients terminally ill with
cancer! On the contrary, they welcomed the opportunity to share what
they had learned. "But what a pity," I heard so many patients lament,
"that we had to wait until now, until our bodies are riddled with
cancer, to learn how to live." Heidegger spoke of two modes of
existence: the everyday mode and the ontological mode. In the everyday
mode we are consumed with and distracted by material surroundings---we
are ﬁlled with wonderment about how things are in the world. In the
ontological mode we are focused on being per se---that is, we are ﬁlled
with wonderment that things are in the world. When we exist in the
ontological mode---the realm beyond everyday concerns---we are in a
state of particular readiness for personal change. But how do we shift
from the everyday mode to the ontological mode? Philosophers often speak
of "boundary experiences"--- urgent experiences that jolt us out of
"everydayness" and rivet our attention upon "being" itself. The most
powerful boundary experience is a confrontation with one's own death.
But what about boundary experiences in everyday clinical practice? How
does the therapist obtain the leverage for change available in the
ontological mode in patients not facing imminent death? Every course of
therapy is studded with experiences that, though less dramatic, may
still effectively alter perspective.

128

the

gift

of

therapy

Bereavement, dealing with the death of the other, is a boundary
experience whose power is too rarely harnessed in the therapeutic
process. Too often in bereavement work we focus extensively and
exclusively upon loss, upon unﬁnished business in the relationship, upon
the task of detaching ourselves from the dead and entering again into
the stream of life. Though all these steps are important, we must not
neglect the fact that the death of the other also serves to confront
each of us, in a stark and poignant manner, with our own death. Years
ago in a study of bereavement, I found that many bereaved spouses went
further than simply undergoing repair and returning to their
prebereavement level of functioning: between a fourth and a third of the
subjects achieved a new level of maturity and wisdom. In addition to
death and bereavement, there arise many other opportunities for
death-related discourse during the course of every therapy. If such
issues never emerge, I believe the patient is simply following the
therapist's covert instructions. Death and mortality form the horizon
for all discussions about aging, bodily changes, life stages, and many
signiﬁcant life markers, such as major anniversaries, departure of
children for college, the empty-nest phenomenon, retirement, the birth
of grandchildren. A class reunion can be a particularly potent catalyst.
Every patient discusses, at one time or another, newspaper accounts of
accidents, atrocities, obituaries. And then, too, there is death's
unmistakable footprint in every nightmare.

chapter 43

How to Talk About Death

I

prefer to speak of death directly and matter-of-factly. Early in the
course of therapy I make a point of obtaining a history of my patients'
experiences with death and ask such questions as When did you ﬁrst
become aware of death? With whom did you discuss it? How did adults in
your life respond to your questions? What deaths have you experienced?
Funerals attended? Religious beliefs regarding death? How have your
attitudes about death changed during your life? Strong fantasies and
dreams about death? I approach patients with severe death anxiety in the
same direct manner. A calm, matter-of-fact dissection of the anxiety is
often reassuring. Often it is useful to dissect the fear and calmly
inquire about what precisely is terrifying about death. Answers to this
question generally include fears of the dying process, concerns for
survivors, concerns about the afterlife (which beg the question by
transforming death into a nonterminal event), and concerns about
obliteration. Once therapists demonstrate their personal equanimity

130

the

gift

of

therapy

when discussing death, their patients will raise the topic far more
frequently. For example, Janice, a thirty-two-year-old mother of three,
had had a hysterectomy two years before. Preoccupied with having more
children, she was jealous of other young mothers, angry when she was
invited to showers of friends, and broke entirely with her pregnant best
friend because of deep and bitter envy. Our initial sessions focused on
her relentless desire for more children and its ramiﬁcations on so many
spheres of her life. In the third session I asked her whether she knew
what she would be thinking about if she weren't thinking about having
babies. "Let me show you," Janice said. She opened her purse, pulled out
a tangerine, peeled it, offered me a segment (which I accepted), and ate
the rest. "Vitamin C," she said. "I eat four tangerines a day." "And why
is vitamin C so important?" "Prevents me from dying. Dying---that's the
answer to your question about what I'd be thinking about. I think of
dying all the time." Death had haunted Janice since she was thirteen,
when her mother had died. Filled with anger toward her mother for
becoming sick, she had refused to visit her in the hospital during the
last weeks of her life. Shortly afterward, she panicked because she
thought a coughing episode indicated lung cancer and could not be
reassured by emergency room physicians. Because her mother had died of
breast cancer, Janice attempted to retard the growth of breasts by
binding her chest and sleeping on her stomach. Guilt for abandoning her
mother marked her for life, and she believed that dedicating herself to
children was an atonement for not having taken care of her mother, as
well as a mode of ensuring that she would not die alone.

H o w t o Ta l k A b o u t D e a t h

131

Keep in mind that concerns about death often masquerade in sexual garb.
Sex is the great death-neutralizer, the absolute vital antithesis of
death. Some patients who are exposed to the great threat of death
suddenly become pervasively preoccupied with sexual thoughts. (There are
TAT \[Thematic Appreciation Tests\] studies documenting increased sexual
content in cancer patients.) The French term for orgasm, la petite mort
("little death"), signiﬁes the orgasmic loss of the self, which
eliminates the pain of separateness---the lonely "I" vanishing into the
merged "we." A patient with a malignant abdominal cancer once consulted
me because she had become infatuated with her surgeon to the extent that
sexual fantasies about him replaced her fears about death. When, for
example, she was scheduled for an important MRI, at which he would be
present, the decision of which clothes to wear so consumed her that she
lost sight of the fact that her life hung in the balance. Another
patient, an "eternal puer," a mathematical wunderkind with great
potential, had remained childlike and closely attached to his mother
well into his adult years. Extraordinarily gifted at conceiving great
ideas, at impromptu brainstorming, at quickly grasping the essentials of
complex new ﬁelds of inquiry, he never could muster the resolve to
complete a project, to build a career, family, or household. Death
concerns were not conscious but entered into our discussions via a
dream: "My mother and I are in a large room. It resembles a room from
our old house, yet it has a beach for one of the walls. We walk onto the
beach and my mother urges me to go into the water. I am reluctant, but I
get her a small chair to sit on and wade in. The water is very dark and

132

the

gift

of

therapy

soon, as I go in deeper, up to my shoulders, the waves turn to granite.
I wake up gasping for air and soaked in sweat." The image of the granite
waves covering him, a powerful image of terror, death, and burial,
helped us to understand his reluctance to leave childhood and mother and
to enter fully into adulthood.

chapter 44

Talk About Life Meaning

W

e humans appear to be meaning-seeking creatures who have had the
misfortune of being thrown into a world devoid of intrinsic meaning. One
of our major tasks is to invent a meaning sturdy enough to support a
life and to perform the tricky maneuver of denying our personal
authorship of this meaning. Thus we conclude instead that it was "out
there" waiting for us. Our ongoing search for substantial meaning
systems often throws us into crises of meaning. More individuals seek
therapy because of concerns about meaning in life than therapists often
realize. Jung reported that one-third of his patients consulted him for
that reason. The complaints take many different forms: for example, "My
life has no coherence," "I have no passion for anything," "Why am I
living? To what end?" "Surely life must have some deeper signiﬁcance."
"I feel so empty---watching TV every night makes me feel so pointless,
so useless." "Even now at the age of ﬁfty I still don't know what I want
to do when I grow up." I once had a dream (described in Momma and the
Meaning

134

the

gift

of

therapy

of Life) in which, while hovering near death in a hospital room, I
suddenly found myself on an amusement park ride (the House of Horrors).
As the cart was just about to enter the black maw of death, I suddenly
caught sight of my dead mother in the watching crowd and called out to
her, "Momma, Momma, how'd I do?" The dream, and especially my
call---"Momma, Momma, how'd I do?"---haunted me for a long time, not
because of the dream's death imagery, but because of its dark
implications about life meaning. Was it possible, I wondered, that I had
been conducting my whole life with the primary goal of obtaining my
mother's approval? Because I had a troubled relationship with my mother
and did not value her approval when she was alive, the dream was that
much more mordant. The crisis of meaning depicted in the dream prompted
me to explore my life in a different manner. In a story I wrote directly
after the dream, I engaged in a conversation with my mother's ghost in
order to heal the breach between us and to understand how our life
meanings both intertwined and conﬂicted with one another. Some
experiential workshops use devices to encourage discourse about life
meaning. Perhaps the most common is to ask participants what they might
wish for their tombstone epitaph. Most such inquiries into life meaning
lead to a discussion of such goals as altruism, hedonism, dedication to
a cause, generativity, creativity, self-actualization. Many feel that
meaning projects take on a deeper, more powerful signiﬁcance if they are
self-transcendent---that is, directed at something or someone outside
themselves, such as the love of a cause, a person, a divine essence. The
precocious recent success of young high-tech millionaires often
generates a life crisis that can be instructive about
non-self-transcendent life-meaning systems. Many such indi-

Ta l k A b o u t L i f e M e a n i n g

135

viduals begin their careers with a clear vision---making it, earning a
pile of money, living the good life, receiving the respect of
colleagues, retiring early. And an unprecedented number of young people
in their thirties did exactly that. But then the question arose: "What
now? What about the rest of my life--- the next forty years?" Most of
the young high-tech millionaires that I have seen continue doing much of
the same: they start new companies, try to repeat their success. Why?
They tell themselves they must prove it was no ﬂuke, that they can do it
alone, without a particular partner or mentor. They raise the bar. To
feel that they and their family are secure, they no longer need one or
two million in the bank---they need ﬁve, ten, even ﬁfty million to feel
secure. They realize the pointlessness and irrationality in earning more
money when they already have more than they can possibly spend, but this
does not stop them. They realize they are taking away time from their
families, from things closer to the heart, but they just cannot give up
playing the game. "The money is just lying out there," they tell me.
"All I have to do is pick it up." They have to make deals. One real
estate entrepreneur told me that he felt he would disappear if he
stopped. Many fear boredom---even the faintest whiff of boredom sends
them scurrying right back to the game. Schopenhauer said that willing
itself is never fulﬁlled--- as soon as one wish is satisﬁed, another
appears. Though there may be some very brief respite, some ﬂeeting
period of satiation, it is immediately transformed into boredom. "Every
human life," he said, "is tossed backward and forward between pain and
boredom." Unlike my approach to other existential ultimate concerns
(death, isolation, freedom), I ﬁnd that meaning in life is best
approached obliquely. What we must do is to plunge into one of many
possible meanings, particularly one with a self-

136

the

gift

of

therapy

transcendent basis. It is engagement that counts, and we therapists do
most good by identifying and helping to remove the obstacles to
engagement. The question of meaning in life is, as the Buddha taught,
not edifying. One must immerse oneself into the river of life and let
the question drift away.

chapter 45

Freedom

E

arlier I described four ultimate concerns, four fundamental facts of
existence---death, isolation, meaninglessness, freedom---which, when
confronted, evoke deep anxiety. The linkage between "freedom" and
anxiety is not intuitively apparent because at ﬁrst glance "freedom"
seems to contain only straightforward positive connotations. After all,
have we not throughout the course of Western civilization yearned and
struggled for political freedom? Yet freedom has a darker side. Viewed
from the perspective of self-creation, choice, will, and action, freedom
is psychologically complex and permeated with anxiety. We are, in the
deepest sense, responsible for ourselves. We are, as Sartre put it, the
authors of ourselves. Through the accretion of our choices, our actions,
and our failures to act, we ultimately design ourselves. We cannot avoid
this responsibility, this freedom. In Sartre's terms, "we are condemned
to freedom." Our freedom runs even deeper than our individual life
design. Over two centuries ago Kant taught us that we are

138

the

gift

of

therapy

responsible for providing form and meaning not only to the internal but
to the external world as well. We encounter the external world only as
it is processed though our own neurological and psychological apparatus.
Reality is not at all as we imagined in childhood---we do not enter into
(and ultimately leave) a well-structured world. Instead, we play the
central role in constituting that world---and we constitute it as though
it appears to have an independent existence. And the relevance of
freedom's dark side to anxiety and to clinical work? One answer can be
found by looking down. If we are primal world constituters, then where
is the solid ground beneath us? What is beneath us? Nothingness, Das
Nichts, as the German existential philosophers put it. The chasm, the
abyss of freedom. And with the realization of the nothingness at the
heart of being comes deep anxiety. Hence, though the term freedom is
absent in therapy sessions and in psychotherapy manuals, its
derivatives---responsibility, willing, wishing, deciding---are highly
visible denizens of all psychotherapy endeavors.

chapter 46

Helping Patients Assume Responsibility

A

s long as patients persist in believing that their major problems are a
result of something outside their control---the actions of other people,
bad nerves, social class injustices, genes---then we therapists are
limited in what we can offer. We can commiserate, suggest more adaptive
methods of responding to the assaults and unfairness of life; we can
help patients attain equanimity, or teach them to be more effective in
altering their environment. But if we hope for more signiﬁcant
therapeutic change, we must encourage our patients to assume
responsibility---that is, to apprehend how they themselves contribute to
their distress. A patient may, for example, describe a series of
horrendous experiences in the singles world: men mistreat her, friends
betray her, employers exploit her, lovers deceive her. Even if the
therapist is convinced of the veracity of the events described, there
comes a time when attention must be paid to the patient's own role in
the sequence of events. The therapist may have to say, in effect, "Even
if ninety-nine percent of the bad

140

the

gift

of

therapy

things that happen to you is someone else's fault, I want to look at the
other one percent---the part that is your responsibility. We have to
look at your role, even if it's very limited, because that's where I can
be of most help." Readiness to accept responsibility varies greatly from
patient to patient. Some arrive quickly at an understanding of their
role in their discomﬁture; others ﬁnd responsibility assumption so
difﬁcult that it constitutes the major part of therapy, and once that
step is taken, therapeutic change may occur almost automatically and
effortlessly. Every therapist develops methods to facilitate
responsibility assumption. Sometimes I emphasize to a much-exploited
patient that for every exploiter there must be an exploitee--- that is,
if they ﬁnd themselves in an exploited role time and again, then surely
the role must contain some lure for them. What might it be? Some
therapists make the same point by confronting patients with the
question, "What's the payoff for you in this situation?" The
group-therapy format offers particularly powerful leverage in helping
patients comprehend their personal responsibility. Patients all begin
the group together on equal footing and over the ﬁrst weeks or months
each member carves out a particular interpersonal role in the group---a
role that is similar to the role each occupies in his/her outside life.
Furthermore, the group is privy to how each member fashions that
interpersonal role. These steps are far more obvious when tracked in the
here-and-now than when the therapist tries to reconstruct them from the
patient's own unreliable account. The therapy group's emphasis on
feedback initiates a responsibility-assumption sequence: 1. Members
learn how their behavior is viewed by others; 2. Then they learn how
their behavior makes others feel;

H e l p i n g Pa t i e n t s A s s u m e R e s p o n s i b i l i t y

141

3.  They observe how their behavior shapes others' opinions of them;
4.  Finally, they learn that these ﬁrst three steps shape the way they
    come to feel about themselves. Thus the process begins with the
    patient's behavior and ends with the way each comes to be valued by
    others and by himself. This sequence can form the base of powerful
    group therapist interventions. For example: "Joe, let's take a look
    at what is happening for you in the group. Here you are, after two
    months, not feeling good about yourself in this group and with
    several of the members impatient with you (or intimidated, or
    avoidant, or angry, or annoyed, or feeling seduced or betrayed).
    What's happened? Is this a familiar place for you? Would you be
    willing to take a look at your role in bringing this to pass?"
    Individual therapists also take advantage of here-and-now data as
    they point out the patient's responsibility in the therapeutic
    process---for example, the patient's lateness, concealing
    information and feelings, forgetting to record dreams.
    Responsibility assumption is an essential ﬁrst step in the
    therapeutic process. Once individuals recognize their role in
    creating their own life predicament, they also realize that they,
    and only they, have the power to change that situation. To look back
    over one's life and to accept the responsibility of what one has
    done to oneself may result in great regret. The therapist must
    anticipate that regret and attempt to reframe it. I often urge
    patients to project themselves into the future and to consider how
    they can live now so that ﬁve years hence they will be able to look
    back upon life without regret sweeping over them anew.

chapter 47

Never (Almost Never) Make Decisions for the Patient

S

ome years ago, Mike, a thirty-three-year-old physician, consulted me
because of an urgent dilemma: he had a time-sharing condo in the
Caribbean and planned to leave on vacation in one month. But there was a
problem---a big problem. He had invited two women to accompany him and
both had accepted---Darlene, his long-term girlfriend, and Patricia, a
sparkling new woman he had met a couple of months before. What should he
do? He was paralyzed with anxiety. He described his relationship with
the two women. Darlene, a journalist, had been the high school prom
queen whom he had met again at a school reunion a few years ago. He
found her beautiful and alluring, and fell in love with her on the spot.
Though Mike and Darlene lived in different cities, they'd carried on an
intense romance for the past three years, spoke daily on the phone, and
spent most weekends and vacations together. In the last several months,
however, the ardor of the relationship had cooled. Mike felt less
attracted to Darlene, their

N e v e r M a k e D e c i s i o n s f o r t h e Pa t i e n t

143

sex life languished, their phone conversations seemed desultory.
Furthermore, her journalistic duties demanded so much travel that it was
often difﬁcult for her to get away for weekends and impossible for her
to move closer to him. But Patricia, his new friend, seemed a dream come
true: a pediatrician, elegant, wealthy, a half mile away, and most eager
to be with him. It seemed like a no-brainer. I reﬂected back to him his
descriptions of the two women, wondering all the while, "What's the
problem?" The decision seemed so obvious--- Patricia was so right and
Darlene so problematic---and the deadline so looming that I felt the
strongest temptation to jump in and tell him to just get on with it and
announce his decision, the only reasonable decision, that could possibly
be made. What was the point of delay? Why make things worse for poor
Darlene by cruelly and unnecessarily stringing her along? Though I
avoided the trap of telling him explicitly what to do, I managed to get
my views across to him. We therapists have our little cunning
ways---statements such as: "I wonder what blocks you from acting upon
the decision you already seem to have made." (And I wonder, what on
earth would therapists do without the device of "I wonder"?). And so in
one way or another I did him the great service (in only three fast-paced
sessions!) of mobilizing him into writing the inevitable "Dear John"
letter to Darlene and sailing off into a glowing Caribbean sunset with
Patricia. But it didn't glow very long. Over the next several months
strange things happened. Though Patricia continued to be a dream woman,
Mike grew more uncomfortable at her insistence on closeness and
commitment. He disliked her giving him the keys to her apartment and
insisting that he reciprocate. And then, when Patricia suggested they
live together, Mike balked. In our sessions he began to rhapsodize on
how he treasured his space and solitude. Patricia was an extraordinary

144

the

gift

of

therapy

woman, without ﬂaws. But he felt invaded. He did not want to live with
her, or with anyone, and they soon drifted apart. It was time for Mike
to search for another relationship, and one day he showed me an ad he
had posted in a computerdating service. It speciﬁed particular
characteristics of the woman he desired (beauty, loyalty, his
approximate age and background) and described the type of relationship
he was seeking (an exclusive but separate arrangement in which he and
she would maintain their own space, speak often on the phone, and spend
weekends and vacations together). "You know what, Doc," he said,
wistfully, "sure sounds a lot like Darlene."

the moral of this cautionary tale is, beware of leaping in to make
decisions for the patient. It is always a bad idea. As this vignette
illustrates, not only do we lack a crystal ball, but we work with
unreliable data. The information supplied by the patient is not only
distorted but is likely to change as time passes or as the relationship
with the therapist changes. Inevitably, new and unexpected factors
emerge. If, as was true in this instance, the information the patient
presents very strongly supports a speciﬁc course of action, then the
patient, for any of a number of reasons, is seeking support for a
particular decision that may or may not be the wisest course of action.
I have grown particularly skeptical of patients' accounts of spouses'
culpability. Again and again I've had the experience of meeting the
spouse and being astounded at the lack of convergence between the person
in front of me and the person I have been hearing about for so many
months. What generally gets omitted in accounts of marital discord is
the patient's role in the process. We are far better off relying on more
reliable data---data not ﬁltered through the patient's bias. There are
two particularly

N e v e r M a k e D e c i s i o n s f o r t h e Pa t i e n t

145

useful sources of more objective observations: couples' sessions, where
a therapist can view the interaction between partners, and focusing upon
the here-and-now therapy relationship, in which therapists can view how
patients contribute to their interpersonal relationships. One caveat:
There are times when the evidence of the patient's being abused by
another is so strong---and the need for decisive action so clear---that
it is incumbent upon the therapist to bring all possible inﬂuence to
bear upon certain decisions. I do all that I can to discourage a woman
with evidence of physical abuse from returning to a setting in which she
is likely to be battered further. Hence the clause "Almost Never" in the
title of this section.

chapter 48

Decisions: A Via Regia into Existential Bedrock

L

eaping in to make decisions for patients is a good way to lose them.
Patients assigned a task that they cannot or will not perform are
unhappy patients. Whether they bridle at being controlled, or feel
inadequate, or shudder at the prospect of disappointing their therapist,
the result is often the same---they drop out of therapy. But beyond the
possibility of technical error is an even more pressing reason not to
make decisions for patients: there is something much better to do with
decision dilemmas. Decisions are a via regia, a royal road, into a rich
existential domain---the realm of freedom, responsibility, choice,
regret, wishing, and willing. To settle for superﬁcial preemptive advice
is to forgo the opportunity of exploring this realm with your patient.
Because decisional dilemmas ignite freedom-anxiety, many go to great
lengths to steer clear of active decisions. That is why some patients
seek delivery from decisions and, through cun-

Decisions

147

ning devices, inveigle unwary therapists to take the burden of decision
away from them. Or they force others in their life to make the decision
for them: every therapist has seen patients who end relationships by so
mistreating their partners that they will choose to leave. Others only
hope for some overt transgression by the other: For example, one of my
patients caught up in a highly destructive relationship said, "I can't
bring myself to end this relationship, but I pray I could catch him in
bed with another woman so that I would be able to leave him." One of my
ﬁrst steps in therapy is to help patients assume responsibility for
their actions. I try to help them understand that they make a decision
even by not deciding or by maneuvering another into making a decision
for them. Once patients accept that premise and own their behavior,
then, in one manner or another, I pose the key therapy question: "Are
you satisﬁed with that?" (Satisﬁed both with the nature of the decision
and with their mode of making the decision.) Take, for example, a
married man having an affair who distances himself from his wife and so
mistreats her that she, not he, makes the decision to end the marriage.
I proceed by laying bare his pattern of disowning his decisions, a
pattern that results in his feeling that he is controlled by external
events. As long as he denies his own agency, real change is unlikely
because his attention will be directed toward changing his environment
rather than himself. When this patient realizes his responsibility in
ending the marriage and realizes also that it was he who chose to end
it, then I turn his attention to how satisﬁed he is with how he made the
decision. Did he act in good faith with his companion of so many years,
with the mother of his children? What regrets will he have in the
future? How much will he respect himself?

chapter 49

Focus on Resistance to Decision

W

hy are decisions hard? In John Gardner's novel Grendl, the protagonist,
confounded by life's mysteries, consults a wise priest who utters two
simple phrases, four terrifying words: Everything fades and alternatives
exclude. "Alternatives exclude"---that concept lies at the heart of so
many decisional difﬁculties. For every "yes" there must be a "no."
Decisions are expensive because they demand renunciation. This
phenomenon has attracted great minds throughout the ages. Aristotle
imagined a hungry dog unable to choose between two equally attractive
portions of food, and the medieval scholastics wrote of Burridan's ass,
which starved to death between two equally sweet-smelling bales of hay.
In chapter 42 I described death as a boundary experience capable of
moving an individual from an everyday state of mind to an ontological
state (a state of being in which we are aware of being) in which change
is more possible. Decision is another boundary experience. It not only
confronts us with the degree

Fo c u s o n R e s i s t a n c e t o D e c i s i o n

149

to which we create ourselves but also to the limits of possibilities.
Making a decision cuts us off from other possibilities. Choosing one
woman, or one career, or one school, means relinquishing the
possibilities of others. The more we face our limits, the more we have
to relinquish our myth of personal specialness, unlimited potential,
imperishability, and immunity to the laws of biological destiny. It is
for these reasons that Heidegger referred to death as the impossibility
of further possibility. The path to decision may be hard because it
leads into the territory of both ﬁniteness and groundlessness---domains
soaked in anxiety. Everything fades and alternatives exclude.

chapter 50

Facilitating Awareness by Advice Giving

T

hough we help patients deal with decision dilemmas primarily by helping
them assume responsibility and by exposing the deep resistances to
choosing, every therapist uses a number of other facilitating
techniques. Sometimes I offer advice or prescribe certain behaviors, not
as a way of usurping my patient's decision, but in order to shake up an
entrenched thought or behavior pattern. For example, Mike, a
thirty-four-year-old scientist, agonized about whether he should stop in
to visit his parents on an upcoming professional trip. Every time he had
done that during the past few years he had, without fail, had a ﬁght
with his gruff blue-collar father, who resented having to meet him at
the airport and berated him for not having rented a car. His last trip
had provoked such an acrimonious airport scene that he had cut his visit
short and left without speaking again to his father. Yet he wanted to
see his mother, with whom he was close and who agreed with him in his
assessment of his father as a vulgar, insensitive cheapskate.

Fa c i l i t a t i n g Aw a r e n e s s b y A d v i c e G i v i n g

151

I urged Mike to visit his parents but to tell his father that he
insisted on renting a car. Mike seemed shocked at my suggestion. His
father had always met him at the airport---that was his role. Perhaps
his father might be hurt at not being needed. Besides, why waste the
money? He had no use for a car once he arrived at his parents' home. Why
pay for it to sit there unused for a day or two? I reminded him that his
salary as a research scientist was more than double that of his father.
And if he was worried about his father's being hurt, why not try having
a gentle phone conversation with him, explaining the reasons for the car
rental decision. "A phone conversation with my father?" Mike said.
"That's impossible. We never speak on the phone. I only speak to my
mother when I phone." "So many rules. So many ﬁxed family rules," I
mused. "You say you want things to change with your father? For that to
happen, some family rules may have to be changed. What's the risk in
opening everything up for discussion---on the phone, in person, even via
a letter?" The patient ﬁnally yielded to my exhortations and, in his own
style and own voice, set about changing his relationship with his
father. Changing one part of the family system always affects other
parts, and in this instance his mother replaced his father as the chief
family problem for several weeks. Eventually that too was resolved; the
family gradually came together, and Mike had a keen sense of the role he
had played in the distance that had existed between him and his father.

another patient, jared, could not take the necessary steps to renew his
green card. Though I knew there were potentially fertile dynamic issues
underlying his procrastination, these

152

the

gift

of

therapy

would have to wait for us to explore because if he did not act
immediately, he would be forced to leave the country, abandoning not
only a promising research venture and a burgeoning romantic
relationship, but therapy as well. I asked if he wanted my help with the
green-card application. He replied that he did and we charted out a
course and schedule of action. He promised that, within twenty-four
hours, he would e-mail me copies of his requests for letters of
reference from former professors and employers and, at our next visit,
seven days hence, he would bring his completed application to my ofﬁce.
This intervention was sufﬁcient to resolve the green-card crisis and
permitted us then to turn our attention to the meaning of his
procrastination, his feelings about my intervention, his wish for me to
take over for him, and his need to be observed and succored.

another example involves Jay, who wished to break off a relationship
with Meg, a woman with whom he had been close for several years. She was
a close friend to his wife and helped nurse her through a terminal
illness and then supported him through a horrendous three-year
bereavement. He had clung to Meg and lived with her during this time,
but, as he recovered from his grief, he realized that they were not
compatible and, after another painful year of indecision, he eventually
asked her to move out. Though he did not want her as a wife, he was
exceedingly grateful to her and offered her a rent-free apartment in a
building he owned. Thereafter he had a series of short-term
relationships with women. Whenever one of these relationships ended, he
was so agonized by isolation that he turned again to Meg until someone
more suitable came alone. All the while he con-

Fa c i l i t a t i n g Aw a r e n e s s b y A d v i c e G i v i n g

153

tinued to give Meg slight hints that perhaps ultimately he and she might
become a couple again. Meg responded by putting her life on hold and
remaining in a state of perpetual readiness for him. I suggested to him
that his bad-faith actions with Meg were responsible not only for her
being stuck in life, but also for much of his own low-grade dysphoria
and guilt. He denied that he was acting in bad faith and cited as proof
his largesse to Meg in offering her a rent-free apartment. If he really
felt generous to her, I pointed out, why not provide for her in some
manner that did not keep her bound to him---for example, give her an
outright cash gift or the deed to a condo. A few more such
confrontational sessions resulted in his acknowledging to himself and to
me that he was selﬁshly refusing to let her go---he wanted to keep her
on hold, as a backup, as insurance against loneliness.

in each of these instances the advice I offered was not meant to be an
end in itself but a means to encourage exploration: into the rules of
family systems, into the meaning and payoff of procrastination and
dependent yearnings, into the nature and consequences of bad faith. More
often than not it is the process of giving advice that helps rather than
the speciﬁc content of the advice. For example, a physician consulted me
in a paralyzed state of procrastination. He was in serious trouble with
his hospital because of his inability to complete medical charts, which
resulted in a mountain of several hundred charts in his ofﬁce. I tried
everything to mobilize him. I visited his ofﬁce to appraise the
magnitude of the task. I asked him to bring charts and a dictating
machine to my ofﬁce so that I could make suggestions about his dictation
technique. We constructed a

154

the

gift

of

therapy

weekly schedule of dictation, and I phoned him to ascertain if he was
sticking to it. The content of none of these speciﬁc interventions was
useful, but nonetheless he was moved by the process---that is, my caring
enough to extend myself beyond the ofﬁce space. The ensuing improvement
in our relationship eventually led to good therapeutic work, resulting
in his discovering his own methods to deal with his backlog.

chapter 51

Facilitating Decisions--- Other Devices

L

ike all therapists, I have favorite mobilizing techniques, developed
over many years of practice. Sometimes I ﬁnd it useful to underscore the
absurdity of resistance based on past irreversible events. Once I had a
resistive patient, very much stuck in life, who persisted in blaming his
mother for events occurring decades previously. I helped him apprehend
the absurdity of his position by asking him to repeat, several times,
this statement: "I'm not going to change, Mother, till you treat me
differently than when I was eight years old." From time to time, over
the years I've used this device effectively (with variations in wording,
of course, to ﬁt a patient's particular situation). Sometimes I simply
remind patients that sooner or later they will have to relinquish the
goal of having a better past. Other patients say they cannot act because
they do not know what they want. In these instances, I try to help them
locate and experience their wishes. This may be taxing, and ultimately
many therapists grow weary and want to shout,

156

the

gift

of

therapy

"Don't you ever want something?" Karen Horney sometimes said, perhaps in
exasperation, "Have you ever thought to ask yourself what you want?"
Some patients don't feel they have the right to want anything, others
attempt to avoid the pain of loss by relinquishing wish. ("If I never
wish, I will never again be disappointed.") Still others don't
experience or express wishes in the hope that the grown-ups around them
will divine their wants. Occasionally individuals can recognize what
they desire only when it is taken away from them. I've sometimes found
it useful in working with individuals confused about their feelings
about another to imagine (or to role-play) a telephone conversation in
which the other breaks off the relationship. What do they feel then?
Sadness? Hurt? Relief? Elation? Can we then ﬁnd a way to allow these
feelings to inform their proactive behavior and decisions? Sometimes
I've galvanized patients caught in a decisional dilemma by citing a line
from Camus's The Fall that has always affected me deeply: "Believe me,
the hardest thing for a man to give up is that which he really doesn't
want, after all." I've tried many ways to help patients see themselves
more objectively. Sometimes a perspective-altering ploy I learned from a
supervisor, Lewis Hill, is useful. I enlist the patient as a
self-consultant in the following manner: "Mary, I'm a bit stuck with one
of my patients and I'd like your consultation; perhaps you might have
some helpful suggestions. I'm seeing an intelligent, sensitive,
attractive forty-ﬁve-year-old woman who tells me she is in an absolutely
dreadful marriage. For years she had planned to leave her husband when
her daughter went to college. That time has long come and gone and
despite the fact that she is very unhappy she stays in the same

Fa c i l i t a t i n g D e c i s i o n s --- O t h e r D e v i c e s

157

situation. She says her husband is unloving and verbally abusive to her
but she is unwilling to ask him to enter couples therapy, since she has
decided to leave and if he changes in couples therapy that would be
harder for her to do. But it is ﬁve years since her daughter left home
and she is still there and things are still the same. She will neither
enter marital therapy nor leave. I wonder whether she is wasting the
only life she has in order to punish him. She says she wants him to make
the move. She prays she could catch him in bed with another woman (or
with a man---she has her suspicions about that), and that she would then
be able to leave." Of course, Mary quickly becomes aware that the
patient is herself. Hearing herself described from a distance in
thirdperson voice may permit her to gain more objectivity upon her
situation.

chapter 52

Conduct Therapy as a Continuous Session

M

any years ago I saw Rollo May in therapy over a twoyear period. He lived
and worked in Tiburon, I in Palo Alto, a seventy-ﬁve-minute drive away.
I thought I might try to make good use of the commute by listening to a
tape of the previous week's therapy session. Rollo agreed to my taping
and I soon discovered that listening to the tape enhanced therapy
wonderfully, since I plunged more quickly into deeper work on the
important themes that had arisen in the previous session. So useful was
it that, ever since, I have routinely taped sessions for patients who
have a long commute to my ofﬁce. Occasionally I do the same for patients
who live nearby but have some peculiar inability to recall the previous
session---perhaps great lability of affect or brief dissociative
episodes. This particular technique illustrates an important facet of
therapy---namely that therapy works best if it approximates a continuous
session. Therapy hours that are discontinuous from one to the next are
far less effective. Using each therapy hour

Conduct Therapy as a Continuous Session

159

to solve the crises that have developed during the week is a
particularly inefﬁcient way to work. When I began in the ﬁeld I heard
David Hamburg, the chair of psychiatry at Stanford, refer jokingly to
psychotherapy as "cyclotherapy," and indeed there is something to be
said for that view in that we continually are engaged in "working
through." We open up new themes, work on them for a while, move to other
issues, but regularly and repetitively return to the same themes, each
time deepening the inquiry. This cyclical aspect of the psychotherapy
process has been compared to changing an automobile tire. We put the
nuts on the bolt, tighten each evenly in turn until we return to the
ﬁrst, then repeat the process until the tire is optimally in place. I am
rarely the one who begins the session. Like most therapists, I prefer
instead to wait for the patient. I want to know his or her "point of
urgency" (as Melanie Klein referred to it). However, if I ever do open
the session, it is invariably to refer back to the last meeting. Hence,
if there was a particularly momentous or emotional or truncated session,
I might begin, "We discussed many important things last week. I wonder
what kind of feelings you took home with you." My intent, of course, is
to tie the current session into the last. My practice of writing
summaries for the therapy group and mailing it to the group members
before the next meeting serves exactly the same purpose. Sometimes
groups begin with members taking issue with the summary. They point out
that they saw things differently or that they now have an understanding
different from the therapist's. I welcome the disagreement because it
tightens the continuity of the sessions.

chapter 53

Take Notes of Each Session

I

f therapists are to be the historians of the therapy process and to
attend to the continuity of the sessions, then it follows that they must
keep some chronicle of events. Managed care and the threat of
litigation, the twin plagues that today threaten the fabric of
psychotherapy, have given us one positive gift: they have prompted
therapists to take regular notes. In the ancient times of secretaries I
routinely dictated, and had transcribed, detailed summaries of each
session. (Much of the material for this and other books is drawn from
these notes.) Today, immediately after the hour, I take a few minutes to
enter into the computer the major issues discussed in each session as
well as my feelings and the unﬁnished business of each hour. I always
arrange my schedule so that, without fail, I spend the necessary minutes
to read the notes before the next session. If I ﬁnd that there is
nothing of signiﬁcance to write, that in itself is an important piece of
data

Ta k e N o t e s o f E a c h S e s s i o n

161

and probably signiﬁes that therapy is stagnating and the patient and I
are breaking no new ground. Many therapists who see patients several
times a week have less need for detailed notes because the sessions
remain in mind more vividly.

chapter 54

Encourage Self-Monitoring

T

he therapy venture is an exercise in self-exploration, and I urge
patients to take advantage of any opportunity to sharpen our
investigation. If a patient who has always been uncomfortable at social
gatherings reports that he has received an invitation to a large party I
usually respond, "Wonderful! What an opportunity to learn about
yourself! Only this time monitor yourself---and be certain to jot down
some notes afterward that we can discuss at the next session." Visits
home to parents are particularly rich sources of information. At my
suggestion many of my patients begin to have longer and deeper
conversations with siblings than ever before. And any type of class
reunion is generally a gold mine of data, as are any opportunities to
revisit old relationships. I urge patients also to attempt to obtain
feedback from others about how they were or are perceived. I know one
elderly man who met someone from his ﬁfth-grade class who told him that
she

Encourage Self-Monitoring

163

remembered him as a "beautiful boy with coal-black hair and a sly
smile." He wept as he heard that. He had always regarded himself as
homely and awkward. Had someone, anyone, only told him then that he was
beautiful, it would have, he believed, changed his whole life.

chapter 55

When Your Patient Weeps

W

hat do you do when a friend weeps in your presence? Ordinarily you
attempt to offer comfort. "There, there," you might say consolingly, or
you may hold your friend, or rush for tissues, or search for some way to
help your friend regain control and stop weeping. The therapy situation,
however, calls for something beyond comforting. Because weeping often
signiﬁes the entry into deeper chambers of emotion, the therapist's task
is not to be polite and help the patient stop weeping. Quite the
contrary---you may wish to encourage your patients to plunge even
deeper. You may simply urge them to share their thoughts: "Don't try to
leave that space. Stay with it. Please keep talking to me; try to put
your feelings into words." Or you may ask a question I often use: "If
your tears had a voice, what would they be saying?" Psychotherapy may be
thought of as an alternating sequence of affect expression and affect
analysis. In other words, you encourage acts of emotional expression but
you always follow with reﬂection upon the emotions expressed. This
sequence is

W h e n Yo u r Pa t i e n t We e p s

165

far more evident in group therapy because such strong emotions are
evoked in a group setting, but it is also evident in the individual
setting, particularly in the act of weeping. Hence, when weeping occurs
I ﬁrst plunge the patient into the content and meaning of the weeping
and later make sure to analyze the act of weeping, especially insofar as
it relates to the here-andnow. Hence, I inquire not only into feelings
about weeping in general but, in particular, how it feels to weep in my
presence.

chapter 56

Give Yourself Time Between Patients

I

expect this unpopular tip to be passed over quickly by many therapists
whose practice is swept along by the swift current of economic
necessity, but here goes anyway. Don't shortchange yourself and the
patient by not leaving ample time between sessions. I have always kept
detailed notes of each session and I never begin a session without
referring to them. My notes often indicate the unﬁnished business---
themes and topics that should be pursued or feelings between me and the
patient that were not fully worked through. If you take each hour
seriously, then the patient will as well. Some therapists schedule so
tightly that they have no break whatsoever between patients. Even ten
minutes is, in my view, insufﬁcient if a good chunk of that time is
spent returning calls. I never take less than a full ten minutes and
prefer ﬁfteen minutes for note taking, note reading, and thinking
between patients. Fifteen-minutes intervals pose complications: patients
must be scheduled at odd times---for example, ten minutes before or
after the hour---but all my patients have taken this in

G i v e Yo u r s e l f T i m e B e t w e e n Pa t i e n t s

167

stride. It also lengthens your day and may diminish income. But it is
worth it. Abraham Lincoln is reputed to have said that if he had eight
hours to cut down a tree, he'd spend several of these hours sharpening
his ax. Don't become the woodcutter who is too rushed to sharpen the ax.

chapter 57

Express Your Dilemmas Openly

G

enerally when I am stuck and have difﬁculty responding to a patient, it
is because I am caught between two or more competing considerations. I
believe you can almost never go wrong by expressing your dilemma openly.
Some examples follow. "Ted, let me interrupt. I feel a bit caught today
between two opposing feelings: on the one hand I know that the history
of your conﬂict with your boss is important and I know, too, that often
you feel hurt when I interrupt you; but on the other hand I have the
strongest sense of your avoiding something important today." "Mary, you
say you don't believe I'm being fully honest with you, that I'm too
tactful and delicate with you. I think you're right: I do hold back. I
often feel caught in a dilemma: on the one hand I wish to be more
natural with you and yet, on the other hand, because I feel that

E x p r e s s Yo u r D i l e m m a s O p e n l y

169

you're easily wounded and that you give my comments inordinate power, I
feel I must consider my wording very, very carefully." "Pete, I've got a
dilemma. I know Ellie is the topic you want to discuss with me: I sense
your strong press to do so and I don't want to frustrate you. But on the
other hand you say you know your relationship with her makes no sense,
that it is all wrong for you, that it will never work out. It seems to
me that we've got to go beneath or beyond Ellie and try to discover more
of what fuels your powerful infatuation. Your descriptions of the
details of your interaction with Ellie have taken up so much of our
recent hours that we've little time for deeper exploration. I suggest we
limit the time we discuss Ellie---perhaps to ten minutes each session."
"Mike, I don't want to avoid your question. I know you feel I duck your
personal inquiries. I don't want to do that and I promise to come back
to your questions. But I do feel it would be more helpful to our work if
we ﬁrst looked at all the reasons behind your questions." One ﬁnal
example. Susan was a patient who came to see me when she was on the
verge of leaving her husband. After several months of productive therapy
she felt better and had improved her relationship with her husband. One
session she described a recent conversation with her husband during
lovemaking in which she mimicked a statement of mine (distorting it as
well), which provided them a good belly laugh. The joint mocking of me
served to bring them closer together. How to respond? I had a number of
possibilities. First, this event reﬂected how close she felt to her
husband---the closest

170

the

gift

of

therapy

they had been for a very long time, perhaps years. We had been working
hard toward this end, and I could have expressed some of my pleasure at
her progress. Or I might have responded to her distortion of my remark
to him. Or I might have commented on how she handled triangles in
general---she had a well-established pattern of great unease in
three-way relationships, including the oedipal triangle---she, her
husband, and son; she and two friends; and now she, her husband, and me.
But my overriding feeling was that she had treated me in bad faith, and
I didn't like it. I knew that she had much gratitude and many positive
feelings toward me but, nonetheless, she had chosen to trivialize her
relationship with me in order to augment her relationship with her
husband. But was this feeling justiﬁed? Was I not putting my personal
pique in the way of what was professionally best for the patient?
Ultimately, I decided to disclose each of these feelings and my dilemma
about revealing them. My disclosure led us into a fruitful discussion of
several important issues. She grasped immediately that our triangle was
a microcosm and that other friends of hers must have experienced
feelings similar to mine. Yes, it was true that her husband felt
threatened by me and that she wanted to soothe him by mocking me. But
perhaps was it also true that she had unconsciously fanned his
competitive feelings? And was there no way for her to offer him some
genuine reassurance and at the same time maintain the integrity of her
relationship with me? My giving voice to my feelings opened up an
inquiry into her entrenched and maladaptive pattern of playing one
person off against the other.

chapter 58

Do Home Visits

I

have paid a few home calls on my patients. Far too few--- for, without
exception, each one has proven proﬁtable. Each visit has informed me
about aspects of my patients that I would have never otherwise
known---their hobbies, the intrusiveness of their work, their aesthetic
sensibility (evidenced by the furnishings, decorations, artworks), their
recreational habits, evidence of books and magazines in the home. One
patient who complained of his lack of friends had a particularly unkempt
home that showed little sensitivity to the sensibilities of visitors. A
young, attractive, well-groomed woman who sought help because of her
inability to form good relationship with men showed such little care
about her home surroundings---heavily stained carpets, a dozen cardboard
boxes full of old mail, tattered furniture---that it was not surprising
to me that her male visitors were turned off. In a home visit to another
patient I learned for the ﬁrst time that she kept over a dozen cats and
that her house so reeked of cat urine that she could never entertain in
her home. A visit to

172

the

gift

of

therapy

the home of a brusque, insensitive man contained, to my wonderment,
walls covered with examples of his exquisite Chinese landscapes and
calligraphy. The discussion preceding the home visit may be particularly
productive. Patients may develop anxiety about such exposure; they may
vacillate about whether they should do a housecleaning or allow their
home to be viewed au naturel. One patient grew very anxious and resisted
my visit for some time. When I saw her apartment she appeared
exceedingly embarrassed as she showed me a wall covered with mementos of
past lovers: carnival dolls, opera ticket stubs, Tahiti and Acapulco
snapshots. Her embarrassment? She had a strong desire to win my respect
for her intellectual ability and was ashamed of my seeing her so
imprisoned by the past. She knew that it was foolish to be eternally
mooning about her past loves and felt that I would be disappointed in
her when I saw how heavily she encumbered herself. Another patient in
deep grief spoke so often of the presence of his wife's effects and
photographs that I suggested a home visit and found his house to be
ﬁlled with material reminders of his wife, including, in the middle of
the living room, the old, shabby sofa upon which she had died. The walls
were covered by her photographs, either of her or photographs that she
had taken, and by bookcases ﬁlled with her books. Most important of all:
there was so little of him in the house---his taste, his interests, his
comforts! The visit proved meaningful to the patient in terms of
process---that I cared enough to extend myself to make the visit---and
it ushered in a stage of dramatic change as he declared he wanted my
help in changing his home. Together we worked out a schedule and
approach to a series of home alterations that both facilitated and
reﬂected progress in the grief work. Still others showed little caring
about themselves, as though

D o H o m e Vi s i t s

173

they deserved no beauty, no comfort, in their lives. One patient, much
to my surprise, proved to be a hoarder with hundreds of old magazines
and phone books in heaps around the house---a fact I might never have
otherwise learned. A patient of one of my students who was also a
hoarder ﬁnally agreed after two years of therapy to a visit by the
therapist with these words: "You have to promise not to cry." Her
comment suggests that her permission for the visit was an indication
that she had genuinely begun the process of change. Home visits are
signiﬁcant events, and I do not intend to convey that beginning
therapists undertake such a step lightly. Boundaries ﬁrst need to be
established and respected, but when the situation requires it, we must
be willing to be ﬂexible, creative, and individualized in the therapy we
offer. On the other hand, however, one wonders why the tradition of home
visiting, once so common in health care, now seems so bold and risky. I
am glad to see the changes now occurring, beginning with family
therapists who more often make a point of scheduling sessions in their
patients' homes.

chapter 59

Don't Take Explanation Too Seriously

I

n an experiment I described earlier, in which a patient and I each
recorded our views of each therapy session, I learned that we remembered
and valued very different aspects of the process. I valued my
intellectual interpretations whereas these made little impact on the
patient, who valued instead the small personal acts relevant to our
relationship. Most published ﬁrsthand accounts of psychotherapy point to
the same discrepancy: Therapists place a far higher value than patients
on interpretation and insight. We therapists grossly overvalue the
content of the intellectual treasure hunt; it has been this way from the
very beginning, when Freud got us off to a bad start with two of his
enticing but misguided metaphors. The ﬁrst was the image of the
therapist-cum-archaeologist painstakingly brushing the dust off buried
memories to uncover the truth---what really happened in the patient's
early years: the original trauma, the primal scene, the primor-

D o n ' t Ta k e E x p l a n a t i o n To o S e r i o u s l y

175

dial events. The second metaphor was that of the jigsaw puzzle. Find
only the last missing piece, Freud suggested, and the entire puzzle will
be solved. Many of his case histories read like mysteries, and readers
eagerly push ahead, anticipating a juicy denouement in which all riddles
will ﬁnd their solution. Naturally we convey our enthusiasm for the
intellectual hunt to our patients, and we observe or imagine their "aha"
reactions to our interpretations. Nietzsche said, "We even invent the
expression on the face of the other with whom we converse to coincide
with the brilliant thought we think we have uttered." Freud took no
pains to conceal his enthusiasm for intellectual solutions. More than
one of his former patients have described his habit of reaching for his
box of "Victory cigars" to celebrate a particularly incisive
interpretation. And the popular media have long presented this mistaken
view of therapy to the public. Hollywood characteristically portrays
psychotherapists lurching through many obstacles, following many wrong
trails, overcoming lust and danger to arrive ultimately at the great
clarifying and redemptive insight. I do not mean that the intellectual
venture is not important. Indeed it is, but not for the reasons we
usually think. We crave the comfort of absolute truth because we cannot
bear the desolation of a purely capricious existence. As Nietzsche put
it, "Truth is an illusion without which a certain species could not
survive." Anointed, as we are, with an inbuilt solution-seeking,
gestalt-ﬁlling need, we cling tenaciously to the belief that
explanation, some explanation, is possible. It makes things bearable, it
anoints us with a sense of control and mastery. But it is not the
content of the intellectual treasure trove

176

the

gift

of

therapy

that matters but the hunt, which is the perfect therapy mating task,
offering something to each participant: Patients bask in the attention
paid to the most minute details of their life, and the therapist is
entranced by the process of solving the riddle of a life. The beauty of
it is that it keeps patient and therapist tightly connected while the
real agent of change---the therapeutic relationship---is germinating. In
practice, there is a great complexity in the link between the
intellectual project and the therapist-patient relationship. The more
that therapists know about the patient's life, past and present, the
more they enter into it and become a closer and more sympathetic
witness. Furthermore, many interpretations are explicitly directed
toward improving the therapist-patient relationship---repeatedly
therapists focus upon identifying and clarifying the obstacles blocking
the encounter between themselves and their patient. At the most
fundamental level the relationship between insight and change remains an
enigma. Though we take for granted that insight leads to change, by no
means is that sequence established empirically. In fact there are
experienced, thoughtful analysts who have raised the possibility of a
reversed sequence---that is, that insight follows change rather than
precedes it. And, ﬁnally, bear in mind Nietzsche's dictum: "There is no
truth, there is only interpretation." Hence, even if we do offer some
elegantly packaged insight of extraordinary we must realize it is a
construct, an explanation, not the explanation. Consider a despairing
widow who could not tolerate being alone and unpaired but nonetheless
sabotaged any potential new relationship with a man. Why? Over several
months of investigation we arrived at several explanations:

D o n ' t Ta k e E x p l a n a t i o n To o S e r i o u s l y

177

• She feared that she was cursed. Every man she had loved met an
untimely end. She avoided intimacy in order to protect the man from her
bad karma. • She feared a man's getting too close because he would be
able to see into her and discover her fundamental badness, smuttiness,
and murderous rage. • If she really permitted herself to love another it
would be a ﬁnal acknowledgment that her husband was indeed dead. •
Loving another man would constitute treason: it would signify that her
love for her husband was not as deep as she had thought. • She had had
too many losses and could not survive another one. Men were too frail;
whenever she looked at a new man in her life, she saw his skull gleaming
under his skin and was besieged by thoughts about his soon becoming a
bag of dry bones. • She hated to face her own helplessness. There were
times when her husband got angry with her and she would be devastated by
his anger. She was determined not to let that ever happen again, never
to give anyone that much control over her. • Settling for one man meant
giving up the possibility of any other man, and she was loath to
relinquish her possibilities. Which of these explanations was true, was
the correct one? One? Some? All? Each represents a different construct:
there are as many explanations as there are explanatory systems. None at
the time proved to make the crucial difference. But

178

the

gift

of

therapy

the search for explanation kept us engaged and our engagement ultimately
made the difference. She took the plunge and chose to relate deeply to
me, and I did not shrink away from her. I was not destroyed by her rage,
I remained close to her, I held her hand when she was most despairing, I
stayed alive and did not fall victim to her cursed karma.

chapter 60

Therapy-Accelerating Devices

T

herapy or personal-growth groups have, for decades, used accelerating,
or "unfreezing," techniques. Some that I have found useful include the
"trust fall," in which the group forms a circle around a member who,
eyes closed, falls backward to be caught by the group members. In the
"top secret" exercise, each of the members writes down, on uniform slips
of paper without identifying details, a top secret that would feel risky
for them to reveal. The statements are then redistributed and each
member reads someone else's top secret and discusses how she would feel
if she had such a secret. Another technique is to play back selected
sections of the videotape of a previous meeting. Or, in student groups,
members alternate the role of the group leader and critique one
another's performance. Or, to break a long initial silence, the leader
may suggest a rapid "go-around" in which members reveal some of their
free associations during the silence. All of these unfreezing, or
accelerating, techniques are only the ﬁrst stage of the exercise. In
each instance the group leader

180

the

gift

of

therapy

must debrief, must help the group members harvest the data generated by
the exercise: for example, their attitudes toward trust, empathy, and
self-disclosure. One of the most powerful interventions I have used (in
groups of cancer patients as well as in a didactic setting for large
audiences) is the "Who am I?" exercise. Each member is given eight slips
of paper and instructed to write an answer to "Who am I?" on each slip.
(Some likely answers: a wife, a female, a Christian, a lover of books, a
mother, a physician, an athlete, a sexual being, an accountant, an
artist, a daughter, etc.). Then each member arranges the slips in order
from most peripheral to most central (that is, closest to one's core).
After that, the members are instructed to meditate upon a slip,
beginning with the most peripheral, and to imagine what it would feel
like to let go of that part of one's identity. A signal (a soft bell or
chime) every couple of minutes moves them to the next slip, and after
the bell chimes eight times and all the slips have been covered, the
procedure is reversed and the members reappropriate each of the aspects
of their identity. In the postexercise discussion (essential in this
exercise as in all others), the members discuss the issues evoked for
them: for example, issues of identity and core self, the experience of
letting go, fantasies about death. In general, I ﬁnd such accelerating
devices less necessary or useful in individual therapy. Some approaches
to therapy---for example, gestalt therapy---use a great many exercises
that, if used judiciously, may facilitate therapy. But it is also true
that some young therapists err by developing a grab bag of exercises and
reach into it to jazz up therapy whenever it seems to have slowed down.
Beginning therapists must learn that there are times to sit in silence,
sometimes in silent communion, sometimes simply while waiting for
patients' thoughts to appear in a form that may be expressed.

Therapy-Accelerating Devices

181

However, in accord with the dictum that one must invent a different
therapy for each patient, there are appropriate times for a therapist to
develop some exercise that ﬁts the needs of a particular patient.
Elsewhere in this text I discuss a number of such devices: a home visit,
role playing, or asking patients to compose their epitaph. I also ask
patients to bring in old family photos. Not only do I feel more linked
to the patient when I share some of their images of past important
ﬁgures, but the patient's memory of signiﬁcant past events and feelings
is greatly catalyzed by the old photos. Occasionally it is useful to ask
patients to write a letter (to be shared with me and not necessarily to
be mailed) to someone with whom they may have important unﬁnished
business---for example, an unavailable or dead parent, an exwife, a
child. The most common technique I use is informal role playing. If, for
example, a patient discusses her inability to confront a partner about
some issue---let's say that she is anxious about a weeklong seaside
vacation with a friend because she needs to have time off each day to be
alone to meditate, to read, or to think. I might suggest a brief
role-play exercise in which she plays her friend and I take her role to
demonstrate how she might make such a request. On other occasions I
might do the opposite: play the other person and have her practice what
she might say. Fritz Perls's empty-chair technique is sometimes useful.
I instruct some patients with a strong self-deprecatory inner voice to
put the judging, self-critical part of them in an empty chair and speak
to it, then to change chairs and play the judge expressing the critical
comments to the manifest self. Again, I emphasize, such techniques are
useful not as ends in themselves, but to generate data for subsequent
exploration.

chapter 61

Therapy as a Dress Rehearsal for Life

M

any therapists cringe when they hear critics characterize their work as
merely the "purchase of friendship." Though there is a grain of truth in
this statement, it does not merit a cringe. Friendship between therapist
and patient is a necessary condition in the process of
therapy---necessary, but not, however, sufﬁcient. Psychotherapy is not a
substitute for life but a dress rehearsal for life. In other words,
though psychotherapy requires a close relationship, the relationship is
not an end---it is a means to an end. The closeness of the therapy
relationship serves many purposes. It affords a safe place for patients
to reveal themselves as fully as possible. More than that, it offers
them the experience of being accepted and understood after deep
disclosure. It teaches social skills: The patient learns what an
intimate relationship requires. And the patient learns that intimacy is
possible, even achievable. Lastly, and perhaps most important of all, is
Carl Rogers's observation that the therapy relationship serves as an
internal reference point to which patients can return in

Therapy as a Dress Rehearsal for Life

183

their imagination. Having once achieved this level of intimacy, they can
harbor the hope and even the expectation of similar relationships. One
often hears of patients (in either group therapy or individual therapy)
who are excellent patients or group members, yet remain essentially
unchanged in their external lives. They may relate well to the
individual therapist or may be key members of groups---self-disclosing,
working hard, catalyzing interaction---and yet do not apply what they
have learned to their outside situation. In other words, they use
therapy as a substitute rather than a rehearsal for life. This
distinction may prove useful in termination decisions. Behavior change
in the therapy situation is obviously not enough: patients must transfer
their change into their life environment. In the late stages of therapy,
I am energetic in ensuring transfer of learning. If I deem it necessary,
I begin to coach actively, to press the patient to experiment with new
behaviors in work, social, and family settings.

chapter 62

Use the Initial Complaint as Leverage

D

on't lose touch with patients' initial complaints. As the following
vignette illustrates, the reasons for seeking therapy given in the ﬁrst
session may serve you in good stead during difﬁcult phases of therapy.

a ﬁfty-ﬁve-year-old female therapist sought my consultation because of
an impasse in her work with Ron, a forty-year-old clinical psychology
student whom she had been seeing for a few months. A short time before,
Ron had been rejected by a woman he had dated a few times, and
thereafter he grew more demanding in the therapy hours and insisted that
his therapist hold his hand and give him comforting hugs. To support his
case he brought in a copy of my book Momma and the Meaning of Life, in
which I described the salubrious effects of holding the hand of a
grieving widow. Ron pouted, refused to shake hands at the end of
sessions, and drew up lists of his therapist's shortcomings. The
therapist felt increasingly uncomfortable, confused,

Use the Initial Complaint as Leverage

185

manipulated, and annoyed with Ron's infantile behavior. Every approach
she had made to ameliorate the impasse had failed, and, growing
frightened at the depth of her patient's anger, she was contemplating
terminating therapy. In supervision we reviewed Ron's initial reason for
seeking therapy---to work on his relationships with women. An attractive
man who formed relationships with women easily, Ron spent most evenings
with his barroom chums picking up women for one-night stands and quickly
moving on to others. On those few occasions when he found a woman
particularly attractive, and wished to continue the relationship, he had
been dumped precipitously. He wasn't sure why but he guessed that she
had gotten fed up with his insistence that he get exactly what he wanted
at all times. It was precisely because of these issues that he had
selected a female therapist. This information shed much light on the
therapy impasse and provided important leverage. The contretemps between
the patient and therapist was no unfortunate complication in therapy, it
was an inevitable and essential development. Of course Ron would demand
too much from his therapist. Of course he would demean her, and of
course she would wish to leave him. But how to turn that to therapeutic
use? Remember chapter 40, "Feedback: Strike When the Iron Is Cold."
Timing is all-important: interpretations are most effective when the
patient's affect has sufﬁciently diminished to permit him to assume a
more dispassionate view of his behavior. When that time arrives, use the
leverage afforded by the presenting problem. Bank on the therapeutic
alliance and suggest that therapist and patient together attempt to
understand the course of events. For example: "Ron, I think what's been
happening between us the last few weeks is really important. Let me tell
you why.

186

the

gift

of

therapy

Think back on the reasons you ﬁrst came to see me. It was because of
problems that persistently arose between you and women. Given that, it
was inevitable that uncomfortable issues would arise between the two of
us. And that has come to pass. So, even though this is not comfortable
for you---nor for me---we should still regard it as an unusual learning
opportunity. Things have happened here that are reﬂective of what
happens in your social life, but there is one fundamental
difference---and that's what is unique about the therapy situation: I'm
not going to break off contact and I'm going to be available for you to
ﬁnd out something you've never been privy to in past relationships---the
feelings evoked in the other person by your actions." Following this,
the therapist may proceed to share the feelings she has about Ron's
behavior, taking care to frame them gently and supportively.

chapter 63

Don't Be Afraid of Touching Your Patient

A

t the onset of my psychiatry training at Johns Hopkins, I attended an
analytic case conference at which a discussant soundly criticized the
young therapist presenting a case because he helped his patient (an
elderly woman) put on her overcoat at the end of a session. A long,
heated debate followed. Some less judgmental members of the conference
agreed that, though it was obvious the therapist had erred, the
patient's advanced age and the raging snowstorm outside lessened the
gravity of the offense. I've never forgotten that conference and even
now, decades later, a fellow resident with whom I have remained friends
and I still joke about the overcoat caper and the inhumane view of
therapy it represented. It took years of practice and remedial
experiences to undo the damage of such rigid training. One such remedial
experience occurred while I was developing methods of leading support
groups for patients with cancer. After my ﬁrst group had been meeting a
few months, a member suggested a different way to end the meeting. She
lit a

188

the

gift

of

therapy

candle, asked us to join hands, then led the group in a guided
meditation. I had never held hands with a patient before but in this
situation I had no choice. I joined in and immediately felt, like all
the members, that it was an inspired way to end our meetings, and for
several years we closed each session in this manner. The meditation was
calming and restorative but it was the touching of hands that
particularly moved me. Artiﬁcial boundaries---patient and therapist, the
sick and the well, the dying and the living---evaporated as we all felt
joined to the others by a common humanity. I make a point to touch each
patient each hour---a handshake, a clasp of the shoulder, usually at the
end of the hour as I accompany the patient to the door. If a patient
wants to hold my hand longer or wants a hug, I refuse only if there is
some compelling reason---for example, concerns about sexual feelings.
But, whatever the contact, I make a point to debrief at the next
session---perhaps something as simple as: "Mary, our last hour ended
differently---you held on to my hand with both of yours for a long time
\[or "You asked for a hug"\]. It seemed to me that you were feeling
something strongly. What can you remember of it?" I believe that most
therapists have their own secret rules about touching. Decades ago, for
example, an elderly, particularly skilled therapist told me that for
many years her patients routinely ended the session by kissing her on
the cheek. Do touch. But make sure the touch becomes grist for the
interpersonal mill. If a patient is in great despair because of, let us
say, a cancer recurrence or any other awful life event and asks during
the session to hold my hand or for a hug, I would no sooner refuse than
to decline to help an old woman facing a snowstorm put on her overcoat.
If I can ﬁnd no way to ease the pain, I may ask what he/she would like
from me that day---to sit in silence, to ask

D o n ' t B e A f r a i d o f To u c h i n g Yo u r Pa t i e n t

189

questions and more actively guide the sessions? To move my chair closer?
To hold hands? To the best of my ability, I try to respond in a loving,
human way, but later, as always, I debrief: I talk about what feelings
my actions produced, and I share my feelings as well. If I have a
concern that my actions may be interpreted as sexual, then I share those
concerns openly and make it clear that, though sexual feelings may be
experienced in the therapy relationship and should be expressed and
discussed, they will never be acted upon. Nothing takes precedence, I
emphasize, over the importance of the patient's feeling safe in the
therapy ofﬁce and the therapy hour. I never, of course, press contact.
If, for example, a patient leaves in anger, refusing a handshake, I
immediately respect that wish for distance. More deeply troubled
patients may at times experience powerful and idiosyncratic feelings
about touch, and if I am uncertain of those feelings, I make explicit
inquiry. "Shall we shake hands as usual today? Or is it best, today, not
to?" In all of these instances I invariably examine the incident the
following session. These general points serve as a beacon in therapy.
Dilemmas about touch in therapy are not common, but when they occur it
is important that therapists not be fettered by legalistic concerns and
be able, as the following example demonstrates, to be responsive,
responsible, and creative in their work. A middle-aged woman I had been
seeing for a year had lost most of her hair because of radiotherapy for
a brain tumor. She was preoccupied by her appearance and often remarked
how hideous others would ﬁnd her without her wig. I asked how she
thought I would react. She felt that I, too, would change my views of
her and would ﬁnd her so repellent that I would shrink away from her. I
opined that I could not imagine shrinking away from her. In the weeks
following she entertained thoughts of remov-

190

the

gift

of

therapy

ing her wig in my ofﬁce, and at one session she announced that the time
had come. She gulped and, after asking me to look away, removed her wig
and, with the aid of her pocket mirror, arranged her remaining wisps of
hair. When I turned my gaze back to her, I had a moment, only a moment,
of shock at how she had suddenly aged, but I quickly reconnected with
the essence of the lovely person I knew and entertained a fantasy of
running my ﬁngers through her wisps of hair. When she asked about my
feelings, I shared the fantasy. Her eyes ﬂooded with tears and she
reached for the Kleenex. I decided to push further. "Shall we try it?" I
asked. "That would be a wonderful thing," she replied, and so I moved
next to her and stroked her hair and scalp. Though the experience lasted
for only a few moments, it remained indelible in both of our minds. She
survived her cancer and, years later, when she returned because of
another issue, she remarked that my touching her scalp had been an
epiphany, an immensely afﬁrming action that radically changed her
negative image of herself. A similar testimonial came from a widow who
was in such despair that she often came to my ofﬁce too distressed to
speak, but was deeply comforted sheerly by my holding her hand. Much
later she remarked that it was a turning point in therapy: it had
grounded her and allowed her to feel connected to me. My hand, she said,
was ballast preventing her from drifting up and away into despair.

chapter 64

Never Be Sexual with Patients

T

he high incidence of sexual transgressions has become a grave problem
over the past few years, not only in psychotherapy, of course, but in
all situations in which a power differential exists: the priesthood, the
military, the corporate and political workplace, medicine, educational
institutions--- you name it. Though such transgressions constitute a
momentous problem in each of these settings, they have particular
meaning in the ﬁeld of psychotherapy, in which intense and intimate
relationships are so essential to the endeavor and in which sexual
relationships are so destructive to all parties, therapists as well as
patients. Psychotherapy is doubly cursed by such transgressions. Not
only are individual patients betrayed and damaged, but the resulting
backlash has been highly destructive for the whole ﬁeld. Therapists have
been forced to practice defensively. Professional organizations instruct
practitioners to exercise extreme caution. They are warned not only
against any unusual intimacy but against any semblance of intimacy,
because the

192

the

gift

of

therapy

legal profession assumes that where there is smoke there must be ﬁre. In
other words, we are advised to adopt a "snapshot" mentality---that is,
avoid any moment that, taken even out of context, might appear
suspicious. Avoid informality, therapists are told; avoid ﬁrst names, do
not offer coffee or tea, do not run over the ﬁfty-minute hour, and do
not see a member of the opposite sex for the last hour of the day (all
offenses to which I plead guilty). Some clinics have considered
videotaping all sessions to ensure the safety of patients. I know a
therapist who, once sued unjustly, now refuses any physical contact,
even a handshake, with patients. These are dangerous developments. If we
don't regain balance in this area, we will sacriﬁce the very core of
psychotherapy. It is for this reason that I wrote the previous tip on
touching. And it is to ensure that the student not fall into the error
of equating therapeutic intimacy and sexual intimacy that I hasten now
to offer the following comments on sexual transgression. Strong sexual
feelings haunt the therapy situation. How could they not, given the
extraordinary intimacy between patient and therapist? Patients regularly
develop feelings of love and/or sexual feelings for their therapist. The
dynamics of such positive transference are often overdetermined. For one
thing, patients are exposed to a very rare, gratifying, and delicious
situation. Their every utterance is examined with interest, every event
of their past and present life is explored, they are nurtured, cared
for, and unconditionally accepted and supported. Some individuals do not
know how to respond to such generosity. What can they offer in return?
Many women, especially those with low self-regard, believe that the only
real gift they have to offer is a sexual gift. Without sex---a commodity
they may have depended upon in past relationships---they can only
foresee a loss of interest and ultimate abandonment by the therapist.
For others, who elevate the therapist to an unrealis-

N e v e r B e S e x u a l w i t h Pa t i e n t s

193

tic, lofty, larger-than-life position, there may also be the wish to
merge with something greater than themselves. Still others may compete
for love with the unknown patients in the therapist's practice. All of
these dynamics should become part of the therapy dialogue: they have in
one way or another created difﬁculty for the patient in his/her life,
and it is good, not unfortunate, that they emerge in the here-and-now of
the therapy hour. Since attraction to the therapist is to be expected,
this phenomenon, like all events in the therapy hour, should be
explicitly addressed and understood. If therapists ﬁnd themselves
aroused by the patient, that very arousal constitutes data about the
patient's way of being (assuming the therapist is clear about his/her
own reactions). Therapists do not gratify masochistic patients by
beating them. Neither should he or she become sexually involved with
patients who crave sex. Although the majority of sexual transgressions
occur between a male therapist and a female patient (for this reason I
use "he" for the therapist in this discussion), similar issues and
temptations apply for female and for gay therapists. Therapists who have
a history of feeling unattractive to women may be exhilarated and
destabilized when avidly sought after by female patients. Keep in mind
that the feelings arising in the therapy situation generally belong more
to the role than the person: Do not mistake the transferential adoration
as a sign of your irresistible personal attractiveness or charm. Some
therapists run into difﬁculty because they have an unfulﬁlled sexual
life or live in too much isolation to make the appropriate and necessary
sexual contacts. Obviously, it is a grave error to look to one's
practice as an opportunity for such contacts. It is important for
therapists to do whatever is necessary to correct their situation---be
that individual therapy, mar-

194

the

gift

of

therapy

ital therapy, dating services, computer matching, you name it. When I
meet with such therapists in therapy or supervision I want to tell them,
and often do, that any option, including visiting a prostitute, is
preferable to the calamitous choice of acting out sexually with
patients; I want to tell them, and often do, to ﬁnd some way of
fulﬁlling their sexual needs with one of the billions of potential
partners in the world: anyone except their patients. That is simply not
a professional or moral option. If, in the ﬁnal analysis, the therapist
can ﬁnd no solution to unruly sexual impulses and is unable or unwilling
to get help from personal therapy, then I believe he should not be
practicing psychotherapy. Sexual transgression is also destructive for
therapists. Offending therapists, once they examine themselves honestly,
understand that they are acting for their own satisfaction rather than
in the service of their patient. Therapists who have made a deep
commitment to a life of service do great violence to themselves and to
their innermost moral precepts. They ultimately pay a devastatingly high
price not only from the external world in the form of civil censure and
punishment and widespread disapprobation, but internally as well, in the
form of pervasive and persistent shame and guilt.

chapter 65

Look for Anniversary and Life-Stage Issues

C

ertain dates may have great signiﬁcance for many patients. As a result
of many years of working with bereaved individuals, I have grown to
respect the persistence and power of anniversary reactions. Many
bereaved spouses feel buffeted by sudden waves of despair that coincide
with milestones of their spouse's demise---for example, the date of
deﬁnitive diagnosis, the death, or the funeral. Not infrequently, the
patient is consciously unaware of the precise dates---a phenomenon that
has always seemed to me a persuasive proof, if one is needed, of the
existence of unconscious inﬂuence upon conscious thoughts and feelings.
Such anniversary reactions may recur unabated in power for years, even
decades. The professional literature contains many startling studies
documenting the anniversary reaction, such as the increased incidence of
psychiatric hospitalization on the anniversaries, even decades later, of
parental death days. Certain notable dates provide openings for therapy
inquiry in a multitude of ways. Birthdays, especially signiﬁcant birth-

196

the

gift

of

therapy

days, may provide an open window to existential concerns and lead to an
increased contemplation of the life cycle. In adulthood, birthday
celebrations are always, it seems to me, bittersweet affairs with an
underside of lament. Some individuals are affected by a birthday that
signiﬁes outliving their parents. Dates of retirement, wedding or
divorce anniversaries, and many other markers bring home to the
individual the inexorable march of time and the transience of life.

chapter 66

Never Ignore "Therapy Anxiety"

A

lthough I stress that psychotherapy is a creative and spontaneous
process shaped by each practitioner's unique style and customized for
each patient, there are, nonetheless, certain universal rules. One such
rule is always explore session-related anxiety. If a patient experiences
anxiety during the session, after the session (on the way home or later
while thinking about the hour), or when preparing to come to the next
session, then I always make a point of focusing in depth upon that
anxiety. Although the anxiety may sometimes issue from the content of
the therapy discussion, far more commonly it stems from the
process---from feelings about the patient-therapist relationship. For
example, one patient described feeling anxious entering my ofﬁce: "Why?
What makes you anxious about coming here?" I asked. "I'm frightened. I
feel I'm skating on thin ice here."

198

the

gift

of

therapy

"What is the equivalent of falling through the ice in our therapy?"
"That you'll be sick of my complaining and moaning and not want to see
me again." "That must complicate things for you a great deal. I tell you
to express all your troubling thoughts. That's hard enough, but then you
add to it something else---that you must also take care not to burden or
discourage me." Or another patient: "I didn't want to come today. I've
been upset all week about what you said to me when I took the Kleenex."
"What did you hear me say?" "That you were fed up with me complaining
and not accepting your help." "What I remember was something very
different. You were weeping and, wanting to comfort you, I reached to
offer you a Kleenex. I was struck by how quickly you moved to take it
yourself---as though to avoid taking something from me---and tried to
encourage you to explore your feelings about taking help from me. But
that's by no means the same as a criticism or being 'fed up.' " "I do
have some feelings about taking help from you. I think of you as having
a ﬁnite amount of caring---only one hundred points---and I don't want to
use up all my points." If a patient develops anxiety during the session,
I become a detective and enlist the patient's aid in going over the
session microscopically to determine precisely when the discomfort
arose. The process of such an inquiry implies that anxiety does

Never Ignore "Therapy Anxiety"

199

not, like rain, descend upon one capriciously but is explicable: it has
causes that can be discovered (and therefore prevented and controlled).
Sometimes, if I have a strong hunch that there may be a delayed reaction
to events of the hour, I suggest, toward the end of the session, a
thought experiment involving projection into the future: "We still have
several minutes to go but I wonder if you might sit back, close your
eyes, and imagine the hour is over and you are on your way home. What
will you be thinking or feeling? How will you regard our session today?
What feelings will you have about me or about the way we are relating?"

chapter 67

Doctor, Take Away My Anxiety

I

f a patient is weighted down with anxiety and asks or pleads for relief,
I generally ﬁnd it useful to ask, "Tell me, what would be the perfect
thing for me to say? What exactly could I say that would lead to your
feeling better." I am, of course, not speaking to the patient's rational
mind, but instead addressing the child part of the patient and asking
for uncensored free associations. In response to such a query, one
patient told me, "I want you to tell me I'm the most beautiful, perfect
baby in the world." I then told her exactly what she requested and
together we examined the soothing effects of my words as well as other
emerging feelings: her embarrassment for her childlike wishes and her
great irritation that she had to tell me what to say. This exercise in
self-soothing creates a certain paradox: the patient is thrown into a
young, dependent state of mind by asking the therapist to utter magical
words of relief but, at the same time, is forced to assume a position of
autonomy by inventing the very words that will soothe her.

chapter 68

On Being Love's Executioner

I do not like to work with patients who are in love. Perhaps it is
because of envy---I too crave enchantment. Perhaps it is because love
and psychotherapy are fundamentally incompatible. The good therapist
ﬁghts darkness and seeks illumination, while romantic love is sustained
by mystery and crumbles upon inspection. I hate to be love's
executioner.

A

paradox: though these opening lines of Love's Executioner express my
discomfort working with patients in love, they have, nonetheless,
prompted many patients in love to consult me. Of course, love comes in
many forms and these lines refer only to one particular type of love
experience: the infatuated, obsessed, highly magicalized state of mind
that entirely possesses the individual. Ordinarily such an experience is
glorious, but there are times when the infatuation causes more distress
than pleasure.

202

the

gift

of

therapy

Sometimes fulﬁllment of the love is forever elusive---for example, when
one or both parties are married and unwilling to leave their marriage.
Sometimes the love is not reciprocated--- one person loves and the other
shuns contact or wishes only a sexual relationship. Sometimes the loved
one is entirely unobtainable---a teacher, a former therapist, the spouse
of a friend. Often one may become so absorbed in love that he/she
devotes much time waiting for some brief sight of the beloved to the
neglect of all else---work, friends, family. A lover in an extramarital
affair may withdraw from his/her spouse, may avoid intimacy in order to
conceal the secret, may refuse couples therapy, may deliberately keep
the marital relationship unsatisfying in order to diminish guilt and
justify the affair. However varied the circumstances, the experience is
the same---the lover idealizes the beloved, is obsessed with her, often
wishing nothing more than to spend the rest of his life basking in her
presence. To develop an empathic relationship with patients in love, you
must not lose sight of the fact that their experience is quite
wonderful: the ecstatic, blissful merger; the dissolving of the lonely
"I" into the enchanted "we" may be one of the great experiences of the
patient's life. It is generally advisable to express your appreciation
of their state of mind and to refrain from criticism of the golden
feeling surrounding the beloved. No one ever put this dilemma better
than Nietzsche, who, shortly after he "came to" from a passionate (but
chaste) love affair with Lou Salome, wrote: One day a sparrow ﬂew past
me; and . . . I thought I'd seen an eagle. Now all the world is busy
proving to me how wrong I am---and there's a proper European gossip
about it. Well, who is better off? I, "the deluded one," as they say,
who on account of this bird call dwelt for a

O n B e i n g L o v e 's E x e c u t i o n e r

203

whole summer in a higher world of hope---or those, whom there is no
deceiving? So one must be delicate with a feeling that permits one to
live in a "higher world of hope." Appreciate the patient's rapture but
also help him prepare for its end. And it always ends. There is one true
property of romantic love: it never stays---evanescence is a part of the
nature of an infatuated love state. But be careful trying to rush its
demise. Don't try to joust with love any more than you would with
powerful religious beliefs---those are duels you cannot win (and there
are similarities between being in love and experiencing religious
ecstasy: One patient referred to his "Sistine Chapel state," another
described his love as his celestial, imperishable condition). Be
patient---leave it for the client to discover and express feelings about
the irrationality of his feelings or disillusionment in the beloved.
When any such expressions do occur, I remember the patient's words
carefully. If and when he reenters that state again and re-idealizes the
beloved, I may remind him of his comments. At the same time I explore
the experience much as I would any powerful emotional state. I say such
things as "How wonderful for you . . . it's like coming to life again,
isn't it? It's easy to understand why you don't want to give this up.
Let's look at what permitted you to experience this now? . . . Tell me
about your life in the weeks before this came upon you. When did you
last feel love like this? What happened to that love?" There is proﬁt in
focusing on the state of being in love rather than the person who is
loved. It is the experience, the emotional state of loving---not the
other person---that is so compelling. Nietzsche's phrase "One loves
one's desire, not the desired" has often proved invaluable to me in my
work with love-tormented patients. Since most individuals know (though
they try not to know)

204

the

gift

of

therapy

that the experience will not persist forever, I try gently to introduce
some long-range perspective and discourage the patient from making any
irreversible decision on the basis of feelings that are likely to be
evanescent. Establish the goals of therapy early in your meetings. What
type of help is sought? Obviously there is something dysfunctional about
the patient's experience or he wouldn't be consulting you. Is the
patient asking for help in removing he himself from the relationship? I
often invoke the image of scales and inquire about the balance of
pleasure and displeasure (or happiness and unhappiness) provided by the
relationship. Sometimes a tally sheet helps illustrate the balance, and
I ask patients to keep a log, with several observation points a day, of
the number of times they think about the beloved, or even the number of
minutes or hours a day given to that pursuit. Patients are sometimes
astounded by the tallies, by how much of their life is consumed by
circular, repetitive thoughts and, conversely, how little they
participate in real-time life. Sometimes I try to offer the patient
perspective by discussing the nature and different forms of love. Erich
Fromm's timeless monograph, The Art of Loving, is a valuable resource
for patient and therapist alike. I often think of mature love as a love
of the being and the growth of the other, and most clients will be
sympathetic to this view. What, then, is the particular nature of their
love? Are they infatuated with someone whom, at bottom, they do not
really respect or someone who treats them badly? Unfortunately, of
course, there are those whose love is intensiﬁed by not being treated
well. If they wish you to help them to get out of the relationship, you
might well remind them (and yourself) that release is arduous and slow.
Occasionally an individual almost instantaneously emerges from an
infatuation, much as the characters of A Midsummer Night's Dream emerge
from their enchantment,

O n B e i n g L o v e 's E x e c u t i o n e r

205

but for the most part, individuals are tormented by yearnings for the
beloved for many months. Sometimes years, even decades, pass before they
can meet or even think of the other without twinges of desire or
anxiety. Nor is the dissolution a steady process. Setbacks occur--- and
nothing is more likely to bring about a setback than another encounter
with the beloved. Patients offer many rationalizations for such new
contact: they insist that they are over it now and that a cordial talk,
a coffee, or lunch with the former beloved will help to clarify things,
help them to understand what went wrong, help them establish a lasting
adult friendship, or even permit them to say good-bye like a mature
person. None of these things is likely to come to pass. Generally the
individual's recovery is set back, much as a slip sets back a recovering
alcoholic. Don't get frustrated at setbacks---some infatuations are
destined to go on for years. It's not a matter of weak will; there is
something in the experience that touches the patient at very deep
levels. Try to understand the crucial role played by the obsession in
the individual's internal life. I believe that the love obsession often
serves as a distraction, keeping the individual's gaze from more painful
thoughts. Sooner or later I hope to arrive at the question: What would
you be thinking about if you were not obsessed with . . . ?

chapter 69

Taking a History

E

arly in their training, psychotherapy students are taught some
systematic history-taking schemes. These schemes always include such
items as the patient's presenting complaint, present illness, and
history (including family, education, physical health, previous therapy,
friendships, etc.). There are obvious advantages to a step-by-step
method of collecting data. Physicians, for example, are trained to avoid
oversight by taking a history and doing a physical examination in a
highly routinized manner that consists of a systematic organ system
review (nervous system, gastrointestinal system, genital-urinary system,
cardiovascular system, musculoskeletal system). Certain situations in
therapy practice demand such a systematic method of collecting
history---for example, in the ﬁrst couple of sessions, when one is
trying to get a quick read of the patient's life context; a time-limited
consultation; or times when one must collect data quickly in order to
make a succinct presentation to colleagues. However, once therapists
gain expe-

Ta k i n g a H i s t o r y

207

rience, they rarely follow a systematic checklist of questions in the
great bulk of their work in psychotherapy. Collecting data becomes
intuitive and automatic. It does not precede therapy but is a part of
the therapy itself. As Erik Erikson put it, "History taking is history
making."

chapter 70

A History of the Patient's Daily Schedule

D

espite my reliance on an intuitive mode of collecting data, there is one
particularly productive inquiry I always make in the ﬁrst or second
session: "Please give me a detailed account of your typical day." I make
sure everything is discussed, including eating and sleeping habits,
dreaming, recreation, periods of discomfort and of joy, precise tasks at
work, the use of alcohol and drugs, even reading, ﬁlm, and TV
preferences. If this inquiry is sufﬁciently detailed, therapists can
learn a great deal, uncovering information that is often missed in other
history-taking systems. I listen to many things: eating habits,
aesthetic preferences, leisure-time activities. In particular, I attend
to how my patients' lives are peopled. With whom do they have regular
contact? What faces do they regularly see? With whom do they have phone
conversations or speak personally during the week? With whom do they
have meals? For example, in recent initial interviews this inquiry
allowed me to learn of activities I might not otherwise have known for

A H i s t o r y o f t h e Pa t i e n t ' s D a i l y S c h e d u l e

209

months: two hours a day of computer solitaire; three hours a night in
Internet sex chat rooms under a different identity; massive
procrastination at work and ensuing shame; a daily schedule so demanding
that I was exhausted listening to it; a middle-aged woman's extended
daily (sometimes hourly) phone calls with her father; a gay woman's long
daily phone conversations with an ex-lover whom she disliked but from
whom she felt unable to separate. An inquiry into the minute details of
the patient's life not only leads to rich material otherwise often
missed but also gives a jump start to the bonding process. Such intense
discussion of minute quotidian activities rapidly increases the sense of
therapist-patient intimacy so necessary in the process of change.

chapter 71

How Is the Patient's Life Peopled?

I

n a valuable study of interpersonal relationships, the psychologist
Ruthellen Josselson uses a paper and pencil "solar system" instrument,
instructing her subjects to represent themselves as a dot in the center
of a page and the people in their life as objects circling them at
various distances. The closer the dot to the center, the more central
the relationship. Her particular study followed the positional changes
in the circling satellites over a period of several years. While this
instrument may be too cumbersome for everyday clinical use, it
nonetheless serves as an excellent model for visualizing interpersonal
patterns. One of my major tasks in my early contacts is to ﬁnd out how
the patient's life is peopled. Much of that information may be obtained
during a check of the patient's daily schedule, but I make certain to do
a detailed inquiry into all the people who are important in the
patient's life as well as any interpersonal contacts in a recent
representative day. I also ﬁnd it instructive to inquire about all the
best friends, past and present, in the patient's life.

chapter 72

Interview the Signiﬁcant Other

N

ever have I regretted interviewing some signiﬁcant ﬁgure in the life of
my patients---generally a spouse or partner. In fact, at the end of such
an interview I invariably wonder, "Why did I wait so long?" or "Why
don't I do this more often?" When I hear patients describe their
signiﬁcant others, I create some mental image of the other person, often
forgetting that my information is highly skewed because it has been
ﬁltered through the patient's imperfect and biased eyes. But once I meet
the signiﬁcant others, they are ﬂeshed in, and I enter more fully into
the life of my patient. Because I meet the patient's partner in such an
unusual situation, I'm aware that I do not really "see" him/her, but
that's not the point---the point is that my image of the face and person
of the other permits me a richer encounter with my patient. Moreover,
the partner may provide a new perspective and invaluable information
about the patient. The signiﬁcant others are, of course, threatened by
an invitation to meet their partner's therapist. The partner appreciates

212

the

gift

of

therapy

that the therapist who will be sizing them up has, understandably, a
primary loyalty to the patient. But there is a strategy that rarely
fails to diminish the threat and generally is effective in persuading
the partner to come to the session. Instruct your patient in the
following manner: "John, please tell X that she could help me be more
helpful to you. I'd like to obtain some of her feedback about
you---especially some of the ways she might like to see you change. This
is not an examination of her but a discussion of her observations of
you." Moreover, I recommend that the session be conducted in just that
manner. Since I prefer to have no secret, outside knowledge of my
patients, I always interview the signiﬁcant other in the presence of my
patient. Elicit the partner's feedback and suggestions for ideas of the
changes the patient might make rather than conduct a personal interview
of the partner. You will get a sufﬁciently complex picture of the
partner just from the way he/she gives you feedback. And I advise also
that you don't turn the session into a couples session. When your
primary loyalty is to one member of a pair with whom you have a therapy
commitment, you are not the one to treat the couple. If you attempt
couples therapy with a cargo of conﬁdential information obtained from
one member of the pair, you will soon be involved in withholding and
duplicitous behavior. Couples therapy is best done by another therapist
whose allegiance is to both participants equally.

chapter 73

Explore Previous Therapy

I

f my patients have had previous therapy, I make a detailed inquiry into
their experience. If the therapy was unsatisfactory, patients almost
always cite their previous therapist's lack of engagement. The
therapist, they say, was too distant, too uninvolved, too unsupportive,
too impersonal. I have yet to hear a patient complain of a therapist
being too revealing, too supportive, or too personal (with the
exception, of course, of instances in which the patient and therapist
have been sexually involved). Once you become aware of the previous
therapist's errors, then you can attempt to avoid repeating them. Make
this explicit by checking in from time to time with simple direct
inquiries. For example, "Mike, we've met for four sessions now and
perhaps we should check into how you and I are doing. You've spoken of
your feelings about Dr. X, your previous therapist. I wonder how that's
playing out with me. Can you think of times you've had similar feelings
about me or that you and I seemed to be moving into similar and
unproductive patterns?"

214

the

gift

of

therapy

If a patient has had a successful course of therapy in the past (and,
for any number of reasons, is unable to continue with the same
therapist), I believe it is equally important to explore what went right
in therapy in order to incorporate those aspects in your current
therapy. Don't expect these accounts of either successful or
unsuccessful therapy to remain static: they generally change just as
patients' views of other past events change. In time, patients may begin
to recall positive effects of therapists they had at ﬁrst viliﬁed.

chapter 74

Sharing the Shade of the Shadow

W

hat do I remember of the seven hundred hours I spent on the couch in my
ﬁrst analysis? My brightest memory of my analyst, Olive Smith, that
silent, patient listener, is of one day when I had placed myself on
trial for greedily anticipating the money I might inherit when my
parents died. I was doing a particularly good job at criticizing myself
when, most uncharacteristically, she leapt into action and laid low the
prosecution with one phrase: "That's just the way we're built." It
wasn't only that she reached out to comfort me, though I welcomed that.
Nor that she normalized my base impulses. No, it was something else: It
was the word we. It was the inference that she and I were alike, that
she, too, had her shadow side. I treasured her gift. And I have passed
it on many times. I attempt to normalize my patients' darker impulses in
any way I can. I reassure, I imitate Olive Smith in using we, I point
out the ubiquity of certain feelings or impulses, I refer patients to
appro-

216

the

gift

of

therapy

priate reading material (for example, for sexual feelings I suggest the
Kinsey, Masters and Johnson, or Hite reports). Endeavor to normalize the
shady side in any way possible. We therapists should be open to all our
own dark, ignoble parts, and there are times when sharing them will
enable patients to stop ﬂagellating themselves for their own real or
imaginary transgressions. Once, after I had complimented a patient on
the type of mothering she was providing for her two children, she grew
visibly uncomfortable and announced gravely that she was going to tell
me something she had never before shared, namely that after giving birth
to her ﬁrst child she had a strong inclination to walk out of the
hospital and abandon her newborn. Though she wanted to be a mother she
could not bear the idea of giving up so many years of freedom. "Show me
the mother who hasn't had such feelings," I said. "Or the father. Though
I love my children," I told her, "there were countless times that I
deeply resented their encroachment upon my other tasks and interests in
life." The eminent British analyst D. W. Winnicott was particularly
courageous in sharing his darker impulses, and a colleague of mine, when
treating patients concerned about anger toward their children, often
cites a Winnicott article in which are listed eighteen reasons why
mothers hate their babies. Winnicott also cites the hostile lullabies
mothers sing to babies, who fortunately do not understand the words. For
example: Rockabye, Baby, on the treetop, When the wind blows the cradle
will rock, When the bough breaks the cradle will fall, And down will
come baby, cradle and all.

chapter 75

Freud Was Not Always Wrong

F

reud bashing has become fashionable. No contemporary reader can escape
the recent scathing criticism condemning psychoanalytic theory as being
as passé as the bygone culture from which it sprang. Psychoanalysis is
attacked as a pseudoscience based on an outmoded scientiﬁc paradigm and
eclipsed by recent advances in the neurobiology of dreaming and the
genetics of schizophrenia and affective disorders. Furthermore, critics
assert that it is a maledominated fantasy of human development, teeming
with sexism, and is constructed from distorted case histories and
inaccurate, sometimes imaginary, observations. So pervasive and
pernicious has been this criticism that it has seeped even into therapy
training programs, and a whole generation of mental health practitioners
has been educated with a critical and wholly uninformed view of the man
whose ideas comprise the very foundation of psychotherapy. Let me
suggest a thought experiment. Imagine you are in despair because of a
failed relationship. You are besieged with

218

the

gift

of

therapy

hateful, disparaging thoughts about a woman whom, for months, you had
idealized. You cannot stop thinking about her, you feel deeply, perhaps
mortally, wounded, and you contemplate suicide--- not only to end your
pain but to punish the woman who caused it. You remain ﬁxed in despair
despite your friends' best efforts to console you. What would be your
next step? Most likely you would consider consulting a psychotherapist.
Your symptoms---depression, anger, obsessive thoughts--- all suggest not
only that you are in need of therapy but that you would beneﬁt
considerably from it. Now try a variation on that experiment. Imagine
you have the same symptoms. But it is more than one hundred years ago,
say 1882, and you live in Central Europe. What would you do? This is
precisely the challenge I faced a few years ago while writing my novel
When Nietzsche Wept. My plot called for Nietzsche to see a therapist in
1882 (the year in which he was in deep despair over the ending of his
relationship with Lou Salome). But who would be Nietzsche's therapist?
After much historical research, it was apparent that there was no such
creature in 1882---only 120 years ago. If Nietzsche had turned for help
to a physician he would have been informed that lovesickness was not a
medical problem and been advised to sojourn at Marienbad or one of the
other baths of Europe for a water-andrest cure. Or perhaps he might have
been referred to a sympathetic clergyman for religious counseling.
Practicing secular therapists? There were none! Though Liebault and
Bernheim had a school of hypnotherapy in Nancy, France, they offered no
psychotherapy per se, only hypnotic symptom removal. The ﬁeld of secular
psychotherapy had yet to be invented; it was awaiting the arrival of
Freud, who in 1882 was still a medical intern and had not yet entered
the ﬁeld of psychiatry. Not only did Freud single-handedly invent the
ﬁeld of psy-

Fr e u d Wa s N o t A l w a y s W r o n g

219

chotherapy but he did it in one fell swoop. In 1895 (in Studies in
Hysteria, co-authored with Josef Breuer) he wrote an amazingly prescient
chapter on psychotherapy that preﬁgures many of the major developments
that were to occur over the next one hundred years. There Freud posits
the fundamentals of our ﬁeld: the value of insight and deep
self-exploration and expression; the existence of resistance,
transference, repressed trauma; the use of dreams and fantasies, role
playing, free association; the need to address characterological
problems as well as symptoms; and the absolute necessity of a trusting
therapeutic relationship. So instrumental to the education of the
therapist do I consider these matters that for decades I offered at
Stanford a Freud appreciation course in which I stressed two points: a
reading of Freud's texts (rather than secondary sources) and an
appreciation of his historical context. Often popularizers are useful
for students reading the works of thinkers who are unable to write
clearly (or choose obfuscation)---for example, philosophers such as
Hegel, Fichte, or even Kant or, in the ﬁeld of psychotherapy, Sullivan,
Fenichel, or Fairbairn. Not so with Freud. Though he did not win a Nobel
Prize for scientiﬁc contribution, he was awarded the Goethe Prize for
literary achievement. Throughout Freud's texts, his prose sparkles, even
through the veil of translation. Indeed many of the clinical tales
resemble those of a master storyteller. In my teaching, I concentrate
particularly on the ﬁrst texts, Studies in Hysteria, selected sections
of The Interpretation of Dreams, and Three Essays on the Theory of
Sexuality, and sketch out his historical context---that is, the
psychological zeitgeist of the late nineteenth century---which permits
the student to realize how truly revolutionary were his insights. One
further point: We should not evaluate Freud's contributions on the basis
of the positions advanced by the various

220

the

gift

of

therapy

Freudian psychoanalytic institutes. Freud had many followers thirsty for
some ritualized orthodoxy, and many analytic institutes adopted a
conservative and static view of his work utterly out of keeping with his
ever-changing creative and innovative disposition. In my own
professional development I have been exceedingly ambivalent toward
traditional psychoanalytic training institutes. It seemed to me that the
conservative analytic position of my day overvalued the importance of
insight, particularly about psychosexual developmental issues, and
furthermore was clueless about the importance of the human encounter in
the therapeutic process. (Theodor Reik wrote: "The devil himself could
not frighten many analysts more than the use of the word 'I.' ")
Consequently, I chose not to enter an analytic institute and, as I look
back over my career, consider that one of the best decisions of my life.
Although I encountered a great sense of professional isolation and
uncertainty, I had the freedom to pursue my own interests and to think
without restricting preconceptions. My feelings today about the
psychoanalytic tradition have changed considerably. Though I don't like
many of the psychoanalytic institutional trappings and ideological
positions, still those institutions are often the only game in town, the
only place where serious technical psychodynamic issues are discussed by
the best and brightest clinical minds in our ﬁeld. Furthermore there has
been, in my view, a recent salutary development in analytic thought and
practice: that is, a rapidly growing analytic interest and literature on
intersubjectivity and two-person psychology that reﬂects a new awareness
of the crucial role of the basic human encounter in the process of
change. To a signiﬁcant degree, progressive analysts strive for greater
genuineness and disclosure in their relationship with patients.

Fr e u d Wa s N o t A l w a y s W r o n g

221

As managed care encourages shorter training (and, hence, cost cutting
through cheaper therapist remuneration), therapists are more than ever
in need of supplementary graduate clinical training. Psychoanalytic
institutes (broadly deﬁned--- Freudian, Jungian, interpersonal,
existential) offer, by far, the most thoughtful and thorough
postgraduate dynamic therapy training. Furthermore, the institute
culture offsets the isolation so inherent in therapeutic practice by
providing a community of like minds, a group of colleagues facing
similar intellectual and professional challenges. Perhaps I am unduly
alarmist but it seems to me that, in these days of relentless attack on
the ﬁeld of psychotherapy, the analytic institutes may become the last
bastion, the repository of collected psychotherapy wisdom, in much the
same way the church for centuries was the repository of philosophical
wisdom and the only realm where serious existential questions--- life
purpose, values, ethics, responsibility, freedom, death, community,
connectedness---were discussed. There are similarities between
psychoanalytic institutes and religious institutions of the past, and it
is important that we do not repeat the tendencies of some religious
institutions to suppress other forums of thoughtful discourse and to
legislate what thinkers are allowed to think.

chapter 76

CBT Is Not What It's Cracked Up to Be . . . Or, Don't Be Afraid of the
EVT Bogeyman

T

he concept of the EVT (empirically validated therapy) has had enormous
recent impact---so far, all negative--- on the ﬁeld of psychotherapy.
Only therapies that have been empirically validated---in actuality, this
means brief cognitive-behavioral therapy (CBT)---are authorized by many
managed-care providers. Graduate psychology schools granting master's
and doctoral degrees are reshaping their curricula to concentrate upon
the teaching of the EVTs; licensing examinations make certain that
psychologists are properly imbued with the knowledge of EVT superiority;
and major federal psychotherapy research funding agencies smile with
particular favor upon EVT research. All these developments create
dissonance for many expert senior clinicians who are exposed daily to
managed-care administrators insisting upon use of EVTs. Senior
clinicians see an apparent avalanche of scientiﬁc evidence "proving"
that their own approach is less effective than that offered by junior

C B T I s N o t W h a t I t 's C r a c k e d U p t o B e

223

(and inexpensive) therapists delivering manualized CBT in astoundingly
brief periods of time. In their guts they know this is wrong, they
suspect the presence of smoke and mirrors, but have no evidentially
based reply, and generally they have pulled in their horns and tried to
go about their work hoping for the nightmare to pass. Recent
meta-analytic publications are restoring some balance. (I draw heavily
from the excellent review and analysis of Weston and Morrison.) First, I
urge clinicians to keep in mind that nonvalidated therapies are not
invalidated therapies. Research, if it is to be funded, must have a
clean design comparable to research testing drug efﬁcacy. Design demands
include "clean" patients (that is, patients with a single disorder
without symptoms of any other diagnostic groups---a type of patient
uncommonly seen in clinical practice), a brief therapy intervention, and
a replicable, preferably manualized (that is, capable of being reduced
to a step-by-step written manual) treatment mode. Such a design heavily
favors CBT and excludes most traditional therapies that rely on an
intimate (unscripted) therapist-patient relationship forged in
genuineness and focusing on the here-and-now as it spontaneously
evolves. Many false assumptions are made in EVT research: that long-term
problems can yield to brief therapy; that patients have only one
deﬁnable symptom, which they can accurately report at the onset of
therapy; that the elements of efﬁcacious therapy are dissociable from
one another; and that a written systematic procedural manual can permit
minimally trained individuals to deliver psychotherapy effectively.
Analysis of results of EVT (Weston and Morrison) indicates far less
impressive outcomes than has generally been thought. There is little
follow-up at the end of one year and almost none at two years. The early
positive response of EVTs (which is

224

the

gift

of

therapy

found in any therapeutic intervention) has led to a distorted picture of
efﬁcacy. The gains are not maintained and the percentage of patients who
remain improved is surprisingly low. There is no evidence that therapist
adherence to manuals positively correlates to improvement---in fact,
there is evidence to the contrary. In general the implications of the
EVT research have been extended far beyond the scientiﬁc evidence.
Naturalistic research on EVT clinical practice reveals that brief
therapy is not so brief: clinicians using brief EVTs see patients for
far more hours than is cited in reported research. Research indicates
(to no one's surprise) that acute distress may be alleviated quickly but
chronic distress requires far longer therapy, and characterological
change the longest therapy course of all. I can't resist raising one
more mischievous point. I have a strong hunch (substantiated only
anecdotally) that EVT practitioners requiring personal psychotherapeutic
help do not seek brief cognitive-behavior therapy but instead turn to
highly trained, experienced, dynamic, manual-less therapists.

chapter 77

Dreams--- Use Them, Use Them, Use Them

W

hy do so many young therapists avoid working with dreams? My supervisees
give me various answers. Many are intimidated by the nature of the dream
literature---so voluminous, complex, arcane, speculative, and
controversial. Students are often befuddled by dream symbol books and by
the efﬂuvia of vitriolic debates between Freudians, Jungians,
gestaltists, and visionaries. Then, too, there is the rapidly developing
literature on the new biology of dreams, which sometimes is sympathetic
to dream work and sometimes dismissive by pronouncing dreams purely
random and meaningless creations. Others are frustrated and discouraged
by the very form of dreams---by their ephemeral, cryptic, extravagant,
and heavily disguised nature. Others, working in a managed-caremandated
brief-therapy framework, lack the time for dream work. Last, and perhaps
most important, many young therapists have not had the experience of a
probing personal therapy that itself proﬁted from dream work.

226

the

gift

of

therapy

I consider this inattention to dreams a great pity and a great loss for
tomorrow's patients. Dreams can be an invaluable aid in effective
therapy. They represent an incisive restating of the patient's deeper
problems, only in a different language---a language of visual imagery.
Highly experienced therapists have always relied on dreams. Freud
considered them "the royal road to the unconscious." Although I agree,
that is not, as I shall discuss, the main reason I ﬁnd dreams so useful.

chapter 78

Full Interpretation of a Dream? Forget It!

O

f all the misconceptions young therapists have about dream work, the
most troublesome is the notion that one's goal should be to interpret a
dream fully and accurately. That idea is without merit for the practice
of psychotherapy, and I urge my students to abandon it. Freud made one
valiant and celebrated attempt at a full interpretation in his
groundbreaking Interpretation of Dreams (1900), in which he thoroughly
analyzed one of his dreams concerning a woman named Irma whom he had
referred to a friend and colleague for surgery. Since the publication of
the Irma dream, many theorists and clinicians have advanced new
interpretations, and even now, one hundred years later, novel
perspectives on that dream continue to appear in the psychoanalytic
literature. Even if it were possible to interpret a dream fully, it
would not necessarily be a good use of the therapy hour. In my own
practice I take a pragmatic approach to dreams and use them any way I
can to facilitate therapy.

chapter 79

Use Dreams Pragmatically: Pillage and Loot

T

he fundamental principle underlying my work with dreams is to extract
from them everything that expedites and accelerates therapy. Pillage and
loot the dream, take out of it whatever seems valuable, and don't fret
about the discarded shell. Consider this fearful dream that followed a
patient's ﬁrst session. "I was still in law school but I was trying a
case in an open, large, crowded courtroom. I was still a woman but my
hair was clipped short and I was dressed in a man's suit with high
boots. My father, wearing a long white gown, was on trial and I was the
prosecutor trying him on a rape charge. I knew at the time that I was
being suicidal because he would ultimately track me down and kill me
because of what I was doing to him."

The dream awakened her at three a.m. and was so frightening and so real
that, terriﬁed of a possible intruder, she raced

Use Dreams Pragmatically: Pillage and Loot

229

around her home checking the locks on all windows and doors. Even as she
related the dream to me three days later, she still felt apprehensive.
How do we loot this dream in the service of therapy? First, consider
timing. Since we were just beginning therapy, my primary task was to
forge a strong therapeutic alliance. Hence, my questions and comments
focused primarily on those aspects of the dream that pertained to
engagement and safety in the therapy situation. I asked such questions
as "What do you make of putting your father on trial? I wonder, might
that be related to telling me about him in our ﬁrst therapy session? Do
you feel it is dangerous to express yourself freely in this ofﬁce? And
your thoughts about the courtroom being open and crowded? I wonder, do
you have concerns or doubts about the privacy and conﬁdentiality of our
meetings?" Note that I did not attempt to interpret the dream. I did not
inquire about many curious aspects of the dream: her gender confusion,
her clothes, her father's white gown, his charge of rape. I tagged them,
I stored them away. Perhaps I might turn back to these dream images in
future sessions, but in the ﬁrst stages of therapy I have another
priority: I must attend to the frame of therapy---trust, safety, and
conﬁdentiality. Another patient had this dream the night following our
ﬁrst session: "I went into a department store to get all my goods for a
trip but there were things I was missing. They were down in the basement
and I started to descend the stairs, which were dark and rickety. It was
frightening. I saw a lizard. That was good: I like lizards---they're
tough and haven't changed over the past hundred million years. Later I
came upstairs and looked for my car, which was rainbow colored, but it
was gone---maybe stolen. Then I

230

the

gift

of

therapy

saw my wife in the parking lot, but my arms were too full with packages
and I was too rushed to go to her or to do anything but gesture to her.
My parents, too, were there but they were pygmies and trying to build a
campﬁre in the parking lot." The patient, a rigid and non-introspective
forty-year-old man, had long resisted therapy and agreed to consult me
only when his wife threatened to leave him unless he changed. His dream
was obviously inﬂuenced by the onset of therapy, which is often depicted
in dreams as a trip or journey. He feels unprepared for the therapy
venture because the goods he needs are in the basement (that is, his
depths, his unconscious), but it is difﬁcult and eerie (the stairs are
dark, frightening, and rickety). Moreover, he is resistive to the
therapy venture---he admires lizards, which haven't changed for 100
million years. Or, perhaps, he is ambivalent about changing---his car is
a risqué rainbow color but he cannot ﬁnd it. My task in the opening
sessions? To help him engage in therapy and to help him overcome his
resistance to it. Hence, I focused only on those components of the dream
dealing with the onset of therapy: the symbol of the journey, his sense
of unpreparedness and inadequacy, the dark, rickety stairs, the descent,
the lizard. I pointedly did not inquire about other aspects of the
dream: his wife and his difﬁculties in communicating with her and his
parents, who, changed into pygmies, lit a ﬁre in the parking lot. It's
not that these aspects weren't important---in later sessions we were to
spend considerable time exploring his relationships to his wife and
parents---but in the second session of therapy, there were other issues
that took precedence. This dream, incidentally, illustrates an important
aspect of understanding the phenomenon, which Freud described in The

Use Dreams Pragmatically: Pillage and Loot

231

Interpretation of Dreams. Note that the dream deals with several
abstract ideas---entering psychotherapy, fear of exploring the personal
unconscious, feelings of inadequacy, uncertainty about whether or not to
change. Yet dreams (aside from a very occasional auditory experience)
are visual phenomena, and the agency of the mind that manufactures
dreams must ﬁnd a way to turn abstract ideas into visual form (a
journey, rickety stairs descending into a basement, a lizard, a rainbow
car).

another clinical example. A forty-ﬁve-year-old man, who had been in deep
grief since his wife's death four years before, was a proliﬁc dreamer
and reported long, complex, and arresting dreams during each session.
Triage was required: time did not permit investigation of all the
dreams, and I had to select those that might facilitate our work on his
chronic pathological grief. Consider these two dreams: "I was at my
summer house and my wife was there, vague---a mere presence in the
background. The house had a different kind of roof, a sod roof, and
growing from it was a tall cypress---it was a beautiful tree but it was
endangering the house and I had to cut it." "I was at home and ﬁxing the
roof of the house by placing some kind of ornament on it when I felt a
big earthquake and could see the silhouette of the city shaking in the
distance and saw two twin skyscrapers fall." These dreams obviously
related to his grief---his associations to "sod" as well as the roof
"ornament" were his wife's grave and tombstone. It is not unusual for
one's life to be depicted as a house in dreams. His wife's death and his
unend-

232

the

gift

of

therapy

ing grief were embodied by the cypress, which endangered his house and
which therefore he had to cut. In the second dream his wife's death was
represented by the earthquake, which collapsed the twin
skyscrapers---the married couple. (This dream, incidentally, occurred
years before the World Trade Center terrorist attack.) We had been
working in therapy on the issues of coming to terms with the fact that
the coupled state in which he had lived his life was no more, that his
wife was truly dead, and that he had to let go, gradually detach from
his wife, and reengage life. The reinforcement supplied by his dreams
were instrumental in therapy---they represented to him a message from
the fount of wisdom within him that it was time to fell the tree and to
turn his attention to the living. Sometimes a patient's dream contains
an image so powerful, so overdetermined, containing so many layers of
meaning, that it lodges in my mind and I refer to the dream again and
again during the subsequent course of the therapy. For example: "I was
on the porch of my home looking through the window at my father sitting
at his desk. I went inside and asked him for gas money for my car. He
reached into his pocket, and as he handed me a lot of bills, he pointed
to my purse. I opened my wallet and it already was crammed with money.
Then I said that my gas tank was empty and he went outside to my car and
pointed to the gas gauge, which said full." The major theme in this
dream was emptiness versus fullness. The patient wanted something from
her father (and from me, since the room in the dream closely resembled
the conﬁguration of my ofﬁce), but she couldn't ﬁgure out what she

Use Dreams Pragmatically: Pillage and Loot

233

wanted. She asked for money and gasoline but her wallet was already
stuffed with money and her gas tank was full. The dream depicted her
pervasive sense of emptiness, as well as her belief that I had the power
to ﬁll her up if she could only discover the right question to ask.
Hence she persisted in craving something from me---compliments, doting,
special treatment, birthday presents---all the while knowing she was off
the mark. My task in therapy was to redirect her attention---away from
gaining supplies from another toward the richness of her own inner
resources. Another patient dreamed of herself as a hunchback and,
studying her image in the mirror, tried to detach the tenacious hump,
which ultimately changed into a screaming baby with long nails clutching
and digging into her back. The idea of her inner, screaming, importunate
baby greatly informed her future therapy. Another patient, who felt
trapped because she had to take care of an aged, demanding mother,
dreamed that her own body had been transformed into the shape of a
wheelchair. A third patient, who entered therapy with amnesia about the
events of the ﬁrst ten years of his life and with remarkably little
curiosity about his past, dreamed of walking along the Paciﬁc coast and
discovering a river that ﬂowed backward, away from the ocean. He
followed the river and soon came upon his dead father, a shabby homeless
man standing before a cave entrance. A little farther along he
discovered his grandfather in identical circumstances. This patient was
haunted by death anxiety, and the dream image of the river running
backward suggested an attempt to break the inexorable rush of time---to
walk backward through time to discover his dead father and grandfather
still living. He was much ashamed of the weaknesses and failures of his
family, and the dream opened up an important seg-

234

the

gift

of

therapy

ment of work on both his shame regarding his past and his terror of
recapitulating it. Another patient had a horrible nightmare: "My
daughter and I were hiking and suddenly she began to sink. She had
fallen into quicksand. I rushed to open my backpack to get my camera but
had trouble unzipping the pack and then she was gone, sunk out of sight.
It was too late. I couldn't save her." A second dream that same night:
"My family and I were trapped in a house by some older man who had
killed people. We closed some heavy gates and then I went out to talk to
the killer, who had a strangely familiar face and was dressed like some
sort of royalty, and said: 'I don't want to offend you, but under the
circumstances you have to appreciate our reluctance to let you in.' "
The patient was in a therapy group and shortly before the dream had been
confronted by several members who told him he functioned as the group
camera, an observer who did not engage personally and did not bring his
feelings into the group. Incidentally, it is not unusual for a follow-up
dream the same night to express the same issue but in different image
language. (Freud referred to such dreams as companion dreams.) In our
therapy work we proceeded, as in all the other examples, to focus on
those parts of the dream that pertained to the current stage of
therapy---in this instance, the lack of engagement and the restricted
affect---and made no attempt to understand the dream in its entirety.

chapter 80

Master Some Dream Navigational Skills

T

here are a number of well-tested aids to working with dreams. First,
make it clear that you are interested in them. I make a point of
inquiring about dreams in the ﬁrst session (often in the context of
exploring sleep patterns). I particularly inquire about repetitive
dreams, nightmares, or other powerful dreams. Dreams occurring in the
previous nights or last few nights usually yield more productive
associations than older ones. Toward the end of my ﬁrst session, as I
prepare the patient for therapy (see chapter 27) I include comments
about the importance of dreams. If the patient claims not to dream or
not to remember dreams, I give the standard instructions: "Keep a
notepad by your bed. Jot down any part of the dream you remember in the
morning or during the night. In the morning, review the dream in your
mind, even before opening your eyes. Ignore the treacherous inner voice
telling you not to bother writing it down because it is so vivid you
won't forget it." With

236

the

gift

of

therapy

persistent nudging eventually (sometimes months later) even the most
recalcitrant patients will begin to recall dreams. Though I do not
generally take notes during the session (aside from the initial meeting
or two), I always write down descriptions of dreams---often they are
complex and contain many small but pregnant details. Furthermore,
important dreams may come up for discussion again and again during the
course of therapy, and it is helpful to have a record of them. (Some
therapists make a point of asking the patient to describe a dream a
second time because the discrepancies between the two descriptions may
provide leads about hot spots in the dream.) I ﬁnd that asking the
patient to repeat the dream in the present tense often brings it to life
and plunges the patient back into the dream. Usually my ﬁrst question is
about the dream affect. "What are the feelings you experience in the
various parts of the dream? What is the emotional center of the dream?"
Next I urge patients to select parts of the dream and associate freely
to the content. Or I may select promising parts of the dream for them to
mull upon. "Just take a couple of minutes," I instruct them, "and think
about \[some part of the dream\] and let your mind wander freely. Think
out loud. Say anything that comes into your mind. Don't censor, don't
dismiss thoughts because they seem silly or irrelevant." And, of course,
I inquire about the relevant events of the day preceding the dream (the
"day residue"). I have always found quite useful Freud's formulation
that the dream borrows building blocks from the day residue, but that
for images to be important enough to become incorporated into it, they
must be reinforced by older, meaningful, affect-laden concerns.
Sometimes it is useful to consider all the ﬁgures in the dream to be
aspects of the dreamer. The gestalt therapist Fritz Perls, who devised a
number of powerful dream work tech-

Master Some Dream Navigational Skills

237

niques, considered everything in the dream to represent some aspect of
the dreamer, and he would ask the dreamer to speak for each object in
the dream. I remember watching him work effectively with a man who
dreamed of his car being unable to start because of a bad spark plug. He
asked the dreamer to play various parts---the car, the spark plug, the
passengers---and to speak for each of them. The intervention threw light
upon his procrastination and his crippling ambivalence; he did not want
to go further with his life as he had deﬁned it, and instead Perls
helped him explore other paths not taken and another, unheeded, life
calling.

chapter 81

Learn About the Patient's Life from Dreams

A

nother valuable use of dreams has little to do with the unconscious or
the unraveling of dream distortion or discovering the meaning of the
dream. The dream is an extraordinarily rich tapestry threaded through
with poignant signiﬁcant memories of the past. Simply culling those
memories may often be a valuable endeavor. Consider this dream: "I am in
a hospital room. The nurse wheels in a gurney covered with old
newspapers and a baby with a bright crimson face. 'Whose baby?' I ask
her. 'It's not wanted,' she answers. I pick it up and its diaper leaks
all over me. I shout, 'I don't want it, I don't want it.' " The
patient's associations to the two emotion-laden points of this
dream---the crimson baby and her shout of "I don't want it"---were rich
and deeply informative. She mused about crimson babies and then thought
of blue-and-yellow babies. The crimson baby made her think of an
abortion she had had when

L e a r n A b o u t t h e Pa t i e n t ' s L i f e f r o m D r e a m s

239

she was a teenager and her parents' anger, rejection, and refusal to
speak to her, other than to insist that she get an after-school job to
stay out of further trouble. Then she thought of a girl she had known in
the fourth grade who was a blue baby and had had heart surgery and had
vanished, never to return to school. She had probably died, but since
the patient's teachers never mentioned her again, she shuddered for
years at the idea of death as a sudden arbitrary vanishing without a
trace. "Blue" also meant depression, recalling her chronically depressed
younger brothers. She had never wanted brothers and resented having had
to share a room with them. And then she thought of "yellow baby" and her
severe hepatitis when she was twelve and how abandoned by her friends
she felt during her weeks of hospitalization. Yellow baby reminded her
also of her son's birth and how terriﬁed she was when he had been
jaundiced at birth. The other emotional part of the dream---her shouting
"I don't want it"---had many implications for her: her husband not
wanting her to have a baby, her feeling unwanted by her mother, her
father sitting on her bed dozens of times and reassuring her excessively
that she was a wanted child, her own rejection of her two younger
brothers. She remembered how she, a ten-year-old white girl, had entered
a recently integrated, mostly black school in the Bronx, where she was
"unwanted" and attacked by the other students. Even though the school
was dangerous, her father, a civil rights attorney, strongly supported
school integration and refused to transfer her to a private
school---another example, she thought, of how she and her best interests
did not count to her parents. And, most relevant of all for our work,
she felt she was unwanted by me; she considered her neediness so
profound that she had to conceal it lest I get fed up and decide to bail
out of treating her. If not for her dream, many of these emotionally
laden mem-

240

the

gift

of

therapy

ories might never have surfaced in our therapy. The dream provided
material for weeks of rich discussions. The persons appearing in dreams
often may be composite ﬁgures---they don't quite look like any one
person but there are parts of many people in them. I often ask patients,
if they still see the dream and the person in their mind's eye, to focus
on the face and to free-associate. Or I may suggest they close their
eyes and allow the face to transform into other faces and describe to me
what they see. In this manner, I have often learned of all sorts of
vanished individuals---uncles, aunts, best friends, ex-lovers,
teachers---who played some important but forgotten role in the patient's
life. Sometimes it is useful to react spontaneously, to express some of
your own loose associations to the dream. Of course, that may bias the
work, since it is the patient's associations, not yours, that lead to a
truer vision of the dream, but since I'm concerned with what advances
the therapy work, not with some illusory genuine interpretation of the
dream, that doesn't trouble me. Consider, for example, the following
dream: "I'm in your ofﬁce but it is much larger and our chairs seem
large and very far apart. I try to get closer but instead of walking I
roll across the ﬂoor to you. You then sit on the ﬂoor, too, and then we
continue to talk, with you holding my feet. I tell you I don't like you
smelling my feet. You then put my feet next to your cheek. I like that."
The patient could do very little with this dream. I inquired about my
smelling her feet and she described her fears that I would see her
darker, unpleasant side and reject her. But the rest of the dream
appeared mysterious and opaque to her. Then I expressed my reaction:
"Margaret, this seems like a very young dream---the large room and
furniture, your rolling over

L e a r n A b o u t t h e Pa t i e n t ' s L i f e f r o m D r e a m s

241

to me, the two of us being on the ﬂoor, my smelling your feet, holding
them against my cheek---the whole ambiance of the dream makes me feel it
is from a very young child's point of view." My comments struck some
important chord, for on the way home after the session, she was ﬂooded
with forgotten memories of the way she and her mother had often massaged
each other's feet while having long, intimate talks. She had had a
highly troubled relationship with her mother and for many months of
therapy she had held the position that her mother had been relentlessly
distant and that they had shared few physically intimate moments. The
dream told us otherwise and ushered in the next stage of therapy, in
which she reformulated her past and recast her parents in softer, more
human hues. Another dream that announced or ushered in a new phase of
therapy was recounted by a patient who was amnesic for much of his
childhood and curiously uncurious about his past. "My father was still
alive. I was in his home and was looking in some old envelopes and
notebooks that I wasn't supposed to be opening until he was dead. But
then I noticed a green light blinking on and off, which I could see
right though one of the sealed envelopes. It was like my cell phone
blinking." The awakening of the patient's curiosity and the call from
his inner self (the blinking green light) instructing him to turn his
gaze to his relationship with his father are easily evident in this
dream. A ﬁnal example of a dream opening up new vistas for therapy: "I
was getting dressed for a wedding but couldn't ﬁnd my dress. I was given
a stack of wood to build the wed-

242

the

gift

of

therapy

ding altar but I had no idea how to do it. Then my mother was braiding
my hair into cornrow braids. Then we were sitting on a sofa and her head
was very close to my face and I could feel her whiskers and then she
disappeared and I was alone." The patient had no notable associations to
this dream--- especially to the odd image of the cornrow braid (with
which she had no personal experience)---until the next evening, when,
lying in her bed near sleep, she suddenly remembered that Martha, long
forgotten, but her best friend during the ﬁrst through third grades, had
cornrow braids! She recounted an episode in the third grade when her
teacher rewarded her good class work by granting her the privilege of
putting up the class Halloween decorations and permitting her to select
another student to assist her. Thinking it would be a good idea to
broaden her friendships, she selected another girl rather than Martha.
"Martha never spoke to me again," she said sadly, "and that was the last
best friend I ever had." She then proceeded to give me a history of her
lifelong loneliness and all the potential intimacies that she somehow
sabotaged. Another association (to the dream image of the head close to
her) was of her fourthgrade teacher putting her head very close to her,
as though she were going to murmur something tender, but instead
hissing, "Why did you do it?" The whiskers in the dream brought to mind
my beard and her fear of allowing me to get too close to her. The
patient's reconnecting with the dream as she approached sleep the
following night is an example of stateassociated memories---a not
uncommon phenomenon.

chapter 82

Pay Attention to the First Dream

E

ver since Freud's 1911 paper on the ﬁrst dream in psychoanalysis,
therapists have had particular respect for the patient's ﬁrst dream in
therapy. This initial dream, Freud believed, is often a priceless
document, which offers an exceptionally revealing view of core problems
because the dream-weaver within the patient's unconscious is still naïve
and has its guard down. (For rhetorical reasons only, Freud sometimes
spoke of the agency of the mind that elaborates dreams as though it were
an independent homunculus.) Later in therapy, when the therapist's
dream-interpretive abilities become evident, our dreams become more
complex and obfuscating. Remember the prescience of the two ﬁrst dreams
in chapter 79. In the ﬁrst a woman attorney prosecuted her father for
rape. In the second a man going on a long journey shopped for provisions
in a department store in which he had to descend a dark stairway. Here
are some others. A patient whose husband was dying of a brain tumor had
this dream the night before her ﬁrst therapy session:

244

the

gift

of

therapy

"I'm still a surgeon, but I'm also a grad student in English. My
preparation for a course involves two different texts, an ancient and a
modern one, each with the same name. I am unprepared for the seminar
because I haven't read either text. I especially haven't read the old,
ﬁrst text, which would have prepared me for the second." When I asked
whether she knew the name of the texts, she answered, "Oh yes, I
remember it clearly. Each book, the old and the new, was entitled The
Death of Innocence." This extremely prescient dream adumbrated much of
our future work. The ancient and the modern texts? She was certain she
knew what they represented. The ancient text was her brother's death in
a trafﬁc accident twenty years earlier. Her husband's death to come was
the modern text. The dream told us that she was not going to be able to
deal with her husband's death until she had come to terms with the loss
of her brother, a loss that had marked her for life, that had exploded
all her young innocent myths about divine providence, the safety of
home, the presence of justice in the universe, the sense of order
dictating that the old die before the young. First dreams often express
patients' expectations or fears about the impending therapy. My own ﬁrst
dream in analysis is still fresh in my mind after forty years: "I am
lying on a doctor's examining table. The sheet is too small to cover me
properly. I can see a nurse inserting a needle into my leg---my shin.
Suddenly there's an explosive hissing, gurgling sound---WHOOOOOSH." The
meaning of the center of the dream---the loud whoosh---was instantly
clear to me. As a child I was plagued with chronic sinusitis, and every
winter my mother took me to

Pa y A t t e n t i o n t o t h e Fi r s t D r e a m

245

Dr. Davis for a sinus draining and ﬂushing. I hated his yellow teeth and
the one ﬁshy eye peering at me though the center of the circular mirror
attached to the headband that otolaryngologists used to wear. I
remembered those visits: his inserting a cannula into my sinus foramen,
my feeling a sharp pain, then hearing a deafening whooooosh as the
injected saline ﬂushed out my sinus. I remembered my observing the
quivering, disgusting contents of the chrome semicircular drainage pan
and thinking that some of my brains had been washed out along with the
pus and mucus. All my fears of my upcoming analysis were expressed in
the dream: that I would be exposed (the too-small sheet) and be
painfully penetrated (the needle insertion), that I would lose my mind,
be brainwashed, and suffer a grievous injury to a long, ﬁrm body part
(depicted as a shinbone). A female patient once dreamed the night before
her ﬁrst session that I would break all the windows in her home and give
her an anesthetic injection in the heart. Our discussion of the
anesthetic injection in the heart disclosed that, though she was a
highly successful scientist, she was strongly tempted to overturn her
career and try to become a painter. She was afraid that my therapy would
put her artist heart to sleep and force her to continue her more
rational but deadened life trajectory. These dreams remind us that
misconceptions about therapy are deep and tenacious. Don't be misled by
appearances. Assume that new patients have fears and confusion about
therapy and make certain to prepare each patient for the course of
psychotherapy.

chapter 83

Attend Carefully to Dreams About the Therapist

O

f all the dreams offered by patients, I believe there are none more
valuable to the therapy enterprise than dreams involving the therapist
(or some symbolic stand-in for the therapist). These dreams represent
great potential for therapeutic payoff and, as the following examples
show, merit careful harvesting. A patient dreamed the following: "I am
in your ofﬁce and you say to me, 'You're an odd bird. I've never seen
anything like you before.' " As usual, I inquired about the feeling tone
of the dream. "Warm and cozy," he responded. This patient, who had a
number of unusual ritualistic obsessive-compulsive practices,
characteristically undervalued his many assets---his intelligence, wide
range of knowledge and interests, his dedication to a life of service.
He persuaded himself that I would be interested

Attend to Dreams About the Therapist

247

only in his oddity. Much as I might take an interest in a freak in a
circus sideshow. The dream led us into the important area of his
lifelong practice of cultivating quirkiness as a mode of interacting
with others. Soon the trail led to his self-contempt and his fears that
he would be dismissed by others because of his emptiness, shallowness,
and sadistic fantasies. A dream from another patient: "You and I are
having sex in my sixth-grade classroom. I am undressed but you still
have all your clothes on. I ask whether it was satisfying enough for
you." This patient had been sexually abused by a teacher in grammar
school and had been exceedingly upset by discussing it in our recent
sessions. Our work on the dream opened up a number of trenchant issues.
She had felt sexually stimulated by our intimate discussion about sex.
"Talking about sex with you is something like having sex with you," she
said, and suspected that I, too, had been stimulated and had been
obtaining voyeuristic pleasure from her disclosures. She discussed her
discomfort with the inequality of disclosure---in our sessions she
undressed while I remained hidden. The question raised in the dream of
whether I was being sexually satisﬁed reﬂected her fear that the only
thing she had to give was sex and that I would abandon her if she failed
to provide it for me. Another dream: "I was in a split-level house.
There was a ten-year-old girl trying to break it apart, and I ﬁght her
off. Then I see a yellow Goodwill truck driving up and crashing again
and again against the foundations of my room. I hear the words, 'The
helping hand strikes again.' "

248

the

gift

of

therapy

My role in this dream as the Goodwill truck threatening the foundations
of her house is unmistakable. But just in case we miss it, the dream
redundantly adds, "The helping hand strikes again." The patient, a
repressed, constricted woman, came from an alcoholic family much
invested in keeping secrets from the community. The dream expressed her
fears of exposure as well as an admonition to me to be gentle and
careful. Another clinical example. Toward the end of the therapy a
female patient dreamed the following: "We're attending a conference
together at a hotel. At some point you suggest that I get a room
adjoining yours so we can sleep together. So I go to the hotel
registration desk and arrange for my room to be moved. Then a short time
later you change your mind and tell me it is not a good idea, after all.
So I go back to the desk to cancel the transfer. But it is too late: all
of my things have been moved to the new room. But then it turns out that
the new room is a much nicer room---larger, higher, better view. And,
numerologically, the room number, 929, is a far more propitious number."
This dream appeared as the patient and I were beginning to discuss
termination. It expressed her view that I was at ﬁrst seductive (that
is, the dream image of my suggesting she and I take adjoining rooms and
sleep together) and that she responded by getting closer to me (she
switched rooms) but then, when I changed my mind about having sex with
her, she could not get her old room back---that is, she had already
undergone some irreversible change. Furthermore, the change was for the
best---the new room was a superior room with salu-

Attend to Dreams About the Therapist

249

brious numerological implications. This patient was an exceptionally
beautiful woman who exuded sexuality and had in the past related to all
men via some form of explicit or sublimated sexuality. The dream
suggests that sexual energy between us may have been essential for the
therapeutic bond to be forged, which, once in place, facilitated
irreversible changes. Another clinical example: "I am in your ofﬁce. I
see a beautiful dark-eyed woman with a red rose in her hair reclining on
a sofa. As I approach, I realize that the woman is not as she had
seemed: her sofa is really a bier, her eyes are dark not with beauty but
with death, and her crimson rose is no ﬂower but a bloody mortal wound."
This patient (described extensively in Momma and the Meaning of Life)
had often expressed her reluctance to engage me as a real person. In our
discussion about the dream she said, "I know that I am this woman and
anyone approaching me will, ipso facto, be introduced to death---another
reason to keep you away, another reason for you not to get too close."
The dream led us into the theme of her being cursed: so many men she had
loved had died that she believed she carried death with her. It was the
reason she refused to let me materialize as a person---she wanted me
outside of time, without a life narrative consisting of a trajectory
with a beginning and, of course, most of all, an end. My notebooks are
crammed with numerous other examples of my appearance in my patients'
dreams. One patient dreamed of urinating upon my watch, another of
wandering through my home, meeting my wife, and becoming part of my
family. As I age more, patients dream of my absence or death. In the
intro-

250

the

gift

of

therapy

duction I cited a dream of a patient who upon entering my deserted ofﬁce
found only a hat rack holding my cobweb-ﬁlled Panama hat. Another came
into my ofﬁce to ﬁnd a librarian seated at my desk who informed her that
my ofﬁce had been converted into a memorial library. Every therapist can
supply other examples.

chapter 84

Beware the Occupational Hazards

T

he cozy setting of psychotherapy practice---comfortable armchairs,
tasteful furnishings, gentle words, the sharing, the warmth, the
intimate engagement---often obscures the occupational hazards.
Psychotherapy is a demanding vocation, and the successful therapist must
be able to tolerate the isolation, anxiety, and frustration that are
inevitable in the work. What a paradox it is that psychotherapists, who
so cherish their patients' pursuit of intimacy, should experience
isolation as a major professional hazard. Yet therapists too often are
solitary creatures, spending all their working day cloistered in
oneto-one sessions and rarely seeing colleagues unless they make a
strenuous effort to build collegial activities into their life. Yes, of
course, the therapist's workaday one-to-one sessions are drenched in
intimacy, but it is a form of intimacy insufﬁcient to support the
therapist's life, an intimacy that does not provide the nourishment and
renewal that emanate from deep, loving relationships with friends and
family. It is one thing to be for

252

the

gift

of

therapy

the other, but quite another thing to be in relationships that are
equally for oneself and the other. Too often, we therapists neglect our
personal relationships. Our work becomes our life. At the end of our
workday, having given so much of ourselves, we feel drained of desire
for more relationship. Besides, patients are so grateful, so adoring, so
idealizing, we therapists run the risk of becoming less appreciative of
family members and friends, who fail to recognize our omniscience and
excellence in all things. The therapist's worldview is in itself
isolating. Seasoned therapists view relationships differently, they
sometimes lose patience with social ritual and bureaucracy, they cannot
abide the ﬂeeting shallow encounters and small talk of many social
gatherings. While traveling, some therapists avoid contact with others
or conceal their profession because they are put off by the public's
distorted responses toward them. They are weary not only of being
irrationally feared or devaluated but of being overvaluated and deemed
capable of mind-reading or of rendering curbstone solutions to
multifarious problems. Although therapists should be inured to the
idealization or devaluation they face in their everyday work, they
rarely are. Instead, they often experience unsettling ripples of
self-doubt or grandiosity. These shifts in self-conﬁdence, indeed all
changes in inner states, must be carefully scrutinized by therapists
lest they interfere with the therapy work. Disruptive life experiences
encountered by the therapist---relationship strains, birth of children,
child-rearing stresses, bereavement, marital discord and divorce,
unforeseen reversals, life calamities, illnesses---all may dramatically
increase the strain and the difﬁculty of doing therapy. All of these
professional hazards are much inﬂuenced by one's work schedule.
Therapists who are under personal ﬁnancial pressures and schedule forty
to ﬁfty hours a week are far

Beware the Occupational Hazards

253

more at risk. I've always considered psychotherapy as more of a calling
than a profession. If accumulating wealth, rather than being of service,
is one's primary motivation, then the life of a psychotherapist is not a
good career choice. Therapist demoralization is related also to one's
range of practice. Overspecialization, especially in clinical areas
loaded with great pain and desolation---for example, working with the
dying, or the severely chronically impaired or psychotic---puts the
therapist much at risk; I believe that balance and diversity in one's
practice vastly contribute to a sense of renewal. Earlier, when I
discussed the transgression of sexual involvement with patients, I
pointed out the similarity of the therapistpatient relationship to any
exploitable relationship containing a power differential. But there
exists a major difference that inheres in the very intensity of the
therapy endeavor. The therapeutic bond can become so strong---so much is
revealed, so much asked, so much given, so much understood---that love
arises, not only from the patient but also from the therapist, who must
keep love in the realm of caritas and prevent its slippage into eros. Of
all the stresses in the life of the psychotherapist, there are two that
are particularly catastrophic: the suicide of a patient and a
malpractice lawsuit. If we work with troubled patients, we will always
have to live with the possibility of suicide. Approximately 50 percent
of senior therapists have faced the suicide, or a serious suicide
attempt, of a current or past patient. Even the most mature and seasoned
therapist will be tormented by shock, sadness, guilt, feelings of
incompetence, and anger at the patient. Equally painful emotions are
experienced by the therapist facing a malpractice lawsuit. In today's
litigious world, competence and integrity are no protection to the
therapist: almost every competent therapist I know has, at least once,
been

254

the

gift

of

therapy

exposed to a lawsuit or the threat of lawsuit. Therapists feel deeply
betrayed by the experience of litigation. After dedicating themselves to
a life of service, always striving to enhance the growth of their
patients, therapists are profoundly shaken and sometimes permanently
changed by the experience. A new and unpleasant thought occurs to them
when they do an initial evaluation: "Will this person sue me?" I
personally know therapists who were so demoralized by a malpractice suit
that they decided upon early retirement. Sixty-ﬁve years ago, Freud
advised therapists to return to personal analysis every ﬁve years
because of frequent exposure to primitive repressed material, which he
likened to dangerous exposure to X rays. Whether or not one shares his
concern that the therapist's repressed instinctual demands might be
stirred up, it is hard to disagree with his belief that the inner work
of therapists must continue in perpetuity. Personally I have found a
psychotherapist support group to be a mighty bulwark against many of
these hazards. For the past ten years I have attended a leaderless group
that consists of eleven male therapists of approximately the same age
and experience and meets for ninety minutes every other week. But none
of these particular group properties is essential: for example, for many
years I led a successful weekly therapy group for psychotherapists of
mixed age and gender. What is essential is that the group offer a safe,
trusting arena for the sharing of the stresses of personal and
professional life. Nor does it matter what the group is called---that
is, whether it is a "therapy group" or a "support group" (which happens
to be therapeutic for its members). If there is no confounding
interpersonal incompatibility among the members, a group of experienced
clinicians needs no professional leader. In fact, the absence of a
designated leader may enable the membership to exercise their own

Beware the Occupational Hazards

255

sharply honed skills more fully. A group of less experienced therapists,
on the other hand, may beneﬁt from an experienced leader serving both as
facilitator and mentor. Forming a support group is easier than one might
think. All that is required is the resolve of one or two dedicated
individuals who generate a list of compatible colleagues, contact them,
and arrange for the time and place of a planning session. In my view,
groups are a powerful vehicle for generating support and personal
change. Couple that with the skills and resources inherent in a
gathering of experienced clinicians and it is obvious why I so
passionately urge therapists to avail themselves of this opportunity.

chapter 85

Cherish the Occupational Privileges

I

rarely hear my therapist colleagues complain that their lives lack
meaning. Life as a therapist is a life of service in which we daily
transcend our personal wishes and turn our gaze toward the needs and
growth of the other. We take pleasure not only in the growth of our
patient but also in the ripple effect--- the salutary inﬂuence our
patients have upon those whom they touch in life. There is extraordinary
privilege here. And extraordinary satisfaction, too. In the preceding
discussion of professional hazards I described the arduous, never-ending
self-scrutiny and inner work required by our profession. But that very
requirement is more privilege than burden because it is an inbuilt
safeguard against stagnation. The active therapist is always evolving,
continuously growing in self-knowledge and awareness. How can one
possibly guide others in an examination of the deep structures of mind
and existence without simultaneously examining oneself? Nor is it
possible to ask a patient to focus upon inter-

Cherish the Occupational Privileges

257

personal relatedness without examining one's own modes of relating. I
receive plenty of feedback from patients (that I am, for example,
withholding, rejecting, judgmental, cold and aloof), which I must take
seriously. I ask myself whether it ﬁts my internal experience and
whether others have given me similar feedback. If I conclude that the
feedback is accurate and illuminates my blind spots, I feel grateful and
thank my patients. Not to do so, or to deny the veracity of an accurate
observation, is to undermine the patient's view of reality and to engage
not in therapy but in anti-therapy. We are cradlers of secrets. Every
day patients grace us with their secrets, often never before shared.
Receiving such secrets is a privilege given to very few. The secrets
provide a backstage view of the human condition without social frills,
role playing, bravado, or stage posturing. Sometimes the secrets scorch
me and I go home and hold my wife and count my blessings. Other secrets
pulsate within me and arouse my own fugitive, longforgotten memories and
impulses. Still others sadden me as I witness how an entire life can be
needlessly consumed by shame and the inability to forgive oneself. Those
who are cradlers of secrets are granted a clarifying lens through which
to view the world---a view with less distortion, denial, and illusion, a
view of the way things really are. (Consider, in this regard, the titles
of books written by Allen Wheelis, an eminent psychoanalyst: The Way
Things Are, The Scheme of Things, The Illusionless Man.) When I turn to
others with the knowledge that we are all (therapist and patient alike)
burdened with painful secrets--- guilt for acts committed, shame for
actions not taken, yearnings to be loved and cherished, deep
vulnerabilities, insecurities, and fears---I draw closer to them. Being
a cradler of secrets has, as the years have passed, made me gentler and
more accepting. When I encounter individuals inﬂated with

258

the

gift

of

therapy

vanity or self-importance, or distracted by any of a myriad of consuming
passions, I intuit the pain of their underlying secrets and feel not
judgment but compassion and, above all, connectedness. When I was ﬁrst
exposed, at a Buddhist retreat, to the formal meditation of
loving-kindness, I felt myself much at home. I believe that many
therapists, more than is generally thought, are familiar with the realm
of lovingkindness. Not only does our work provide us the opportunity to
transcend ourselves, to evolve and to grow, and to be blessed by a
clarity of vision into the true and tragic knowledge of the human
condition, but we are offered even more. We are intellectually
challenged. We become explorers immersed in the grandest and most
complex of pursuits---the development and maintenance of the human mind.
Hand in hand with patients, we savor the pleasure of great
discoveries--- the "aha" experience when disparate ideational fragments
suddenly slide smoothly together into coherence. At other times we are
midwife to the birth of something new, liberating, and elevating. We
watch our patients let go of old self-defeating patterns, detach from
ancient grievances, develop zest for living, learn to love us, and,
through that act, turn lovingly to others. It is a joy to see others
open the taps to their own founts of wisdom. Sometimes I feel like a
guide escorting patients through the rooms of their own house. What a
treat it is to watch them open doors to rooms never before entered,
discover new wings of their house containing parts in exile---wise,
beautiful, and creative pieces of identity. Sometimes the ﬁrst step of
that process is in dream work, when both the patient and I marvel at the
emergence from darkness of ingenious constructions and luminous images.
I imagine creative writing teachers must have similar experiences. Last,
it has always struck me as an extraordinary privilege to

Cherish the Occupational Privileges

259

belong to the venerable and honorable guild of healers. We therapists
are part of a tradition reaching back not only to our immediate
psychotherapy ancestors, beginning with Freud and Jung and all their
ancestors---Nietzsche, Schopenhauer, Kierkegaard---but also to Jesus,
the Buddha, Plato, Socrates, Galen, Hippocrates, and all the other great
religious leaders, philosophers, and physicians who have, since the
beginning of time, ministered to human despair.

Notes p. xiv---Erikson, Erik, Identity: Youth and Crisis (New York: W.
W. Norton, 1968), pp. 138--39. p. 1---Karen Horney, Neurosis and Human
Growth (New York: W. W. Norton, 1950). p. 5---C. P. Rosenbaum, personal
communication, 2001. p. 6---André Malraux, Antimemoirs (New York: Holt,
Rinehart, and Winston, 1968), p. 1. p. 6---Arthur Schopenhauer, parerga
and paralipomena, Volume 2, translated by E. Payne (Clarendon Press.
Oxford. 1974) p. 292 p. 6,7---Arthur Schopenhauer, The Complete Essays
of Schopenhauer, trans T. Bailey Saunders (New York: Wiley, 1942),p.2
p. 7---ibid--p.298 p.8---Hermann Hesse, The Glass Bead Game: Magister
Ludi, Richard Winston. p. 15---Ram Dass, oral communication, 1988.
p. 18---Carl Rogers, "The Necessary and Sufﬁcient Conditions of
Psychotherapeutic Personality Change," Journal of Consulting Psychology
21 (1957): 95--103. p. 21---Irvin Yalom, Every Day Gets a Little Closer
(New York: Basic Books, 1974). p. 21---Terence, Lady of Andros,
Self-Tormentor & Eunuch, vol. 1, trans. John Sargeant (Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1992). p. 29---This dream is discussed in
Momma annd the Meaning of Life (New York: Basic Books, 1999.)
p. 31---This incident discussed in Momma and the Meaning of Life (New
York: Basic Books, 1999.)

262

Notes

p. 63---K. Benne, "History of the T-group in the laboratory setting," in
T-Group Theory and Laboratory Method, ed. L. Bradford, J. Gibb, K. Benne
(New York : John Wiley, 1964), pp. 80--135. p. 64---Irvin Yalom,
Inpatient Group Psychotherapy (New York: Basic Books, 1983).
p. 64---Irvin Yalom, Every Day Gets a Little Closer (New York: Basic
Books, 1974). p. 73---Irvin Yalom, Love's Executioner (New York: Basic
Books, 1989). p. 76---Sigmund Freud, Studies in Hysteria (New York:
Basic books, 2001). p. 79---Irvin Yalom, "Group Therapy and Alcoholism,"
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 233 (1974): 85--103.
p. 81---Yalom, S. Bloch, S. Brown, "The Written Summary as a Group
Psychotherapy Technique," Archives of General Psychiatry 32 (1975):
605--13. p. 81---Sándor Ferenczi, The Clinical Diaries of Sándor
Ferenczi, ed. Judith Dupont (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1995).
p. 82---Irvin Yalom, Lying on the Couch (New York: Basic Books, 1996).
p. 89---Peter Lomas, True and False Experience (New York: Taplinger,
1993), pp. 15--16. p. 104---Friedrich Nietzsche, Thus Spake Zarathustra
(New York: Penguin Books, 1961), p. 85. p. 106---Louis Fierman, ed.,
Effective Psychotherapy: The Contributions of Helmut Kaiser (New York:
The Free Press, 1965), pp. 172--202. p. 106---Irvin Yalom, When
Nietzsche Wept (New York: Basic Books, 1972). p. 108---Harry Stack
Sullivan, The Psychiatric Interview (New York: Norton, 1988).
p. 112---J. Luft, Group Processes: An Introduction to Group Dynamics
(Palo Alto, Calif.: National Press, 1966). p. 128---I. Yalom, M.
Liebermann, "Bereavement and Heightened Existential Awareness,"
Psychiatry, 1992. p. 131---Irvin Yalom, Existential Psychotherapy (New
York: Basic Books, 1980), p.146. p. 148---J. Gardner, Grendel (New York:
Random House, 1989). p. 149---Martin Heidegger, Being and Time (New
York: Harper and Row, 1962), p. 294.

Notes

263

p. 175---Friedrich Nietzsche, The Gay Science (New York: Vintage Books,
1974). p. 175---Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to Power (New York:
Vintage Books, 1967), p. 272. p. 176---Friedrich Nietzsche, The Will to
Power (New York: Vintage Books, 1967), p. 267. p. 201---Irvin Yalom,
Love's Executioner (New York: Basic Books, 1989), p. 15.
p. 202--3---Friedrich Nietzsche, Letter to P. Gast 4 August 1882, cited
by P. Fuss and H. Shapiro, in Nietzsche: A Self-portrait from His
Letters (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1971), p. 63.
p. 203---Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond Good and Evil (New York: Vintage
Books, 1989), p. 95. p. 204---Erich Fromm, The Art of Loving (New York:
Perennial Classics, 2000). p. 207---Erik Erikson, personal
communication, 1970. p. 210---Ruthellen Josselson, The Space Between Us
(New York: Sage, 1995), p. 201. p. 216---D. W. Winnicott, "Hate in the
Counter-transference," International Journal of Psychoanalysis 30
(1949): 69. p. 219---Sigmund Freud, Studies in Hysteria (New York: Basic
Books Classics, 2000). p. 223---Drew Weston and Kate Morrison, "A
Multidimensional MetaAnalysis of Treatments for Depression, Panic, and
Generalized Anxiety Disorder: An Empirical Examination of the Status of
Empirically Supported Therapies," Journal of Consulting and Clinical
Psychology, December 2001, Volume 69, Number 6. p. 243---Sigmund Freud,
The Handling of Dream Interpretations, standard edition, vol. 12
(London: the Hogarth Press, 1958), p. 91. p. 243---These two dreams are
described in Momma and the Meaning of Life (New York: Basic Books,
1999). p. 249---Irvin Yalom, Momma and the Meaning of Life (New York:
Basic Books, 1999), pp. 83--154. p. 254---Sigmund Freud, Analysis
Terminable and Interminable, Standard Edition, vol. 23, p. 249

A b o u t t h e Au t h o r I R V I N D . Y A L O M , M . D . , is the
author of Love's Executioner, Momma and the Meaning of Life, Lying on
the Couch, and When Nietzsche Wept, as well as several classic textbooks
on psychotherapy, including Existential Psychotherapy and the foremost
work on group therapy, The Theory and Practice of Group Psychotherapy.
He is Professor Emeritus of Psychiatry at Stanford University, and he
divides his practice between Palo Alto, California, where he lives, and
San Francisco. Visit the author's website at www.yalom.com.

Visit www.AuthorTracker.com for exclusive information on your favorite
HarperCollins author.

other works by irvin d. yalom, m.d. The Theory and Practice of Group
Psychotherapy (Fourth Edition) Encounter Groups: First Facts (with
Morton A. Lieberman and Matthew B. Miles) Every Day Gets a Little
Closer: A Twice-Told Therapy (with Ginny Elkin) Inpatient Group
Psychotherapy Existential Psychotherapy A Concise Guide to Group Therapy
(with Sophia Vinogradir) Love's Executioner When Nietzsche Wept The
Yalom Reader (edited by Ben Yalom) Lying on the Couch Momma and the
Meaning of Life: Tales of Psychotherapy

Credits

Designed by Nicola Ferguson

Copyright THE GIFT OF THERAPY. Copyright © 2002 by Irvin D. Yalom,
M.D. All

rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
non-exclusive, non-transferable right to access and read the text of
this ebook on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced,
transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or stored in
or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any
form or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or
hereinafter invented, without the express written permission of
HarperCollins ebooks. Adobe Acrobat eBook Reader July 2007 ISBN
978-0-06-146799-8 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher Australia HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty.
Ltd. 25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321) Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au Canada HarperCollins Publishers
Ltd. 55 Avenue Road, Suite 2900 Toronto, ON, M5R, 3L2, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca New Zealand HarperCollinsPublishers
(New Zealand) Limited P.O. Box 1 Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz United Kingdom HarperCollins
Publishers Ltd. 77-85 Fulham Palace Road London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.uk.harpercollinsebooks.com United States HarperCollins
Publishers Inc. 10 East 53rd Street New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com


