THE ACTOR

DON MIGUEL RUIZ BARBARA EMRYS

The Actor How to Live an Authentic Life

Argentina - Chile - Colombia - Spain USA - Mexico - Peru - Uruguay

© 2020 by Miguel Angel Ruiz and Barbara Emrys © 2020 by Urano Publishing
USA, Inc. 8871 SW 129th Terrace Miami FL 33176 USA Cover art and design
by Opalworks Cover copyright © Ediciones Urano, S.A.U. All righs
reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including
photocopying, recording, or any information storage or retrieval system,
without prior permission in writing from the publishers. The first
edition of this book was published in November 2020 ISBN:
978-1-953027-02-3

Index Orientation Day Day 1: The Artist Day 2: Language Day 3: Acting
Day 4: The Stage Day 5: The Final Curtain

Orientation Day Good morning, and welcome to your personal Mystery
School! This week we begin a series of teachings about your life from an
artist's point of view. Since you were old enough to speak, you've told
countless stories about your personal experiences. You've spent decades
expressing your feelings and documenting your actions. And yet in many
ways, you remain a mystery to yourself. We're here together now to
investigate the most compelling mystery of all: you. As this series
expands, so will your awareness. You will discover more about your
world, how it was created, and how it can be modified for your
happiness. Your world is the reality you perceive. You may think people
see things exactly as you do, and make the same assumptions about what
they see, but everyone's world is unique. Your personal reality is a
distinct work of art, shaped by your own ways of thinking and imagining.
These courses are intended to help you recognize the creative choices
that have made your reality what it is now, and the choices that are
still available to you. Of course, you've walked this campus since you
were born. You've attended many similar classes in your life and
explored mysteries for longer than you can remember. You've attended
many orientation days like this one, and many graduation ceremonies.
You've been a student and you've been a teacher, sharing your wisdom
with others as you move through life. You, like every human, arrived on
this planet without knowledge. You could see and sense, but you were
intellectually blind. And like most new humans, you raised your little
lamp---let's call it curiosity---and moved forward into the darkness.
You were hungry for light and everything light could reveal. As you
solved each of life's mysteries, more mysteries revealed themselves.
Revelations came faster as your awareness grew. Your

questions became deeper and their answers more challenging to process.
This has been the way with you since your life began. There's an ancient
story that exists in human imagination. It concerns a gathering of wise
entities in the heavens. They decided to create a mystery school, and
that school would be called Earth. There are many versions of this
story, but most agree that it took a long time to prepare this school.
Science tells us it took billions of years to create an environment that
could sustain life on this planet. It took billions more to build a
campus where artists could come and discover the mysteries of life. To
put it another way, it took an extremely long process of evolution to
bring us to this particular moment---where, together, we can discover a
new way of understanding you. Every bit of knowledge, every topic, is a
new field of exploration. Many people like you have explored the
sciences and became experts in their field. Some study philosophy and
social sciences. Some become chemists, physicists, engineers. Some
dedicate themselves to religion, or to the law. Some excel at sports and
some excel at the arts. Some very inspired students go on to inspire all
of humanity. You may be among them, and more like you will follow.
Today, mysteries are yielding to human curiosity faster than ever. For
many years now, you've been a part of this global academy where
mysteries are examined and secrets are revealed. You've been a student
even before your traditional schooling began. By now you've shown the
world your skills, and you have the ability to develop more. You have
the power to improve the quality of your life every day. You are
mastering you, even now. Using the power of attention, you can continue
to see more, realize more, and take charge of your level of awareness.
As I'm sure you've observed by now, even masters never stop learning.
You've mastered many skills, but you too have miles to go before the
adventure is over.

Being a student of life is like entering a maze that contains countless
paths, each of which offers more choices. As you wind your way through
the maze, it's impossible to see where each turn will lead you. Your
life evolves according to the paths you follow, and your decisions are
affected by everyone you encounter on the journey. Other students have
influenced your perception of yourself. Their reflections have already
affected the trajectory of your life and will, in some way, shape your
future. Teachers provide insights, but students cannot see what they're
not ready to see. Your work with me is also an artistic exchange. I use
the clearest language I can when I speak; that is my artistic
contribution. You listen attentively, at your own level of
comprehension; that is your contribution. How I choose my words is my
responsibility, and how you interpret my words is yours. Together we are
creating awareness out of mystery. During our time together, you will
recall familiar secrets and you will also uncover many surprising ones.
You will begin to see clearly where once you were disoriented or
confused. The discoveries you make here will give power to the present
moment and help you make peace with the past. I suggest you see even the
smallest revelation as a lightning bolt to energize the next day's
journey. This Mystery School series will address the challenges you face
as you continue to shape your world. In future classes, we will discuss
your personal mythologies and the power they exert over every aspect of
your life. We will discuss romantic relationships, and the many ways we
bond as human beings. There are so many doorways to learning, but this
week we begin with a review of the dramatic arts. Why? Acting is our
first learned skill---even before language, and even before we stand up
to walk. Performance art is a way of life for every person, and it has
influenced our common dream. You, for instance, are the main character
in every story you've told about yourself, and your loyalty to that
character often keeps you from realizing your authenticity as a

human being. This week you have the opportunity to see the human drama
as a whole, as well as the role you play in it. You may notice many
things you couldn't before. You may decide to modify your actions as a
result. New discoveries help us see that we have choices in life. How we
make those choices is up to us. It's an interesting world; you are an
interesting individual. Again, welcome! Lift your little lamp. Bring
your excellent curiosity. Bring an enthusiasm for adventure, and always
remember to open your mind to the truth.

Day 1: The Artist "...the artist can fashion a beautiful thing; and if
he does not do it solely for his own pleasure, he is not an artist at
all." --Oscar Wilde

A good day to you! Today, we begin our course in dramatic arts. In this
particular school, every topic is meant to improve your understanding of
human thinking and behavior. Every lesson brings you a step closer to
wisdom and awareness. How you listen is up to you. How you apply each
lesson is for you to decide. There are some students who go to school
anxious to learn. Maybe you've been that kind of student in the past.
There are some who go to school but get easily distracted. That also
could be you. There are some who fail to take notes or remember what
they've learned. And there are some who show up, attend a few classes,
and drop out early. Dropping out indicates a mysterious lack of
interest. If you were that kind of student, you probably wouldn't be
here now. No, I suspect you've been interested in solving life's
mysteries since you arrived on campus, but you've entered a new level of
discovery now. So leave your old ideas at the door. Settle in, listen,
and prepare to see with different eyes. With an open mind and a
willingness to experiment, you can turn abstract ideas into observable
actions. Good! We've gone through the introductions, so let's begin this
class by speaking about the artist. Before any work of art can be
created, there must first be an artist. Energy, you can say, is the
artist of the natural world. You are the artist of your own reality. The
impulse to create is in your genetic makeup. You were born to it. What
defines an artist, exactly? Well, many things. An artist has an eye for
beauty. An artist looks for wonder in the physical world and the virtual
world. An artist sees what isn't readily seen by others, and shares that
vision

with humanity. An artist knows how to surrender to the creative
force...to be thoughtless and in love. Some of those definitions might
not seem familiar to you. They might seem a little eccentric.
Eccentricity is considered a characteristic of artists, but aren't we
all eccentric and strange? You may not like the way some people express
their art, but every expression has a right to exist. We are all
artists, and our talents are diverse and remarkable. You and I are
architects, painters, and storytellers, just for a start. There's no
need to argue over technique and style, because we each do it according
to our instincts. Every artist processes information in a unique way. We
do our best with the tools at hand, which include the brain we were born
with and the knowledge we've accumulated. Given inferior tools, a
sculptor might produce inferior work. Given only a small amount of
light, or very few colors, any painter would be challenged. And yet,
challenges often lead to exciting and innovative art. Genius lies in the
distinctive expression of every individual, whatever the restrictions.
Before we discuss the nature of your talents, let's talk about nature
itself. Let's talk about the emergence of the artist into the physical
realm. You and I were born into a world that can legitimately be called
a masterpiece of art. You can see that, surely. Earth is a perfect
creation. It took billions of years for this planet to evolve into the
marvel it is. We, too, are a marvel. Humanity is new by comparison, but
it has experienced its own astonishing evolution. And the process
continues, for both the planet and the species. Every one of us is a
transforming work of art.

You, the Marvel We all began life as authentic beings, but authenticity
became elusive as we grew into adulthood. Authenticity got lost in the
relentless song and dance, you could say. We learned to live up to other
peoples' expectations of us. We learned to pretend, and to be blind to
the pretense. In the human drama, truth is often forgotten for the sake
of the show. But, deep within the

spectacle, truth waits to be illuminated. Underneath all the theatrics,
truth is what we are. Like everyone else, you were conceived by wondrous
means and made into a human within a few short months. Everyone develops
according to life's biological blueprint. Energy is the architect, the
artist. Energy makes matter and directs the evolution of matter. You
were conceived, born, and refined into a work of perfection by energy's
unstoppable force. At the moment of your conception, you started your
education. Even in the womb, you approached the mysteries of being human
one puzzle at a time. Life has been your teacher, guiding you from your
earliest moments. When you broke the physical connection with your
biological mother, you started to learn from the rest of humanity. As
your infant brain matured, it began to define your personal universe. It
learned to recognize sounds, shapes, faces. At a certain point, someone
spoke your name and you recognized it as your own. Someone hooked your
attention, which began the formal process of learning. You imitated
their words, and were on your way to mastering a language. At first you
didn't know what you knew or didn't know---and you didn't care. Why
should you? You were born not understanding what you saw or heard, but
you were destined to figure it out. Slowly, you learned to distinguish
one thing from another. You singled out emotions and gave a kind of
order to the chaos. Step-by-step, unknowns become known. As your nervous
system evolved, you became adept at solving mystery after mystery. The
mind of every artist is created from bits of knowledge and memory. Your
mind developed according to the stories you heard and the ideas you
accepted as true. Meanwhile, your body continued to be guided by life's
energy. At four or five years of age, you went to your first mystery
school away from home. Perhaps it was nursery school, or kindergarten,
where you

learned the rules of human conduct from other people. You studied the
social arts, where "getting along" and "fitting in" meant everything.
You were taught to share and to play nice. You received constant
reminders: Don't kick! Don't bite! Use your inside voice! Wait your
turn! These techniques helped you become an artist of diplomacy in a
world of contrasting cultures. In first grade, you were taught to read,
to write, and to work with numbers. To a small child, these are
staggering mysteries---until they're not. After a time of struggle and
discipline, you began to break the codes. You became a kind of magician,
revealing the unseen and discovering the unexpected. A handful of
letters suddenly became sentence, a thought, a story---a universe. And
numbers! The symbols 0-9 introduced amazing games, mathematical
solutions, and entirely new universes. At first, numbers could only be
managed on the fingers of two little hands. As your brain grew in
complexity, so did the problem-solving power of numbers. From ten little
fingers, your calculations took you all the way to the infinite! How
could you have imagined such things when your studies began? In those
early years, you also fell in love with music. Just twelve tones, you
found, could create an infinite library of sounds. There's that word
again: infinite. Infinite... Limitless... Never ending. All symbols
yield to it eventually. In fact, the more we understand about ourselves,
the more likely we are to find ourselves at the doorstep of infinite
mystery. In elementary school you studied simple science, where
experiments revealed some of life's basic secrets. You began to learn
about the physical world a little at a time. You began to understand
your place in it, and your relationship to all living things. You did
all of this---adding, multiplying, reading, singing, experimenting---not
knowing you were training to be a master. Then, as now, you were the
artist, and life was your creative partner. Then came middle school,
where more complex mysteries become

familiar. You were also rocked by the secrets of your own body. Puberty!
Physical changes meant emotional changes---and even deeper mysteries.
And that adventure hasn't ended. Your body continues to change in
dynamic ways. You'll make adjustments to the changes, even into old age;
but the body's mysteries, like the mysteries of the universe, will
puzzle and intrigue you for a lifetime. After middle school came high
school, then college, perhaps, and then a job and career. Every new
school, every profession, represented a different culture. Each demanded
that you learn a new dialect and break new codes. They required you to
reimagine yourself, and adapt to bigger changes. Can you recall any of
that now? Change leads to more change, so you may never have recognized
how much you transformed in a short time. Here on Earth is where you
learned and you matured. Here, you developed free will and began to make
decisions according to your own philosophies. You gathered information
and experience on this campus, until you, too, became a master and a
teacher. Whatever your age, you're still transforming. Your library of
knowledge is your alma mater. What you say and what you think are the
laws you live by. Right or wrong, your mind---with all its views and
opinions---runs the show. The mind creates a version (or, more
accurately, a distortion) of the real universe. It observes what is, and
makes sense of everything in its own artistic way. It recreates what has
already been created by life. It copies. It reinvents. As a result, we
humans build tunnels, towers, and bridges as they exist in nature. We
duplicate nature, and in some ways we improve on it. Over the centuries,
we've learned to unlock the basic mysteries of physics and to
reconstruct matter. And we've gone farther; we've challenged the
elements. We've defied gravity. We've dared to fly---even to hurl
ourselves into space. We're adventurers, explorers, and accomplished
sorcerers. We are artists, and our strange art affects every species on
Earth.

There are many kinds of artists attending this university. Some sculpt
objects out of clay and stone. Some bend metals, carve wood, weave
fabric. Some artists write, and reveal the human condition through their
words. Artists fashion things out of imagination. They construct, they
dream, they invent. And no matter their particular expertise, artists
have one thing in common: They act. They emote. They perform. They
practice the art of dramatic interpretation---which leads us to our
topic of the week.

The Actor This class is focused on a specific kind of art, one that has
kept humanity enthralled for thousands of years: acting. We'll discuss
acting in more depth later in the week, but let's take a quick look now
at how it relates to you and to your reality. We are all players and
spectators in the human drama---that includes you. You are the
experienced actor, having gone through years of training without ever
realizing it. You are a thespian. You're also a fan of the theater. We
are all enthusiastic supporters of the arts, and we all have specific
performing talents of our own, although those talents may not be
recognizable to us, or to anyone. Acting is mostly reacting. We're
always in reaction, and there are many ways to react. Just as an actor
makes different choices in a scene, you and I choose our favorite
reactions. Say I poke you with my elbow a little too energetically. You
can react with anger and pretend to be injured. Or you can laugh. Or you
can give me a hug. Or you can do nothing, which is also a reaction.
Reacting is an artistic choice, not just a strategic one. You've been
studying this art for a lifetime. By now, you favor certain reactions
over others. You may even feel those reactions define you. Performing is
a learned skill. You picked it up even before you mastered a vocabulary.
Before you learned the words, you'd already mastered the attitudes.
Before you found out that there's such a thing as filmmaking, you were
the star of

your own movie, dramatizing your words and actions. As kids, most of us
developed a hunger for audience response--- something we never really
got over. Realizing our own talent for drama, we dedicated ourselves to
the craft, conditioning our bodies to react to the slightest offense,
the smallest worry. Even moody silences are dramatic reactions. Pouting
is a performance. For some actors, it's a trademark skill. And all such
skills begin early in life. You began your training soon after birth,
imitating the actors who came before you. You did this for
survival---and for fun. Back then, your audience was programmed to love
everything you did. You smiled, and they laughed. You burped, and they
cheered. You babbled incoherently, and they clapped. The amount of
pleasure it gave people to see you try to walk---and start to talk---is
impossible to measure. You were a hit with everyone. In no time, you
were taking your act on the road, make-believing with your little
friends, switching roles, changing plots. Without knowing it, you were
practicing for the role of your life, in the longest running play ever
to hit the stage. Of course, as your performance lost its freshness and
spontaneity, your fan base got smaller. Inevitably, you began to remind
everyone of everyone else. After a while, the laughter seemed forced and
the cheers were muted. Even so, you played on, adapting your act to the
needs of the moment and the expectations of the crowd. You were a
trouper, and still are. As any professional actor will tell you, it's
important to deliver a compelling performance, no matter how an audience
responds. Commit to doing your best, whether they're with you or not. An
audience may be restless and noisy, or composed of just a few people.
They may not laugh when they should or be shocked when you want them to
be. It shouldn't matter. You're not playing for them; you're playing for
you. In this world there are hundreds, thousands, and millions of them.
The world is teeming with critics. They're all followers of something.
They're

devoted to soccer, astrology, fashion, food. And fans have their own
tastes and preferences. How can you know what an audience wants? How can
you hope to please everyone? 'Turning out' the audience is a challenge
to most performers-after all artists---were trained to please. Their
happiness has always relied on a positive response from someone else.
The things that frighten most professional actors are the same things
that frighten the amateur---meaning you, me, and the rest of humanity.
They're afraid to be judged. We all take the risk of being judged on a
daily basis. We step out of the house each morning to face a world full
of critics. All the world is a stage--- and you are only one of several
billion players. Fortunately, most of them are too busy judging their
own performance to notice yours. Professional actors, on the other hand,
must step into the lights and be scrutinized by those who have come
specifically to judge them. They're examined by faceless people sitting
in the dark, people whose expectations are high and whose judgments are
often ruthless. Actors are panned by unseen critics and adored by
nameless fans. Bad press can break them emotionally. It has, on
occasion, almost broken you, hasn't it? The judgments of your peers have
hurt you in the past. So you already understand the trials of an artist
very well. The fear of being judged is a handicap we all share, whatever
our talents. It makes it hard for us to walk onto a stage or into the
workplace. It's scary to step into the lights with other skilled
artists, any of whom may be more talented or more attractive. If that
isn't enough, consider what else professional actors have to worry
about. To create effective drama, actors must imagine, and remember.
They must have faith in what they do. Faith means believing in something
one hundred percent, and a good story is only as good as our ability to
believe it. So actors believe. We all believe. We believe what we say,
and hope that our audience believes us, too. We put real emotion into
our performances,

so that our bodies don't always know the difference between an act and
an actual experience. We've all felt the pain of regret. We've lived the
horror of a trauma over and over again. Old wounds come to life when we
summon them. Memory can work against us, but that hasn't kept us from
bringing the past to mind often, regardless of the pain it causes. This
is a practiced art. Professional actors call on intimate and disturbing
memories from their own lives in order to make a scene believable. They
often recreate moments of trauma to inform their art. They act out
emotions so well that audiences become engrossed, and sometimes even
uncomfortable. Stage actors do these eight performances a week for
months at a time. That sounds like a lot. On the other hand, the rest of
humanity is doing it non-stop. Eight performances a week (including
matinees) is nothing for most people. It's probably nothing for you.
Don't you repeat your favorite narratives over and over, to the
discomfort of everyone around you? Don't you lie awake at night, without
an audience, and relive the worst moments of the day? Most of us imagine
future failures. How about you? Do you fear what tomorrow will bring? Do
worst-case scenarios run through your mind all day? Do you believe what
you fear? The greater the actor's belief, the more intense the
audience's response---even when the audience is only you, listening to
yourself in the dark. The job of every actor is difficult enough---just
having to learn the lines, commit them to memory, and deliver them
convincingly. On top of that, they deal with technical problems and
unpredictable audiences. They miss cues and stumble over furniture. Just
like the rest of us, they often fail at the thing they're most
passionate about doing well. Maybe the biggest challenge for a
professional actor is returning to the world offstage. When the play is
over, it's important for an actor to recover emotional balance. Once the
theater goes dark, performers must find themselves again. This goes for
all of us. Every day, artists---plumbers,

politicians, teachers (and you)---push their bodies to emotional limits.
You say you can't help it, that you are a passionate person, but passion
and drama are different things. Passion is truth; drama is theater. It's
a good time in your evolution to see the difference, and to choose. It's
hard to walk away from an intensely dramatic scene. It takes a while to
find some inner calm after a fight. When tempers flare and our defenses
are activated, most of us react automatically. Habits take charge, so we
say things we usually say when we're afraid and angry. We recite the
usual lines. Our body language is already programmed, so we kick things,
break things, or slam a door. We put on a predictable show. We are
seasoned actors following old scripts. "I don't know why I say that
stuff," we may reflect afterward, but the next performance is the same.
So, too, are the apologies and justifications. You're capable of doing
more than following old stage directions. You can rewrite the script.
You can also improvise. Experience informs the things you say and the
choices you make, but so does imagination. So does ingenuity. Every
production deserves a fresh interpretation; every actor yearns for a new
approach. You, the artist, can do this; you can expand your talents and
renew your passions. You can pursue truth through your art. As you
developed as an artist, you learned a lot about yourself. You learned
your strengths and weaknesses, your talents and terrors. From the days
of being afraid of the dark, you learned to fortify your defenses. You
learned to accept judgments, or fight back. You learned to run from
conflict, or to face it. Along the way, you've collected a stash of
secrets, as everyone does. The secrets you keep---especially from
yourself---will likely create more fear. Enough fear, and you're unable
to perform on any stage. If you're afraid to hold your little lamp up to
the truth, you'll remain an enigma to yourself: the mystery you're least
willing to solve. Childhood fears fall away, but grown-up fears last a
lifetime if they're not confronted. What you're able to see in yourself
you're able to see in everyone. And

seeing is the essence of art. A blind artist still has vision. It's
important that artists study themselves. It's important that you do.
"What will I find then?" you may ask. "What monsters must I face? How
can I possibly fight back against the truth?" Knowing yourself
intimately is never the nightmare you expect; far from it. Knowing
yourself breathes new life into a love affair that began in childhood.
Look away, and the affair will end swiftly. Feeling genuine love for
yourself is a homecoming. It's a return to paradise. And paradise is a
great place to improve your art.

Why Does Any of This Matter? You've already mastered so many aspects of
the performing arts. You may now consciously turn your attention to
mastering the art of being an authentic human. Sound impossible? Not
really. You've come to this kind of turning point before. Your first
attempts to walk led to failure. You stumbled and fell, but were so
determined to work at it, to improve your craft, that nothing could
discourage you. Eventually, you learned to move with balance and
confidence. Maybe you mastered some athletic skills. You also excelled
in the arts of speech and emotional drama. Every mastery improved your
life and expanded your awareness. Practicing any art develops the brain.
The more agile the brain, the easier it is to learn anything. Children
who study dance, music, painting, or acting have an academic advantage.
They also have the rare ability to abandon thought and surrender to the
creative impulse, a talent that serves them in every aspect of life.
What does it matter, to know yourself as an artist? The artist
recognizes that each of us is a universe living within countless
universes. With an artist's eye, you can appreciate colors, shapes, and
the vibrations of life. Secret by secret, you can reveal yourself, just
as you would the mysteries of the moon, the stars, the sun, and the
Earth. Piece by piece, you begin to see the whole picture.

The artist's eye searches for beauty. Beauty is the grace that moves you
through the world. Beauty is the gratitude you feel when you're truly
inspired. Beauty lies in a well-chosen phrase, the gift of a smile, and
the respect one person shows another. Every living form possesses its
own kind of beauty. Every physical body is a work of art. Your mind is a
glass-blower, shaping a delicate world for your body to occupy. It
matters that you make that world transparent and pleasing to the eye. It
matters that you make it a dream of beauty and purpose, from which
others can drink inspiration. And let's not forget your most artistic
gift: the genius of words. It's no small thing to become familiar with
the language you speak, a language unique to you. You have your own way
of using words, either to inspire or to do harm. You choose the mood and
the tone behind the syllables you speak. It's never too late to
recognize the voice in your head, always prompting, always predicting.
That voice is yours. No one else controls it. Listen closely to its
repetitive messages. Do they represent who you are, or how you want to
sound? Maybe the voice you're hearing once belonged to someone else,
someone you tried hard to impersonate or to please. Maybe it belonged to
the character you used to play. Maybe you're too old now to play past
roles, or too wise. You can let them go any time. You can pack away the
old costumes and ignore the echo of past monologues in your head. If you
choose, you can simply be.

How Do I Begin? Would it be weird to move through society without a role
to play? It might feel like going onto a battlefield unarmed. It may
seem strange at first just to observe and enjoy, to ignore old impulses
and reactions, and just listen. Listening is a big challenge, even to a
seasoned actor, but it reveals answers to many mysteries. You can learn
fascinating things about other artists. You might learn to understand
your species. You will definitely learn more about

yourself. Listen. Observe. Trust life, in all its whimsy. Find ways to
express yourself more fully. Use your own voice to sing life's music and
to speak its language. Go your own way, while respecting the ways of
others. Set aside your defenses and laugh at your fears. Instead of
echoing everyone else, you can nurture your individuality and
spontaneity. Accept situations as they present themselves, and respond
honestly. Maybe you do that already. Do you welcome the unexpected? Can
you manage disappointment with grace? If not, make these your new
disciplines. Broaden your interpretation of the roles you play. You've
created a character to present to the world, and in some ways, you've
allowed that character to develop subtle shades and adaptable traits. In
other ways, you've lost flexibility; certain traits have become rigid
and uncompromising. Instead of developing a taste for beauty and a
talent for love, you've sometimes been guarded and suspicious. At times,
you've neglected those you love. And too often, you've neglected your
most precious ally: your own body. The body is its own work of art. You
might think it to be large, bulky, or slow. It may seem skinny or
feeble, but still it can be guided with confidence and style. How do you
walk into a room? Are you expecting rejection or commanding interest?
Observe, and be willing to make changes. If not for the body, you'd have
no chance to participate in the human spectacle. You'd have no
opportunity to exhibit your art in any form. Professional actors usually
go through years of training. They're mindful of how they move. They
learn to dance. They work out. Since an actor's voice is so vital to the
craft, they take care of it. They're taught to project when they speak,
and to breathe efficiently. They take singing lessons. They practice
tonal exercises and tongue-twisters. They keep their tools in good
working condition.

Like any actor, your body is your essential instrument. It's an
exceptional work of art, but it can also generate art. Without the body,
there's no actor and there's no performance. Your body meets the world
for you. It plays the tune you want to share. It tells the stories you
want to tell. It produces emotions and conjures words. It fights, it
seduces---and, absolutely, it creates. Your body creates life and many
replications of life. It turns little ideas into things of beauty and
power. So your education as an artist begins with attention to the body.
The most basic question you can ask yourself is, "How can I take better
care of it?" You probably don't treat your body like the precious
instrument it is. More likely, you take it for granted. It's doubtful
you take the time to thank your body, or give it an occasional caress.
It's unlikely you even think about your brain, its most intricate organ
and the hub of all your creativity. What can you do? You can enhance
ordinary moments by giving your body attention. Give it the
encouragement it needs---that means talking, but also touching. Let it
know how appreciated it is. Cherish your physical being as a classical
violinist might cherish a Stradivarius. Your body is your most intimate
partner. As with any good partnership, each is responsible for the
welfare of the other. Artists reflect life, and life is evident in
everything seen and heard. Miss nothing. Judge nothing. Be open and
accepting of it all. Alter the way you see the world. Allow small things
to make an impression. Notice the endearing traits of a stranger. See an
old friend with new eyes. Remark on the wonders of nature. Learn to see
from every point of view. Use perspective, every artist's secret tool.
Be aware of it, along with your body, your brain, your voice. And don't
forget how you choose your words.

Day 2: Language "When I use a word,' Humpty Dumpty said in rather a
scornful tone, 'it means just what I choose it to mean, neither more nor
less." --Lewis Carroll

Good morning! I hope you slept well, and that your dreams were helpful
to the learning process! Even now, in the brilliance of the morning, you
are dreaming. You are imagining and interpreting. As the sound of my
words reaches your ears, you assume their meaning. "Okay, I get it," you
might say, and go to the next thing. Instead, imagine how their meaning
applies to your life. Imagine reacting to situations in uncharacteristic
ways because you dreamed about my words in a new way. By picturing
yourself doing just one thing differently, or seeing just one thing in a
way you never thought of before, you change a little. You evolve. You
expand your usual perspective and you create a slightly different
reality for yourself, just as great artists do. You may not see yourself
as an artist, and yet your objective is to create. You see things your
way, and share that unique perception through your art. Everyone is
destined to create a story, for instance. You create stories, and you
always have. At an early age, you learned to give names to everything.
You were trained to apply all your experiences to the development of
your story. You were told who you were and who your ancestors were. You
were given a history, and also a dream of the future. You were told all
sorts of stories, and soon became your own storyteller. Your personal
story developed over time, inspiring every possible emotional
reaction---joy, despair, and everything in-between. It's a story about
the artist, told by the artist. You're at the center of a universe you
create. Your story is different from every other story; but, as I'm sure
you've noticed, all stories have important elements in common.

All stories have a protagonist---a character through whose eyes the
reader sees the world. You've created such a character for yourself, and
share his or her point of view with everyone who will listen. All
stories have heroes and villains. Yours does, I'm sure. All stories
appeal to people's emotions. You've probably noticed that your stories
get a better response when you exaggerate the drama a little. Of course,
none of this matters unless you and your listeners speak the same
language. What good is a story, however dramatic, if the words make no
sense to the listener? Students on the world campus speak many different
languages. They speak the language their parents taught them in early
childhood, and they also learn to speak the language of their chosen
art. Many choose to learn the language of other artists and other
cultures. Whether or not they see themselves as teachers, every artist
will eventually teach others. Whether or not they see themselves as
artists, they have been creating a masterpiece since they arrived.
Without language, you and I would have problems communicating
effectively. Of course, we could scratch shapes in the dirt or paint on
walls. We might gesture and point. Inevitably, we would have to work out
a system of sounds, and those sounds would become more elaborate over
time. As our speaking skills developed, we'd look for ways to explore
more abstract ideas. We'd try to communicate feelings. We'd want to
explain things that can't be seen. That's the way language began for our
species. We incorporated one sound, then another and another, according
to mutual agreements. A language is built on agreements. You and I
decide that this sound means this thing, and so on. That is the way
language works, even now. If you think a word means something specific,
and I interpret it another way, our communication fails. Disagreement
leads to misunderstanding, and even the simplest misunderstanding can
lead to the end of all communication. When we agree on the meaning of
words, when we enjoy listening to

each other and sharing ideas joyfully, our communication improves. We
develop our artistic skills. Language is an amazing, living form of art.
Humans may not be the only species that practices this art, but we are
masterful at it. It would be impossible to count the number of languages
humanity has developed since its beginning, when men and women drew
things in the dirt and painted animals on cavern walls. How did you and
I learn to speak the language of our people? We arrived as helpless
infants, with no language skills beyond wordless screams and kicking
feet. As our brains developed, we learned to distinguish sounds. Slowly,
steadily, we began to interpret sounds and eventually mimic them. It
happened over time, but it happened easily and organically. We were
destined to be artists of words. You know the role mimicking plays in
childhood development. As a toddler, you heard the sounds that your
parents and siblings made and you attempted to duplicate those sounds,
syllable by syllable. You also observed actions and mannerisms. With a
lot of practice and repetition, the baby eventually became the master.
The first thing you must have noticed in your infancy is how people talk
and talk. They talk about themselves and they gossip about each other.
In fact, gossip is the common tongue of humanity. Adults gossip, and
children listen. They catch on quickly. Soon, they're gossiping with
their peers and making fun of kids who aren't like them. This process,
too, is easy and organic. As they watch their parents interact socially,
children learn a subtle emotional language as well. People tend to react
emotionally (yes, even dramatically) to what they hear and see. Words of
disapproval trigger hurt feelings, and people show it. Words of praise
give pleasure, and they show that. They also act out their
disappointment, indignation, and outrage. They're good at this; they've
been practicing all their lives. People make faces. They yell and shout.
They argue, and then, feeling remorse, they make up. These are features
of their

art. Children learn these skills from experts. Joy has its own
expression. So does anxiety. So does heartbreak. The human body speaks a
multitude of languages, which kids pick up at an early age. They notice
and they imitate. They observe, learn, and bring their unique style to
the craft. Technique, genius, and personal style: these are the
qualities of a great artist. And you are definitely one. You and I show
different kinds of genius, but we are both masters at being who we say
we are. Whatever your vocation, you probably sound like your peers. If
you changed careers, you might sound a little different---because every
professional speaks a different dialect. Doctors don't sound like dairy
farmers. Attorneys don't sound like baristas. Each trade is its own
culture. Changing locations changes the conversation. When you move
around the country, you hear unfamiliar idioms. Beyond your country's
borders, language and culture change. Those changes are enough to alter
your reality. Imagine humanity as a big herb garden, with a wide variety
of plants that offer a wide variety of benefits. There are herbs that
comfort, or cure, or agitate, but all plants function in similar ways.
They require the same basic elements to exist. So do we. But while
humans function in the same way as most living things, they also talk.
They use symbols---printed words, sounds, and physical gestures---to
communicate. Language is not only a necessary part of human survival,
language is our astonishing art.

Breaking the Code Humans use codes, or specific sets of symbols, to
communicate. An alphabet is such a code. Countless words can be created
out of just a few symbols; this is the wonder of language. Transferring
an idea or a feeling into a few spoken syllables is a mystifying art.
How the brain makes that happen is a matter for another mystery school,
but for now let's discuss the codes we deciphered long ago.

All variations of our Latin alphabet consist of up to twenty-six
letters, beginning with a, b, c. Mix these up, and you have a living
language, subtle and adaptable---and proven to endure through the ages.
The formula is the same in every culture: a handful of symbols, when
rearranged, can produce countless phrases, making human communication as
powerful and complex as it is. And then there is the language of
numbers. Counting zero, there are only ten symbols in this code---so
few, and yet their ability to calculate and to quantify is limitless.
Mathematical formulas provide solutions to life's biggest puzzles. Math
has allowed humanity to build cities and empires. It has helped to cure
disease and launch us into space. 1 and 0 have defined the computer age,
altering communication forever. Numbers offer more ways to tell a story
and to unravel life's most confounding mysteries. Music, too, is a
language of its own. Twelve notes, or tones, can be arranged in infinite
ways to produce countless musical phrases. We can capture a tune, record
it, and play it back as many times as we want, to our constant delight.
Yes, music is a delight to the senses. Musical beats pulse through all
matter. From the time of primitive humans, music has had the power to
excite emotions and unsettle societies. It has defined our present
values and documented our history. I've mentioned three basic codes:
words, music, numbers. Call them a-bc, 1-2-3, and do-re-mi. All three
work together in a mix of math and emotion. Without mathematics---the
steady count of beats per phrase--- there is no melody. Without words,
melody can't tell a good story. Someone's passion is being sung in every
poem, and every conversation carries a tune. And all of this adds up to
performance art. We perform with skill and awareness, or we do not. We
put words to just the right music, but we can also seem tone-deaf. We
behave like amateurs, and then we'll act with artistic precision. Art is
subjective, personal, and always changing.

We create beauty out of words. We create books, plays, films, and
lasting attachments with words. Words can inspire us to appreciate
beauty if we've never been encouraged to do so before. Words excite.
Words comfort. Like any artistic expression, words can also create
divisions. Words can produce fear and animosity. We have a curious
relationship with symbols, it seems. We use them to our advantage and to
our detriment...but we're not very good at seeing the difference. We're
not great at breaking our own emotional codes. Consider the role you
play. How does your character use words to communicate with other
characters? How does your character communicate with itself? Do your
words support a negative viewpoint? Do they criticize, complain, and
sometimes even mock the speaker? You may think you sound positive and
tolerant, but listen to your thoughts; they might not sound charitable.
You think you are a cheerful person, but your frown says something else.
You might swear you're an affectionate person, but your body language
says you're not. You lean away from people. You avoid direct contact and
warm gestures. I'm not accusing you; these are examples of how we all
fool ourselves. Our self-image is often at odds with our own words and
actions. The body speaks its own language. It tells secrets that the
mind is unwilling to disclose. Our moods and gestures deliver messages
in spite of us, and they often speak more eloquently than words. Your
face is "talking" whether or not you make a sound. Feeling disapproval,
your mouth tightens. Your brows lift. Your arms cross in response to an
unspoken threat. Your fists clench. Your shoulders rise and fall in
silent judgment and your knees bounce with impatience. Your head tilts,
turns, or ducks away from possible controversy. Who needs a voice when
the rest of you is so emotionally transparent? Most people keep their
thoughts contained, but that doesn't mean their emotions aren't easily
recognized---and transferred. In a play, an actor gives

us an interpretation of a character's motives. Any audience can
understand that language. In a book, a character's thoughts and feelings
are written in detail; the reader gets it. Consider the art that is
going on around you. Everybody is delivering a silent soliloquy. They're
performing without speaking. Their faces offer clues. Their mental
narrative is unknown to you, but you get the message anyway. Emotion
runs under the surface---it's chemical, subtle, but easier to interpret
than speech. And it has a magnetic pull. We are naturally drawn toward
another person's emotional drama. And we're not above pulling people
into our own drama. Everyone likes a good story, and people who make
stories come alive are charismatic. They can move crowds. Audiences want
to feel, and they want their feelings to be mirrored. They want someone
to feel as bad, or perhaps worse, than they do. They want a dose of
drama, and a taste of the emotional food they remember from childhood.
Do you see it? Can you appreciate what you do---what we've all been
taught to do? What you can see, you can change. And personal
transformation begins with the smallest changes. You have time to
improve your art while you walk this campus, so take advantage of every
opportunity. Look closer. Listen more carefully. There are still so many
mysteries left to solve. Of course, you've learned a lot about yourself
already. You've recognized your own artistic prowess by now, surely. How
you think, how you speak, how you use words---and, yes, how you move
your body---are all under your control. Right? Nobody writes material
for you anymore. Nobody feeds you lines from the wings. Nobody tells you
to smirk, to shrug, or to roll your eyes. You make these choices now...
or do you? Your behavior is so automatic that you may not notice most of
what you do and say. You may not even be curious about it. You've
learned your responses by heart the way you once memorized popular songs
and multiplication tables. And now, maybe those responses rule you.
Maybe

language has betrayed you. Maybe words jump out of your mouth without
warning and cause all kinds of problems. If so, what happened? Did the
artist become lazy? Did the musician give up? When was the last time you
listened to yourself and questioned what you were saying? How often do
you make a fresh observation---or say nothing, rather than saying
something predictable? Do you dare correct yourself, or admit you have
no idea what you're talking about? Have you ever tried to stop a runaway
train of thought? Or, even better, have you ever tried to keep that
train from leaving the station? Outside opinions shouldn't control your
thinking. Pay attention, and you can change the way you react. You can
discard a few outdated beliefs. You can curb the monologues running
inside your head. You can have pleasant and unpleasant experiences and
remain emotionally stable. As you make your way around campus, you can
teach your mind a few new tricks. The mind is meant to be flexible; it
can quit stubborn habits and yield to new ideas. Encourage it to laugh
at itself. Allow it to appreciate beauty and to respect all things. Stop
your fears from gaining momentum. This is not about becoming a more
adept actor; it's about becoming a better human being. It's about
clearing away some mental fog and giving yourself more opportunities to
see. And what you see, you can change.

Too Many Auditions In order to get an acting job, you need to audition
for a specific role. You're given a script and you're asked to perform a
scene in an uncomfortable setting. It may seem that you've spent your
life auditioning like this. And it might feel that you've spent
significant amounts of time preparing for your next role. You've moved
from one social circle to another since your earliest days. Remember?
Each situation was kind of a test, a way to exhibit your talents. Each
new circumstance required you to please someone, or to resolve personal
conflicts. Every new society was its own mystery school.

As you graduated from one school and enrolled in another, different
rules applied. With every change, you were expected to get along with
new people and to learn their language. Good communication may have
grown more challenging, but its rewards were greater. At its core,
communication reflects a need for truth. You, like everyone, hope to be
understood and to make real connections with people. You want your words
to be faithful messengers of your intent, but they often fail. Words are
symbols; they can only do so much to describe what exists. They suggest.
They imply. Words pretend to be real things---but, as you've learned,
they often do a better job of masking the truth than revealing it. You
know people who hide behind a wall of words. You, too, know how to use
language to mislead and deceive. You recite lines. You deny and
exaggerate. Telling lies often seems like the best method of dealing
with people. In the past, lies may have defended you from bullies. They
defended you from the hard truth, and they provided alibis when you were
afraid. But what about the future? How much longer can lies really serve
you? You shouldn't have to audition for life. There is no need to fear
the judgements of your peers. The friends you encounter on your strolls
around campus are preoccupied with their own fears. They're concerned
with fitting in, just as you are. Like you, they look for brave and
authentic people to associate with, so it shouldn't be surprising that
some of them have chosen you. Be aware, however, of the energy you spend
trying to be them. We are all capable of inspiring others. We are
innovators. We are artists. We are storytellers and weavers of dreams.
We like to solve silly riddles and explore profound mysteries. Wherever
we come from, we go about our everyday business in the same way. A woman
speaking Kirundi in an African market says the same kinds of things that
women say in markets around the globe. She bargains for fresh produce in
the morning. She gossips about the neighbor's family. She scolds her
children when they

misbehave and comforts them when they're sick. When night falls, she
whispers words of desire to her husband. She understands the vocabulary
of love, and how to put her needs into language. All of us have things
in common, but we come into the world as individuals. We approach every
challenge differently, and with a style that is our own. We walk across
our little stage with a singular stride. We speak with a voice that
distinguishes us from other artists. The world celebrates those who are
unafraid to be one of a kind. Your gift to humanity is to remain genuine
and unaffected. Your most valuable contribution is your authenticity.
Your finest pursuit is the truth, as you walk through a market, across a
campus, or onto any stage.

Why Does Any of this Matter? Once again, you may be wondering, "What
difference does all of this make to me?" Well, as a student of art, you
want to make exciting choices. You want all your creative efforts to
reveal some level of truth. The tools you need are close at hand: your
body, your words, your voice. The quality of your art depends on how you
apply those tools. Your happiness depends on the way your art reflects
your vision. Today, we focused on the art of the spoken word. How do you
choose words? Do you say what you mean and mean what you say? Words are
the tools of your trade. Are they obeying your intentions? If not,
decide how they can serve you better. You utter the words and choose the
tone. Are you paying attention to that process? Do you monitor your
thoughts, or do they run ahead of you? You can improve your relationship
with words by selecting them consciously and creatively. An actor
interprets symbols and brings words to life. We all do it. We interpret
symbols. We say words in a way that suggests how we feel. Words are just
words---they're dead things that come alive through imagination. Spoken
with intent, words can move hearts and change minds. Your words
---spoken or unspoken---have the power to change you. Just as they've

fixed you to one role, they can open you and expand your vision of
yourself. Too often, words just fill the silences. You don't need to
repeat mindless phrases, or to say the same things in the same ways as
if you'd memorized the script. You can be a better communicator by
listening, and making sure your words represent who you are now. You may
have settled on an acting style, but there are other methods to explore.
You can even forget your comfortable techniques and rediscover
authenticity. You can speak as if your words were sacred, just like the
words of humanity's greatest messengers. In your story, you really are
the messenger; you are also the message. You create an environment for
other people to inhabit. The way you communicate can change lives for
the better, or destroy budding passions. It can expand possibilities or
limit them. All of this is for you to decide. The campus of this school
is vast, and full of exciting options. Take it all in. Wander from the
main walkways and distinguish yourself from other artists. With the
wisdom that comes from experience, you will become more confident. With
confidence, you'll be more willing to take chances and to speak for
yourself. If inhibitions from childhood still plague you as an adult,
you're not keeping up with your own evolution. I encourage you to come
up with original homework assignments for this class. You are the best
authority on you. You know your most predictable responses. You know
your own pet words and phrases. You know your most touching stories. You
also know your triggers and defenses. You know how to avoid judgment by
judging yourself first. You know this character of yours better than
anybody. So study yourself. Have fun, experiment a little, and challenge
yourself. Check on your inner dialogue now and then. How does it sound
from one day to the next? What feelings does it generate? Maybe you can
make it through a whole day---a week, a month---without listening to the
voice in

your head. When it gets no attention, the noise will stop. For any
artist, it matters to get comfortable with silence, and be willing to
let life rush in.

What Else Can I Do? We can all benefit by doing research on our fellow
artists. We can learn to watch other people without comment or judgment.
We can observe their reactions to everyday events, and notice how we
react in similar ways. We can feel their rhythm, hear their language. We
can sense the message that lies hidden beneath their words. Once you
develop a talent for listening to others, you can hear yourself better.
You can ask yourself, "What is my tone and my style?" And then you can
go farther. "What is my message?" you can ask. "What kind of artist am
I, really?" Questions like those inspire new discoveries. A rewarding
relationship with life begins with trusting yourself. It comes from
appreciating your instrument---the body, the brain---and allowing it to
play an authentic song. Never mind the techniques taught to you long
ago. Don't worry about remembering your lines. If you pay attention to
the moment, the right words will fall into place at the right time. We
all get stuck. We can't seem to get over the spell of old stories, but
that spell can be broken. Maybe you could start by writing about your
life. Writing out your history is the best way to challenge outdated
beliefs. Do it in whatever way you choose. Begin at the beginning---or
the end, or the middle. Anyway you do it, you'll find some emotional
resolution. You'll find perspective. You'll expose buried secrets and
old grudges, along with things that have outlived their time and lost
their purpose. Don't assume your life hasn't been full of wonders. Don't
underestimate the role you've played in your own destiny. Tell your
story objectively, showing respect for every character. Most of all,
respect the hero, the protagonist. The choices made by that character
were neither good nor bad. The plot didn't work out the right way---or
the worst way. There's nothing to judge and everything to forgive. An
artist understands this, and handles

every subject with compassion. Another good exercise is to imagine
yourself as a playwright, starring in your own play. You're the
storyteller. You're also the lead actor, the headliner. You're the
intriguing plot twist, or the character who redirects the action. You're
everything shocking, amazing, and reassuring. It doesn't matter how the
audience responds. Enthusiasm matters, and love for what you do. Play it
for you---yes, be that daring. Try to imagine one important event in
your story. Then imagine this: your lines are improvised, not studied.
Every motion and gesture is spontaneous. How would that alter the scene?
How would simple honesty have affected the rest of the plot? Don't fear
the past; learn from it. Dedicate yourself to making future scenes ring
with truth. You are a student of art. You are a painter, and the canvas
is your life. You are a musician, and the symphony is you. You are a
novelist, a composer, a sculptor. How do you make a masterpiece? For
one, you respect your art, whatever its peculiarities. Trust your
vision. See the beauty in everything and paint it into your canvas. Love
the art of you and speak in the simplest idioms of love.

Day 3: Acting "All that happens to us, including our humiliations, our
misfortunes...all is given to us as raw material, as clay, so that we
may shape our art." --Jorge Luis Borges

Hi! Greetings to you, on another beautiful morning! The sky is clear and
the mood is electric. The homework you gave yourself energized you to
learn more, I can tell. We're all born to wonder, and to imagine.
Mysteries are made to be solved. Today we dive a little deeper into the
mystery of the actor. Are you ready? We humans have the ability to bring
visions to life and to compose the mood and the music of our days. This
involves acting out key roles. We learn social behaviors, mimicry, and
language skills early in our development, and all of these elements come
together to make us the performers we are. This course is not intended
to teach acting---you're a master already---but if you're interested in
excelling at the art of life, it helps to recognize this: You are acting
all the time. You believe the roles you play. You believe the roles
other people play. That's simple enough. If you're thinking, "Hey, wait.
I'm offended by that!" I'd say you're now playing the role of an
offended person. If you're saying, "I agree that most people are faking
it, but I'm not. I never pretend!" I'd say, sure, okay. You are
authentic, but the character you assume (at work, at home, or even
alone) is not. Most of us love to watch comedians doing impressions of
other people. So why does it hurt to be told we're imitating others? We
all became a part of human society through imitation. It's how we
learned to package and promote ourselves.

We are, in large part, a knockoff of the people who raised us. We take
after many of the people who befriended us, or fell in love with us.
Siblings don't resemble each other just because of their DNA; they
resemble each other because they learned the same moves from the people
who parented them. They learned the same speech patterns. They learned
how to shape their mouths around syllables, and how to laugh, argue,
persuade. They learned how to charm, or to annoy. They do it all in
similar ways, because they went to the same art school. The art of
mimicry enables every living thing to grow safely to adulthood. It
prepares all creatures to have infants of their own. Like baby whales,
bunnies, or baboons, we humans learn to do everything our elders do in
order to survive. It's instinctive, and it's no fault of ours if we
continue to imitate throughout adulthood. Still, imitation is something
we should outgrow. Mature people act on their own, speak for themselves,
and make decisions about their own life's journey. So should we all.
When we remind people of everyone else, we cease to be interesting;
we're barely interesting to ourselves. Instead, we could take advantage
of our differences. We could retrieve the authenticity that was
misplaced in childhood, no matter the situation. It's an actor's
instinct to meet truth in the moment. When honesty suddenly cuts through
all the pretense, it can shock us. It can also shock an audience. To be
willing conspirators in the moment, they, too, need that lightning bolt
of truth. To come together as people, we all need to get real.

Early Training When we were children, we made people happy. In simpler
times, we could sing off key, dance badly, or paint the sky green, and
we'd get a great response. We could fall off the sofa and get a big
laugh. For a while, it seemed as if the world was the best possible
audience, always easy to please. We learned to mimic the people closest
to us, and they rewarded us with love. Seeing themselves in us, they
were inspired to love themselves a

little more. Have you ever watched a child looking in the mirror?
Children please themselves in the same way they've learned to please
others. They pose. They try a hundred different facial expressions. They
spin around like fashion models. They use all the elements of their
emerging craft to create roles to play on the world stage. Professional
actors learn to sharpen the same skills they developed as amateurs:
moving and speaking. So do you, in fact. As you mature, you continue to
sharpen the skills life already gave you. An actor who moves across the
stage confidently is more likely to captivate a crowd. An actor who's
truly convincing gets everyone's attention. The same applies to you. How
you move through the world determines the way people respond to you.
Your tone, your choice of words, your body movements---they have the
power to captivate an audience every time you step into a scene. Every
actor needs a place to shine, and your place was waiting for you long
before you arrived on stage. The backdrop had already been hung, you
could say, and props were already in place. Trusted characters were
there already, standing on their marks and waiting for you under key
lights. They were eager to act with you, to help you prepare and
rehearse. Upon your arrival, the stage was set, your fellow actors were
in place, and the play was already in progress. It was your turn to be
part of the action. It's not surprising that your worst nightmares
sometimes involve being onstage, naked and without a script. You came
into this world exactly that way: naked, dazzled by the lights, aware
that everyone was watching. For a long time, you couldn't speak the
lines they were feeding you. You couldn't perform like your older
siblings. You've been pacing the stage ever since, often unsure of your
skills and terrified of judgment. But like any seasoned actor, you
continue to step up and give it your best shot. You follow the same
routine each day. In the morning, you put on your make-up (or whatever
face you feel will serve you best), and dress for the

part you are expected to play. Your choices aren't just about fitting in
with the crowd. The big stage isn't just for those who conform---no,
even nonconformists require masks and costumes. Defiance is a style
choice. So are outrage and cynicism. When everyone is rebelling, even
rebels seem conventional. Even insurgents are slaves to fashion. In the
end, hairstyle, face, and clothing say very little about who we really
are. Like bumper stickers and tattoos, they suggest how desperate we are
not to be seen. We prefer to hide behind our slogans and our make-up. We
camouflage the truth with sarcasm. Just for a moment, think back on your
wonderful, spontaneous emergence into the world. You were an authentic
being once. Where did that creature go? Are you busy rehearsing,
reciting, acting? Who compensates you for those efforts? You were born
to mimic; that's true. You were blessed with a good brain, which makes
it possible to process everything you see and respond to it. With
practice and experience, you've become a master. When you do something
enough times, it becomes part of your character. That's how professional
actors prepare for a role. That's how you did it, too: with practice and
repetition. You established a character and a backstory. Now the
dialogue comes automatically. Other characters in your play are lightly
sketched, but you know you. No one can perform that role better, no
matter the script, no matter the audience. But now you're beginning to
see how this role has influenced your decisions and your actions. You
see how much control it has over you. You may even realize that you
don't need to work so hard at it. You could even take some time to
discover the artist behind the role. Let each piece of the puzzle lead
you to the next piece. Keep learning more about the mystery of you the
actor. By becoming aware of your methods, you can make informed
decisions about where to go from here.

The Method Awareness helps you to recognize your choices. Right now,
you're

becoming aware of yourself as an actor. You're seeing yourself from a
new perspective, which will help you make better choices as you grow. So
let's take a look at different techniques actors use to excel at their
craft. You already see similarities to the way most of us approach
ordinary situations. For instance, it's a common technique for us to act
like we care about other people's problems when we don't. We show
emotion---getting angry, sad, or offended---because it seems
appropriate. There are plenty of times when our feelings don't match our
actions. There are times when our actions don't match our thoughts. In
some drama schools, that's called surface acting. Surface acting is what
the rest of us call being superficial, or insincere. When there's a
contradiction between what an actor feels and what he does, the result
is a bad performance. The long-term result is physical exhaustion. Being
authentic is energizing, but faking it is hard work. Doing a mediocre
job can make an actor anxious, self-conscious, even ashamed. The
performance suffers, of course. If an actor can't create a bond with
other players, the whole play will suffer. How does this relate to you?
When you're not in tune with yourself, your art suffers. When you're not
in tune with your fellow players, your life suffers. This should make
sense to you; it should even sound familiar. You've probably heard of
Method Acting, but what does it mean? The Method encourages an actor to
use personal memories to inspire a performance. This makes sense, since
artists rely heavily on their own life experience. You, too, rely on
what you know and what you've experienced. You refer to past history in
your social interactions, don't you? You talk about your childhood, your
past love affairs, your current job. When your stories aren't enough,
you repeat other people's stories; you borrow from someone else's life.
Either way, you do your best to engage people. You hook their attention
and you entertain them. That's your method. Method Acting advises an
actor to bring a specific memory to life as the

scene is in progress. For instance, the emotions that an actor felt when
a loved one died years ago are reactivated and substituted for those of
the character while the scene is playing out. The actor was heartbroken
then, and his character is heartbroken now. Using emotional memories
makes a performer more believable in a make-believe situation. Whether
you're performing on stage or off, that method may seem normal to you.
We draw on painful memories often, obsessing over past offenses. Maybe
we get angry now because we couldn't then. We prolong our grieving,
thinking we're honoring a loved one, or punishing ourselves. We relive
past confrontations and old jealousies just for fun. And that's only
what we do by ourselves. In public, we turn those private feelings into
performance art. We've all been in situations where we're expected to
feel strong emotions and to demonstrate those emotions publicly. A
funeral is that kind of situation. A wedding is another. We're expected
to cry openly, in our grief and in our joy. We yell like maniacs at a
ball game. We roar with laughter at a comedy show. We're as zealous as
our co-workers, or as cynical as a friend. We're as offended, or as
deeply hurt, as someone close to us. "If you loved me," your partner
might say, "you'd feel what I feel!" It seems you should, but you don't.
You can't. You can empathize, of course. You can sense what someone is
going through and comfort them. In real life, reaching another person's
level of outrage doesn't help; it makes things worse. For most of us,
pretending to feel something isn't fun. In the short term, it puts us at
war with ourselves. In the long run, it makes us really tired. It can
also make us sick. For professional actors, showing intense emotion in
every performance is hard on the body. In most situations, it's hard on
yours. Bringing painful memories to mind, whatever your excuse, feels
like a punishment. To your nervous system, it really is a punishment.
Your acting may seem real, but it follows a thought process that you
control. You brought a memory to life; you made a random idea seem true.

You're the playwright, the director. You determine the mood and the
method of every performance, and you pay the emotional price for it. It
makes no artistic sense to inflict pain on yourself. It's folly to
relive a childhood trauma to appear more authentic. It may seem obvious
to say, but authenticity doesn't need a gimmick. Truth needs no effort.
Resolving emotional problems is part of every actor's job; it's also
your job. We all want to be more productive artists and better partners.
This means clearing our emotional stumbling blocks so we're ready to
take on bigger roles. Try to be a conscientious editor of your own
material. If you've been indulging old wounds and bad memories, you're
making your life too difficult. And you're getting in the way of your
art. There is another acting technique that simply requires actors to be
present. In other words, they immerse themselves in the scene's
circumstance rather than recalling past experiences. They believe what's
happening on stage. And it works. The key is to look, to listen, and to
understand what's going on right in front of you. Take note of this.
Present circumstances should determine your actions, not past
impressions. The point is to show up and be attentive to the moment. The
point is to be there. Being there doesn't mean trying to remember a
feeling. It doesn't mean searching for an appropriate story. Quoting
wiser people isn't the same as expressing your real feelings. Words are
more likely to reach the heart of the listener when they're spoken with
sincerity. We all know when someone isn't being emotionally honest on
stage; it makes us uneasy. We want to look away. The same is true in
ordinary life: when people try too hard, we get uncomfortable. When
someone's faking it, we'd prefer to look away. Acting is believing: this
is a maxim in most drama schools. Of course, believing something doesn't
make it true. In your daily life it pays to be skeptical. You don't have
to believe everything you hear, whether the ideas come from you or
anyone else. You can see more, and hear better, when you're able to
perceive what's actually happening and not turn it into a

melodrama. Accept more challenges like these. Challenge yourself to be
skeptical, but willing to listen. After all, you're not performing for a
paying public. You're not trying to put on a show. You know now that
authenticity will serve you for a lifetime. It will also serve your
company of players. Anyone sharing your journey will appreciate your
ability to be there and be real--- right now, one hundred percent.

Attention to the Craft Maybe you think acting is for people more
extroverted than you, or who like being the center of attention. You
might think it's for someone more attractive and confident. Deep within
you, you know better. You've always sensed that you're an actor. You may
not recall your first teachers, or directors. You might deny that a
script was ever being written for you, but you're still not sure why you
say many of the things you say. Certain impulses baffle you, and many of
your reactions surprised you. You can't make sense of this little soap
opera that is your life, even now. Your journey is a confounding
mystery, mostly because you haven't noticed what's going on behind the
scenes. Attention is the key to learning. Students get nowhere if they
lose attention in class. Attention helped you to be a good actor; it
helped you stay loyal to your role. By redirecting your attention, you
can do something you've never tried before: discard old roles and
realities. Until now, you've allowed your beliefs to control your
attention. When you believe something, in other words, you tend to focus
your attention on everything that might support that belief. You find
ways to confirm the merit of your belief. In fact, it's difficult to
pull your attention away long enough to consider a different point of
view. When you have control of your attention, you're not so easily
ruled by any belief or opinion. You don't feel obliged to react to what
other people think. You can consciously decide where to invest your
faith. Where you

put your attention, things happen. Relationships blossom. Gardens grow.
Projects flourish. Most importantly, beliefs are born through the force
of your attention. And without it, they lose their power over you.
You've used your attention to support a certain way of being, but maybe
you'd like things to be different now. Maybe you want to be more
receptive, more spontaneous. The world will try to distract you from
that effort. It's noisy place where everyone is fighting for attention.
People around you are caught up in their own show. Your character is a
bit player in their production. Your story isn't important. None of that
should matter; what matters is how you distract and deny yourself.
Picture yourself at the movies on a Saturday night: the theater is full
and the audience is restless and loud. With all that chaos around you,
it's hard to concentrate on the film. Crowds like to talk. They text.
They squirm, move around, and make trips to the concession stand.
Meanwhile, up there on the screen, the action keeps rolling. The movie
goes on, with or without anyone's attention. I could be describing the
world you know---the world outside the theater. Every day, life's
astonishing art is being created in front of your eyes. It buds, it
blossoms, it flashes and dies, while your attention is on the noise.
Even without all the outside drama, your attention is being hijacked by
the scenes going on in your head. This is true for everyone; nobody is
paying much attention to anybody. Attention pays amazing dividends.
Teaching that lesson to your kids is as important as applying it to
yourself. Whether or not they choose to be happy adults, they will have
an available connection to joy, to love, and to life, through you. They
will learn the rewards of paying attention from you.

Truth in Acting Attention makes the difference between an ordinary actor
and a captivating one. It makes the difference between a solid friend
and someone who can't be trusted. Never mind what the rest of the world
is doing; we all need to

put more attention on being honest. We say we'll do things, and then we
forget what we said. We make promises we can't keep. We lie to ourselves
regularly by acting and overreacting. There's a simple improvisation
that explains this point. Try to relax and imagine for a moment...
Imagine that you are standing on a hillside, looking down at a lovely
country landscape below. The sight is a pleasant one, and very calming.
Looking closer, you notice that there is a long stretch of train track
running through this little valley. Can you see it? Good. Let's
continue. As you stand there, looking at the view, you hear the sound of
an approaching train. The sound seems to be coming from two different
directions. This catches your attention. Now you can see two trains; one
is coming from the east and one is coming from the west. Both trains are
racing along the same track. Their whistles blow. Neither train is
slowing down. Suddenly it occurs to you: at the speed they're going, the
two trains can't avoid crashing into each other. Okay, now. Stand
exactly where you are, and act out your response. You're watching. The
trains are rushing toward each other. Their horns are blowing. The
screech of metallic brakes fills the valley, but you know the trains
can't possibly slow down in time to avoid a tragic collision. Are you
imagining yourself crying, or turning away? Are you stumbling down the
hill, arms waving? Are you yelling at the trains? Are you shouting for
help? Maybe you cover your face, refusing to be a witness to this event.
When the trains finally crash into each other and fly off the track,
what do you do? Do you scream in horror? Do you fall to the ground? Do
you faint? If you were acting in front of an audience, you would get
intensely emotional playing this scene, wouldn't you? Of course!
Watching a disaster take place is emotionally shattering. And you would
show that. You would show terror and rage. You would lose your voice
shrieking. You would lose your mind. Actually, a good director would
give you a failing grade if you did any of

that. An acting coach would watch your frantic performance, give you a
minute to catch your breath, and then say, "Okay. Now show me what you'd
really do in that situation." What? After all that emotional effort?
You'd probably be insulted by the comment, but you're a good student.
You'd try again. This time you'd pay more attention. You'd stare into
the imagined distance and watch the two trains approaching, getting
nearer and nearer to each other. You'd see they were going too fast and
getting too close to avoid a disaster. What could you do? You could do
nothing. Alone, and so far away, you couldn't help. So you would do
nothing. Your expression would probably go from concern, to amazement,
to paralysis. Even before the moment of the collision, your body would
freeze. Your mouth might open, but you'd make no sound. You'd watch in
silence. You'd barely breathe. When it was all over, you might make a
choice to run to the scene or run for help. This response is far less
theatrical than all the screaming, but it's more honest. Honesty, as
we've said, can be riveting. Truth is compelling, and because we see it
so seldom, it has the power to shock us. Maybe this exercise shocks you.
Doing nothing may go against your instincts, but your instincts are lost
in the thought process. It's easy to think you'd do all sorts of
things--- things that don't make sense when the time comes. But thinking
rarely plays the lead role in an emergency. It's good to check your
level of honesty in any situation. When you're stunned by your own
falseness, something changes in you. When you witness your own
hypocrisy, you start yearning for truth. Truth is elusive in our daily
lives, mostly because we forget to look for it. That can change. We can
develop an appetite for it. We can demand it from ourselves. We can stop
pretending for a moment, and wait for it. Great actors love to act, and
I can see why. They're more attracted to the truth than to a lie---and,
ironically, they find it on stage. How can acting and

authenticity be compatible? Well, the answer is both complicated and
simple. We've all been searching for truth since the early days of this
adventure. As kids, we learned that deception was often expected,
sometimes preferred. Since then, we've been missing the taste and feel
of truth. To put it simply, we've been missing us for too long. The
problem is, most audiences love the drama. They insist on a good show.
So what's an actor to do? Audiences change everything. We respond
differently when we're being observed. For example, imagine the scene
with the two trains again. This time, imagine you're not alone on a
country hillside. Someone is with you when the trains collide. Okay.
With someone beside you, your reactions would be bigger; maybe you'd
actually scream, point, and describe what's coming. You'd probably check
the other person for a response. It's no mystery that people feed off
each other's emotions. We take cues from each other. We were trained to
deliver a performance, and too often, we feel obligated to do so. Why?
Well, drama paid off in our infancy, didn't it? When we couldn't ask for
something, we screamed. Screaming got someone's attention, at the very
least. When we were finally able to use words, we screamed anyway. A
tantrum got us a quick response. Screaming and kicking got immediate
results. We discovered a way to control other people, bigger people, and
the lesson stuck. Childhood tantrums grow into teenage tantrums;
eventually, they evolve into destructive behaviors in adults. It's weird
to see grownups kick and scream to get attention, isn't it? Kicking and
screaming are metaphors, of course, for all kinds of theatrical
behavior. The actions of a toddler doesn't improve adult relationships.
We all know this by now. When every action gets a reaction---followed by
the need to react to that reaction---the insanity escalates. Maybe you,
too, act like a crazy person under pressure. Maybe you're the drama
queen, throwing tantrums to get attention. No? Okay, I'm not talking

about you specifically, but some people continue to play those roles. It
doesn't matter that they get a negative response---only that they get a
response. Most people evolve and mature. They learn from experience and
adapt. They dare to be honest. Sometimes, they grow wise. I'm asking you
now: are you as honest with yourself as you know how to be---or does it
satisfy you just to give a realistic performance? All roads lead to
truth, if you want to find it. It may require a winding, confusing
journey, but what else are you here to do? Don't waste time waiting for
better roles, better plays, or a more congenial troupe of players.
Listen to yourself now. Learn from your lies. Change course, and let
honesty slip into your conversations. Encourage a taste for it. To be
free to create, you have to laugh away the critics. You have to lose
your fear of judgment. You may have to leave the beaten track to find
truth hidden in the thorn bushes. Who cares? Go ahead. Indulge in a
daily dose of truth, if only for you.

The Company The troupe, or the theatrical family, is the beating heart
of professional acting, and the trust that exists among that family is
an example for all of us. Actors must count on each other. They must
count on their backstage support as well. The magic of theater is about
collaboration, for every artist is essential to the final result.
Actors, at their best, work as a close team. They trust each other for
the right cues and the right timing. They rely on each other's energy
and inspiration. Professional acting can involve long hours and physical
stress, but good collaboration makes it worthwhile. So it is with the
rest of us. We all travel with a small cast of friends. Sharing
experiences brings us closer. Trusting each other makes us less cynical
about life. Allowing a friend to shine is a generous gift. None of this
sounds particularly theatrical, but it leads to the same: a magical
outcome. The magic we create between us is its own precious mystery.

Artists of any kind are drawn to one another. They enjoy sharing the
language and passions of their art. They talk about the work, its
problems and rewards. Do you discuss your own process, or tricks of your
trade, with anyone? In what company can you openly talk about your
fears, or your victories over fear? In what circumstance would you dare
to be emotionally vulnerable, and feel comfortable about it? Supported
by their troupe, actors can make brave choices. They can be fools in
league with other fools for the sake of their art. When did you trust
life enough to cast aside your inhibitions? It's inspiring to see people
working together as a confident team, or to witness trust and fellowship
between people in pursuit of a common purpose. It's discouraging to be
at odds with each other. It only takes a slight shift of perception to
appreciate every person's talent. If more of us made that shift, we'd be
excited to share similar passions. We'd remove our masks now and then.
We'd dare to be genuine. Instead, we choose to remain guarded. We keep
secrets, even from ourselves. Admitting that we're a company of
players---participating in big and small productions together---can
break down a lot of imaginary walls. It can even break down some real
ones, so that we're willing to invent games and conspire together. Fun
can be our main objective. We don't need to be children again to know
the thrill of playing as a team. We can get caught up in the excitement
and feel that magic anytime. Children's theater is an example of
surrendering to the magic. An audience of children does more than
observe; they insist on being part of the action. You can imagine it,
I'm sure. Do it now: picture yourself sitting in the audience at a play
produced for children. The curtain comes up on a fairy story---Rapunzel
and the Witch, let's say. Notice how quickly the children accept the
premise of a girl being captured by a witch and forced to live out her
days in an enchanted tower.

They get it immediately, even if they've never heard the story before.
Their excitement doesn't depend on elaborate sets or special effects.
They don't have to know a backstory. They don't have to see waves of
golden hair tumbling from the tower window; they imagine it. They
understand that a prince has fallen in love with Rapunzel and wants to
release her from the witch's cruelty. When the wicked witch creeps on
stage, they're filled with terror and excitement. They call out to the
other characters on stage, warning them of the danger. They're part of
the scene. They're caught up in the action. Children arrive at a theater
as themselves and then become something else. They become
co-conspirators. They willingly, eagerly, surrender to the
spell---throwing themselves into the plot. While the play lasts,
Rapunzel's happiness affects their happiness. Her destiny is their
destiny. You may think that sounds childish, but are adults really any
different? Don't you routinely push yourself into absurd plot twists?
Aren't you often lured into someone else's drama? It's hard to resist
getting hooked. You believe the premise of their story, whatever it is,
and sign on to the madness. It happens. Kids use their amazing
imaginations for fun. For them, it's great to be in an imagined world
and to believe in it completely. In the company of other excited kids,
they can take a thrilling ride. But staying too long in a fantasy is
exhausting, even for a child. After an afternoon of pretending, children
are relieved to be called home for supper and to collapse into a warm
bed. We adults, too, need to be called home to ourselves. Young or old,
no one wants to be locked in a tower forever, however magical it might
have seemed at first. I'm asking you to notice where you put your faith,
and make changes when you need to. Common sense says to put your faith
in you. Don't lie to yourself for the sake of an idyllic notion. It's
not enough to admit to the fantasy; you need to wake yourself up. See
where a bad story is taking you,

and alter your course. Say no to the drama. Win the war over fear.
Protect yourself from your own abuses; no one can do it for you.

Stage Fright I'm sure you've felt the struggle between wanting to fit in
and daring to be real. You've been reluctant to take a different path.
You've been afraid to make the unwelcome comment. You've known the
anxiety of having to face the public and expose yourself to criticism.
Sometimes the situation isn't so public. For example, you've been
apprehensive about a first date, or a job interview. You've made
yourself sick over a homework assignment, or an upcoming business trip.
You've been afraid to confront a friend, or to break up with a partner.
A fear of judgment can end your most creative impulses. It can cause you
to go against yourself. Maybe you've also experienced the terror of
being on an actual stage, in front of a live audience. In that case,
your critics were hundreds of strangers. You had all the right
tools---your face, your voice, your message ---but under that kind of
scrutiny, your tools seemed inadequate. Maybe the dream of being naked
and laughed at became real for you. If so, your work would have been
spoiled by fear. It happens to every artist. Your life is your art, and
the masterpiece you create must someday be revealed to the world.
Painters must exhibit their works, even if it means exposing themselves
to rejection. Actors must walk onto the stage. Musicians must open their
hearts to a fickle public. Comedians have to face the hecklers. And what
do any of those challenges have to do with you? Just about everything.
You're on display often, if not most of the time. You exhibit your art
to co-workers and family members on a regular basis. Your talents are
under scrutiny every day. You practice and rehearse for every upcoming
show and get the jitters anyway. In solitary moments, you imagine the
worst possible outcome.

So it may be time to take another view of life. Your existence is an
ongoing dream, and the dream changes as your perceptions change. Other
people are performing on their little stages, trying to please their own
public. Watch them in action. See how fear represses their best
instincts. See how their criticism of you reflects their own
insecurities. Don't worry that people will reject you. It's far more
important to notice how you reject yourself. Professional actors deserve
enormous credit for facing their fears. They step onto the stage, night
after night, putting their reputations on the line. Well, an amateur
like you does the same. You take similar chances every day. You face
possible failure, as every artist does. You risk being ridiculed. You
put yourself on display and brace yourself for the consequences. In your
career, you've died a little and come back again many times. In the
process, you've improved your craft. Take a moment to recognize the
dreamlike quality of your life. Imagine yourself on stage, under the
lights. Who's watching? Is anyone even paying attention? Your fears seem
overwhelming, but you confront them and get beyond them. Fear is often a
creative choice, an accessory. Choose courage instead. Choose humor.
Choose faith in yourself. Create on your own terms. You have a chance to
be a master before you leave this campus. That, too, is your choice.
Everyone you know has had to overcome fear; you can guide the ones you
love by example. Be aware of the troupe---your team of supporters.
Mutual trust is something we all wish for. Enjoy your cast of
characters. Let them know you. Get to know them, and support them in
their play. See people as the artists they are. See how they commit
themselves to their roles. Notice their character's motivations, as well
as their strengths and their shortcomings. Appreciate them as they are.
Encourage their art, whatever it is. Your attention matters, so show
them the best reflections of themselves. Be there for the people in your
life, and trust them to do the

same for you.

Love as Motivation In simple terms, motivation is what gets an actor
from one side of the stage to the other. What compels us ordinary people
to do what we do? That's hard to say, since our behavior is so often
automatic. We don't give a lot of thought to our actions or reactions.
We move erratically across the stage and fill uncomfortable silences
with noise. Professional actors, however, plan their movements
precisely. You and I don't ask questions like, "Why did I sit down, or
why did I get up again?" We don't wonder why we turned upstage or moved
suddenly to the left. We don't notice every tilt of the head or lift of
the brow. Actors use the smallest gestures to tell the audience
something. They use their body, their instrument, consciously. The rest
of us? Well, we aren't so conscious, but that doesn't mean we're not
motivated. In your daily routine, one scene leads to another and
conversations repeat themselves (much like they do in a television soap
opera). You're not sure why you say the things you say. You can't always
explain what makes you do what you do. Something compels you. Something
makes you play different roles, in different situations, for different
people. You choose your mood according to an unspoken need. You act like
a baby with one person, crying for what you want. With another person,
you're smooth and seductive. With someone else, you're short-tempered
and competitive. You're the good child, or the bad child. You're the
martyr, the mediator, or the dummy. Those are all acting choices.
They're usually motivated by something---perhaps by a need to be
validated, or praised, or just to be noticed. Whatever it is, the end
result is that you get what you want. You make deliberate choices when
you play a role. You act for specific reasons, whether or not you admit
to them. Have you asked yourself lately about those reasons? What
brought you here, for instance? Why are you

attending this class? How would you like your world to change, and how
committed are you to making those changes happen? How willing are you to
end the drama in your life? An astute actor doesn't search for
motivation just to get across the stage, but to get at the heart of a
scene. She finds the core of a character using empathy, not judgment.
It's your job, too, to understand the motivation behind your actions and
words without judgement. Once that is understood, you can adjust your
actions to suit who you are now, not the role you used to play. You can
act now, into the moment, and save yourself the pain of any future
regrets. You can allow love to guide your next decision, and the next.
Love is every artist's most compelling motivation. Take a good look at
your character's attitudes about love. It may be time to update some old
beliefs on the subject; you might even decide to abandon those beliefs.
Does love feel dangerous to you? Has it always seemed scary? Do you
worry about losing control? Do you think loving someone makes you seem
weak, or foolish? If so, give up on that idea. Being afraid of love
makes no sense at all. Love is simple, but we often make it complicated.
Our relationship with love is one of confusion and resistance. It's a
lot like our relationship with ourselves; we're reluctant to get too
close or feel too deeply. We've been taught to think love is just an
emotion---maybe even a debilitating one. Like any good actor, you may
like to turn love into high drama. You may turn it into a joke. If you
only pretend to love, love yields quickly to hate. Your acting might
deceive the world, but the world doesn't matter. You matter, and how you
love determines your happiness. The problem is, few of us were taught
how to love. Our relationship with love is loaded with contradictions.
We don't really trust it. We write songs about it, glorify it, and then
blame love for all our problems. We say love is fickle. We say love is
blind, but we yearn for it anyway. We pledge our love eternally, unless
something happens to change our

minds. Love conquers all, depending on the situation. Love is all we
need... maybe. It's safe to say that most of us learned to love with
doubts and conditions. You may have heard yourself say you can't love,
or that you don't deserve love, but those are stories. They were
intended to protect you from pain, but you don't need them now. You
might think love is to blame for your unhappiness, but you're lying to
yourself. What you believe is making you unhappy. Just for a moment,
forget what you believe about love. Think of love as the combined force
of all emotions. Think of love as energy itself, powerful and creative.
You are that power, existing within matter. Love is as much a part of
you as the atoms of your body. It's rare for anyone to experience the
uncompromising authority of love, and there's a reason for that. As you
walk through your life, you only meet love's reflections. A reflection
is not the thing itself. You've spent your life getting distorted
reflections of love, and you've mirrored love back in the same way. You
choose how intensely you're willing to love, according to the risks. In
fact, love is not a choice. Your mind can deny it, but it has no chance
against love. For an artist, love is the primary incentive. When you
create, you lose track of who you are. You surrender to life. When
you're in the process of making something---an object, a plan, or a
memory---love is always in charge. You already know what it feels like
to surrender. You abandon your fears when you make love, for
example---you forget all the roles you've ever played. When you create,
you also forget who you're supposed to be. You're guided by mystery when
you work your hands to shape beautiful things out of the raw materials
of life. You feel like energy itself when you sing, or dance. Energy is
the force of love. Love won't hurt you. Pushing love away will hurt you.
Believing you're

a victim of love will hurt you. Like every artist, you've probably
lacked inspiration on occasion. You've felt starved for attention and
praise. Yes, there have been times when you've felt betrayed by love, by
life. You can leave those stories in the past. Now you know the truth:
you are your own best source of love. In the course of your journey,
you've convinced yourself to believe in lies. You've made poor choices
as well as brilliant ones. This is how you've evolved. See that, and
celebrate your exceptional life. When it comes to artistic flair, no one
excels like you. No one channels life the way you do. No one loves as
fearlessly as you do now. Who cares what the critics say? Surrender to
your best artistic instincts. Set yourself to making a masterpiece, and
infuse it with love every day.

Why Does All this Matter? Like all of us, you're here to enjoy life. The
problem is, you get swept up in the drama. Who can blame you? The trials
and tribulations of humanity demand your full attention. It's especially
hard to resist the melodrama taking place in your mind with its unruly
cast and illogical storylines. Your mind broadcasts a soap opera of its
own. It puts on a good show--- too good, you could say. It produces a
drama that feeds your fears and your doubts. And that drama has a
tendency to spread to the real world, which affects everyone you love.
Their reactions may be just as dramatic, causing even more fear and
doubt. And so the show goes on. We all want to command attention, but
some people get attention through disruption and chaos. If you feel
you're one of those, consider writing a different script for yourself.
Consider having more respect for your play and for the players taking
part in it. So much self-indulgence causes unnecessary pain. In the long
run, you'll feel the pain more than anyone. Be aware of your own
dramatic excesses. You're not the victim of your art. Neither are you
the beleaguered audience feeling used, cheated, and demanding your money
back. You are the actor, choreographer, and set

designer in this production of yours. You also direct, produce, and
control the quality of your material. Your tantrums don't help the
creative process. Self-pity doesn't reflect your genius. Artistic
excellence sounds impossible to achieve at first, but remember that
you've been working on your masterpiece for decades. You've been
learning new methods all your life. You've been practicing and
experimenting. Your special talents show in the things you love to do.
Art is a celebration of life. Artistic excellence is an ongoing odyssey.
Don't stop now. We stop growing as artists when we stop exploring. We
don't learn by following the same trails and observing the same scenery.
We build our own masterpiece by cutting a different path. "A
masterpiece? Are you kidding?" you might be saying. "Who can be
bothered? And why should it matter?" Why? Well, you're much happier
doing something you're good at. You're happier being productive. When
you're not battling outside pressures, you can begin to love yourself,
and that matters. Your art matters. Your authentic presence matters to
the lives of the people around you. While you're preparing for your next
role, or planning your next publicity tour, consider the energy you
spend rehearsing for life instead of living it. Consider the amount of
time you spend dreaming of love instead of putting the power of love
into action. Love is your most enduring legacy. It's been discouraged
and postponed, so the challenge now is to bring it back.

Where Do I Start? Remember that we are all acting, and we don't know it.
We play different roles for different people, in different situations.
You and I are not professional actors, but we've been taught to please
and to follow direction. From a very young age we were told to act this
way or that way according to every situation. Nothing about that is
right or wrong; it's just a fact. Kids need to fit in for their own
safety. They need to blend into society and adapt

to cultural peculiarities. And the habit of blending in stays with us
into adulthood. What does authenticity look like in action? For one, we
stop struggling to imagine how people are judging us. We're not afraid
to offer our own unique take on things. Our reactions are born of our
perceptions, not our stories. We are present, aware, and responsive to
the moment. Honesty and spontaneity used to be natural to all of us. It
used to be natural to you. You were completely authentic as a child, but
what was once instinctive may now take some practice. You may have
forgotten how to respond spontaneously, and it will take practice to
assure yourself that you won't die from not acting a part. "Not acting"
doesn't mean acting like you're not acting. Like any good professional,
you can be aware that you're performing even while you savor precious
moments of truth. You can distinguish the times you need to be what
people expect you to be from the times you only need to be. You can
respect other people's roles while choosing to be genuine. You are not
like anyone else. Your brain doesn't function like any one's and your
body doesn't look like anyone's. Your memories are different and your
interpretations of memories are filtered through your own beliefs. In
this lifetime you will play the role of someone's mother or father or
attentive friend. You will play the wife, the husband, the lover. These
are predictable roles, but you will play them your way. Professional
actors find a way to be authentic in predictable roles. When they
replace someone in a role, they won't play the character exactly as it
was played before. They're unlikely to copy another performance, however
well it was received by the public. They must give the role as much of
themselves as they can. For instance, Romeo and Juliet are central
characters in Shakespeare's famous tragedy. Every young actor who plays
Romeo will do it his way. Every actress playing Juliet will portray the
role as she imagines it. Every

interpretation is valuable. Every characterization is unique because
actors perceive and behave differently. Is that true for the rest of us?
Are we bringing our unique style and vision to our actions, or are we
echoing a performance we've seen and admired? Are we imitating the
responses of people close to us? Are we using the same phrases and
making similar gestures? These aren't questions we usually ask
ourselves. Only you know if you're being true to your own instincts.
Only you can decide to walk through the world in unaffected ways. It's
important to remind yourself that you have a choice. In every situation,
you can choose to pick up a familiar role or put it aside. At any moment
you can choose to hide behind a mask, or to set it down and abandon the
act. Either way, the rest of the world may still look at what you're
doing and see a performance; but without a mask, you'll feel liberated.
Without a role to play, you will know yourself better. You can respect
the truth of you---its manifestations and its mysteries. You have the
choice to use your talents consciously. When a performance isn't needed,
you can also choose to set aside your pretenses and stop the show.
You've been under the spell of your own character for a long time. The
stories you tell about yourself are not the truth. They are your
exceptional art, and you invest a lot in your art. You invest a lot in
your stories to the point that they seem true. In fact, your body bends
to your stories. Your moods, your attitude, your prejudices are
supported by stories that were handed down to you by other people.
Stories can change, however. You can alter the script and cancel the
next performance. You can take it all in---the people, the
conversations, the drama---and enjoy it for what it is. You can allow
actions to take the place of your stories. Good actors get caught up in
the doing of things, even when they have to recite a lot of dialogue.
The circumstances in a play or film may be fixed, but an actor must
summon the will to respond to those

circumstances. So must you. We all want our moments to count. We also
want to benefit from someone's full attention, if only briefly. We want
to be better at paying attention, too, and to focus on one thing at a
time. Most of all, we want action, not theory, and action requires that
we use our will. I'm reminding you that your will is an awesome force.
It's your superpower. Yes, you have the responsibility to use it wisely,
but you might have forgotten to use it at all. Just as some actors allow
themselves to be upstaged, we often let someone with a stronger will
control us. We get lazy about our actions. We let other people make
artistic choices for us and even take charge of our own production. We
surrender our will. I leave you with this homework assignment: exercise
your will. Feel its force, and direct it. Turn energy into something
tangible. Turn "nothing" into something wonderful. Your will is your
power. Command it with joy.

Day 4: The Stage "All the world's a stage, and all the men and women
merely players. They have their exits and their entrances, and one man
in his time plays many parts..." --Shakespeare

How reassuring to see you again, ready to tackle more mysteries! Notice
that you used your will to get here this morning. You're willing to
learn more, to see more, and to put your curiosity to good use. Let's
see where your will, and mine, take us now. In his excellent way,
Shakespeare stated what most people already know to be true: we play the
roles people expect us to play. As he described it, we start as infants
and then grow into reluctant students. In time, we become sighing
lovers, soldiers, and respectable members of society. Eventually we grow
old. We end our lives as weak as babies again, helpless and mystified.
"This strange eventful history" is one we all share, bringing our own
style to each role and walking onto whatever stage we choose. Which
moves us to the next topic: the stage. The stage is every actor's
natural environment. Today, you're going to imagine it bigger than the
space that an actor can cover in a few strides. For you, and for the
rest of humanity, the stage includes the length and breadth of the
Earth. Your performance refers to the artistic choices you've made since
you arrived. This planet is the stage you stepped onto decades ago. The
events of your life may seem vague now, but today you'll have a chance
to remember. You'll see how your past led you to this moment. By
remembering where you've been, you can plot all future road trips
consciously. Map-making changed human destiny; this exercise can change
yours. Imagine your travels through life---your history of choices and
decisions--- as a roadmap. See it as a charted route whose starting
point is your physical

birth. It's a long and meandering road from there, but easily imagined
once you start. You've probably had breakfast at a roadside diner where
you're given a menu, a set of silverware, and a place mat with
children's games and puzzles printed on it. One of the puzzles is a
simple maze. To solve it, you trace a line from the entrance of the maze
to an exit point on the far side. Even little puzzles like that can be
challenging. Some paths end quickly. Some wind back to the beginning.
Some connect to other paths, going nowhere. Only one path will lead out
of the maze. Your life's journey is far more elaborate than a child's
puzzle, but it involves similar twists and turns. So go ahead: Imagine
your life sketched out on a piece of paper. Imagine it as a maze. Notice
the dead-ends and switchbacks---the results of your less successful
choices. Recall the stretches when everything seemed to go smoothly.
Make the puzzle as tricky as the trajectory of your life has been, but
remember this: it has only one entrance and one exit.

The Maze This maze of yours took shape when you emerged from your
mother's womb. Back then, decisions were made for you until you were old
enough to make them for yourself. You kept moving forward. There were
paths you wished you'd never taken and paths you took without hesitation
or regret. You moved forward anyway. You followed someone else's road
map, or you stumbled through a series of random turns on your own.
Either way, you kept moving. Like a tourist enjoying vacation photos,
you can now see where you went during your stay here, and how much fun
you had. If you stretch the path into a straight line, the route you've
taken is even easier to track. Try doing that: imagine the maze as a
highway that extends across an entire map. Again, follow your life's
path. Do this tonight: draw a straight line across a large sheet of
paper. The start of the line marks your

birth; the end marks this present moment. Draw little x's to indicate
the major events in your life, and label them. Mark the less significant
events as well. They might have been pivotal moments---moments that
changed your cast of characters, or shifted your motivation. Those
"lesser" moments may even have saved you, and extended your time in the
maze. See where every choice has led you. Those choices are clear to you
now, even if they weren't back then. Notice the various crossroads you
could have taken but didn't. See where you could have changed course, or
turned back. Recall the passions that pushed you to move faster, or to
slow down. Recall the people who persuaded you to stay in place. Mark
the times where you got distracted and lingered too long. No decision
was a wrong one; they all provide some good information---information
you wished you'd had years ago. Now you can go back to drawing your life
as a maze. Give it the same detail. Give it the attention it deserves.
You can even create a narrative to go with it. You're used to telling
your story in bits and pieces; this exercise gives you a chance to talk
through it from beginning to end. It gives you a way to smooth the
emotional rough spots and resolve unhealed wounds. Every incident is
part of the intricate puzzle, or tapestry, that makes your life such a
unique achievement. Work through the places that once tested you
emotionally. Make peace with old injuries. Forgive the people who hurt
you. Forgive yourself as well. I urge you to do this, and then to study
your handiwork. What did you find out? How has this process changed your
perspective? It's odd to take a class in your own history, I know. It's
not easy to examine your life objectively. You already know the subject
well, but you probably haven't approached your life from the viewpoint
of a master artist. Do it now. Step back and admire your efforts. Like a
painter putting down his brush, allow yourself to be amazed.

A Life on Film Now, if you don't mind, I'll change the metaphor
slightly. Imagine this line on a sheet of paper as a strip of celluloid,
with images of the key events of your life. It plays like a movie.
There's a dramatic beginning to the film, as you opened your lungs and
gasped for air. That simple act catapulted you into the dream of
humanity, where your talents would determine your ability to survive and
to flourish. What a thriller! See the movie from beginning to end. Take
a closer look at some of the key scenes. You can make cuts in the film,
or slow down the rush of images. You can focus on a memory that seems
unimportant, or one that changed the direction of events. There's
nothing to fear in watching. It's only an exercise. Looking closely at
your life shouldn't make you feel regret. It's your saga, yes, but it's
fun-filled and loaded with action sequences, just like any movie. It's a
slapstick comedy, a tragedy, a cautionary tale. Enjoy all of it. Don't
let unpleasant memories bother you. Wonderful moments, gone forever,
shouldn't sadden you. You're only studying a puzzle on a placemat.
You're imagining a movie, and contemplating a course for the future. You
can also view this movie as if you were watching another person's life
documented on film---another life, with another actor. Appreciate the
changing moods. Get comfortable with the madness as well as the
monotony. Mistakes were made and promises were broken; heartbreaks came
and went. Try to understand each sequence from your present perspective.
Above all, be sympathetic to the main character. Do you wonder how other
people might view the movie of your life--- people you've known and
loved? They'd probably see the central character differently. And they
would want to see themselves in it, of course. They'd expect to be
featured prominently. If you walked into an adjacent theater, where a
film was playing about the life of someone you know, you'd do the same.

"Where do I fit into this narrative?" you'd wonder. "How necessary am I
to the plot? How valuable am I to the hero?" You're not the main
character in anyone's movie but your own, but you want to be represented
well in their stories. You want them to confirm your importance. You'd
prefer to be missed when you walk out of a scene. We're a traveling
troupe of actors and artists who move around a very big stage. We
shuffle aimlessly or we march with solemn determination, but we're all
moving steadily away from the lights and out of the frame. We all know
there's an exit to the maze, but we don't know when we'll stumble on it.
And we will all leave a legacy, of course. Our legacy will be the
collection of memory-images we leave behind. What will yours look like?
Will you leave memories that inspire and comfort? How generously did you
love? How bravely did you open yourself to love? You're still taking
this journey, and you're meeting more artists along the way who will
carry an impression of you throughout their lives. However old or young
you are, this legacy is yours to determine, and it will exist until
everyone who knew you is gone. During your time on stage, some of your
fellow artists have demonstrated their love and support. You've done the
same for them. You rely on other people to give you information about
yourself. You may not agree with their assessment of you, but seeing
yourself in the eyes of another person tells you a lot. It tells you
many things about them. It may tell you things you didn't know about
yourself. And it tells you about how you relate to the people around
you. A clear reflection is one that comes with no prejudice or judgment.
When you see yourself reflected in the eyes of someone who truly loves
you, you are inspired to be more generous with your love. You're
inspired to love yourself more. Good reflections and positive feedback
encourage you to be the best artist you can be. In fact,
mirror-reflections may be the most fascinating part of the human dream.
Let's take a look at the mysteries of

mirroring.

Seeing the Mirrored Path Every lifetime is a solitary experience, no
matter how many companions come and go. Let's imagine the maze again.
You're alone as you march through the maze, but yours is not the only
path. The entire world is a maze. Within that maze, everyone is
following his own course. Within the same world, we live in separate
realities, but our realities parallel each other and affect each other's
lives. Your parents took a journey of their own, making different
choices for different reasons. Your brothers, sisters, and childhood
friends chose their own course. All your teachers followed different
trajectories toward the finish line. Their journeys, like yours, were
mapped out by the people who taught them. Sure, someone else drew their
version of the map, but between the entrance and the exit, they
improvised. They blazed their own course. You did, too, and will
continue to do so, as long as your journey lasts. And how long is that?
Some lives last almost a century; some longer. Some lives are brief.
While most of us are still zigzagging through the maze, some dear
friends have already left it. Every life is about solving mysteries, and
there are countless ways to do that. Where our attention is pulled, we
go. Where emotions lead us, we run. We move in directions that suit our
interests and curiosities, with companions to assist us in the journey.
Everyone you encounter has an image of you. Everyone reflects that image
back to you. Every person is a mirror, in other words. The corridors of
your maze are lined with mirrors. Looking at your life this way, you can
see the kinds of people that have attracted you, and maybe you can see
why you are drawn to some mirror reflections and repelled by others.
Looking closely at your friendships and affairs, you can see patterns
you didn't recognize until now. I'm sure you're familiar with garden
mazes. They're giant outdoor

puzzles where tall hedgerows conceal a system of crisscrossing paths.
It's easy to get lost inside a garden maze, but that's part of the
thrill. Walking with a sweetheart you can get happily and conveniently
lost. You can linger, hide from the world, and enjoy some quiet time
together. All the paths eventually lead to an exit, but once inside,
it's impossible to tell where that exit might be. Well, imagine mirrors
lining your maze instead of bushes and trees. You are wandering through
a world that shows you assorted images of yourself. Wherever you go, you
meet a new reflection. You, too, are a mirror for every person you meet.
The thing is, you can't accurately reflect yourself. You can never
really see yourself in action, so you rely on others to reflect you. And
they do. People see you through their own lens. Their opinions of you
are in keeping with their assumptions and expectations. Since you
already have an image of yourself set firmly in your mind, any
reflection that contradicts that image will seem surprising, even
disturbing, to you. Some reflections don't seem to represent you at all.
When life is such a hall of mirrors, which mirrors can you rely on to
tell you the truth? Or, more to the point, why should you rely on any of
them? Why should another person's opinion of you be so important? We all
want someone to confirm the best image of ourselves, but people are
quick to judge. They get a feeling about you right away. They can decide
who you are even before meeting you. It's a rare person who looks,
listens, and really sees someone. If they love what they see in you,
you've found a great mirror. And it works both ways: when you show
respect and admiration for someone else, they're naturally drawn to you.
They want to see that reflection again and again. It should be the
instinct of a parent to love whole-heartedly, but it sometimes happens
that children have to wait to find genuine love later in life. They have
to wait to be appreciated by someone who has no

preconceptions or expectations---someone who admires them for what they
are. Ultimately, it's up to each of us to love ourselves as we are. It's
up to me, and it's up to you. The love and respect you have for yourself
determines how others see themselves through you. So let's talk more
about that. Let's see how you can create a high standard of art through
clear and positive mirroring.

Alice in the Mirror Professional artists mirror the human condition.
They mimic life. They reflect society. We amateurs do much the same. We
mirror popular thinking. We mirror contemporary trends. We mirror each
other, through our fashion choices and our ideologies. So it's easy to
understand how reflections get muddled and distorted. How we reflect
each other affects the quality of our work as artists. It affects our
relationships and the way we live our lives. Are you aware of the kind
of mirroring that attracts you to someone? You're not always drawn to
someone who's kind or forgiving, for example. Maybe you gravitate toward
people who are critical and occasionally cruel. Maybe you feel more
comfortable being bullied than pampered. You may feel you deserve a
tyrant in your life instead of a collaborator. Then again, you may crave
such a perfect reflection that you constantly misrepresent yourself.
Some of us want affection above all, even if it means pretending to be
something we're not. If you only see your worth through another person's
eyes, you might be convinced you can't live without that person. You may
never discover yourself at all. On the other hand, if you gave yourself
the love you crave, you wouldn't be so desperate to find it somewhere
else. If you respected yourself absolutely, you'd be immune to
manipulation. How far would you stray for a few crumbs of affection?
What would you do, even now, for a little praise?

How many times have you underestimated your value in order to fit in, or
to attract followers? Only you can answer questions like these. No one
else can solve the mystery of you. No one else can feed your deepest
needs. As you've noticed, other mirrors have needs of their own. Maybe
you're aware that some mirrors have a stronger will than you. Some pull
you into their world so completely that you care about nothing else. You
become more concerned about their drama than your own. You treat them as
the main character of your story. You try to live their life. Like the
mythical Alice, you're lured into an attractive mirror, you're
transfixed, and could remain there indefinitely. There's a chance you've
done this already; you've tried to take another person's journey. You've
adopted someone else's habits and celebrated their best memories. You've
mirrored their interests and activities. Eventually it all feels wrong;
you find yourself doing things you don't want to do. Your infatuation
with some mirrors can lead to obsession, and obsession takes you on a
winding path to nowhere. By "nowhere" I mean self-destruction, or the
destruction of a dream. All artists want to feel inspired, yes, but
inspiration leads to creativity, where obsession does not. Obsession
will likely undo your creation. You need to step back once in a while
and see where you are. See where your attention has pulled you. Is it
where you want to be, or are you now dedicated to one thing at the
expense of all others? I suggest you use perspective. See as an artist
sees. Recognize beauty in yourself, and do everything you can to express
it. Great art doesn't have to be more complicated than that. You've
probably heard some artists claim they have to suffer to create. Many
legendary artists endured poverty and rejection, so suffering is assumed
to be an indispensable part of the creative process. Suffering is a
recurring theme in most people's stories, in fact. We're all a little
addicted to it, and we have endless excuses. We deserve to suffer, we

say. We suffer when we're misunderstood. We suffer for a cause. We
suffer for noble reasons. We suffer for love. We suffer for art. "Great
art requires great suffering" is a universal assumption, but why should
it be true? There is real suffering in the world, yes. Physical pain and
deprivation exists. Most people struggle to support themselves and their
families. They struggle to secure their futures, to find shelter or
employment. Others struggle to make sense out of mystery. Struggle is
familiar to everyone, but it's not an excuse to suffer. Every
entrepreneur has to fight to make a business work. Painters, poets,
musicians, and actors struggle to be recognized, enduring punishing
conditions in the process. Dancers and athletes feel the pain of injury
and failure. They're not alone in their creative frustration. You feel
it too, but telling yourself a story about how much you're suffering
does nothing to end the frustration. You, the artist, are responsible
for the stories you tell and the mood you set. You're responsible for
your happiness, and for your own artistic fulfillment. Take creative
action as a remedy for frustration. Tell a better story. Be attentive to
your body, the instrument of your art, and do what you can to heal a
mind at war with itself. See clearly and love generously while you
stroll through this mirrored maze.

Reflections on Love Most artists dare to reveal themselves to other
people. Do you? Can you step into the bright lights with (or without)
the fear of rejection? Do you trust life not to judge you or desert you?
Keep in mind that people make judgments; life does not. It's possible to
look into a defective mirror and remain confident. Being reflected
poorly doesn't have to result in discouragement. No mirror gives you the
whole picture, or the true picture. Every mirror tells you something,
however. You may get mad at someone for failing to see the best in you.
You may

get defensive, but there's something to be learned from a bad mirror
too. Clear, cloudy, or corrupt, all reflections inform you. The more
information you have, the better you see. Be skeptical about the
information you get, but listen anyway. Listen without judgment and
learn. Without mirrors, you and I would be like most other animals. We
would lack the information we need to evolve. We'd miss important
revelations even from the poorest reflections. At the same time, we are
more than any mirror can show us. We are more than what we see and
think. Everything changes when we're willing to explore the mysterious
truth of us. This is where love enters the scene. Far from being blind,
love perceives the truth. You understood that in your infancy, and you
can relearn it now. There are people in your life who need the brightest
reflection you can give. Instead of showing your disappointment, show
your admiration. Affirm. Applaud. Do this, and not just for the people
you love most. Every person deserves a clear reflection from someone
motivated by love. Your journey through the maze goes on. It twists and
bends, providing countless mirror-images along the way. How you respond
to the reflections you see depends on how you love yourself---and how
fearless you are about loving others, however they may reflect you. As
babies, most of us gazed into clear, bright mirrors. Mommy's smile told
us we were precious; Daddy's strength told us we were safe. Everyone
reflected a wonderful image back to us. Summer winds carried all the
wonders of life to our senses. We were all children once, looking
wide-eyed into the mirror, but over the years we started to focus on the
distortions. In time, we fell out of love with ourselves. We began to
doubt we were capable of loving at all. When you look in a mirror, you
probably only see what you hope to see, expect to see, or most dislike
seeing. You see other people the same way. Is that actually seeing? Most
of us are hardly aware of what's going on until life wakes us up with a
shock. Meanwhile, we're blind to the beauty and

unprepared for the truth. Reflections are not the thing they reflect.
The truth of you was never in the glass. Your warm body is the truth. I
think you realize this now. You are a living, breathing human. You are
real, but the realness of you is lost in the reflection. If you've
forgotten this, take a few minutes to remind yourself. Sit in front of a
full-length mirror. See the whole picture---you, the room, all those
colors and shapes---as a visual reproduction of what is real. Everything
is visible to you because light is touching the glass, but none of it
exists in the glass. Close your eyes and feel the truth. Feel you, the
one who is being reflected. Feel life pushing through your veins. Feel
your breath and your heartbeat. Feel the heat of you, and the electric
current that runs through your body. You are life. Life keeps making
more life. It does this with no self-importance and no personal stories.
You can do the same. You can exist without your stories. You can be true
to yourself without explanations or excuses. You can love without
conditions and without a doubt. Don't stand still waiting for someone to
prompt you. Put your will into action. Keep turning corners. Keep
discovering and growing. Lay the foundations for something new. Your
time in the maze is magical; you only have to open your eyes and see it.

Why Does Any of This Matter? Why does it help to see your life as a maze
of avenues and alleyways? Your future is determined by the choices you
make---to turn right or left, or continue straight ahead. You may also
choose to hang out a while, or possibly backtrack. It's interesting to
see how those choices were made in the past. It helps to see how they
brought you to this place, on this day. It's important to see how you
can move forward from here, now that you're aware of your motivations
and are willing to modify them. Let in some light. Light reflects images
from one person to another and

back again. By recognizing mirrors for what they are, you can respond to
them more sensibly. We're talking about human beings, so behind the
"glass" is a mind. A mind tends to scramble information. It comes to
conclusions; it guesses and assumes. And assumptions, as you know,
complicate everything. Awareness is the ability to see objectively,
without making judgements or assumptions. Every mind warps the truth a
little, so don't take opinions so personally. When you assess your own
behavior fairly, you can be more gracious in your assessment of others.
Actors study their characters objectively, fairly. This is how you can
study yourself. This is how you can nurture your authentic qualities.
Think about the stage you've set. Maybe it could use some design
changes. This isn't about deciding where the furniture goes; I'm talking
about the mood. I'm asking whether you're designing a heaven for
yourself, or a hell. Heaven. Hell. Let's take some time to understand
the difference. Heaven is a state of mind, of course. When we create a
reality where respect rules our behavior, we're in heaven. I respect
those close to me. I respect everyone I encounter---and I respect you,
without having to know you personally. Let's say you respect me and
everyone else in your story. Things go smoothly between us, because we
share respect without having to agree on everything. That's heaven. Hell
is something else. Fear rules hell. Life can be intolerable when fear is
allowed to set the mood. If respect isn't our natural impulse, we will
judge each other. We will accuse each other and fear each other. Heaven
and hell are metaphors, but the misery we make is not. A living hell is
a real experience. Respect is how we avoid its agonies. Respect
yourself, and let that respect shine out to the world. Let it touch
everything you touch and be mirrored back to you. Be aware of how
respect transforms your reality. With that kind of awareness comes
evolution. How are you evolving? Well, you're daring to see what you
couldn't see before.

You're opening up to light's information. You're getting closer to
reflecting the truth, and the truth places you in heaven, even as you
walk this earth.

What Else Can I Do? The tension of not knowing what's next, or whether
you'll ever be wanted again, exists for all artists. We never feel we've
done enough, won enough, or impressed enough people. The worry is
always, can I do more? You're another kind of student now. In this
particular school, you're exploring deeper mysteries. You have an
appetite for truth. You aspire to be clear mirror. I urge you to ask
questions. Weigh the answers carefully. Hear all sides to a story before
you share your opinions, and respect all points of view. Maybe you
considered yourself life's victim once; now you are life's accomplice.
And how does that collaboration begin? We conspire with life when we are
aware, and when we are adaptable to its changes. We're in cahoots with
life when we're open to new information, not closed and defended. We're
in partnership with life when we're honest with ourselves. By denying
the obvious, we're likely to face consequences. When we lie to
ourselves, we'll soon feel the pain. To be impeccable means to be
without sin. For you, the artist, it's a sin to go against yourself.
It's a sin to disrespect your art. Imagine yourself as impeccable---how
would that look and sound? How would you move through the world? Well,
imagine saying what you mean and doing what you say. Imagine you're
someone who never assumes, but asks and then evaluates. Imagine that you
can listen to criticism without reacting defensively. Imagine doing your
best, and that your best efforts evolve over time. If you can imagine
yourself responding like this to ordinary situations, you're ready to
put these lessons to use. 1) Be impeccable with your words and actions.

2) Don't take things personally. 3) Don't make assumptions. 4) Do your
best in every moment. These lessons are essential tools for an artist of
life. Today is a good day to sharpen your skills. Maybe you don't think
you're brave enough, or creative enough, but mastery begins with small
attempts. It begins by doing the best you can in the moment. Practice.
Rehearse. Make an impassioned commitment to your craft. Under pressure
of any kind, we revert to the smallest definition of ourselves. We fall
back on the character who runs away in fear, the one who is victimized,
or even the one who bullies. It's important to recognize how
specifically you identify yourself with the roles and reactions you once
relied on. It's important to see, and to be willing to change. Now is
not the time to revert to the smallness of you. Now is the time to step
into the light, see what you do, and reshape it. Observe how your
emotions rise to support an old story. Shift the emotion; alter the
narrative. Laugh. Breathe. Thank life for reminding you that you're more
than anyone's definition of you.

Day 5: The Final Curtain "We have a direct sense of life. When you gain
that, you will put aside your mirrors and statues, your toys and your
dolls." --George Bernard Shaw

It's no secret that everyone wants to know a secret. We're all diving
for answers in an ocean of mystery. More than anything, we want to know
who we are---and yet this is the question we're most afraid to ask. Who
am I? you may have asked yourself on occasion. Well, you know what
you're not. You're not the roles you play. You're not your reputation
and you're not your reviews. You may have always measured your worth in
praise. You've faked it. You've overacted. You loved the show, but
whenever you had a chance to step away from the stage, you were
relieved, weren't you? The drama seemed a little too intense. It looked
a little crazy. It felt unnatural. Most of your behavior may seem
over-the-top when you see it from another perspective. Sketch your
history on paper, and you can see how playing a role brought you to a
crisis point again and again. You can recall the times you lost yourself
completely, or when you let down your team. Look carefully. Maybe you
assumed too much and miscalculated. You went against yourself often, but
there were also times when you preserved your integrity. There were
times when you were awesome. Let your senses feel what you can't
explain. Appearances deceive. You appear to be many things at once. You
come across as wide range of selfimposed limitations and outrageous
possibilities. It seems, above all, that you are your own best kept
secret. The truth is much simpler than any of that, as you've discovered
this week. You want to understand the mystery, but you're afraid to look
too closely. What is real? you wonder. You worry that you've put too
much faith in things that are not real. Reality is your mystery to
solve. Questions need to

be asked and explored. Obstacles need to be faced and conquered. More
mysteries are waiting in the wings. There's more to discover about love,
for instance. What is love? People often ask. You asked, listened, and
shifted your perspective on love---and found that love is more than you
imagined. Far from being one whimsical emotion, love is the totality of
all emotions. Far from being a weakness, love is the energy that made
you possible---and still drives you to evolve. Every generation finds
new answers to age-old questions. Some generations rediscover answers
that were lost and forgotten. Solving one mystery opens the door to
many, many more. Pull back the curtain and flood the dark places with
light, until you come to the final mystery, which lies beyond the maze.

Leaving the Stage You may never have thought of your world as a stage
before. You may never have considered your actions and reactions as a
performance. Having that awareness, however, makes it possible to choose
your roles and to play them with intention. Being aware gives you
choices. You can choose the times you don't need to play a role at all.
Instead, you can be present and spontaneous. You can make the choice to
listen, to observe, and put your attention on what's happening around
you. And, maybe for the first time, you can examine the qualities that
make you authentic. Your choices change with every situation, but
awareness keeps you true to yourself. Some day you will leave the stage.
We all do. The lights will go out and the play will be over. In
professional acting, the theater must go dark at some point and actors
must fall out of character. They must say goodbye to the troupe and move
on. The curtain will come down, and everyone---cast, crew, and happy
patrons---will walk out of the theater to resume their lives. Closings
happen many times within one lifespan, just as they do in the theater.
Every show begins with great enthusiasm but inevitably comes to

an end. Old sets are broken apart, props are put away, and costumes are
discarded. How do you prepare to exit the stage for good? How do you
ready yourself for the larger mystery beyond the maze? First, you want
to wake from the dream---yes, the dream. A stage play is a dream created
by actors. A journey, too, is like a dream. It challenges you to
improvise, and to learn different ways of doing things. Your life is a
dream that often seems nonsensical. Good luck may run out, and your
friends may fail you. Your fortunes rise and fall again. On occasion,
tragic events force you to be the hero of your own story. Maybe you're
great at this already. Maybe you consider yourself an accomplished
dreamer. Upheavals don't bother you. You're flexible; you're fearless in
the face of change. You've done your best in all situations, and your
body of work is admirable. Maybe now you can see your life in ways you
never could before. For instance, you are here, actively engaged in your
story, and at the same time you're observing the action from a distance.
You've learned the art of perspective, as a painter must. You've
disciplined yourself to see the whole picture, and to avoid getting lost
in the details. You can see life in its totality, but you can also see
yourself while you're immersed in the performance. You're right; your
perspective has changed. And maybe you're less attached to the roles you
play. But before the lights go out on this amazing show, give yourself
one last challenge as an artist: to leave the maze, using your
imagination. Just as imagination took you into other worlds back in
those early days of childhood, your grown-up imagination can lift you
out of the maze while you still occupy it. While your curiosity is sharp
and your will is strong, continue to expand your awareness. Appreciate
the value of your losses and successes, and learn to trust future
outcomes. As you know, when death happens you will cease to be part of
the human experience. It matters that you live it now,

with eyes that are open and a mind that is willing to play. Being human
is a wild ride. It's never just one experience. Intensities change.
Devotions change. It can be terrifying and exhausting. It can be, and
often is, sweetly astonishing. I urge you to see the human experience in
its entirety. I encourage you to enjoy the fullness of that experience,
while you live---and to face one last obstacle, when you're ready.

The Last Judgment You're free to be authentic when you no longer fear
the judgments of other people. And what about your own judgments?
Chances are that you judge yourself even more harshly than you do anyone
else. You will continue to do so, until you overcome the temptation to
judge at all. Someday you'll stop. You'll make your final judgment.
You'll hear it and cringe at the sound. Every impulse to judge after
that will feel alien and uncomfortable. It matters that you pay
attention. It matters that you modify your stories inwardly so that you
can communicate respect outwardly. It matters to you. It matters to the
physical body you occupy, and the people who look to you for guidance.
In order to play a role faithfully, actors assume specific points of
view. Characters in a play are supposed to have lived real lives, with
past histories to explain their actions. An actor's job is to understand
their sensitivities and secret fears---and their tendency to judge.
Imagine if a character had no judgments about anything. Would he seem
boring, and unworthy of an audience's attention? Maybe. Most people
would say that flawed characters are the most intriguing. Villains are
compelling characters, for instance. Perpetual victims are also
compelling. It's usually the best and the worst of people that make
audiences take notice. But you and I aren't trying to keep audiences
entertained anymore, are we? How would you behave if you no longer
needed to please an audience? What if you weren't afraid of being
judged? You'd listen better, wouldn't

you? You'd relax and observe. You'd delay your reactions and focus on
the moment. The entire tone of your performance would change. Judgment
is the villain in your private movie. Once it's driven from the plot,
you can explore a vast range of human emotion without all the drama. You
can feel without having to make the audience feel. Nobody has to laugh
or to cry. No one needs to go home unsettled or depressed. Your name
doesn't have to go down in the books as "the greatest performer who ever
lived." You can be remembered as someone even more captivating: someone
who was authentic. Professional acting sometimes succeeds where our best
efforts as amateurs cannot. Actors often manage to capture moments of
truth. Professionals are concerned with making a good living, of course,
but also with the integrity of their work. They want to feel proud when
their work is done. They want to be elevated by their art. Like many of
us, they want to touch a godly truth. The trouble is, we've been
encouraged to focus on our failures. We're distracted by our flaws. As
actors-in-training, we were judged on our appearance. We were judged on
our manners. It mattered that we performed well in school and behaved
well in society. We endured a lot of criticism, so naturally we grew up
to focus on our imperfections. In my view, everything is perfect as it
is. You want to develop rather than remake yourself. You've become blind
to the wonder of you. Keep in mind that an artist doesn't see
imperfection. Artists are beguiled by their subjects. Artists are
captivated by the magic of life. Let's go back to the movies for a
minute. Imagine that you're in that dark theater, your arms wrapped
around a tub of popcorn. You're ready to be transported. The movie
begins. Right away, you're dazzled by the images in front of you. You're
quickly caught up in the plot. Now, imagine that there's a speck of dirt
on the screen. Once you've seen it, you can't see anything else. It
annoys you, and you can't let it go. You

can't focus on the actors or the scenery. Gradually, you lose track of
the plot and your emotional connection to the story is lost. The whole
point of going to the movies was to enjoy a break from your
obsessions---and now here you are, obsessing. More than that, you're
missing the wonder. You are missing the magic. Somewhere, beyond your
sight, a light is shining through a strip of celluloid. Or through a
prism. Or onto tiny mirrors. Film technology changes and evolves, but
the principle is the same: light touches matter, light is reflected, and
light's information is dispersed. In the case of a movie, a series of
images is enhanced and then projected onto a screen. You see the result,
and you recognize it as a picture story. As you watch, the story becomes
your reality, and you respond to it emotionally. The more you believe
you're part of the action on screen, the more emotionally invested you
get. It took remarkable genius to put all those elements together to
such powerful effect, but it's a perfect example of art duplicating
life's mystery. Light shines on matter. Light bounces off matter. What
we see triggers certain feelings. Life is an awesome light show, and
each of us experiences the show differently. Fixating on that speck of
dust on the screen is a choice. You will focus on it until you decide to
broaden your vision and absorb the entire experience. Meanwhile, truth
is flashing behind the lens. Life is waiting, calling. Never mind what
everyone else is doing. Can you feel it? Are you paying attention? Life
makes all things possible. You make things possible in your own way by
creating things out of pure imagination. Inspiration, that mysterious
force, allows you to create beauty in infinite ways. It allows you to
spark inspiration in others and share a love for what you do. Humanity
can be your playground, or it can be your best excuse to suffer. The
world is caught up in its own drama and is paying no attention to yours.

Your family taught you to conform; now you can break some of those
rules. You can ask impossible questions and face difficult answers. You
can find excellence, with or without an audience, and decide for
yourself what the next act will bring.

The Next Phase Acting requires belief and commitment. Being a good
audience requires the same thing. When actors can't persuade an audience
to believe, they fail at their craft. If the audience isn't willing to
accept the premise of a story, however fantastic, they fail as
collaborators. What if this happy conspiracy was motivated by a mutual
desire for truth? An entertaining lie is great for the theater, but it
doesn't serve us well in ordinary life. Deception is hard to justify or
defend. Melodrama can be exhausting. In a play or a movie, it's
thrilling to imagine witches stealing children, or alien creatures
invading our galaxy. It can be fun to believe superheroes patrol the
skies---but we don't want to live in a world that runs on fear or
fantasy. Evolution is about growth. It's about adaptability, and you
have the capacity to adapt. You can self-reflect. You can face
irrational fears and dispel them. You can imagine fantastic things
without putting your faith in them. You can admit you're dreaming, and
you can shift the dream. You can even transform the dreamer. You've
envisioned your path as a walk through a college campus, a place where
mysteries are discussed and explored. Life on campus is easy. Your
fellow students are there to confide in you, to guide you, and get you
where you're meant to be. The idea of Earth as a university campus is
illuminating. It reminds you that you're here to learn. You've also
imagined your journey taking place on a stage. Any stage is
intimidating, perhaps, but your fears are shared by other players.
You've always been an actor, studying at the same drama school as the
rest of humanity. You see that your performance skills were taught by
experts. You

can decide now where those skills will take you. Finally, I've asked you
to see your life as a maze---the kind of place where your progress is
hard to measure and where your vision is limited. In a maze, you live
with the stress of not knowing where you are or where you're going. A
maze is full of false starts and random disappointments. You're
surrounded by reflections, but you can't trust them to tell you the
truth. So it makes sense to nurture a deep love for yourself. Love is
essential to appreciating the beauty of this, your only lifetime. The
idea of walking through a maze is exactly that: an idea. New ideas can
help you move beyond your present ways of thinking. This particular idea
helps you see how you've walked through life, and how you can move ahead
with enthusiasm. Sometimes you've been clueless; sometimes not. You've
been paralyzed with fear, and you've also been brave through the
traumas. The idea of a maze reminds you that you came into the world
here, and will exit somewhere over there. It's up to you to navigate the
spaces in between. I've asked you to imagine your journey through life
in several ways---as a campus, a stage, and a rambling garden maze. Each
one paints a picture of your life. Each one places you at a different
level of awareness at different points in time. Right now, you may think
of yourself as a constant student, never quite ready to rise to the next
level. Or you may think you know it all. You may think you graduated
long ago. Maybe you've already taken your show on the road and toured
the world. You've built a career on the strength of one role, one
winning performance. Of course today you're not what you were yesterday.
You're a struggling student one moment; a valedictorian the next. Your
audience is with you one day, and they don't show up the next. We're
experts and amateurs---in turns, and all at once. At any point, you can
decide if your actions are in sync with your awareness. Your journey
will end at the time of your death, but while you

live, see things as they are. Enjoy the reflections, but value what is
real. The exit to this labyrinth may suddenly appear beyond the next
tree or shrub. The end of the journey may come before you've fully
appreciated its beauty. While you're here, make sure your eyes are open
and your senses are wide awake.

What Can I Do Now? Take a deep breath. Exercise your imagination and
expand your understanding. Focus your energy. First, believe who you
think you are. This should require no effort, since that is exactly what
you do all the time. Once you have that familiar sense of
comfort---knowing what you know about yourself---stop knowing it. That's
right; stop believing. You are not who you think you are. Feel the
emotional discomfort of that, and relax into it. Feel safe, not knowing.
Now, feel the sensation of believing something you know to be true about
someone close to you. Once again, this is something you do on a constant
basis. You think you know people. Once you have that sensation, that
absolute conviction that a person is completely known to you, then stop.
Stop believing what you think about them is true. Feel a lightness where
that belief once existed. Play with beliefs that way. Recognize a
conviction, and then invest belief in an opposing conviction. Finally,
discard all conviction on the subject. This leaves you with uncluttered
perception moment to moment. The exercise isn't meant to make you stop
caring, but to show you how emotionally connected you are to your
beliefs. In this way, you see how detachment is possible, and that
attaching again is a choice. Believe it is. Believe it is not. As we've
discussed, your attention determines what you believe, not the other way
around. Spiritual mastery is about transcending the main character of
your story. It's about seeing beyond your immediate environment and
expanding your sense of reality. Mastery for a professional artist means
the same.

Professionals lose themselves in their art. They document what they see
and imagine what they cannot see. At their best, they awaken other
artists like you and me. They make us aware of things we hadn't yet
considered. And awareness grows over time. Awareness begins in the womb,
as the fetus grows and the infant brain develops. There, as matter
slowly takes shape, the senses stir, perceiving light and sound, warmth
and weightlessness. From those earliest stages, we're all collaborators
in our own transformation. Life gives us the raw materials, and we
develop them at our own pace. You've already succeeded at three
important challenges: 1) You continue to grow in awareness. 2) You keep
evolving, both physically and spiritually. 3) Your will is
strengthening. Remember that your will makes change possible; it has the
power to discourage you and it has the power to push you beyond normal
boundaries of perception. Awareness. Transformation. Will. Today, and
for all future days, these are important tools for your evolution. And
you have others. Imagination, for instance, takes you anywhere you want
to go. Collaboration intensifies creativity, so don't forget the troupe.
You share this vast stage with countless others. Allow them free
expression. Respect their talents. Respect invites opportunities---in
life and in art. Every teacher is a guide, offering clues to seemingly
unsolvable mysteries. A teacher can point you in the direction of truth,
but where the journey will take you is its own kind of mystery. I
appreciate your will to wonder and to learn and I've been honored to
help you in that effort. This week, you've seen your life from different
perspectives. Whether you imagine yourself walking across a campus or
across the world, you've learned from the choices you've made. You've
learned from the places you visited and the people who fascinated you.
You've discovered skills you may not have thought you possessed. You've
learned to appreciate talents that were developed in childhood and

refined as you matured. You've seen how those talents can be shaped to
suit your present awareness. You also know that they can be modified or
replaced. Instead of acting---acting! acting!---you may choose to settle
into the realness of you. You may choose to know yourself as the one
warm body in a roomful of mirrors. You are an authentic being, however
you shape your acting skills and however much you crave an audience.
Play with life. Play with your fellow artists. Take advantage of every
opportunity to learn more about the mystery of you. Well, I see it's
getting late. You and I must leave each other, but only for now. You
have my love and my encouragement. If awareness is important to you, the
adventure is on. If truth is what you're looking for, opinions don't
matter. You've already distinguished yourself by going your own way.
Continue to make choices the way an artist would, and dare to inspire.
You were meant to turn inspiration into something magical, and offer it
back to humanity. That is your gift as an artist, and your enduring
legacy. Class Ends

MYSTERY SCHOOL SERIES Forthcoming titles THE MYTH Stories We Tell
Ourselves about Our Reality EROS Misconceptions About the Art of Romance
and Sex GRIEF How to Take Care of Ourselves While Surviving the Loss of
People We Love


