Dedication

This book is dedicated to those who have chosen to be the heroes of
their own story. It is dedicated to all peaceful rebels who wish to
change their world. This book is dedicated to those who love themselves
without condition and who let that pure love shine for the world. It is
dedicated to those who lead with compassion, who dare to act kindly, and
who will not be governed by irrational fear. This book is dedicated to
all women and men who act with courage and speak for those who cannot
speak for themselves. It is written in honor of those who use their
words to deliver messages of love and respect. With heartfelt thanks to
our readers, DON MIGUEL RUIZ AND BARBARA EMRYS

Contents

Cover Title Page Dedication Introduction 1. The Three Pearls of Wisdom
2. Opening the Door Question 1: Ask Yourself, "Who Am I?" 3. The First
Pearl 4. The Voice of Me 5. One Mind, One Community 6. The Mind as
Government 7. Justice and the Judge 8. The Commander in Chief Question
2: Ask Yourself, "What Is Real?" 9. The Second Pearl 10. Life Under
Tyranny 11. Getting Out of Jail 12. The Diplomat 13. Peace and Sanity
Question 3: Ask Yourself, "What Is Love?" 14. The Third Pearl 15. The
Love of Your Life 16. Lovers and Sweethearts 17. Love for Humanity 18.
Fear and Knowledge

19. Peace in Our Time 20. Afterword About the Authors Copyright About
the Publisher

Introduction

1 The Three Pearls of Wisdom ONE RAINY DAY, long ago, an old man was
driving his wagon down a country road. The road was filled with
potholes, so the drive was difficult, and the rain only made it worse.
As the wagon plunged into a particularly deep hole, a rear wheel broke
off. Calming his horse, the old man jumped down onto the muddy road and
began to struggle with the wagon wheel. He soon realized that the hole
was too deep and the wheel was too heavy for him to lift. As he stood
there, wet and cold, he heard footsteps running toward him. A farm boy
was on his way home to supper when he saw the old man's broken wagon,
with water flowing around it like a river. The boy was big, strong, and
eager to help. Finding a fallen fence post, he stepped knee-deep into
the muddy hole and propped up the wagon. Then he began fixing the wheel.
While he worked, the boy spoke to the old man about his wishes for the
future. He understood very little about the world, but he wanted to
learn. He wanted to discover who he was and to find answers to life's
biggest mysteries. He was going to be a man soon and wanted to know more
about love. He said he often daydreamed about the wonderful things yet
to come. "Most days," the boy laughed, "I'm not sure if I'm dreaming or
if I'm awake!" The boy talked on, and the old man listened in silence.
Within an hour, the job was done. The wheel was set securely in its
place, and the wagon was back on the road. The old man, filled with
gratitude, searched through his pockets for a few coins. Finding nothing
to offer the boy for his work, he asked him if he would accept three
pearls of wisdom instead, assuring him that the pearls would provide
more riches than any coins. As the sun pierced through rushing storm
clouds, the boy smiled. He knew he could not refuse the man's gratitude,
however it was offered. And, after all, he had much to learn.

"Yes," answered the boy politely. "I am truly honored that you would
share your wisdom with me, sir." So the old man leaned toward him and
began to speak. "To find your way in this world you need only answer
three questions," the old man explained. "First, you must ask yourself:
'Who am I?' You will know who you are when you see who you are not.
"Second, you must ask yourself: 'What is real?' You will know what is
real when you accept what is not real. "Third," the man finished, "you
must ask yourself: 'What is love?' You will know love when you realize
what love is not." The old man straightened himself, brushing flecks of
mud off his coat. The boy removed his hat respectfully and expressed his
thanks. He watched the old man climb onto his wagon and whistle to his
horse. The wagon lurched, shuddered, and then began to rattle down the
road. As the boy turned toward home, where supper was waiting, he
glanced back to see the back of the wagon disappear among the evening
shadows.

2 Opening the Door SIMPLE STORIES INVITE us to reflect on our own lives.
One way or another, they represent everyone's story. If a story is good,
it has the power to inspire questions and encourage us to look for
answers. If a story is very good, it can get under our skin and dare us
to see the truth. It can open new doors of perception. These stories
leave us a choice: to be challenged by the truth or to close the door
and continue walking a familiar path. This book is for those who are
willing to see the truth of themselves. It is for those willing to ask
what is real and to go through unfamiliar doors. Life is eager to begin
a new conversation with you. If you're willing to listen and to change,
your world can be transformed. We humans are what we are today because
of the way our nervous system has responded to light over millions of
years. Our brains have become intricate, our capabilities diverse, and
our societies complex. We've certainly made our mark on this planet. And
yet, if we were asked what we had to show for humanity's years of
evolution, what would we say? Would we say that we're free of worry and
conflict? Would we say we finally understand how to be the best humans
we can be? It would be wonderful to say that our beliefs no longer drive
us to do terrible things. It would be great to say that our minds no
longer wage their internal wars. It would be nice to say that humans
have become far too wise to turn against each other. It would be nice to
say that about our species, but we cannot---not yet, at least. In an
ideal world, humans get along with each other for their own benefit and
for the benefit of humanity. In an ideal community, people cooperate in
order to prosper, and they appreciate their good fortune. They value
life and care for the land that nurtures them. Ideally, they respect
themselves and everyone else.

In an ideal family, children are made to feel safe and appreciated.
Parents are inspired teachers and vigilant protectors. The elderly
continue to be productive. Groups of people form societies, of course,
but no society tries to undermine any other. Together, they build
greater communities, and together they ensure the well-being of every
citizen. In this world of our imagination, governments may still exist.
An ideal government presides over a country with respect. Its leaders
are wise and farseeing. The best possible congress is one that
legislates with conscience and compassion. Its laws are clear and
just---and the rules apply to everyone. In this ideal world, people are
also able to govern themselves justly. What does it mean to govern
ourselves? It means we are in charge of our own thoughts and responsible
for our own actions. We refuse to walk blindly through life. We see
exactly what is and not merely what we prefer to see. We don't permit
the past to take command of the present. We view our personal reality
the way a great artist would---with an eye for beauty and balance. In an
ideal world, we don't punish ourselves repeatedly for one mistake. We
don't indulge in self-pity. We don't manipulate emotions. We don't
gossip or seek out drama. In an ideal world, we have no desire to judge
or to blame. We are not defeated by guilt and shame, nor do we inflict
shame on anyone else. In other words, we govern ourselves in the same
way we want to be governed: with respect. There is much more we could
say about that ideal world, but it's important to consider why this
world doesn't actually exist for most of us. Helping the world move
toward its ideal expression is too great a task for a small book, but we
can take the first steps on our own. Everything we build together as
human beings begins with a little imagination. We may believe we are
tragic victims of circumstance, but with imagination we can take another
perspective and see how unkindly we treat ourselves. With all its
thoughts and judgments, the mind may seem like our worst adversary, but
by imagining the mind differently, we can make it our ally. By modifying
the way our minds work we can begin to change our world. We all have
fears we won't admit to ourselves, and we're not always sure how to
overcome them. We need love, but we're not convinced we deserve it. We
want to love ourselves, but we don't know how. To one degree or another,
there is chaos and confusion in each of us. Ideas take hold, and
opinions intimidate. We get caught up in our own drama and

take it all so seriously. We play roles that don't reflect the truth of
what we are. Why do we do this to ourselves? The answer is that we were
shown how, and we became masters at it. Everyone is born an authentic
being, but it is hard to remain authentic in a world where beliefs have
already been assigned to us. As infants and children, we are told who we
are, how we should behave, and how to respond to what we perceive. This
is how families and cultures function most effectively and how children
survive within their cultures. But that doesn't mean these lessons are
rooted in reality. You could say that our early training teaches us to
deceive ourselves. We learn to lie. Life is truth, and only life exists.
By using words to describe the truth, we automatically distort it. So a
lie is simply a distortion of the truth. There may be no malice
intended, but we still use lies against ourselves and against each
other. We all know how little kids say the funniest things---funny,
because they speak the truth as they perceive it, without judgment.
Honest insights, plainly spoken, sound pretty shocking to adult ears.
Why? In many cultures, stating an obvious truth is considered impolite.
Honesty and authenticity are sometimes thought to be childlike
qualities. At times, they might even be considered crazy. Most of us
have learned to lie about what we see and how we feel. By the time we've
reached adulthood, we've even learned to believe our lies. Growing up,
we develop strong minds, but minds can become corrupted. We form strong
opinions, but our opinions don't represent the truth. Emotional
responses become corrupted when they are ruled by opinions and beliefs.
We were created by a loving force, but we even learn to corrupt love.
Corruption sounds like a willful crime, but people don't come into the
world with corrupt intentions. We were born hungry for the truth and
eager to love. Corruption happens when we put our faith in thoughts and
ideas instead of what we perceive. We believe most of what we're told
and, in the process, we lose our connection with life---with truth. We
create rules and structures that conform to what we've been taught to
believe. Love is one example of how our natural impulses can be poisoned
by ideas. Too many of us were taught that love is conditional, that it
comes with specific rules of engagement. To put it simply, love is
corrupted by if.

We may not always hear if spoken out loud, but we sense it often enough,
even between people who are devoted to each other. I will love you if
you do what I want. I'll love you if you stand by me, no matter what.
I'll love you if you do this or believe that. If you embarrass me,
disagree with me, or leave me . . . I will stop loving you. Amazingly,
we say things like this to the people we care about most, just as we say
them to ourselves. Yes, we set conditions on loving
ourselves---conditions that are often too strict to meet. Real love
comes with no conditions. And yet that's not how most of us were taught
to offer love and to receive it. When we think of love as conditional,
it becomes something else, something corrupt. Of course, this kind of
corruption can be repaired, because it begins in the virtual world of
the mind. Virtual reality is a reflection, an interpretation of what is
real. The mind gives us an impression of everything we can touch and
see, but it's an impression. Ideas aren't made of matter. Beliefs aren't
part of our genetic makeup. The mind isn't actually real, and the
fanciful world it creates doesn't actually exist. So what is the mind,
and what does it do? The mind is a function of the brain that turns
perception into language. The ways we describe reality are unique to
each of us. You have your way; I have mine. The difference depends on
how our brains work, of course. It also depends on how we've been taught
to perceive the world. When we see an idyllic scene---such as a mountain
range, green meadows, and open expanses of wilderness---some of us think
of paradise. We react with excitement and pleasure. Others, seeing the
same scenery, imagine extreme hardship and loneliness and react in fear.
Where some see tranquility, others see disturbance. If we were taught to
be afraid, we will likely continue to be afraid. If we believe that
unfamiliar things are dangerous, we will avoid new experiences. We were
taught to interpret what we see. We were told what to believe and
believed what we were told. We've been guided by private and public
opinion since we were born. Reality is made of impressions and
experiences to which we give personal meaning and value. It

changes constantly, of course, since events keep changing. Our personal
perception of reality is affected by our opinions and our fears. Many
beliefs encourage fear. Many beliefs are influenced by fear. Fear has
had a big effect on the way we learned to view the world. Physical fear
is natural and essential to our survival, but it's important to remember
that irrational fear is not. It is irrational to be afraid of what
doesn't exist. In fact, it can cause actual harm. And yet we've learned
to let irrational fear shape our reality. We've learned to react
emotionally in ways that other people do and to fear what we only
imagine. These reactions took time and practice to perfect. We followed
the rules of our families and cultures. Our parents and teachers showed
us how to behave in a world of humans, and we took those lessons with us
into adulthood. Now we tell ourselves how to behave in much the same
way. We follow the rules of society, but we've applied most of society's
rules to our own lives. We rule ourselves through self-made laws,
personal judgments, and mental intimidation. As children, we observed
how our own family and our local community were governed. We followed
the protocols of school, church, and the front office. To go against the
rules usually resulted in a loss of respect among our peers. Sometimes
the losses were far greater. We obeyed the rules of our city and state
governments and the laws of our nation's government. Breaking those
rules meant paying bigger penalties. All of this influenced the way our
minds work, and so you could say the way we run ourselves mirrors the
way things run in the world. It's no surprise that we all have a little
government operating in our heads. The mind is the government that sets
the rules, and the physical body follows those rules. We're willing to
pay real penalties for breaking the rules we put in place---and, very
often, we make someone else pay as well. Like most governments, the mind
tries to impose its laws on other bodies. When we are aware of the way
the mind functions, we can alter the way we rule ourselves. When we see
how our own little government works, we can change it. We can amend our
own laws. Whatever we're able to imagine for our own sake we can create.
We can become better caretakers to our bodies and allow ourselves more
freedom of expression. We can end the strict penalties we've inflicted
on ourselves ---penalties that make it impossible to experience the love
we deserve. We all want to be the best humans we can be. We want to
contribute to our own personal evolution. We want to know what we've
been doing

wrong and what we could do better. We want our secret questions to be
answered and to see how the answers can be applied to our own lives.
We'd like to discover what is true. We can all use a few pearls of
wisdom. Wisdom improves our relationship with life, with truth. It
allows us to rise above our fears and our common beliefs. It gives us
the will to walk through one new door, and then the next. The journey
begins with three essential questions: Who am I? What is real? What is
love?

Ask Yourself, "Who Am I?"

3 The First Pearl Who am I? You will know who you are when you see who
you are not. WE THINK WE know all there is to know about ourselves. You
may believe you're the reliable one, the optimistic one, or the
melancholy one. You've probably decided you're either an introvert or
the life of the party. Sometimes we experience a disturbance of some
kind in our lives, a trauma or a loss. Seeing ourselves in action during
a crisis, we're sometimes shocked. It could be that we never imagined we
could be so strong. Or maybe we're weaker than we expected or more
fearful. There comes a time in most of our lives when we're ready to
admit we are not who we thought we were. In such cases, it could be that
the values we defend aren't reflected in our actions. We're in conflict
with people around us. Our minds are in conflict with our hearts. We
blame or we lash out. We shout at our kids. We insult a friend. "Where
did that come from?" we ask ourselves. Confused and discouraged, we
begin to wonder what makes us do the things we do. We wanted the truth
but seemed to have missed something in our search. Asking yourself, "Who
am I?" means taking the first step back to authenticity, or truth. Our
instinct is to cling to the picture we have of ourselves, which makes
any new discoveries impossible. Questioning who we are gives us a chance
to bring down a few walls---a few stubborn beliefs---and reconnect with
life. Most of the stories about who you are come from things your
parents told you---what you like, what you dislike, or what you're good
at. You heard more opinions from brothers, sisters, and childhood
friends. As you grew up, you got descriptions of yourself from everyone
you met. "You're the smart one," they might have said. "You're the
rebel," or "My, you're just like your father." People still like to
imagine you in their own way. "You're so stubborn," "You don't know how
to love," "You never take risks."

By now, you've formed a solid opinion of yourself, but consider what
that opinion is based on. Since you were born, you've heard different
people describe you many different ways. They each see what they want to
see. And you've supplemented other people's stories with stories of your
own. When you meet someone, you talk about your life--- past events and
hopes for the future. You tell the same stories, more or less the same
way, featuring yourself as the main character. How did that character
come to define you? Let's first look at how we tell our story, and then
we can see how the main character describes itself and drives all our
actions. We are storytelling creatures. Telling a story is a good way to
connect to other people. Most of us don't think of ourselves as weavers
of myths, but we never stop telling the story of our lives. We recount
the events of each day as they unfold, for anyone who will listen. We
tell stories to ourselves, as if to explain what we've already
experienced. We talk nostalgically about yesterday and speculate about
tomorrow. Some stories we tell often, inventing dramatic interpretations
and new plot twists. And why not? Telling stories is what humans do. You
probably don't put faith in fairy tales anymore, but you believe the
story of your life. Most of us put a lot of faith in our version of
reality. We talk about the events of our lives reverently, describing
them in careful detail. We put on a performance for an audience of one,
or many. If we stopped to listen to ourselves, we'd also realize how
masterfully we play with emotions. If we took the time to write down the
story of our lives, highlighting its most important moments, we'd see
how easy it is to fall into our own emotional traps. However, if we
wrote it all down a second time and a third, those moments would
eventually lose their power to move us. We would begin to see just how
much we are shaping our story to emphasize the drama. Even the best
stories lose their emotional impact after the first telling. When we're
finally able to disarm the emotional triggers in our own story, we can
recall any event without the usual self-pity or selfimportance. We can
talk about today's problems and yesterday's mishaps without the need for
sympathy. If we ever read our story out loud, we'd begin to see it all
as a work of fiction, a work of art. And we'd realize that even our best
stories don't tell the truth about us. So if that's the case, then who
are we? As the old man in our little parable suggested, we'd be wise to
first take a look at what we are not.

4 The Voice of Me EVER SINCE YOU can remember, you've given the main
character of your story power to determine your reality. It has the
authority to talk, think, and make decisions that affect your body and
your world. It tells you what to believe and how to invest your beliefs
with emotional energy. You call the main character in your ongoing story
me. Let's take a minute to understand what the word me means in this
context. Me is the person you accept as your real self. You talk about
yourself all the time, right? You say me, mine, and myself countless
times in the course of an ordinary conversation. Through me, you say
things like, "Hey, this is important to me!" or, "Are you listening to
me?" or, "What are they saying about me?" Me is everything you believe
you are. Me is everything related to the character you forged out of
core beliefs and countless experiences. The word me, or its counterpart
in any language, is a simple pronoun ---and like every word in the
language we speak, it has no meaning until we agree upon a meaning. The
difference is that me comes with a lot of baggage: past memories,
judgments, and automatic assumptions. We put a lot of faith in our
identity and expect it to matter to other people. Who we think we are
develops into a mythology. We share the myth of me with old friends and
new acquaintances. We tell riveting stories about ourselves. We send
photos to back up our stories. We celebrate me in so many ways. Me
always refers to the person speaking, but we don't give much
consideration to who that might be. We say, "Look at me!" indicating
that we want attention given to this human being---but also to this
thought process, these frustrations, these expectations. We feel
sympathy for ourselves, but to the one listening, "Look at me!" could
evoke other emotions. Our idea of who we are isn't everyone's idea of
who we are. It may not be anyone's idea.

Me doesn't refer to the body we occupy. Me doesn't describe the energy
that moves through us. Me isn't a primal thing, because we didn't invent
a "self" until we learned a language. Me didn't exist until we began to
see the world through symbols and their meanings. In short, me doesn't
refer to anything real. It refers to an image, an idea we have of
ourselves that we've attempted to put into words. Of course, the words
we use to describe ourselves change all the time, because we see things
differently with every changing situation. Who we think we are has
evolved a lot since early childhood, when we first began to talk and
think. Who we imagine ourselves to be still changes---with time, with
shifting moods, and with the feedback we get from people we care about.
Our impressions change, but we each subscribe to a general myth, or
false belief, about ourselves. Me is a personal mythology, a collection
of stories that we repeat to ourselves and accept as truth. Like
children with their superheroes, we are believers in me. Wrapped in our
mythology, we feel confident to take on the world. Me is not what you
actually are. You are life, or the energy that made you a physical
being. Life runs through your body and makes it able to move, to love,
to feel. Life's energy created your miraculous brain. It made a thinking
mind possible and gave voice to its main character. Life is everything
seen and unseen. Only life exists. There is only life---and infinite
points of view. Everything created by life has a point of view, and your
body is one. Your mind is one. The human body develops according to its
biological programming, but the mind evolves consciously, through
attention and deliberate action. The mind is what we think we are, until
we decide otherwise. The voice that speaks for the mind is us, until we
recognize that it's not the truth of us at all. Of all the things we can
accomplish as humans, this kind of selfawareness brings the most
rewards. It can guide the evolution of the main character. Me responds
to your name and knows your history. Me is aware of your physical
environment, and me can also become aware of itself. Personal growth
does get complicated when we try to distance ourselves from the
character we created. Through me, we describe ourselves and the world.
If we claim to be the victim of the voice in our head, we'll be the
victim in all situations. If we deny the power we have to change the
voice of me, how can new doors of awareness ever open? How can we live
fearlessly within the dream of humanity, where there

are more than seven billion me's---all with opinions of their own and
all demanding to be heard? Reality is everyone's personal creation, so
the same is true of your reality. The judgments in your head are the
result of your beliefs and past experiences. If you feel oppressed by
your own thoughts, then it's time to take charge of them. Does me have
to be a big judge or a constant victim? No. Most of us want a closer
relationship with the truth, and we all want some peace of mind. We want
to be healthy, but so often our judgments make us sick. We want to be
spiritually aware, but our beliefs keep us spellbound. If we take the
time to listen to what we think and say, we have a chance to be more
honest with ourselves. Behavior follows belief, and any belief can be
modified. If we challenge our own opinions, we can begin to find our way
back to authenticity. Do we always have to be right? Do we really need
to have the last word? If our actions do not represent the kind of
people we want to be, we can take new paths of action. We can change. It
makes sense that the more we invest in our own self-image, the more
difficult it is to change. So we shouldn't use the main character of our
story as an excuse to feel victimized or to deceive ourselves. The truth
can speak through the mind, just as it moves through nerves and flesh.
The mind can choose to serve truth and not the stories. Life's energy
uses the tools available to create a body, a thought, or a dream. A
healthy body is a wonderful conduit for energy, and an aware mind is the
secret to making our reality work for us. Your body is real, but me is
fictional. And yet me is running the show. How many times have you
defended your actions and not understood why? At times, we all regret
doing things we consider inexcusable or saying things we don't really
mean. We like to say, "I'm only human," but it's not our humanness
that's causing the problem. So it's natural to wonder who really is in
charge. "Who am I?" we wonder, not really expecting an answer. No one
stops to ask who they're not, and that's where we have to begin. Be
aware of yourself as energy, and everything changes. Here is how that
works. You are no longer the victim of your beliefs; you are the
creator. You are the artist. You are also the painting---the canvas that
is your reality. Imagine picking up a brush and painting a figure that
looks like you. Imagine doing that continually for the rest of your
life. Unlike most figures in a painting, however, this one has a brain.
It has a brain with a mind that gives meaning to what it perceives. It
functions

beautifully, but it's not aware that there is an artist. There are many
other figures in this painting, but they're also not aware of the
artist. This makes it inevitable that they rely on each other for
knowledge. They react and interact with each other. They learn from each
other. Every day the scenario changes. Instant by instant, there are
subtle changes happening to the painter's main point of focus. The
figure itself is coming alive at your touch. You not only have colors
and brushes to work with, but you can make choices through this
character. You can work as life works, providing constant opportunity
for growth, so that the main figure adapts well to an ever-changing
landscape. You can skillfully guide me into awareness. Some people dare
to look inward. They take the time to listen to their own thoughts and
reflect on their own actions. They ask questions of themselves. "Am I
really this kind of person?" "Are these feelings genuine?" "If I'd known
I had a choice, would I have done it the same way?" They catch
themselves in midreaction and change the response. They find emotional
balance. That's what it means to be present. That's how we become
healthier in mind and spirit. By observing, we can all learn. By
modifying the voice in our heads, we have a chance to grow wise. Some
people stop believing their thoughts altogether. This is important,
because once the voice in our head loses authority, it turns silent. We
can observe events and respond genuinely. We're used to reacting in
expected ways. We're used to seeing things as we've been taught to see
them---and as we've preferred to see them. Once we stop lying to
ourselves, all that is left is truth. All that is left is authenticity,
something we lost in our storytelling. Throughout human history, people
have been wondering, questioning, seeking. Some of those people have
changed the world--- not just their world, but the entire dream of
humanity. They begin by doubting what they know. They ask one question,
then another. They consult wiser men and women, perhaps. Soon, they
start listening to the main character of their own story. It has a voice
that speaks clearly, and only to them. What is it saying, and how much
of its message is true? Can any of it be believed? For that matter, what
is the truth, what is real? We have a few amazing tools to work with
when it comes to solving the mystery of who we are. The first tool is
the power of attention. Our attention is what makes it possible to take
notice and to learn. The sound of our name captures our attention, a
response we learned in infancy. Attention brings every other faculty
into play---we look, we listen, we

respond. We receive information, and we process it. And, by catching
another person's attention, we learn to transmit information to someone
else and out to the world. Over time, however, we've mastered the art of
sleepwalking through life. We don't think we need to pay attention,
because we're sure we know what's going on around us. Our responses to
everything have become predictable. Our thinking is automatic, and we
automatically assume we know what other people are thinking. It's safe
to say that our attention has been weakened by neglect. What if we
rediscovered its amazing power? We'd have minds that are agile and
flexible when events change---and change is inevitable. There's no need
ever to be crushed by failed expectations. If we used our senses to
gather real information, we wouldn't be so mystified by life. If we
really listened---not only to what people are saying, but also to what
we say to ourselves in quiet moments---we would empathize with others so
much more and show compassion toward ourselves. Instead, we make
assumptions and encourage misunderstanding. Strengthening our attention
may feel like a workout at first, but the rewards come quickly. The
brain responds eagerly to new challenges. Look, listen, and observe
without judgment. Notice how your emotional responses become more honest
without a story. Attention can lead to total awareness in every precious
moment of life. The second tool is memory. Memory is stored in matter
(our brains) the way music is stored on a compact disc. We're able to
store all the memories of a lifetime in one brain, but that doesn't make
those memories real. We store impressions of things, people, and
events---but since every brain perceives in its own way, even siblings
remember childhood events differently. Memory helps to create an
impression of reality, but impressions aren't the same as truth. We rely
too much on memory to tell us the truth. We let it turn our attention
away from the present moment and draw us into the past. We frequently
use memory against ourselves, but we have the power to use it
differently. Instead, we can let memory enlighten us. Just as memory
played a key role in our early development, it can guide us in our adult
transformation. In infancy we watched our parents; we listened, and we
imitated. Everything we observed became part of our own pattern of
behavior. We tried to walk, we fell down, and we tried again. We learned
to avoid pain and move toward pleasure. And what about now, when we wish
to change some unpleasant patterns? Why wouldn't we do everything we can
to take care of our physical body and

our emotional well-being? We know how it feels to lose our temper and
feel regret. It feels awful. We know how shame and guilt make us feel,
and yet we still invite them in. Memory can serve us in our efforts to
wake up and resist automatic responses. Memory can steer us away from
abusive habits, encouraging us to stand up and walk forward with
selfrespect. The third and best tool is imagination. Imagination is its
own kind of superpower. We picture something in our minds, and then we
make it real. In fact, just by imagining something wonderful, the body
feels comforted and energized. We can also imagine painful events and
horrible consequences. By imagining the worst, we produce fear in the
physical body and spread fear to other bodies. We imagine the future and
tune out the present. Imagination is power, for sure; but like all
power, it can be corrupted. Right now, we can practice using imagination
in a valuable way. We can turn our attention to the exciting task of
making ourselves more aware. We can use memory the way it was intended
to be used---to keep us from repeating past mistakes. We can imagine
things we've never tried to imagine. We can doubt what we know and let
go of familiar stories. The mind wields enormous influence. It has
developed habits over time, but we can change those habits. By using the
tools available to us, we can calm the inner chaos and find peace in our
virtual world. You're not who you think you are. In obvious ways, you're
not the kid you were at four years old, struggling with unspoken fears.
You're not the awkward teen, the rookie at work, or the young
entrepreneur. You're not someone's significant other or your mom's
favorite child. You're not the main character of your story or anyone
else's, regardless of how long you've played those roles. And you're not
actually the one you call me, who tries to speak for your physical body.
You're not your mind or the set of laws your mind tries so hard to
enforce. It has created an entire governing force out of those laws, but
that's not what you are either. You're not really the little government
in your head, but its laws nonetheless influence your actions and
reactions. Sometimes that government seems tolerant; sometimes it's
blind and unforgiving. Either way, me is operating as its commander in
chief. Now would be a good time to decide what kind of leader me should
be. Now is a good time to take a look at your creation and to make
inspired changes. We were all born to learn, to grow, and to become
aware human beings. It was our intention to be the best we could be.
Somewhere along

the way, we got distracted. Our intentions were derailed. We forgot what
it felt like to be authentic. It may seem impossible to escape from our
own system of punishments and rewards, but that's not true. We can bring
down the whole structure if we want to. It's interesting to see how each
of us creates a personal reality. It's also interesting to see just how
far we go to defend that reality. Rather than defend it, we can make it
better. It takes a few basic insights to pull off a revolution. First,
it's important to see how the system was put into place. It's helpful to
see how we got here, wherever we are, and what we can do to change our
world. We can explore ways to transform the one who's describing that
world to us. Awareness is the ability to see what is, and it's never too
late to open our eyes.

5 One Mind, One Community TO UNDERSTAND THE governing mind a little
better, let's first take another look at the ways in which we've been
governed throughout our lives. We were each born into a vast community
called humanity. Over many thousands of years, humans have created
groups, or civilizations, all over the planet. We create groups in order
to survive. We agree on certain rules---written laws or ritual
customs---so that order can be maintained within those groups. We
establish governing bodies made up of respected men and women. We create
cities and nations, all run by their own government. Every nation is
made of smaller governing bodies, and it all starts with the family. A
family is its own little nation, traditionally composed of a man, a
woman, and their children. A family cannot be defined any one way, of
course---a family is formed when people of different genders and ages
come together in order to provide for the welfare and safety of the
group. The group may consist of two people, a dozen people, or many
more. Together they create a home, which is an extension of themselves.
Every family is regulated by its own government. Families establish
rules of conduct, rules that help maintain harmony within the group:
"Work hard," "Look after each other," "Respect your elders." They also
devise punishments for breaking those rules. The head of a family makes
key decisions, setting the rules and enforcing them. One parent may
yield authority to the other, or both parents may share power equally,
forming government within the family. You and I were born to different
families and grew up in different households. The rules were probably
different, along with penalties for bad behavior, but we were both
domesticated using a system of punishments and rewards. From the time we
were toddlers, we learned there was a price to pay for rebellion.
Whoever served as the head the family imposed the rules, using the power
of authority.

Of course, those in charge had other ways of persuading us. They might
have applied physical punishments or psychological abuses. Sometimes,
all it took was the subtle power of suggestion. Using our own
imaginations to control us, our parents often told stories about naughty
kids getting what they deserved. "You'd better watch out," they
cautioned us, using Santa Claus, the bogeyman, or dead saints to make
their point. Parents tell stories to manage their children. To
discipline unruly children, they intimidate. To keep them from danger,
they use whatever means they think is appropriate. Parents themselves
are ruled by the strict lessons of their childhood. No one is above the
law. Groups of families create communities, the next level of
government. A community, like a family, is dedicated to the welfare of
the whole. Every community has a leader, just as every family does, and
that leader makes the rules regarding acceptable modes of behavior.
Everyone in the community agrees to follow the rules, knowing they will
receive some kind of punishment if they don't. When communities create
alliances with other communities, cities are established. In a city,
there are many more people who want to lead. The competition gets
fierce, and governing becomes more arduous. Every city must choose a
mayor and a legislature made up of dedicated citizens. Together, they
decide on the rules of acceptable conduct and on various ways of
enforcing those rules. Cities are ruled by their individual governments,
and no one person---not even the mayor---is above the law. When cities
develop partnerships with other cities, a province or a state is formed.
Every state has its own government, which has its own governor and
system of laws. Choosing leaders gets more complicated as societies get
larger. Citizens find it harder to be active participants in their own
fate. Governors administer justice according to state laws and enforce
those laws through whatever force is available to them. No one (at least
in theory) is above the law. States ultimately form a confederacy called
a country or nation. Now the stakes are high for everyone. Different
kinds of government leaders compete to rule the entire country. Once in
office, they use the power of their authority and direct available
forces to impose their rules. Enforcement doesn't always mean
imprisonment or corporeal punishment. Governors may also use fear and
imagination to manage their constituents. Like their parents once did,
they might use threats, guilt, and shame. They may simply use little
suggestions to influence people. By whatever means, they enforce the
law. And they often find that they are not above the laws they've put in
place.

A leader of one nation may desire to rule other nations as well. This is
how civilizations evolve, as societies become more complex and leaders
expand their authority. Nations form bigger nations and impose their
laws on more communities and families. In some cases, nations lose power
and get swallowed up. Maps are drawn and redrawn. Rules still continue
to be made and enforced, with whatever means are available. It's
worthwhile to remember how outside governance has played a continuing
role in our lives. It's worthwhile because our personal reality reflects
the ways we use the same governing methods to discipline ourselves.
We've been taught to respond to traffic lights, signals, and
sirens---because by not responding we risk paying a penalty. We don't
ignore tax deadlines or no-trespassing signs for the same reason. In any
country, life goes more smoothly when we don't challenge local laws.
Challenging our own mental directives is another matter. Thinking that
harsh judgment is somehow virtuous, we impose rules and sanctions on
ourselves, rarely stopping to wonder why. Would it hurt if we relaxed
our control a little? What price would we pay for being kinder to
ourselves? We grew up under the influence of one governing institution
after another. We all learned by observing, listening, and
imitating---so it follows that we've devised a way to police our own
happiness. We are afraid to lose control. We want to control other
people without considering their freedoms or showing them basic respect.
Too often, our system of governing gets in the way of our basic desire
to communicate and to love. It's not surprising that our
principles---the ones taught to us by our family and culture---often
suppress us and put limits on our joy. Imitating them, we write our own
constitution and execute our own punishments. We disparage ourselves,
attack ourselves, and suffer the emotional pain. For reasons most of us
have forgotten, we insist on denying our bodies basic pleasures. We
often force ourselves to do what we don't enjoy, and we (sometimes
literally) send ourselves to bed without supper. In the personal reality
we've created, no one is above the law. Not even us. Imposing our will
on other people only pushes them away. Our laws aren't real. Our little
government only illustrates who we are not. We're not lawmakers, doomed
to enforce rules at the expense of our own happiness. Our minds and
bodies are meant to be allies in the quest for a better relationship
with life. By questioning our own rules, we can enjoy the freedom to act
and react truthfully. We can start the journey back to authenticity.

6 The Mind as Government ALLOWING THE MIND to operate like a government
pulls us farther from what we really are. Devising laws and punishments
is a job for outside institutions. It is what societies do, and even
their success depends on a willingness to change what doesn't work. With
all our private judgments and censures, we've each built virtual jails
for ourselves---and that can't possibly make us happy. Our personal
reality doesn't have to be a prison. It should be an artistic effort.
When we think of it as a living work of art, we can modify the
masterpiece as we go. We have the power to make better choices, keeping
the welfare of the body in mind. By governing ourselves with respect, we
can create harmony in every facet of our lives. Of course, it helps to
remind ourselves what government was designed to do. The kind of
government most of us are familiar with has three main branches: a
legislative, an executive, and a judicial branch. All three have the
overriding purpose of serving the welfare of the country. A system of
checks and balances makes sure one branch of government doesn't act in
ways that undermine the others. Our mind can work the same way, by
checking the integrity of its own actions. Every branch needs to be
accountable and transparent. The mind needs to be aware of itself and
practice effective oversight. The legislative branch of any government
is called congress. Congress makes laws and ratifies treaties, and so
does the human mind. The mind creates strict laws---not just those
handed down by family and society, but its own laws. These
laws---whether consciously or unconsciously made---govern how we live.
They're the self-reprimands and resolutions that guide our behavior.
They also include our prejudices and phobias. You abide by the laws of
your mind, and your mind expects others to abide by its laws as well. As
you may have noticed, you get along better with people who respect your
laws and accept your views.

Take a moment to consider how much importance you give to your rules and
principles. It doesn't matter if they echo the principles of your
parents or grandparents, because they're yours now. You may be able to
state them clearly, and you may find fault with people who don't agree
with those principles. You may even try to convince family members and
friends to follow them. If they disagree, you might get angry. You might
even pick a fight. As it turns out, most relationship problems have to
do with your government wanting to be right and deciding every other
government is wrong. Defending your own constitution, you often declare
war on other nations and their people. Most people declare a thousand
little wars over a lifetime, fighting every criticism and rival opinion.
You get the sense that you're not being respected, so you become
disrespectful. All of this inhibits your natural inclination to love and
be generous. Your congress has overruled your authenticity, which means
your government has defeated its true purpose. We lose our sense of
fairness and empathy when our personal laws take on too much importance.
It's nice to have a code of behavior to live by, but that code should
not have a negative impact on our relationships. We may not even
recognize certain ideas as principles, but the character called me still
uses them to legislate and to prosecute. It uses them to scold other
people and to quarrel with itself. Understanding our own actions and
reactions makes a change in our internal government possible. Think
about the ideas that define you---ideas that tell the world who you are.
You're an activist or a volunteer. You're a workaholic. You're a liberal
or a conservative. You're loyal to a fault. You're God-fearing,
patriotic, and the number-one fan of your home team. These may seem like
admirable ways to describe yourself, but have they made your life
easier? How much time do you spend explaining and defending your
position? Do you criticize people who describe themselves differently?
Do you "lay down the law" to your family and friends, expecting them to
be as fanatical as you are? You may still want to start a war or just
win a few battles. Either way, opinions aren't where your power lies.
They're just opinions. A good argument is still just an argument. Your
beliefs and ideologies may feel as if they are the heart and soul of
you, but they're not. Cherished ideas represent a way of thinking that
makes us feel safe and possibly even superior. We invest them with a lot
of emotional power, but they have no power of their own. Ideas and
ideologies influence the way we conduct ourselves, which often feels

right, but they can also harm our ability to interact and share time
with others. Think about your beliefs. Are they more important than the
truth of you? Are they more precious than love? To respect someone's
right to an opinion is an act of love. It's a gift to others to let them
share their views. It's not so difficult to listen without judgment.
It's not that weird to say, "I don't know," and disarm the moment. Let
others know they have a valid point. We don't always have to be right.
We don't ever have to be me. Most of the battles we fight are in our
heads. We grapple with ideas and constantly struggle with notions of
right and wrong. And then we take the fight outside, arguing about truth
and lies, good and evil. Our way is brilliant; their way is stupid. Like
most conflicts between nations, our wars with other people are public
declarations of self-importance. We have a tendency to defend the main
character of our story, often as if we were defending human life.
Consider that for a moment: we're defending the integrity of something
that isn't real. Maybe we're afraid of losing face, and that reveals the
whole problem. We will lose our masks, in other words. We will abandon
pretense. Unable to support what we are not, we will stand naked and
authentic in front of the world ---which may be what we've needed all
along. If we refuse to quit old habits and pretenses, how can we
experience the truth of us? We will continue to be at odds with the
world. We will continue to see injustice everywhere and make our lives
that much more difficult. The voice of me insists that we be right and
that everyone else be wrong, but where do our ideas come from in the
first place? If we dare to incorporate new ideas, what exactly is at
stake? Who needs to be shielded from that disturbance? If we want peace
of mind, we won't find it by arguing and insisting. We find unexpected
peace when we stop trying to defend the main character.

7 Justice and the Judge MAKING LAWS IS up to congress, one branch of
government. We can say that the mind acts as a legislative branch, but
the mind invents ways to implement its laws as well. So let's turn to
the second branch of selfgovernment: the judicial. The judicial branch
decides how laws should be enforced and under what circumstances. Like
outside governments, our mental government demands punishment for
breaking the law. We have many different ways of exacting punishments on
the people around us. Our punishments may be subtle or brutal, or we may
turn our anger against ourselves. How many of us have tortured ourselves
for eating too much, accomplishing too little, or for just not being
good enough? People run their judicial systems differently. You may be
tough on yourself, but lenient with others. You might be clueless about
your own crimes, but highly sensitive to the crimes of other people. You
may be a loving person to others, but cruel to yourself---or the other
way around. Most people are capable of cruelty if they're angry or
insecure enough. Before you can make changes to your particular justice
system, you need to acknowledge how it works. We all need to consider
our actions. We can ask ourselves, "Is this response fair? Am I being
respectful in this situation? Would I want to be treated this way?"
Respect is a word that's impressed on us in childhood, but we were never
given a chance to understand it fully. In spite of what many of us were
told, no one has to earn respect. Everyone is different, but every human
body is a copy of life itself. Every creature gives proof to the dance
of energy and matter---that's reason enough to show respect. Respect
makes it possible to see beyond someone's opinions and customs. It makes
it possible to see the truth, and truth frees us from our deceptions.

There's no real justice when a government is operating blindly. When the
mind is reacting automatically, we make errors in judgment. We pay a
high price for our assumptions, causing unnecessary suffering. If we
refuse to see things as they are, we can get disappointed. We blame, and
we carry grudges. We show contempt for ourselves and others. How does
any of this make us better human beings? How does this make us feel
safer or more at peace with ourselves? Respect is the solution to
injustice. Heaven, by any interpretation, is ruled by respect. We create
heaven on earth by respecting ourselves and every living thing. Respect
makes our interactions with other people go more smoothly. At home, in
our social lives, and in our business dealings, respect wins allies. We
don't have to like people to show them respect. All human relationships
thrive on mutual respect, whether or not we can agree on ideas. We can't
give what we don't have, so respect has to begin with us. Not all of us
were taught self-respect in childhood. We may not have been encouraged
to respect our bodies and the bodies of other humans. As adults, we can
now assess how kind we are to ourselves. How fair are we? How severe is
our justice system, particularly when it comes to our own behavior? Can
we forgive ourselves? Do we even know how? Just as forgiveness is
essential to bring healing to a country, it is also essential to a
healthy mind. Throughout human history, the practice of forgiveness has
turned mortal enemies into compassionate allies. This happens in our own
lives as well. Forgiveness puts old grievances to rest. We often resist
the impulse to forgive, because we think it absolves bad people from a
just punishment. Guilt or innocence is not the point. Forgiveness
releases each of us from the need to hate. Forgiveness takes the past
off our shoulders, so we can go forward without its burden. For nations
and individuals alike, the past is a corpse we shouldn't want to carry
around with us. Memory should teach, not torture us. We want to be well
again, happy and whole. By forgiving a trespass, we release ourselves
from torment. Consider the way you use past memories to hurt yourself,
time and again. There's no justice in any of it. You feel the pain over
and over, and no one is affected but you. Remembering makes you
miserable, and life becomes miserable for those close to you. You
overlook the present moment until it too becomes the past. The future
becomes clouded by hatred. All the real moments are lost to the moments
that never existed. So, of course, you feel you've missed something.

We were all domesticated through a system of rewards and punishments.
The rewards might have been positive attention for our behavior---words
of praise or gestures of affection. We might have been treated to ice
cream for a job well done or allowed to spend a day playing outside with
a friend. "Punishment" could mean a lack of response from our parents or
harsh words. A punishment might have meant getting spanked or being
subjected to worse physical abuses. But it also felt like punishment to
us when we were blamed for something or made to feel guilty and ashamed.
As adults, we've learned to reward ourselves for our good deeds and to
blame ourselves for the bad. We feel ashamed without knowing why. We
submit to the kind of punishments we tolerated as children, and we offer
ourselves no forgiveness. As parents sometimes do to kids, we neglect
our bodies or judge them harshly. Refusing to take responsibility for
the stories we tell, we blame the human body for our discomfort and
pain. Then we go a step farther: we invent other characters to take the
blame. Having grown up believing in goblins and Santa Claus, we're used
to the feeling of being watched and judged. We expect to be punished by
someone for something. Why shouldn't we feel anxious and neurotic? We
fear the wrath of whatever god we were taught to believe in. We want to
appease angels and blame devils for the "awful" things we do. We watch
ourselves in action, we condemn, and we punish. It seems we're willing
to remain immature just to avoid taking charge of our reality. By
imagining ourselves as the central character in our life story, we add
ourselves to a long list of childhood fictional creatures---except me
seems to be the only one who isn't taking the blame. We say things like,
"My bad" and "I have only myself to blame," but we're not talking about
the mind---or about the main character of our story. We're almost always
blaming the human body. We judge it, and we usually find it guilty. When
the main character acts like a big judge, our bodies react in fear. Me
is the schoolyard bully in our world, ready to punch and intimidate. The
main character of everyone's story is the rule maker, the judge, and the
enforcer---and also the president of a very private nation. So we need
to pay attention to the way we speak through me. A forgiving mind is
just and fair. Forgiveness creates immunities from pain. We don't have
to punish ourselves for past mistakes or invent new mistakes out of our
imagination. Whatever the circumstances, we are all doing our best.
Tomorrow, we can do even better, but not if we're

afraid of the one who is in charge of our judicial system---not if we're
afraid of the judge. We all need checks and balances, which we can only
exercise through self-awareness. We need to make sure our laws don't
continue to harm the human being; we need to ensure that our reality is
not being ruled by a lunatic. How do lunatics behave? They disrespect
the human body and punish it for their own bad choices. They lie to
themselves. They take everything personally. They invent conflicts and
enjoy the drama. They let self-importance make decisions for them. They
let fear control them. Fighting over opinions is a little insane.
Insisting on having the last word is exhausting. Putting conditions on
love sounds self-defeating. Still, we do crazy things like that all the
time. And we suffer for it. It seems we make all kinds of excuses to
suffer. Suffering is the only addiction for most of us, and we find many
ways to create it. We want to be right at any cost and suffer when we're
proven wrong. We suffer for our own judgments, and we continually
imagine that we're being judged. We suffer for our bad habits---blaming
cigarettes, drugs, or alcohol. We blame food. We blame sports. We blame
everything on our upbringing. We blame loved ones for our unhappiness.
And, of course, we blame the physical body for letting us down. This may
not be easy to admit---it may not seem easy to fix---but, with a little
insight, we can make a corrupt system impeccable again. We can respect
ourselves---for no reason and every reason. We can become our own
champion and best friend, refusing to suffer---whatever the
circumstance. Why does any human suffer? The problem is almost always
leadership. Reliable leaders take care of their country---their
body---first. Aware leaders will not believe the lies they tell
themselves. Effective leaders don't submit to fear or intimidation. The
mind leads because we allow it to lead. We believe in the character it
created and allow it to speak on our behalf. We believe its opinions and
its recollections, but me does not represent the truth. The mind cannot
duplicate the truth. Truth is pure energy. Becoming aware of ourselves
as energy, or truth, is an important revelation. The mind will continue
to talk, sounding for all the world like a knowledgeable friend, but we
don't have to believe it. We can rise above the voice of me at any time.
Me is the point of view of life's reflection. It is an artificial
intelligence. Life's information is filtered through all the thoughts
and characteristics we've given ourselves. The main character has its
own

intelligence, but every me is different, depending on the development of
the brain and circumstances that affect the physical body. Each of us
identifies with that character, so we find it difficult to separate me
from reality. So it follows that we allow me to rule, without any
interference.

8 The Commander in Chief BY TRYING TO answer the question "Who am I?"
you can begin to discern who you are not. You are not your body, but you
are the guardian of its welfare and integrity. You are not the stories
you tell about yourself. You are not the main character of those
stories, but you believe you are---so completely that you are sometimes
willing to defend its point of view with your life. You are not your
mind, but you are responsible for the message it delivers to your body.
You are also responsible for the message it delivers through your body
to the rest of humanity. Your mind has learned to operate like a
government composed of three branches. It has a congress that makes up
laws. A judicial branch enforces those laws through a system of rewards
and punishments similar to the methods your family and community used to
domesticate you. In this chapter we will cover the executive branch, and
the "president" in charge of making decisions. First, let's understand
that the leader of your own nation is not real. The one who rules your
little government is something out of your imagination but nevertheless
has the power to affect your world. So what kind of leader do you want
to be? Remember, you can't give what you don't have. If you want to be
more compassionate, you must treat yourself with compassion. If you want
to represent the truth to others, stop lying to yourself. If you want to
love someone in the truest sense, love yourself without conditions. As
with any government, the mind needs to make decisions that serve the
body. The mind's addictions become the body's addictions, and so we
should all stop making excuses to suffer. Whether the physical body is
healthy or sick, it needs a trustworthy caretaker. It can't flourish
when it's being pushed beyond reason. It needs comfort, not criticism.
It needs messages of delight, not doom. It needs to laugh. Responsible
leaders rule fairly. Wise commanders know the power they wield over
other minds and hearts and they use that power carefully.

They are aware of imbalances and prejudices within their administration.
Without conscious leadership, the entire country suffers. Consider what
kind of leader you are or want to be, and consider the people your
leadership will affect on a daily basis. If we want to preside over this
body (our country) more wisely than we have been doing, we need to give
our governing style a fair assessment. We need to be honest with
ourselves, admit to our mistakes, and be willing to change. All three
branches of government need to be accountable for the happiness of the
human being. If we're unwilling to pay attention to our personal
evolution, the body will continue to pay a price. The main character of
our story, me, wants to preside over everything. The problem, of course,
is that me has long been a victim. Me feels persecuted by the system or
judged by society. Me is forever on the defensive, and so how can me be
a strong leader? How can me be an impartial judge? In the same way, me
could be perpetually angry or resentful. If me is constantly critical,
how can it work harmoniously with other branches of government? If me is
a judge and a bully, how can it achieve the wisdom necessary to guide a
nation? How do informal agreements get made between leaders, and how do
treaties get approved? For many people, a victim has been acting as
commander in chief of their country's armed forces. That puts the whole
country at risk. What is a victim? Someone who complains all the time.
Someone who sees personal injustice everywhere and insists on "being
treated fairly." Clearly, there's nothing fair about one individual
wanting the benefit of everyone's attention. There's no justice in a
system ruled by one person's needs, with little concern for the needs of
others. When we think we're victimized, we become unreasonable. When
we're insecure, small battles grow into major conflicts. When war breaks
out, who pays the ultimate price? The body does---and it's hard to
generate happiness again. We feel physically assaulted and dispirited,
simply because of what we believe to be true. Spirit means life, and
life is the truth of what we are. We are spiritually mature when we are
in a close relationship with life---when we can tell the real from the
unreal. Wonderful relationships can't happen when we're obsessed with me
and all things that concern me. Peace won't happen as long as we're
waging wars within us and around us.

Our bodies feel the stress and anxiety we create by constantly being a
victim or a judge. This makes it especially important to consider the
way we lead---how we legislate, how we execute decisions, and how we
choose our punishments. Our bodies feel the abuses first, but they
aren't the only ones. How do we treat all the citizens of our
nation---those who work with us, live with us, and depend on us? We can
be an example of what bad governing does to good human beings---or we
can show them what it takes to live functional, happy lives. Physical
development is built into our biological blueprint, but spiritual
evolution needs our attention and our will. How the main character tells
its story affects the mood of the country and its closest allies. Humans
are social animals, and the mind mirrors our need for other bodies---in
other words, it likes to connect with other minds. It sets up
strongholds in other dreams by sending its best ambassadors---words and
ideas. It sets up embassies in other people's realities, claiming a
little bit of influence for itself. Once we inhabit space in other
people's minds, it's tempting to interfere in their business. We might
question their culture, overlooking the fact that we're in their world,
not ours. The positive effect we have on people is the result of our
respect for their traditions and beliefs. Peace is the result of
honoring the way other humans do things without imposing our laws on
them. We all want peace; we all want to feel that our world is safe. We
want to feel secure, and we want to feel proud of ourselves. It's funny
how we love to praise the country we live in, but have never learned to
praise the body that serves as a home to us. Our physical body is an
extension of who we are. It houses our mind. It is home to the infinite
energy that runs through us. Are we proud of that? Are we willing to
protect it, even above our favorite opinions? When you travel, you may
find that people of other cultures like to hear you describe your
country. It feels good to tell them about its natural beauty and its
many freedoms. Listen to what you tell people about your body as you go
through an ordinary day. Do you talk about it with love and respect or
with derision? What about its leadership? Does it inspire or intimidate?
Is it sane, generous, and able to rise above its own story? Does it make
people feel safe? How proud are you of the body that offers so many
privileges? The leader of your "country" is the one who is perceiving
and describing everything. The one reading these words is the main
character of your story. You are the president of your own nation, and
you submit

to all the rules you've put into place, based on what you've observed in
your lifetime. You can see that you're the one who creates and enforces
the rules, whether they seem fair or not. Your influence goes as far as
your words go. Your command is as strong as your personal authority. If
you're able to see how your nation is run, you may also notice that
everyone around you is the leader of their own nation. Your mother is a
government of her own. Your father, your siblings, and your friends are
ruled by their own governments. You seek opportunities to participate in
those governments. A government is influenced by the conversations of
its people. The ideas that we send---by texting, talking, singing, or
filming---go into other minds. Our ambassadors reach other nations, and
we receive ambassadors from other nations. We all have influence on our
governments, just as we have influence on our families, tribes, and
cities. Together, we influence humanity---and the equilibrium of life on
earth. Being aware of that kind of power should encourage us to use it
responsibly. Humans can't control the planet, but they can hurt it. As
"president" we can't actually control the body we live in, but we can
hurt it. We can't stop the body from getting old or sick, but we can
injure it through our actions, reactions, and neglect. We can sedate it
or intoxicate it. We can poison and corrupt it; and we do. Corruption,
once again, is the problem. Truth is the solution. What is truth? The
truth cannot be explained with words. In fact, words take us farther
from the truth, creating a reality of their own. However, we all know
instinctively that there is more to us than words and theories. We were
whole before we learned a language. We can feel whole again without
relying on symbols to speak for us. Words are our emissaries, but,
again, they are not the truth of us. Close your eyes, and you can feel
energy moving through you. You can feel it running under your skin,
making it warm. Notice your breath, your heartbeat, your flickering
eyelids. Move your fingers, your legs, your head, and feel the power
that commands every motion. That power is life, flowing into all the
little universes of you. Every emotion is real. Every sensory perception
is telling you the truth. The thoughts that manipulate your emotions are
not real. What you are is pure energy, the force of life. Nothing else
is real. The mind is a mirror reflection of the truth, and mirrors
merely attempt to represent what is real. The reflection is only as good
as the quality of the mirror. Life's energy is real. It is what you
are---what we all are. We don't have to prove our worth. We forget that,
thinking we have to fight

for recognition, and then fight to maintain it. We fight for attention.
We fight over ideas and personal opinions at the expense of our
emotional health. We fight to understand ourselves, and we fight to be
understood. Life is truth, and it doesn't need to be understood. Truth
doesn't need proof, or even faith, to survive. And it doesn't need our
stories. Truth existed before stories, before humanity; and truth will
continue after all the storytellers are gone. We don't need a thought or
a theory to show us the truth. Truth can be felt in our loving and in
our enduring passion to live. If we understand how we govern ourselves,
we can create a more benevolent government. We can change the
temperament of its leader. Most of us are intimidated by power but eager
to use power against ourselves. We can see violence everywhere, but not
the kind of violence we inflict on our own bodies. We've tortured it to
make it thinner, stronger, or more attractive. We've been unkind to the
body, often trying to control its natural impulses. Seeing that, we can
change. The human body has served us loyally, and it deserves loyalty in
return. We imagine that life looks upon us favorably or treats us badly,
but life is what we are. Our minds can imagine so many things, so
imagine how the mind can conspire with life. Imagine giving up control
in this moment and surrendering to life. Imagine going through a day
without having to be me. Using a little bit of imagination, we can
govern ourselves in new ways and come up with solutions to recurring
problems. After all, imagining and problem solving are what the mind
does best. We're all in the process of creating the reality we think we
deserve, and each of us has defined the central character. Each of us
sees the world through the eyes of me, and me is on autopilot, making
rules and executing them without full awareness. Like all great stories,
your personal story could use a hero. Your body could use a savior. As
it happens, the only one who can save you is the main character of your
story. The one you call me is not real, but it affects real things.
Rather than perceiving the truth, most of us yield to an inner voice. We
listen to our own thoughts. We believe them and obey them, at the
expense of our happiness. We focus on past conversations, past moments,
past years. It may have taken time and patience to learn those habits,
but they can be undone with far less effort. We have the tools. We have
attention, memory, and imagination to guide us forward. If me is the
problem, me is also the solution. Your country already has a leader who
wants to be wise and compassionate. If you're asking

life's deeper questions, you may already be a president who's prepared
to put the welfare of the country first. You have a legislature that
wants to revise its laws, and a justice system that respects all
individuals. You can sense what is real and what is not. You're ready to
take the next step. Change requires action. One action leads to another,
and another, until new habits become automatic and changes become
evident. In time, people's reactions change, and they see you
differently. There's no need to look to other governments for solutions.
You have all you need to build a healthy and prosperous nation. You have
the will, and you have the awareness. So if what we call reality is
virtual and me is not real, then what about the world around us? What
else isn't actually real? What other pearls of wisdom have we
overlooked?

Ask Yourself, "What Is Real?"

9 The Second Pearl What is real? You will know what is real when you
accept what is not real. ONCE WE LEARN to challenge our stories, we get
a sense of who we're not. Seeing that, we can become aware of the truth.
We can see everything from an infinite point of view. You've grown
accustomed to seeing yourself as a product of life and perhaps even as a
victim of circumstance. By shifting your attention, you can see from
another perspective: you are the artist of this creation. You are energy
itself. By asking the question "What is real?" we're challenging what we
think we know. Nothing is quite as we imagine it. Again, think of the
brain as a mirror. If our hands reached for an image in a mirror, we
would touch glass, not the thing whose image it reflects. The mind uses
information received by the brain to create a picture of reality.
Thought is the reflection. If we tried to physically reach for a
thought, we couldn't. We look in a glass mirror to get an idea of how
our bodies look. We depend on an accurate reflection, but we always get
some degree of distortion. The mind reflects the truth in its particular
way. It sees through the filter of existing ideas and opinions. It sees
what it has been taught to expect. To one degree or another, we're all
perceiving warped reflections of the truth. Why is this important?
Because, as we discovered earlier, we identify ourselves with the mind.
We're totally convinced we are the main character in the mind's reality.
Imagine what would happen if the reflection became aware of itself? This
would probably create a huge disturbance. What if you realized you
weren't your thoughts and beliefs ---that you weren't even me? It may
not be easy to imagine; it may not seem like fun. Maybe you find just
talking about minds, mirrors, and reflections disturbing. That's a good
sign. It means you've just challenged a belief of some kind. You

can deny the disturbance, of course, or you can recognize it---and even
take advantage of it. If you acknowledge that your mind is a mirror
reflection of what is real, and not a very accurate one, you can see
that yours is only one interpretation of reality---one of more than
seven billion individual interpretations. Then you can experiment. You
can put what the reflection is telling you in a reasonable perspective
and move your attention to your senses. You can begin to notice how your
body feels, emotionally and physically. Are those feelings coming from a
memory? Are they reacting to an ongoing narrative? What are you telling
yourself, and why? When you're not thinking, your body is free to feel,
without your interference. It will regulate emotional moods on its own.
It will be able to tell you when something is physically wrong, and you
will notice. You will be able to modify your habitual responses---like
anger, indignation, and fear. Emotions will inform you, which is what
emotions are supposed to do. No emotion should become addictive or
chronic and sicken you. Imagine it, and it can happen. Imagine finding
emotional balance automatically. Imagine checking your thoughts all the
time, no matter what is going on around you. It sounds funny, but by not
thinking so much, you'll bring yourself closer to answering the question
"What is real?" By perceiving without thinking, you'll notice what isn't
real now and never was. Pure perception is not about what you tell
yourself. It doesn't rely on what other people tell you. Stop
thinking---and you're able to observe, listen, and feel. The truth is
obvious in everything you see and experience. Be still for a moment. Can
you hear the voice of me commenting on this moment? It might be
explaining what you're reading right now or planning what to do when you
stop reading. It might be distracting itself, making comments about
someone else---what she did, what he said. Maybe it's enjoying
conversations that haven't happened and are unlikely ever to happen.
Your thoughts follow a story line, often with a beginning, a middle, and
an end. The story includes familiar characters, most of whom you think
you know well. Your reality is populated by other characters---not so
much by actual people, but the things you think you know about those
people. Events happen, and the people exist, but your understanding of
them is the stuff of dreams. We're all "dreaming" reality.

When we're awake, our dream is typically based on real events, but we
each interpret events differently. We see and hear things according to
our particular beliefs and assumptions. As we've seen, everyone believes
the "president" no matter what he or she is saying---and we all obey
laws that exist within our personal reality. Asleep, we're still
dreaming, but the laws are different, if laws exist at all. The law of
gravity may not exist in our sleeping dreams. The laws of physics are
ignored, and basic logic becomes irrelevant. Our waking dream follows
physical laws---and social and civic laws---but sleeping dreams happily
ignore them. Either way, we're dreaming. We are all making distinct and
separate impressions of this moment, wherever we are and whatever we're
doing. The moment is real, but we're telling our own story about it.
This is the wonderful magic of the human mind, to turn real things into
symbols and impressions. But we shouldn't forget that the body responds
emotionally to our kind of magic. The waking dream can be mastered, just
as we can alter the course of our nighttime dreaming. We can remind
ourselves before falling asleep to wake up in the middle of a recurring
nightmare. We can leave clues--- to pinch ourselves or to challenge
threatening characters in a sleeping dream. The same is true of our
waking life. It's simple enough to remind ourselves that we're dreaming
all the time, even as we go through an ordinary day. Other people are
dreaming too, and their reality is based on what they think is true. It
has nothing to do with us, unless we agree that it does. Everyone has
the power to steer their reality in a new direction. Everyone has a
chance to alter its message. We created the idea of ourselves by
listening to the opinions of people closest to us. They told us their
version of who we are. We can't change the way other people perceive us,
and it's not important to try. We can, however, take charge of our own
dream. At any point, we can modify the reflection so that it will better
reflect the truth. We can stop assuming we know better than anyone else
and start to ask questions. We can stop insisting that we're right. It's
not a sign of weakness to surrender the need to know. We can even
question our own knowledge. We can disregard our own advice and trust
life more. We alter the face of me. By adopting energy's point of view,
we let go of our small obsessions. By seeing beyond our own concerns, we
can appreciate the infinite landscape. Each of us is pure energy, caught
up in the dream of matter. We assume we know who we are. We assume we
can discern what is real.

We believe all our assumptions are true---until we start to doubt.
That's the first step in answering "What is real?" Our sense of reality
starts to shift when we question what we believe.

10 Life Under Tyranny THERE IS ONLY one truth: energy. Energy is the
force that creates and sustains the universe. We use different words for
it: life, truth, intent, love. They all point to the same thing. Energy
is life. Matter is a copy of life. It is a copy of truth. The mind is a
reflection of that truth---and, like that painting we mentioned, it
offers many clues about the artist. Our impression of reality is
changing constantly. In that sense, there's no solid ground under our
feet. Reality isn't what we imagine it is in this moment. In fact,
reality isn't what it seemed to be a minute ago. It will be something
else a minute from now, an hour from now---and it won't stop changing.
We'd like to think it's fixed, solid. We'd like our impression of
reality to be everyone's impression. We like to feel safe, knowing that
the world is what we think it is---but impressions change, don't they?
Everything is shifting, transforming, whether or not we notice. The main
character is also shifting constantly. It all started when we were
toddlers, learning to speak and then to think. Thinking is the act of
talking to ourselves. We mimicked other characters, saying what they
said and thinking what they thought, until we felt confident to narrate
our own dream. The me that we first imagined wasn't the me that went to
kindergarten, learning to interact with other me's. Me isn't what it was
then, or what it became in college, or what it was when we first got
married. The me who is now a parent can hardly remember the me who was
single. The person we think we are has changed over the years, as we
accumulated experiences and processed new information. It has acted
selfishly and generously. It has been reckless, and it has been
responsible. It has been an unreliable caretaker for the physical body
as well as a devoted one. The characteristics of me are changing
constantly. As me changes, so does its impression of reality.

Every human sees reality a little differently---or a lot differently---
from every other. Reality changes with our changing circumstances.
Reality looks different according to where we're sitting, standing, or
walking. If we take one step in any direction, our view of the world
changes---instantly, we can see things that weren't apparent before. If
we lie down or stand on a ladder, we've changed our point of view of
things. If we're riding a bike or driving a car, scenes fly by at
different speeds. What we call reality is more of a moving-picture show.
Change the country, language, or culture, and our sense of reality gets
a shock. Nothing smells the same or sounds the same. No one talks like
us. Our smallest routines are disrupted. People everywhere find ways to
feed and shelter themselves, but their ways are distinct. They raise
children and provide for their families, but the rules change with the
scenery---reality's landscape is constantly evolving. If we're okay with
this, we can start to wake up and pay attention. If we experience a
traumatic event, we get jolted out of our normal perceptions and the
world is suddenly not the same---it may never be the same. A car
accident or the loss of a loved one makes existence feel threatening and
unpredictable. In a crisis, the mind stops its narrative and isn't sure
how to pick it up again. Time slows, speeds up, or becomes irrelevant.
Why does tragedy have this effect on us? Tragedy creates changes that
seem too big for the mind to accept. It struggles to put the old me into
the context of a new reality. For a mind that hasn't learned to be a
friend and ally to the body, the struggle usually ends in failure. We
feel heartbroken and abandoned by life. The mind is an ally when it
adapts to abrupt changes, whether those changes are tragic or
gratifying. Our existence includes all events and all possibilities.
Every experience is an integral part of being alive. All emotions are
acceptable. We don't need to play a role or act out our feelings for
dramatic effect. We don't need to follow the mind's programming,
responding to events the way we were taught to respond. We don't have to
follow old laws. At any time, in any situation, we can experience events
from the perspective of life itself. The law of life, we can say, is to
create and never stop creating. Transformation is life's chief
characteristic. Life has no me. It doesn't feel victimized and never
casts blame. In the infinite picture, there is no judge; life makes no
judgments. From life's point of view, there are no crimes or
penalties---only transformations. Energy transforms, but never stops. It
is everywhere, it is infinite, and it is eternal. We know that, but

we don't know ourselves as energy. We see ourselves as separate from it,
and consequently separate from truth. We live in a world of rules and
rarely gaze beyond that world. Those rules become irrelevant when we
sleep, but fall back into place as soon as the mind wakes up---almost as
soon. There's a moment, before we open our eyes, when we're not sure
where we are---or who we are. The moment passes quickly, because we've
learned to "reconstruct" ourselves automatically. We've done this so
many times we don't notice the process. We open our eyes, and we
remember: "I'm at home," or, "I'm still in a hotel . . . um, in Denver,
I think. . . . No, it's Monday, so I'm in Dayton." Having established
where we are, we put together the pieces of who we are---and there are
many, many little pieces. Again, the process is automatic and barely
noticeable. We remember who we went to bed with and roll over to make
sure. We remember what we were worried about when we went to sleep the
night before---and begin to worry again. We remind ourselves what
reality we're living in and start the dream all over again. If we slowed
the process down, it would probably be like reading a fairy tale to a
child, sounding something like this: "And then he remembered he was
Timmy, who fell asleep under a willow tree after running away from his
home, which stood on the edge of a village called . . ." We put our
personal story together in a fraction of a second, get the appropriate
emotions on board, and then me is ready to face the day. If our sense of
reality hasn't undergone any recent disruptions, most of us settle into
a familiar pattern of thought and behavior. Of course, these are
patterns that have been constrained by laws---our laws. Like little kids
expecting to be bullied at school, we wake up most days with a vague
sense of guilt. We've probably messed up somehow and can only hope that
we don't get caught. We hope we're not exposed as liars or pretenders.
We hope we're not going to be judged or contradicted, and then we step
out of the house, armed with our best stories. With all our defenses, we
still won't avoid conflict. We will surely clash with other opinions and
offend other feelings. The best of us get defensive and even aggressive
on occasion. Even the most eventempered person can get provoked. Even
the most honorable president acts unwisely now and then. We govern our
world poorly sometimes, disappointing ourselves and the people we care
about. Sometimes, we may inadvertently start a war.

As long as the war continues in our own heads, our relationships with
others will be compromised. When we fail to get along with ourselves,
our efforts to get along with other people will be frustrated. Our
internal private tyrannies grow into public tyrannies, and soon family
members are fighting, friends fall out, and entire communities are in
conflict. Everyone needs to be right. Everyone is yelling, and no one is
listening. Listening is essential. We need to listen to ourselves first.
It's important to learn our mind's particular language. Even silently,
it uses words to accuse and to demoralize the body, words it learned
long ago. "What an idiot!" we say to ourselves. "I'm such a dummy," "I'm
hideous," "I'm a freak!" Are we listening to this? The disrespect is
clear, and it will be reflected in the way other people speak to us. If
we listen, we can change the way we communicate with ourselves. We can
base even this relationship on respect. Where is the compassion we're
naturally inclined to give a friend, a child, or a favorite pet? It's
there, of course, but we never learned to treat our own bodies as well
as we would a pet dog or cat. We can just as easily choose to say things
to ourselves like, "Come on, you're amazing, but right now you're just
tired." We can follow a curse with an apology, telling the body we're
sorry for the insult. We can laugh at ourselves with affection. It's not
so hard to learn the language of respect. We can be patient with our
blunders. "Man, I really love you!" we can say out loud. "Silly thing!
You crack me up!" is a fair response to an ordinary mistake. If we're
fair to ourselves, we will judge the world fairly. If we keep our inner
dialogue honest, we can build trust between mind and body---the most
important relationship there is. As you've begun to see, we rule
ourselves in ways we don't notice. The body notices, however, and
responds to our tyrannies the way it would respond to physical threats.
It responds to toxic thoughts the way it might respond to a virus. It
fights the invasion and often loses---even if we don't notice.
Self-judgment is an assault, and so is self-contempt. It's an attack on
the body to pity ourselves, to worry, or to obsess. The most amazing
thing about the body is that it recovers from most abuses on its own.
Cuts heal; broken bones mend. Diseases are attacked and defeated. When
our planet changes temperature, it makes chemical adjustments and
stabilizes. Our bodies do the same. However, if the assaults to the body
are constant and long overlooked, the damage may become irreversible.
Our attitudes about ourselves strike us physically, and so we need to
play a different role. Each of us needs to be the peacekeeper, not the

tyrant. We want to be conscious guardians of freedom for the human body
we occupy. We are adults now, whose parents and siblings should no
longer run our lives. Many of us are parents now or even grandparents.
We're in charge of our actions and our reactions. We're capable leaders
in our own right. Then why do we insist on waging internal wars? Why do
we build prisons for ourselves and make our bodies live within them? Why
do we insist that other people must suffer with us? When we feel badly
treated, we fight back. When our notions of reality are rigid, we feel
trapped. Of course, we feel like running away. Naturally, we want to
know what real freedom feels like. So what's stopping us?

11 Getting Out of Jail WE ALL REMEMBER what it was like to be a
teenager, sick of the indignities of childhood. We wanted to break away
from our parents. We wanted to escape the prison of home and family.
Some of you reading this may still be teenagers, but even in adulthood
most people have the impulse to break free of something. Even in old
age, we want to exercise our independence. This impulse to be free is
natural, but who is really standing in our way? No matter how unfair
outside circumstances seem, feelings of oppression begin with us. We
entertain some unpleasant ideas about ourselves. We hang on to
irrational fears and create random superstitions. We tell ourselves we
can't, we shouldn't---or else. We demand some kind of penance for having
too much fun. We punish ourselves for breaking unwritten rules. We even
make ourselves pay penalties for loving. Oppression exists. There are
real prisoners in the world and actual prisons, but most people are
oppressed by their own stories and fears. They're driven to despair by
beliefs they refuse to abandon. They are nagged by voices only they can
hear. No one can say what it is you demand of yourself except you. No
one thinks about ways to punish you but you. So listen to yourself. Hear
how you tell people you don't do that or eat that or how you're not that
kind of guy. Listen to your thoughts, and hear how you browbeat
yourself. You may sound like your father sometimes, or your mother, or
your college math professor. Mostly, you sound like that character you
invented to keep yourself in line. You sound like me. A strong desire
for freedom usually begins in adolescence. All kids, at some time or
another, begin to feel constrained and a little persecuted. Parents try
to shape and protect their children, but kids reach a point when they
resent them for it. They rebel, even if it means hurting themselves in
the process. Society gets involved, but kids lose patience

with its rules. Governments and religious institutions want to lead them
in one direction or another. Breaking free of it all sounds appealing,
but most people want freedom to be given to them. That won't happen. The
freedom that really counts is the freedom we grant ourselves. Tyranny
starts with us and with that little government in our heads. Who makes
the rules? Who enforces them? Who can rewrite those rules? The president
can---the aware executive we want to be. We can each repeal our own laws
and reform our own personal justice system. We can break out of jail
free anytime. As you've probably figured out by now, me can become a
better decision maker. Me can be a better administrator---or me can step
aside and become a friend. If the desire is there, me can be a diplomat
and a peacemaker. Me can ultimately be the savior you've been looking
for.

12 The Diplomat AS WE DESCRIBED earlier, humanity first organizes itself
into families, then communities and cities, then states, and finally
into countries and kingdoms. Each country has borders to keep out
foreign intruders. Around the globe, there are hundreds of languages
spoken, making communication even more challenging. But countries need
to communicate with each other. People need to gather and share ideas.
They need to listen, without judgment. Every country needs diplomats to
do the job of reaching out and connecting with other countries. Every
nation needs people who are skilled communicators and negotiators. Every
human body could use an ally. What kind of mind is an ally to the human
body? It's a mind that listens to itself and rejects thought-stories of
hate. "I hate myself!" is an example of unskilled communication. Who is
hating what? Are you hating your body or your circumstances? Are you
dissatisfied with the effect you seem to have on other people? "I hate
you!" usually means someone in your life isn't obeying you. We can't
control most people, and we shouldn't want to. Chances are, they've
practiced being their own kind of tyrant, strictly controlling
themselves and managing everyone around them, just like you. An ally
doesn't gossip or judge---the kind of things that are toxic to the body.
So many of our thoughts are self-degrading, and so many of our
commentaries make us suspicious and afraid of other people. "Carla is
such a snob," or "Jimmy is such a jerk," may have sounded cool in high
school, but where does it get us now? It gets us into the habit of
complaining, for one. How can the body be happy and confident in an
environment of prejudice and disgust? Judgments blind us to people's
truth and push away our friends. Who can trust someone who judges
everything so harshly? How can we even trust ourselves? Most of us
didn't start life this way. We were born into families that spoke to us
kindly. When we finally began to speak, we spoke like them.

We soon found out that words brought us what we needed. Growing up with
many people under the same roof, we learned to use words effectively to
make our desires known. To keep the peace, we had to listen to other
points of view. In school, our ability to use words got us good grades
and made us new friends. College and the bigger world helped us refine
those skills, as we learned to negotiate, to charm, to build trust, and
more. We learned the art of diplomacy. With a little diplomacy, we found
we could fit into most social circles. Learning how to be diplomatic
made it easier to get employment and to stay in positions of influence.
We discovered that tact and sensitivity could bridge differences between
people and resolve conflicts. Respect for others---and for other
realities---could save us. At some point, we all had to learn the
language of our profession. Every business has its terms and code
phrases, and every workplace has a government of its own. Every
generation uses its own idioms, and every region has its own dialect.
People around the globe speak the language of their peers, their
vocation, their fellow citizens, their culture. We are all members of a
species that needs to communicate with words in order to survive. Good
communication takes a willingness to recognize common interests and to
make alliances. People are at their best when they feel they can trust
each other to listen, to agree, and to honor agreements. If we refuse to
talk, how can we avoid hostilities? If we have no respect for other
cultures, how can we excel as humans? It's in our nature to cooperate,
and history tells us that peaceful coexistence is in the best interest
of our species. And yet rulers sometimes invent conflicts. Leaders want
more power. Nations overtake nations. We see how the world of politics
works, but what about the world within us? How can we make things better
in our own dream? Our body wants the company of other bodies, but our
mind---our internal government---often has a different agenda. To avoid
continuing conflicts within us, we need to use our diplomatic skills for
a different purpose. The mind needs to make a treaty with the physical
body it occupies. It needs to make new agreements, and it needs to honor
those agreements. Mind and body need to sit down and talk. "I promise I
won't hurt you" sounds odd at first, but it's an important message to
give the body. "I've put my self-importance above your needs, but I want
to do better. I want to be a friend, not a tyrant." Say something like
that a few times, and you'll begin to recognize your neglect and abuses.
You'll listen to your thoughts. You'll become a little more honest with
yourself. You'll connect with something you've taken

for granted most of your life---your human body. Turn your attention to
this relationship. Talk out loud more often, so that you can recognize
repetitive words and attitudes. With patience, you'll begin to modify
the voice in your head. The body can do its part in mending the
relationship too. It needs to learn to wait before responding
emotionally to everything you say. Give it permission to ignore your
chatter. Give it a break from me. It will soon adapt to a style of
leadership that shows restraint and good timing. The human body was
meant to communicate effectively with life, even as events change and
shift. As you achieve more awareness, you can allow that kind of
communication. You don't need to interfere. As a result, your body will
be less intimidated by management---and, with practice, it will be the
equal partner it was meant to be. When the relationship between me and
the body works well, all our relationships improve. We become more
generous, without trying. We don't have to play roles. We don't have to
twist ourselves into shapes to please other people. We don't need lies
or alibis. Authenticity will carry us through each moment and all
moments. We are life, creating new dreams and remarkable beauty
everywhere we go. We are also the emissaries of life, mending divisions
and connecting people. The best leaders are plain-speaking
communicators. They say what they mean and mean what they say. We all
have the ability to be clear and honest with ourselves. We don't need to
accumulate any more superstitions, and we can eliminate the ones we
have. Awareness and authenticity are a natural result of having a mind
that respectfully communicates with the body, so the body can better
commune with life. And what about getting along with other bodies, with
other minds? Like all foreign relations, it helps to learn a language
that their governments understand. By listening to others, we get a
sense of how their realities work and who is in charge. It allows us to
speak directly to them, rather than the people we would prefer them to
be. When we were growing up, the unspoken message we got from our
caretakers was, "Be like me." Has that become your message to the people
around you? You can be a better diplomat in the world at large, but you
need to start by shedding the habits that made you guarded, suspicious,
and untrue to yourself. Your mind dispatches all communications. How is
it representing the truth, right now? The language that the mind speaks
to the body is the language we speak to everyone we meet. Your words can
be impeccable ambassadors,

representing truth and intent, starting with the words you think. You
give them that authority; no one else can. They have no meaning, no
authority of their own. You determine whether words---even a word like
me--- serve your body or disparage it. You choose the phrases and ideas
that shape your personal reality. At any time, you can decide whether
they are serving life. Language is driven by our intent---the power of
our will. Language can create a masterpiece out of the most modest
dream. Ideas create a heaven for us to live in, or they keep us in hell.
How do you communicate with yourself? Are you in the habit of delivering
messages of outrage or fear? Do you invent excuses to be defensive? How
does your body feel about that? When toxic messages are spoken out loud
and often, we eventually crave the emotional results---fury,
disappointment, alarm. By repeating messages of appreciation for
ourselves and others, we develop an appetite for respect. Respect is the
solution to humanity's problems, from global unrest, to playground
scuffles, to the delicate balance of power that exists in our own minds.
Respect opens the door to cooperation and understanding in any culture.
Respect means we honor everyone's right to exist. Respect is the best
part of love. Every one of us creates the kind of reality we think we
deserve, but our human body deserves far more than we've given it. It
deserves, above all, the happiness that comes from a sane and peaceful
mind.

13 Peace and Sanity A GOVERNMENT IS swayed by the mood of its citizens.
Humanity as a whole is guided by the balance and composure of each of
its members. Every person is an essential part of the body of humanity,
and so your personal evolution counts. It matters. How people rule
themselves privately extends outward. How we rule ourselves is reflected
in the way we are ruled. This is how the human dream works, and it
changes by the will of each human, with time and practice. Our personal
dream can change whenever we say so. Sure, it may take a little effort,
but not as much as it took to become our own petty tyrants. Me began
when we first learned to talk and has consumed our attention ever since.
Most of us can't imagine ourselves without a main character. We find it
difficult to imagine a moment or two without our own voice chattering in
our heads. Most of us think we'll never be free of our relentless
thinking, which is a problem; but solving problems is the mind's special
talent. By giving some attention to our inner narrative as we go through
the day, we can make real changes. Thoughts will respond. Words will
obey. By directing our efforts toward mental peace and calm, we can rise
above the noise. We all know that it's not enough that other people want
us to change. We have to want it too. Desire is a motivating force, a
way to direct energy consciously. We often think we have to wait for
desire to come to us; we think we have to be in the mood before we act.
If we always waited for the right mood, nothing would change. Action is
vital to our own evolution, as it is to life. We need to keep growing,
changing, and challenging our beliefs. If reality was a car, desire
would be the gas pedal. Step on it, and the car moves. Press harder, and
it moves faster. Desire generates and directs energy; it's ours to play
with. If we're not feeling the desire, then we can summon it. Whatever
spiritual teachings say about desire, it fuels our actions---for

our own good or ill. Desire moves us in one of two directions, and it's
important to understand the difference. Ideally, desire moves us toward
passion, the power of love. Loving what we do leads to inspiration.
Events won't always yield to our desires, but if obstacles slow us down,
we can change course. We can redirect our energies without resentment or
frustration. It does no good to push against other people's wishes or to
find fault with other realities. We can move forward in other ways, and
new directions bring unexpected opportunities. Desire guides our passion
and inspiration; inspiration leads to creativity. Desire can also drive
us over a cliff---it can lead to obsession. Putting the full power of
attention on one object of desire makes us fanatical---meaning we want
something so much that we can't see anything else. This goes way beyond
a passion for football or a love for punk rock. Who hasn't been
enthralled by an idea, a philosophy, or a person? In time, nothing else
matters. We could be desperately hooked on drugs or alcohol, ignoring
countless warnings and offers to help. However we become fixated, we
risk losing touch with the ones who love us---and our own power is
squandered and misused. How do we tell whether our desires are inspired
or obsessive? Inspiration leads us to create new things and new
realities; obsession leads to many types of destruction. When we're
obsessed, we can't see clearly and we can't react freely. We may starve
a good relationship or ruin a promising career. We compromise our
physical health and sanity. Soon enough, obsession will devastate our
world and many of the people in it. It's easy to become fanatical
without knowing it. We can mistake it for healthy enthusiasm, until we
look around and realize how much was lost while our attention was
diverted. Our desires can take us into dangerous terrain, but desire can
also bring us back to peace and sanity. Desire pushes humans toward
greatness and creativity. Passion inspires ideas and innovations; it
stirs the flames of romance and seals lifelong unions. We're talking
about getting back to sanity---so does that mean we're insane? Well,
sure. Each of us knows how irrational we can get sometimes, so let's be
as honest as we can. Let's look at some of the things we do. We believe
almost everything we hear and everything we think. We can rarely tell
the difference between real and unreal. We walk through a world of
living things and actual people, but respond primarily to a virtual one.
We let thoughts guide feelings. We judge, but we're

unwilling to be judged. We take everything personally, as if only me
exists. We build hierarchies of importance---ranking some humans at the
top and some at the bottom. We want love, but we use love as a weapon
against ourselves. If we're even willing to show contempt for the body
that made all our dreaming possible---we must be crazy. When we wake up
and see things as they are, it feels like being sober at a party full of
drunks. Imagine being at a big boisterous affair, where all the guests
have been drinking for a long time. Their actions are senseless. Their
words are reckless. Gossip starts, and the poison spreads quickly. We
could say all of humanity is at this party---where rumors run wild,
feelings get hurt, and reactions get violent. The spectacle is a strange
one if you're not drinking. If we're not drunk, we have the advantage of
seeing what's happening around us. We see how everyone is intoxicated,
and they think the other guests don't notice. At an actual party, the
level of chaos depends on how much alcohol people have consumed. In this
metaphorical party, the degree of insanity depends on how much false
information people accept and absorb. It depends on how superstitious
they are and how much they lie to themselves. Superstitions are beliefs
that have authority over our thinking. We give them that authority, of
course. If we put faith in an idea, it will determine the way we think
and behave. This isn't just about worshipping or believing in old wives'
tales. Most people's superstitions are more subtle than that. Believing
that words have power over you is a superstition---words have no power
except the power you give them. It's superstitious to believe in all the
little lies you tell yourself. It's superstitious to believe that life
is rewarding you for good behavior and punishing you for breaking rules,
just the way your parents did. It's superstitious to think that truth
can be lost or destroyed. It's superstitious to imagine that truth is
somewhere outside of you, unreachable and mysterious. Most of humanity
is driving under the influence of one superstition or another. We may
still believe what our parents have been telling us since infancy. We
believe what our ancestors believed. We believe what everyone else
believes. Most of all, we believe ourselves. Humans are thinkers,
philosophers, and they use language to communicate ideas. They use
sounds and symbols to inform themselves and to teach each other. We are
all scientists, searching for the truth. Of course, we usually settle
for a best guess based on the information

available to us. We give power to our assumptions and let fear control
and even intoxicate us. Throughout our time on earth, we've looked at
the stars to predict the future. Until recently, humans were nearly
helpless at night, depending on the moon's light. Without it, we were
unable hunt, to travel, or to do battle. An eclipse might have signaled
the end of the world. Any disturbance in nature might have seemed like
punishment from the heavens. In our fear, we concluded that the gods
were laughing at us or that demons controlled the earth and sky.
Earthquakes were a sign of one god's wrath; floods were a sign of
another god's indifference. Ending a drought required a sacrifice; rain
required a feast. Fear works like a virus in the human dream. We
contract each other's fears and make them our own. We give power to
ideas. We catch cultural viruses, and we spread them. When we're sober
and sane, the effect of superstition on humanity is obvious. We see how
one person can make a suggestion, and people react as if it were truth.
We see how contagious ideas can be. An adept communicator can sway a
crowd. One person, reacting in anger and making a case for fear, will
inspire a thousand others to follow. One cries, "Fire!" and a hundred
others will panic. Superstitions corrupt human imagination. Without
superstition, imagination can bring great visions into being.
Imagination encourages evolution, but it needs to be kept safe from the
influences of fear. It's not so hard to wake up and be sane. The folly
can end with us--- one dreamer at a time. Each of us can sober up and
observe the party of revelers. We can see how many people deliberately
choose to stay drunk. We can see how much poison they're willing to
tolerate and ask ourselves, "Is that how I want to live my life? Am I
really so afraid to be conscious and fully aware?" We can see how drunk
we've become and say no to common fears and superstitions. We can end
our addiction to worry and to drama. Wake up, open your eyes, and see
life in front of you---and everywhere. Use your attention, your brain's
most remarkable power, to see the truth in people. See beyond the
drunkards, with all their opinions and phobias---even if one of those
drunkards is you. Maybe you're the drama queen, the critic, or the
cynic. See beyond your own stories---your thoughts and your assumptions.
Instead of sedating yourself to keep from hearing the noise, listen. Pay
attention. Observe. Say no to the thoughts that make you crazy. Say no
to a runaway narrative. The storyteller is

someone you invented, accustomed to saying the same old things the same
old way. Say no to that voice in your head. See fear for what it
typically is: the body's response to me. Most of us spend our lives
running from our own voice. We run from our thoughts because we believe
them. They scare us, they defame us, and still we believe them. Use your
senses, and bypass thinking altogether. Play with life, the way you used
to before there was a government operating in you---back before there
were laws, penalties, and a president to answer to. Quiet down, and open
up emotionally. Let life play with you. Then you might be ready to
accept the truth about love.

Ask Yourself, "What Is Love?"

14 The Third Pearl What is love? You will know love when you realize
what love is not. YOU CAN'T FULLY understand yourself until you're able
to identify yourself as life---as energy's eternal force. How does that
awareness help you? It puts all your efforts into perspective. It makes
knowledge your servant, not your master. It makes your virtual reality a
playful work of art, not a prison. It changes the voice of me, making it
possible to transcend the main character. Me doesn't need to be defeated
or replaced. Through you, it can evolve. The evolution of me is a
choice. You decide how you feel about yourself from moment to moment. By
shifting your attention just a little, you've been getting an idea of
what you're not. You've asked, "What is real?" and begun the process of
doubting what you think you know. This process goes on, deepens, and
will lead to greater discoveries---but the truth is simple. Truth is
life; it is not a system of beliefs. Truth is infinite and everlasting,
but your body and your dream are not. Truth is energy, power. Truth is
the reality of you. We can also say that truth is love. What most of us
call love is the opposite of love. Our problems exist because we are
taught to love with conditions. This is not just our personal problem;
it's humanity's problem. No matter the culture, we are taught to corrupt
love. We are taught to distrust the only real thing there is: life's
infinite force. Rules and conditions have defined the way we love. As
we've seen, people build their own governments with self-made laws and
penalties. We take our laws seriously, and we're strict about their
execution. None of this is right or wrong; it's a fact. Domestication
shaped our behaviors. We were judged and disciplined as children and, as
adults, we learned to judge and to discipline ourselves. We punish
ourselves and we pardon ourselves, but what exactly is our crime?

The biggest crimes are the ones we commit against our own body. If you
are the kind of tyrant who insults your body, it's likely that you'll
treat other bodies with disrespect. If you're inclined to hurt yourself
physically, you'll probably feel okay about hurting others. Either way,
your body will pay the price. Hurting other people comes back to us in
one way or another. Judging or abusing people will lead to punishments
even we can't regulate. We will be treated in the same way we treat
other humans. If society judges us and finds us guilty, we're punished.
And again, the body suffers. Whatever our abuses, the human body pays.
When we berate ourselves, the body pays an emotional price. And we do
berate ourselves, of course. Most of us, at one time or another, have
watched people marching down a city sidewalk muttering to themselves.
We've seen people so possessed by anger that they're yelling and
screaming at no one. Are we so different? We frequently yell and scream
at ourselves, but silently. We walk down the street complaining to
ourselves, reviewing old conversations, and making up new ones. Our lips
are moving, and our faces show the strain. We could be on the phone, but
aren't we just using someone else as an excuse to rant? When the voice
in our head becomes unbearable to us, it shouts out for the world to
hear. The thing is, no one really wants to hear it, and no one wants to
witness the battles being waged inside of us. A phone to our ear may
make us appear less crazy, and it may help us feel less alone; but we
don't need the phone or the friend. If we feel miserable at times, it's
probably because we're believing something that's not true. We're
hearing our own voice scolding us. When it does, we're children again,
afraid and bewildered. We're teenagers again, knowing for sure we'll be
grounded. We're drunk drivers, about to be pulled over and fined. The
voice is ours, however it sounds, and we can stop it. The voice of me
has been running the show for so long we hardly notice. Once we notice,
we can save ourselves. We can regain a little sanity. At any time, we
can politely end the conversation we're having with ourselves. Just as
we do when we're on the phone, we can say we have to go. "I gotta run,
honey. All my love. Bye-bye." We can do this any time---while driving,
on the street, or even while trying to go to sleep at night. "Ciao.
Gotta go," and we hang up on ourselves. Nothing improves by continuing
the conversation. An appetite for poison will lead to more poison. No
problem is ever solved by rebuking ourselves or blaming someone else. We
have to put an end to our own

bullying. The conversations we have with ourselves aren't real, but they
create real emotions in us and real turmoil in our lives. Emotions
aren't the problem. Our thoughts are. Emotions tell us the truth about
what's going on inside of us. When we feel anger, our pulse quickens,
our breathing becomes erratic, and our muscles tense. Our thoughts
trigger unpleasant feelings, and our bodies pay the price. So, what if
we paid attention to these signs and learned from them? We can see
emotions as clues about what we are telling ourselves. They tell us when
we're beating ourselves up and we need to improve the message. They tell
us we're on a dangerous mental track. They'll usually tell us when we're
at the wrong party. Emotions remind us that we're not loving ourselves,
and they let us know when we've traveled too far from the truth. The
truth may not be something we can put into words, but if we're sober
enough to pay attention, we can feel its resonance. We can feel it as
love. Take away our words, our preoccupations and obsessive thoughts,
and love is all that's left. What is love? Love is life's energy,
creating more life all the time and in infinite ways. Most of us were
taught to think of love as one kind of emotion---one among many others.
We think that it has a beginning and an end, as emotions usually do.
Emotion is the energy that our bodies create, and love is the sum of all
emotions. Love is energy, and therefore it has no beginning or end.
Energy has no agenda. Neither does love. It has no limits or conditions.
Like all energy, love can be transformed, but never destroyed.
Unconditional love can seem intimidating at first. You may want to run
from it. You may doubt its sincerity. You may wonder how it comes so
naturally to children, but not to you. You may want to blame love for
your pain and your self-rejection---but love is never to blame. What
makes things painful and complicated are the terms and conditions we put
on love. No one wants to hear, "I love you if . . ." "I love you if you
can be like me and think like me." "I love you if you feel my pain."
These words sound funny, but for most people it's the underlying
romantic message. The word if denies the truth of love. "If you loved
me, you'd suffer the way I'm suffering," is too often what we mean to
say to a loved one. "If you really cared, you'd make sacrifices for me,"
is implied in different ways. "If you truly loved me, you'd prove it,
you'd tell your friends, you'd put me first, you'd . . ." Those words
may never be spoken, but they tend to hide behind other words. They echo
the voice of the main character.

Love doesn't require sacrifice. We are generous in love because we want
to be, and we need nothing in return. It's exhilarating to be alive.
It's a privilege to feel the power of love. Like life, love is its own
justification. And, like life---like truth---it doesn't need proof in
order to exist. Conditions make love something it isn't, but that's the
way we were shown how to love. Conditional love has become part of how
we govern ourselves. It forces us to judge people and to demean
ourselves. Like any crime, it hurts the body first. It leaves us feeling
alone and unwanted, which leads to injuries we're at a loss to fix. Real
love starts with us. It's never too late to rediscover the power of it
in ourselves. It's never too late to ask the question, "What is love?"
and open all our senses to the answer. Real love has nothing to do with
vanity or self-importance. Self-love isn't egotism. The ego is me,
wanting attention and adulation. Love is the energy that runs through us
and all around us. When we share love, we're sharing our life force.
When we give ourselves love, we're acknowledging what we really are.
When we nurture affection and respect for our human body, the seeds of
love begin to grow. We're loving ourselves when we give the body the
benefit of every doubt. We're respecting ourselves when we treat the
mind like our creation---because it is. If we monitor our thoughts, we
can better understand the mind's language. We can become respectful
diplomats, softening our words and encouraging the best friend we'll
ever have. We can be patient and attentive for the sake of a great love
affair. Your body is the love of your life. The relationship you have
with your body affects all relationships. Loving yourself, without
conditions, can heal the biggest divisions in your world. It can
reconnect you to the force of energy that made your world possible.

15 The Love of Your Life YOUR PHYSICAL BODY is, and has always been,
your true love. There is not, nor will there ever be, a more loyal
friend or a more intimate partner. What you think, it will feel. What
you command, it will do its best to obey. If you do something to harm
your body---including obsessive thinking---it will do everything it can
to repair itself. Your body works hard to stay healthy and to make your
world easier to tolerate. Out of gratitude for its remarkable
generosity, you may want to be generous as well. You can love your body,
no matter what. You can put it first in almost every situation.
Listening to the needs of your human body may take some practice, but
attention is what it needs most. The mind may want things, but it
doesn't need things. Does your body need to feel important? Does it need
to gossip? Not at all. The mind is hungry for stories. When we binge on
food, we're not making the body happy; we're giving comfort to an
agitated mind. The body doesn't need regular sedation, but we routinely
try to shut the mind off with alcohol and drugs. We avoid
self-reflection by judging others. We deny love, and our bodies suffer.
Loving our bodies unconditionally is natural to us, as we can see from
observing small children. Babies and toddlers love without shame or
restraint. Over time, children learn to think, to imitate adult
behavior, and to put limits on love. They forget to love fearlessly.
Most distressingly, they forget to love themselves. It may be hard to
remember, but we all arrived on earth as babies and loved everything
about the body we occupied. We loved everything we saw and sensed. As we
grew into active children, our bodies took us on a joyride of physical
wonders and sensory experiences. We thrived in this paradise---and then,
it seems, we were banished from it. We were told many stories as we grew
up, and we believed them all. A few stories suggested there was
something sinful, even ugly, about our bodies. Many stories caused us
shame. We learned to blame the body for

most of life's disappointments. "It's not my fault," the mind learned to
say. "I'm only human." But the mind isn't the human body; it's made of
virtual stuff. It governs the body in whatever way it's allowed to. How
many of us were taught to love our bodies? Health trends come and go,
but listening to your body is a different skill. Where is your attention
when you eat, when you exercise, when you're preparing to sleep? Most of
the time, it's on past regrets and future worries. You're arguing with
people who aren't there. You're anxious about things that aren't
happening. Your physical body, like a child or a lover, needs your
attention in order to thrive. It needs a one-on-one conversation now and
then. It needs to hear some gratitude for all it does. "I'm so fat!"
doesn't provide comfort at all, particularly when the words are spoken
with loathing. "I look just like Mom!" sends confusing signals, but
eventually your body registers the pain of disappointment. We aren't
always thrilled with the way we look, but our bodies aren't at fault.
Our bodies glow when they feel love. They're energized when they feel
the truth expressed in action and words. They perform well when we feed
them well. They strut when we dress them up. They breathe and bounce
when we let them take us for a stroll, a bike ride, or a swim. That's
the way we would normally describe a pet---and most of us are far more
concerned about the health and happiness of our pets than our own
bodies. We're activists when it comes to giving our dogs nutritious food
or runs in the doggie park. For some reason, we can't commit to loving
our bodies in the same way. The human body serves us in ways we can't
imagine. It compensates for our offenses and keeps on going. It
overlooks our crimes. It heals itself---often before we know we're sick.
Emotions are important; they maintain the health and metabolism of the
body in much the same way that weather patterns balance the planet's
metabolism. But the body, doing countless jobs to sustain our health,
can be overwhelmed by the drama. It has to support so much indignation,
outrage, and fear---and rise to our highest joys. It has to support our
convictions and superstitions. And it has to support our absurd theories
about love. Unconditional love is love. Everything else is a distortion
of love. Love is not one emotion, but the totality of every emotion. It
is the force of life, and how can we put conditions on that? The body is
our home on earth. It gives us all it can give, and we can do the same.
Maybe we never learned how to love our physical selves, but it's not too
late. We may adore our cats and goldfish more than we love the human
body we

inhabit---but, by getting to know that body, we may find ourselves
falling in love again. So it may be time to look at yourself with the
eyes of a lover.

16 Lovers and Sweethearts ROMANTIC LOVE IS considered a different kind
of love. But is it? Your sweetheart's body is your wonderland, right?
True love sees only beauty and perfection, and a dedicated lover would
go to any length to express that love. If the one you loved wanted you
near, you'd be quick to respond. If you knew you were missed, you'd call
or make the time to be there physically---or at least you'd give
reassurances. If your true love was feeling neglected, you'd offer a hug
or plan a date night. You'd apologize for being distracted or for
thinking only of yourself. Well, your body misses you most of the time.
It misses the truth. And yes, you're distracted. You're thinking of your
reputation and your social status. You're thinking of the last
conversation or the next one. You make the minimal effort for your body
and often push it beyond its limits. Is exercise a gesture of love or a
punishment? What about dieting? If your body isn't feeling your
judgment, it's feeling your indifference. Where are the pats and
squeezes? Where are the flowers, the love letters? Self-love is romantic
love. When we care deeply for someone, every gesture is an act of love.
When we love without condition, there's no impulse to accuse or to
resent. Our love doesn't diminish because of judgments made against us.
Our love is the very essence of who we are ---it is our life force. Why
would we neglect our bodies, then? Let your body experience all the
beauty and wonder around you. When you are embracing life fully and
appreciating your body for all that it lets you feel, then you are
cherishing your closest friend and intimate. Everyone feels good around
people who have genuine love for themselves. It feels heartening, even
inspiring, to be in their company. It feels safe. It would be wonderful
if people had those same feelings when they're around us. It's not
likely to happen if we don't feel comfortable with ourselves.

Once again, we can't give what we don't have. If we have no money to
spare, we can't share our wealth. We can't inspire courage if we're
always afraid. So it makes sense that loving others is difficult if we
don't love ourselves. Like any love affair, self-love needs nurturing.
How do we assure the body that it's loved? We give it the company it
needs, of course---not just from other humans but from our story's main
character. Me needs to get involved in a caring way. Me needs to say a
kind word now and then. In time, little gestures of appreciation become
automatic. In time, we'll wake up every day whispering words of
encouragement. We'll see ourselves in a mirror and say something nice.
Like any pet or child, the body yearns for tender sounds and intimate
assurances. It loves shameless gestures of affection. There are things
you can do for your body, beginning today. You can write love letters to
yourself and read them out loud. Devote some time to conversations
between the mind and the body. Listen, and reassure. Offer the pat, the
squeeze, and the hug now and then. Place a hand on your cheek and wrap
the other hand around your shoulder. Hold yourself for a while. Feel
better? Of course. Hugs are wonderful, whatever you may have told
yourself. This may be the first time since childhood that you
acknowledged your body's fundamental need to be touched and
appreciated---by you. Be good company for your body. Take an afternoon
nap or have a quiet lunch out alone. Go to the movies together. Commune
with life by taking a walk in a forest or on a beach. Take a quiet
moment to watch the nighttime sky. Give it lots of music! Your mind will
appreciate the lyrics, and your body will sway to the beat, the melody,
the reverberations of life. The body's most important relationship is
with life, not with your nagging thoughts. Your body is the perfect
merging of matter and energy. Your body is the most real thing you know.
You can do better at loving, beginning with the one you literally cannot
live without. Say, "I love you," to your body. Say it often, and say it
out loud. Say it because it's true. Say it when you start your day. As
you settle into bed at night, place your hand on your head and say how
much you love your brain and everything connected to the brain. "I love
my brain, my ears, my eyes, my nose." Move your hand down to the mouth,
the neck, the chest, the shoulders. Name every part of your body as you
go, and give thanks to the parts you can't name. Go all the way down to
the feet, to the toes. This ritual doesn't take very long, and its
effects are powerful.

All of this may feel odd at first, but expressing love is what humans
crave. We want to feel it pouring out of us, but we've convinced
ourselves that no one wants to receive it. Our bodies definitely do.
Everyone's body does, even if their system of government denies it. We
love, because love is the energetic force of us. Saying "I love you"
brings us back to the truth. Sex with another human being is also an act
of self-love, giving your body what it needs and enjoys. When we make
physical love, the voice in our heads goes silent and our stories are
forgotten. Me is irrelevant--- for a time. Loving ourselves causes the
same energetic reaction. Unconditional love for ourselves is the
definition of paradise---we began there, remember? The love of your life
is not your spouse, your lover, or your child. It's your physical body,
your wonderland. Loving your human body makes it possible---even
easy---to love all humans the way you were meant to. Loving requires
listening and careful response. Before you go on an angry tirade,
consider how it will affect your nervous system. Stop for a moment.
Breathe. Step back from the situation and listen to how you're
communicating with yourself. Your words are the body's command. Are you
making accusations? Are you taking yourself too seriously? If everything
is about me, then every event will seem personal. Every comment will
need a defensive response. Are you willing to do that to your body? For
certain, you can use your energies more productively. You can love
without worrying about getting something out of it. Your body will be so
grateful. You'll be surprised to find that loving comes naturally. You
may discover that you're very generous and that your generosity inspires
gratitude in everyone who knows you. Gratitude inspires generosity,
which inspires more gratitude. This perfectly describes love in action.
Gratitude and generosity create the ideal relationship between your mind
and body. Kindness and affection stimulate your whole system. A little
praise brings great emotional reward. Why not let it come from the one
telling the story? Don't let your thoughts hide from you, growing in
darkness until they're too strong to control. When you don't have to
defend your opinions, you're free to be authentic. You're free to say
no, without penalty. You're free to say yes, without regret. You're free
to love without limits. You're free to surrender to life, to love. It's
not the physical body that surrenders; it's the mind giving up its
stories. The

surrendered mind softens its own laws or throws them out altogether. It
allows love to rule, with no interference. In fact, everything changes
when the main character respects and reveres the body. When we love
ourselves completely, we return to the place we only knew in infancy. We
remember that love has no conditions and needs no justifications. We
remember the sensation of paradise and desire only that. Paradise is
home, and it's never too late to for us to go back.

17 Love for Humanity THE WAY BACK to self-love begins when the mind
breaks its own spell. Our beliefs act like a fortress, defending us from
new insights, but beliefs are made of mist and fog. When there is
nothing left to defend, truth is all there is. All the great messengers
have recognized this. Their wisdom was evident in their authenticity.
Throughout the ages, the most authentic humans have left the brightest
legacies. Wise men and women distinguish themselves by challenging what
they know. At some point, they decide to take a deeper look at reality,
questioning the world they've created in their minds. They dare to see
what is, not what they were taught to see. They refrain from telling old
stories and confirming common beliefs. They refuse to let memory dictate
reality. They remove the blinders and start a journey toward awareness.
Searching for truth is everyone's birthright and often starts with
doubt. "I thought I knew myself, but now I'm not sure. What should I
believe? Why should I believe anything?" Doubt begins a process of
exploration, as we take another look at the things we were taught to
accept as true. "I used to have a theory about life. . . . Was any of it
real?" Doubt can dismantle a belief structure, if we're willing to let
it. Why should we do that? Because we want to clear away the nonsense
and see the truth. Doubt gives us a chance to look around, observe the
crazy party, and decide how we want to play within it. It gives us a
chance to revise the main character, whose voice still lingers in our
heads---a voice that may not have changed since childhood. You've grown
up. You're not a frightened child anymore. You want to be mature,
emotionally and spiritually. You want to be authentic, because acting
the part of the main character has made you weary. Doubt reveals your
lies. It discredits your stories, until you're ready to cast them aside
and put complete faith in the truth of you.

The solution to all conflict is respect. Respect means the end to war,
to abuses, and to the kinds of crimes you routinely commit against
yourself. Respect brings peace to your world. Self-respect will
eventually rewrite the laws that hurt your body. It will transform your
congress and your constitution. The old style of leadership will change
for the good of your country. There will be no more confused intentions,
because words, your best ambassadors, will deliver a clear message. They
will offer comfort to your adversaries as well as to your friends.
Respect means you honor the right of every country, or body, to exist
---beginning with your own. If other nations can't respect you in turn,
they are welcome to find other allies. You won't interfere with their
governments, and they needn't interfere with yours. Respect sounds like
a simple solution, but most of us haven't made it a practice. Our
defenses are in overdrive. It takes deliberate acts of selflove to
overturn our own habits. It takes an internal revolution to rise above
our own knowledge. The earth is the result of billions of years of
evolution. The world's governments are the result of thousands of years
of evolution. Your little government is barely as old as you are, but
your words and actions may well have an influence on future generations.
Consider that when you wonder who you are and how you'd like to affect
your world. The president of your little regime can make life a prison
or a paradise. Every passing moment gives you a chance to decide on your
style of leadership. Whom you vote for---the dictator or the enlightened
decision maker---makes all the difference. Me is never the same, because
our impression of reality keeps changing. This means me can be as
flexible as reality itself. Me can be president of an all-inclusive
reality, not just the parts that are comfortable and familiar. The main
character can rescue the body or rule it recklessly. It can be taught to
doubt automatic assumptions and resist the temptation to repeat them.
With practice, self-importance begins to seem unnatural. Self-pity loses
its appeal, and we stop taking things so personally. Right now you're
reading or hearing these words read aloud. This means you're converting
spoken symbols into mental imagery. The words have no life of their own
until you read or hear them. They're dead things until imagination
brings them to life. Once you imagine something, it's alive in a virtual
landscape. You read, listen, and create a world to exist in. Now these
words and their meanings can be applied to your actions. If you choose,
you can make ideas come to life in the world of people and places. This
is how you

built your personal reality in the first place---you watched, learned,
and let desire drive you. You built real things out of ideas. You used
the powers of attention, memory, and imagination to become a unique
human in the human dream. Like setting up an avatar in a video game, we
choose the character we want to be. We dress it up and arm it with
weapons or strategies for survival. Through the centuries we've used
books, plays, and movies to enjoy realities that we're not able to play
out in our own lives. Today's video technology makes it possible to
interact with characters we create ---as well as those created by people
we may never meet. What we may not realize is that we've been doing this
for ourselves all along---without books, without technology. In life, it
takes years to build the character you know as me. No one is born with
an intellectual sense of self. As babies, we just are. We see, we sense,
and we respond in whatever ways we can. As we learn to use words and
give them meaning, we begin to describe ourselves. Of course, we get a
lot of assistance---the people around us, already adept at explaining
things, are eager to tell us who we are. They describe us according to
their judgments, their hopes, and how they see themselves in us. So,
little by little, we begin to imagine me. We all know how kids like to
play with ideas of themselves. A small child can spend an entire day as
a dog, barking and begging for treats. Children become knights and
princesses in their imaginations, creating environments to go along with
those roles. They build fortresses and treetop castles. They imagine
entire kingdoms and rule them confidently. We all remember playing with
imaginary friends, but the imaginary friend who follows us everywhere,
and always, is me. As a community, humanity tells classic stories of
heroes and gods. In the story we tell about ourselves, each of us is the
hero---the fallen hero or the savior. We are victors or persecuted
victims, according to our stories. We seem self-reliant or helpless,
depending on how much attention we crave. Our hairstyles and outfits
change with the times, but beliefs and behaviors eventually settle in to
stay---until we choose to wake up, to truly look at ourselves, and to
change what doesn't work. Our habitual behavior "doesn't work" when it
pushes away the people we love. A belief doesn't work if it makes us
feel bad. An ideology doesn't work if it leads to obsession, fear, or
cynicism. We've been using the power of imagination to define ourselves
throughout our lives. We can use that power again in order to be the
best

possible person within the context of any dream. It's important to see
where we are now and how we got here. Think about the transformative
events of your life. They may not be the ones that family photos have
documented. They might have happened when you were alone; they might
have happened without your notice. You had a thought, you imagined the
world differently for a second, and everything changed. Change is
frequently the result of subtle realizations. You read a book or you see
a movie. Something changes your viewpoint or awakens your curiosity. You
listen in on another conversation, and it causes you to reflect on your
life. You hear a song whose lyrics go straight to your heart, and
nothing is the same afterward. Incidents like these might have changed
the course of your life. They might have nudged you in a new direction
or given you direction when you had none. Maybe you followed
expectations or walked a path that was already laid out for you. However
events unfolded, they brought you to this point, this moment. Life is
teaching us all the time. We are all apprentices in that sense, and we
can create any kind of discipline for ourselves. We can set aside a few
minutes every day to remind ourselves of the truth---to breathe calmly,
listen to our internal voices, and dismiss them. Our thoughts document
this day's events, yesterday's events, and idly speculate about future
events. They're not telling us anything new or anything that's true. The
stories that we tell about this life are fiction. Me is the protagonist
in this work of fiction. When me believes its worst stories, fear and
paranoia rule the human body. Then it seems that a demon has been
unleashed. All stories about spiritual warriors have tried to illustrate
this. The final confrontation with me is the key element in sacred
stories. The story of the Buddha illustrates this beautifully.
Denouncing me as an illusion is the act of a spiritual master. The story
of Jesus meeting me in the desert is a classic lesson in awareness. Your
creation may be not seem like a devil or a saint, but to make it aware
of itself takes conscious effort. All traditions tell the same story,
each with its own symbols and characters. The mind's world is built upon
a bedrock of symbols, and it's important to distinguish the ways every
symbol explains what is real. It's important to see how every human mind
uses imagination to create its own version of reality. Actually, every
mind creates a version of unreality. Every mind creates its own virtual
world. It can also re-create it. It can scan its own database of
stories, looking for malicious information, and self-correct. It can end
the strategy of isolating the

human body, alienating it, and then controlling it however it wishes.
Judgments and criticisms can go. Gossip and speculation can go.
Suspicions and prejudices---all of our excuses to hate---can go.
Representative governments need a system of checks and balances. Our
personal knowledge, for all it inspires, should be challenged. Our
irrational fears should be faced and resolved. No belief should be
allowed to induce shame. In spite of the laws we instituted, we need to
be free to love without condition.

18 Fear and Knowledge ONE OF THE biggest barriers to love is fear. Of
course, fear is natural to every organism; it's meant to alert us to
danger and preserve our physical lives. Irrational fear, on the other
hand, is different. It's the fear of something that doesn't exist.
Children can't tell the difference between real and irrational fear, and
it's fair to say the rest of us can't either. We have a scary thought
and the body reacts, sensing real danger. We detect fear in other people
and catch the virus. We observe their reactions and mimic their
hysteria. We panic. What we know clearly has the power to do us harm. As
children, we didn't question what we knew. We could name the things that
scared us---thunder, darkness, hairy spiders. We "knew" there were
creatures in the basement without names. We knew those creatures were
real, because we were terrified of them; and we knew we were terrified,
because those creatures were real. Even now, we know when we are afraid,
and we know why. Knowing encourages more fear, and fear confirms what we
know. This sounds a like an endless cycle, doesn't it? So we must
challenge our knowledge. And we have to face fear sooner or later. The
longer we wait, the bigger the fears get. Facing fear brings clarity.
Clarity, in turn, reduces fear---allowing us to turn off our bedroom
light without worrying about demons in the shadows or ogres under the
bed. What is real? Not our irrational fears, and not the stories we have
so long believed about ourselves and our relationship with life.
Admitting what is not real takes us a long way toward personal
awareness. We know that beliefs adapt to new circumstances; they change
and fade away. The more we accept a belief as a choice, the less power
our fears have over us. With less fear, our confidence strengthens; and
with more confidence, the better we get at challenging our beliefs. We
see what they are, and we know instinctively they're not real. We can
discard

them if we want. We also know when we've stopped being afraid. We know
when we're happy, and when we feel safe. So what we know, in that sense,
can also save us. First, we need to accept that we're afraid. Fear often
runs under the radar, and only our actions give us a clue. Challenging
fear means finding its source and then looking deeper. This means
excuses aren't acceptable. "Well, my mom used to say . . ." doesn't
justify the beliefs that follow us into adulthood. "I've been like this
ever since my accident . . ." doesn't explain why we're still afraid and
unhappy. "I've been told I'm high-strung," usually means we've made
peace with our anxieties. We hold on to fear for many reasons. We hold
on to old beliefs because they've become comfortable. Change is
inconvenient and brings too many surprises. We want things to stay the
same. We want our phobias to define us. In many cases, we don't know who
we'd be without our fears. It could also be that we just never got
around to telling them good-bye. If we're ready to change, there are
things we can do. We can be a lot more honest with ourselves, for one.
We can confess our attachment to fear or to the beliefs that cause us
fear. It often helps to listen to other people talk through their fears.
Offering someone else comfort is helpful too. We used to do this
intuitively as children---taking a friend's hand on a dark road or
comforting a puppy through a thunderstorm. We can still help a child
check for goblins under the bed. We can look under our own "bed." We may
have been imagining the worst, only to discover that the worst isn't so
bad. We can face our own fear for the sake of a friend. Friends can face
goblins together. They can grow and become stronger by giving each other
confidence. Fear, left unchallenged, controls our lives and leads our
actions. We often say we're afraid of other people---a partner, a boss,
a stranger. In most cases, we're afraid our own reactions. We're afraid
of how me might react to any given situation. We're afraid of what we'll
do next to disappoint, confuse, or betray ourselves. Whatever the
reason, we're afraid---and it must be somebody's fault. When we blame
events, people, or God for our problems, we're playing the role of a
victim. Like those primitive hunters on a moonless night, we're helpless
to save ourselves. Anger doesn't make us more capable. Self-pity wins us
no admiration. When we separate ourselves from the problem, we get
farther away from a solution. The fact is, we

are the problem. We are the confusion, through no fault of our own. And
we are also the only solution. To wake up and see is the gift we give
ourselves. To do something about what we see is our salvation. Awareness
is life's gift to mortals. Hercules might have prayed to Zeus for gifts
of power, but only he, Hercules, could decide how to use power wisely.
No matter what we do in life, we are all explorers seeking truth. We
listen for truth in classic stories and common conversations. We evolve
as individuals when we challenge ourselves to see. Humanity evolves when
we challenge what we know. People once believed the sun revolved around
this planet. We were certain that if we traveled far enough, we'd drop
off the earth. We knew what we feared. We feared what we knew. The mind
builds its own house out of illusions---bright ones and dreary
ones---from the time we start to talk and think. Everything goes along
smoothly until expectations are crushed. Everything seems great until
our desires conflict with other people's desires. Everything is fine
until our unshakable reality is shaken, and then panic sets in. Rigid
beliefs will break soon enough. When a virtual earthquake happens, the
body trembles and emotions burst to the surface. We all know this,
because we've lived through it many times. We say we've been
disappointed in love or betrayed by a friend, and we've reacted. We've
acted out. Thinking they're helping, loved ones support our worst
stories. They confirm our worst fears. They too become outraged and
suggest we seek some kind of revenge---and we listen to them. The more
we commit to the story, the harder it is to see clearly. The less we
see, the more afraid we are. The more afraid we are, the more we cling
to our stories. Knowledge and fear work hand in hand. As we become more
irrational, the body suffers even more. Old ideas and bad habits will
continue to hurt us if we're unable to give ourselves some grace. A
heartbreak can last a lifetime if we don't recognize the gift it brings.
If a lover disappoints or rejects us, we feel heartbroken. If we have to
leave a beloved school, we're heartbroken. If a belief is disproved or
our image of someone destroyed, we're heartbroken---but it's not the
heart that breaks. What breaks is the mind's absolute certainty. What
gets threatened is the main character, so sure of me. When the virtual
reality receives a blow, the body responds in shock. The thing people
call heartbreak is the result of a head-on collision with truth. This is
a perfect opportunity for real awareness. "It didn't turn

out the way I'd imagined," we might say to ourselves. "She's not the
person I thought she was." "He's not the man I married." These are often
said with sadness and grief, but they are important revelations. In
them, we hear the doubt in me. Its reality has been challenged. This is
when the mind has a chance to face itself and see its own illusions.
Love doesn't hurt us. Love isn't to blame for our pain, and love is
never an excuse to suffer. Nobody is to blame, whatever the drama. We're
being given a chance to see what actually is rather than what we wanted
to imagine. This is a good thing, but the typical response to
disappointment is to become spiteful. We pity ourselves and want
everyone else to pity us. This hurts the body and puts more distance
between what is real and what we imagine to be real. In other words,
we're lying to ourselves again. We get disappointed when others can't
live up to our fantasies of them. Friends fail to meet our expectations,
and we feel cheated. Lovers can't measure up to our standards, and we
feel rejected. People aren't what we think they are, but is it ever
their fault? We wanted to imagine them our way, no matter what the
evidence said to the contrary. Instead of feeling self-pity, we can feel
gratitude for the chance to awaken. Instead of focusing on what wasn't
there, we can begin to focus on what is. We all learned to get attention
by telling a good story. Attention is what we all enjoy, and telling a
dramatic story is a great way to get it. We've learned just what parts
to tell a particular audience. We've made them laugh. We've made them
cry. We're accomplished at drawing other people into our life's drama,
because we believe it. We identify ourselves through our stories, and
when a story is challenged, we feel threatened. "If this isn't true,
what else about me isn't true?" we wonder. "If I'm not me, then who am
I?" If one thing is false, then nothing can be true. The body hears
those messages and feels anxious. "Who's driving this machine?" it could
justifiably wonder. "And where are we going?" People come from different
cultures, but we all have one thing in common. We direct precious energy
into being who we say we are. We get distracted and wander from the
truth. We let fear control us. We dodge questions and give alibis. That
isn't spiritual maturity, or maturity of any kind. But, like the
children we once were, we can face our fear. We can walk through
existence in a way we never thought we could. We can grow up.

We can change the rules we live by, because we created those rules. We
can see life in its totality, not through the "eyes" of one predictable
character. Anyone can learn to see, explore, and discover what's real.
Like hungry tourists in a foreign country, any of us can acquire a taste
for exotic things. In other words, the mind can develop a taste for
truth. Does it want to? As long as we believe we're accurately
representing the truth, why should we crave a different taste? Why can't
we just be drunk and stay that way? Well, think about that for a second.
Drunks of any kind don't really like themselves, and they don't see much
to like about life. They lie to the people close to them, and they
deceive themselves. Drunks are what we've been, and now we want
something else. Most drunks would probably rather be sober. They'd
rather see clearly, breathe fresh air, and feel the sun on their faces.
They'd rather feel the touch of truth and not just speculate about it.
They want to be the best humans they can be, but how can they do that?

19 Peace in Our Time THERE'S A REASON these pearls of wisdom follow
important questions. Questions are invitations. They are preludes to
action. They offer a chance to break through fears and barriers of
accepted knowledge. Sometimes we hear an idea that's strange to our
ears, but it still resonates as truth. We get excited, and we want more.
We listen closer or read further. We rearrange our thinking to include
that perspective. A new theory sets us on a philosophical adventure,
and, like any adventure, it has its scary elements. If we take this
ride, we'll almost certainly end up in a different place. Our view of
the world will be transformed, and we'll learn things about ourselves we
didn't know before. Yes, it sounds scary, but also exhilarating. Most of
us love to explore new worlds. We love it, until we feel we're losing
me. Some of us reach a point in our spiritual excursions when we don't
recognize ourselves anymore. That's usually when we get scared and end
the whole adventure. We give up. We get a little tipsy and return to the
party. If we're willing to keep going, that's when the real adventure
begins. That's when life starts to play with us---talking to us and
calling to us in our dreams. New information starts coming from
everywhere. We read things, hear things, and respond to things
differently. We look at everything with fresh eyes. The words on that
billboard we pass every day start to sound wise. Mindless television
commercials reveal secret knowledge. Conversations overheard at
restaurants seem to deliver profound messages. Suddenly, we're decoding
life's riddles, one at a time. As any scientist will testify, searching
for answers brings unexpected revelations. Curiosity opens unseen doors
and offers surprising points of view. We go to sleep with a question and
wake up with a new point of view. It's not that the information we get
is really new, only that we're suddenly allowing ourselves to receive
it.

Life is the bearer of information---by way of words, images, or a hit
song on the radio. It speaks the truth to us continuously, tirelessly,
mostly without words. Unwilling to master our own attention, we miss a
lot. When we're fixated on one thing, we're blind to everything else.
When we welcome a different idea, however reluctantly, reality begins to
shift. Our imaginations ignite, and we get a glimpse of the truth. We
can imagine eternity, infinity, and immortality. We can sense the
magnitude of love's force. We're often transported when imagining God.
But if we open our eyes, we see God here in front of us: we see life
radiating from everything. We witness love in action---everywhere. We
feel energy. We sense the eternal and infinite power of us moving
through all matter. Humanity's greatest art is to dream
consciously---using language the way a master artist uses brushes and
paints. We are the artist of our dream, and we are the central point of
focus in whatever landscape we choose to imagine. We were meant to wake
up and see what's all around us. We were designed to change and to
evolve. Our physical bodies never stop changing. Energy never stays the
same. Still, we attempt to define ourselves the same way through the
years of our lives. Would we really rather not wake up? We all know what
it feels like to wake up, since we do it every morning. Eyes still
closed, we hear sounds and decipher their meaning. We listen and feel
our bodies stir. We sense energy, in and around us, in so many different
ways. Taking a conscious breath, we move, stretch, and feel the wonder
of being human. Then we open our eyes. Remember the first time? It's
easy to imagine opening our eyes for the first time. We did this as
newborns, and we've done it over and over again throughout our lives.
Every time we wake from a night's sleep, from a nap---every time we jolt
ourselves back from a daydream---we have a chance to see for the first
time. Close your eyes, and the world disappears. Open them again, and
everything you see is a miracle. Everything you hear is an intimate
vibration of energy, a greeting from life. Awake and aware, we can see
the world as it is and respond to it authentically. Isn't that easier
than having to recall the role you're playing every minute of every day?
When our eyes open, the brain starts to register images, and the mind
comes to rapid conclusions---it begins to tell a story. All this happens
because light has entered our eyes. All we ever really see is light, in
fact. All anyone ever sees is light, touching objects and bouncing off
objects.

The rest is a story. The rest is a spell cast by a gifted magician. It
takes a dedicated sorcerer to break that self-made spell. It takes
someone willing to wake up, to open the senses, and to see. Everyone is
driven by an ongoing dream, and everyone has the power to steer that
dream in a new direction. Everyone has a chance to alter the message.
Angel is another word for messenger. The way we react to people and
occurrences makes us the angels we are. We may feel like reluctant
angels, disgraced angels, or recovering angels, but we're learning to
deliver the message of life through our words and our actions. With each
revelation, we're becoming more aware of life's message. We're learning
to see a broader picture of the world. We're enriching our relationship
with all things. Peace means freedom from disturbance. On a global
scale, it means there is no war between nations. It means different
cultures get along; their traditions are respected and their beliefs
tolerated. Peace means that one government doesn't seek to overthrow or
impose its principles on another. Peace means the same thing to you, to
me, and to everyone. It means an end to the chaos in our minds. It means
we've ended our war over ideas, a war that causes us confusion and
unrest. We don't want to impose our principles on anyone else or to
disrespect other people's beliefs and traditions. The peace we create in
our time, in our universe, has a lasting influence. It ensures our own
sense of well-being, and it affects the safety and well-being of the
world around us. You may be dissatisfied with your life or frustrated
with the way things are going right now. You may feel as though you have
no control over anything---not your friends, your children, or your
reality. Maybe you wonder what makes other people do what they do. Maybe
you've realized that you don't know everything, and you can't know
everything. "I don't know" is a game changer. When you give up having to
know or needing to be right, you feel lighter right away. Surrender your
stories. The mind is not the boss of anything, and it doesn't want to
be. Let life take over from here. Life is energy, truth, intent. No
image you have of yourself can match the real energy and power of you.
Words, no matter how sincerely spoken, can't express the truth. You are
energy living inside a human being. You are truth, wrapped up in a
fanciful story. At its core, this is the story of an awakening mind.
Like most of us, you can only see yourself one way until you use the
power of attention to see much more. You believe one reflection until
you learn to see yourself

in everything. Trust completely in the truth, and you will feel all your
lies fade away. Most of us trust nature. We feel comfortable in nature,
even in a city park. We enjoy the uninhibited company of animals and the
serenity of trees. This might seem strange, considering that nature can
harm us. Nature can turn violent. It can ravage a forest or bring down a
mountain. Animals soil our carpets and bite our relatives. They are both
unpredictable and in many ways unreliable. What's so comforting about
that? What is there to trust? What we trust is authenticity. Animals and
trees don't hide behind a story. Life rules the oceans and mountain
ranges; our thoughts don't. We're reluctant to see ourselves as part of
nature. Instead, we see ourselves as nature's rivals. We see ourselves
as tourists within a natural landscape. As tourists, we wonder and we
marvel. We admire the intelligence of trees and the sensitivity of
raindrops. We feel that the sea and the sky know something we don't and
that nature has a secret power we lack. There is only life, and its
countless points of view. It's a disservice to life, to truth, to think
we are separate from it. It's self-defeating to deny life's power and
magic in ourselves. Whether we're listening to it or not, our internal
chatter adds to the stress our bodies are feeling. It affects our moods.
It alters the way we deal with other people, and it makes us struggle
just to get through the day. So much is going on in our minds that we
can hardly make decisions or have clear conversations. Unable to contain
the inner story, we talk about our problems, needs, and frustrations. We
voice our opinions too loudly. We pull everyone's attention toward me.
What we think we know consumes us. What other people know infects us.
Our focus is on the news, on speculations, but not the truth. Our bodies
get hooked on drama, which only makes us hungrier for more drama, more
gossip and conspiracies. Inwardly, we're punishing ourselves for our
misdeeds and blaming ourselves for our misfortunes. We carry memories
everywhere we go, even if their weight is unbearable. Our eyes are on
the past, and our imaginations fly to the future. This makes us
impervious to the present moment. So we forget to be kind. We forget to
say hello to a stranger or listen to a friend. We forget to be good to
ourselves. All this can be turned around. We can afford to give love
generously ---because love is the truth of us. It has no limits. Love is
the energy of us. It costs us nothing to respect ourselves without
looking for

justifications. It costs us nothing to respect everyone we meet, because
all matter was created from the same mystery. All humans were born
innocent of crimes. All of us survived to this point, bending to
unspoken laws and withstanding the noise of our own thoughts. Out of
pure potential we were conceived and created. We survived all the
ordeals of childhood and the pressures of the human dream. And we're
here now, wondering and wanting, because we know there are things we can
still learn. We sense there's a better way to be human. We were blessed
with a brain and a nervous system that allow us to receive information
directly from life. We are able to create a virtual world, instant by
instant. It's not fixed; it's fluid. Our reality can be reshaped; the
human body will respond to new agreements. Our emotions don't have to
respond to clumsy leadership. Our thoughts can be tempered. Every one of
us is able to reflect the truth through our words and actions. And
that---let's face it---is an amazing superpower.

20 Afterword FOR ALL HIS work, the boy in our story went home without
coins in his pocket---but that's not why he made such a heroic effort to
help an old man with his wagon. He did it for love; he did it because
love was the truth of who he was. His every word was a messenger of love
from his own little country to an unfamiliar one. He would return home
all the better for having built a bridge between two human beings. As
his life unfolded, he would face challenges. He might learn to wage
unnecessary wars in his head. He might be expected to join the party of
drunks and impose his beliefs on other minds. He might never face his
fears or question his own knowledge. His true nature might become
corrupted, causing him to fall out of love with himself. He might also
wake up. He might, if he remembered the words of an old man, find his
way back to paradise. He might remember to love unconditionally, as one
who truly loves himself. He might learn to shape reality like a master
artist. Things are the way they are in the world not because they are
right or wrong. Naturally, there are things we can all do better for the
sake of our personal happiness. We can free ourselves of our own
tyrannies and give ourselves the sense of safety we've been longing for.
Because we are free doesn't mean other "countries" will be free. It
doesn't mean that other leaders will be aware or responsible. The choice
for transformation belongs to every individual. We can guide ourselves
toward personal independence, but should not coerce anyone else to
follow us. Our journey back to authenticity is ours alone and mustn't be
used as an excuse to pressure family members or dear friends. At any
time, we can wake up and see the totality of what we are. We can see
life as it is and accept everything we see. We can show how truth walks
and talks in the world without attempting to govern others. We can offer
our presence---not our rules---to demonstrate the best of what a human
can be.

We don't have to imagine ourselves more aggressive or more helpless than
we are. In fact, we'll be happier if we don't. We'll be more able to
meet daily surprises and upheavals without our old illusions. We can be
grateful, whatever the disturbance. No matter the circumstances, we can
live permanently in paradise. Having already recognized what we are not,
we can live each moment as truth, as energy. We can perceive as life
perceives, enjoying all points of view. It's up to each of us to
appreciate the main character of our story as a work of fiction. It's up
to each of us to create a masterpiece by being aware of what is. The
voice in our heads is meant to evolve. Through the transformation of the
main character, we can have a loving influence on the lives of those
around us. We can make words impeccable again. Through me, we can
transform our personal reality. So, please, help me to change your
world.

About the Authors

DON MIGUEL RUIZ is the international bestselling author of The Four
Agreements (over seven years on the New York Times bestseller list), The
Mastery of Love, The Voice of Knowledge, The Fifth Agreement, and The
Toltec Art of Life and Death. He has dedicated his life to sharing the
wisdom of the ancient Toltec through his books, lectures, and journeys
to sacred sites around the world. BARBARA EMRYS is a spiritual teacher
and the author of The Red Clay of Burundi: Finding God, the Music, and
Me and the co-author of The Toltec Art of Life and Death. Discover great
authors, exclusive offers, and more at hc.com.

Copyright

THE THREE QUESTIONS. Copyright © 2018 by Miguel Ruiz and Barbara Emrys.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright
Conventions. By payment of the required fees, you have been granted the
nonexclusive, nontransferable right to access and read the text of this
e-book on-screen. No part of this text may be reproduced, transmitted,
downloaded, decompiled, reverse-engineered, or stored in or introduced
into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form or by any
means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins
ebooks. FIRST EDITION Cover design: Studio Gearbox; cover art: ©
Nicholas Wilton \| Illustration Source Library of Congress
Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Ruiz, Miguel, Jr., author. \|
Emrys, Barbara, author. Title: The three questions : how to discover and
master the power within you / Don Miguel Ruiz, Barbara Emrys.
Description: San Francisco : HarperOne, 2018. Identifiers: LCCN
2018010174\| ISBN 9780062391094 (hardback) \| ISBN 9780062391117 (ebook)
\| ISBN 9780062881564 (Intl) Subjects: LCSH: Self-actualization
(Psychology) \| Spirituality. \| BISAC: SELF-HELP / Spiritual. \|
RELIGION / Spirituality. \| BODY, MIND & SPIRIT / Spirituality /
Shamanism. Classification: LCC BF637.S4 R85 2018 \| DDC 158---dc23 LC
record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2018010174 Digital Edition JUNE
2018 ISBN: 978-0-06-239111-7 Version 04302018 Print ISBN:
978-0-06-239109-4

About the Publisher

Australia HarperCollins Publishers Australia Pty. Ltd. Level 13, 201
Elizabeth Street Sydney, NSW 2000, Australia www.harpercollins.com.au
Canada HarperCollins Publishers Ltd Bay Adelaide Centre, East Tower 22
Adelaide Street West, 41st Floor Toronto, Ontario, Canada M5H 4E3
www.harpercollins.ca India HarperCollins India A 75, Sector 57 Noida
Uttar Pradesh 201 301 www.harpercollins.co.in New Zealand HarperCollins
Publishers New Zealand Unit D1, 63 Apollo Drive Rosedale 0632 Auckland,
New Zealand www.harpercollins.co.nz United Kingdom HarperCollins
Publishers Ltd. 1 London Bridge Street London SE1 9GF, UK

www.harpercollins.co.uk United States HarperCollins Publishers Inc. 195
Broadway New York, NY 10007 www.harpercollins.com


