Copyright © 2000 by Miguel Angel Ruiz, M.D. and Janet Mills The Four
Agreements® is a Registered Trademark Published by Amber-Allen
Publishing, Inc. P. O. Box 6657 San Rafael, California 94903 Cover
Illustration: Nicholas Wilton All rights reserved. This book may not be
reproduced in whole or in part without written permission from the
publisher, except by a reviewer who may quote brief passages in a
review; nor may any part of this book be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or other, without
written permission from the publisher. Copyright infringement is against
the law. If you believe this book was illegally distributed and
infringes on the author's copyright, please notify the publisher at
copyright@amberallen.com. Printed Book: ISBN 978-1-878424-48-8 Digital
Book: ISBN ISBN 978-1-934408-02-5

DEDICATION I believe in angels. Angel means messenger. I dedicate this
book to the angels in human form that deliver a message of love instead
of fear, superstition, and emotional poison. To all the teachers from
preschool to post-graduate school; to all who teach a better way of
life. To all the artists, authors, leaders, movie directors, and media
professionals who share themselves with generosity instead of sel shness
to improve human lives. To all the parents who teach their children to
be honest and compassionate. To anyone who loves and respects every
human in the world.

CONTENTS Introduction: Three Masteries, Four Agreements

PART ONE: Mastering Awareness

1... DOMESTICATION Human suffering begins with domestication

2... THE POWER OF THE WORD Humans are creators, but our power of
creation is invested in our beliefs

3... DREAMING The function of the human mind is to dream, but we have
learned to dream without awareness

PART TWO: Mastering Transformation

4... THE SECOND ATTENTION Using your will and attention for the second
time

5... ACTION--REACTION Using The Four Agreements to change your
actions--reactions

6... ATTACH--DETACH Surrendering to the angel of death

PART THREE: Living The Four Agreements

7... A DIALOGUE WITH DON MIGUEL 8... TRUE STORIES OF AWARENESS AND
TRANSFORMATION Abbreviated Glossary

PRACTICE IDEAS Mastering Awareness The Image of Perfection The Book of
Law The Power of the Word Your Authentic Self Mastering Transformation
The Dream of the Second Attention Awareness, Attention, Action--Reaction
Attach--Detach

NOTE If it has been some time since you last read The Four Agreements,
you may want to refer to the Abbreviated Glossary at the end of this
book, where a list of terms is provided for your convenience. To avoid
using the masculine gender exclusively when referring to both male and
female readers, we have randomly used masculine and feminine pronouns
throughout the book.

THE FOUR AGREEMENTS 1... BE IMPECCABLE WITH YOUR WORD Speak with
integrity. Say only what you mean. Avoid using the word to speak against
yourself or to gossip about others. Use the power of your word in the
direction of truth and love. 2... DON'T TAKE ANYTHING PERSONALLY Nothing
others do is because of you. What others say and do is a projection of
their own reality, their own dream. When you are immune to the opinions
and actions of others, you won't be the victim of needless su ering.
3... DON'T MAKE ASSUMPTIONS Find the courage to ask questions and to
express what you really want. Communicate with others as clearly as you
can to avoid misunderstandings, sadness, and drama. With just this one
agreement, you can completely transform your life. 4... ALWAYS DO YOUR
BEST Your best is going to change from moment to moment; it will be di
erent when you are healthy as opposed to sick. Under any circumstance,
simply do your best, and you will avoid selfjudgment, self-abuse, and
regret.

in • teg • ri • ty (in teg´ rə tē) 1. the quality or state of being
complete; unbroken condition; wholeness; entirety 2. the quality or
state of being unimpaired; perfect condition; soundness 3. the quality
or state of being of sound moral principle; uprightness, honesty, and
sincerity.

INTRODUCTION Three Masteries, Four Agreements The word is like a seed,
and the human mind is so fertile, but only for those kinds of seeds it
is prepared for.

The rst time you read The Four Agreements, some part of you knows that
you have heard these concepts before or have experienced them in your
life, though perhaps not as simply.

In reading The Four Agreements you discover that humans create thousands
of agreements based mainly on making assumptions and taking everything
personally, and by doing this, we are using the power of our word
against ourselves. We are using all the power of our creation to create
a dream that sets us up to su er for the rest of our lives. The Four
Agreements are a tool for transformation, leading you

to stop judging, mainly yourself, and to start practicing another way of
life. They lead you to stop the guilt, the shame, and the selfrejection;
they help you break the agreements that limit the expression of your
creativity, and replace them with new agreements that facilitate the
expression of your love.

With The Four Agreements, my intention was to create a messenger that
can enter the imagination of readers and change their point of view. If
you have practiced these agreements, you already know what they can do.
They have the capacity to go

directly into your belief system, into those thousands of agreements you
made with yourself, and create a doubt. And just like magic, because
they are magic, The Four Agreements slowly free the faith

that is trapped inside your belief system. Little by little, you recover
your integrity, and the real you starts to awaken. The Four Agreements
are like a map that tells you all the di erent ways to reach your
destination. Their simplicity is what makes them so easy to use in so
many directions. But the map is just one half. You are the other half.
In any relationship, there are two halves. The book, the messenger, is
one half of the relationship, but

you are the other half, and that is the beauty of this relationship:
your half. If you have a goal and you use the messenger as your guide,
you are going to reach your goal. With The Four Agreements, you can

learn how to heal your emotional body. You can use it to change your
belief system and create a brand new belief system. You can

use it to heal your marriage, your relationships with your friends, and
your relationships at work, and to improve your life in every

way. But rst, because it's a map, you have to start with awareness of
where you are and where you want to be. Thousands of years ago the
Toltec created three masteries to

guide us out of su ering and return us to our true nature: happiness,
freedom, and love. The Toltec encouraged us to see ourselves with truth,
and they created a mastery just for awareness. The mastery, the Mastery
of Awareness, is the

rst

rst step toward

personal freedom, because we cannot be free if we don't know what we
are, where we are, or what kind of freedom we are looking for. In this
mastery, we become aware of the fog that is in our mind. We

become aware that we are dreaming all the time, and that everybody else
is dreaming. The Mastery of Awareness can also be called the Mastery of
Truth.

The second Toltec mastery, the Mastery of Transformation,

shows us how to change the dream of our life. The goal of the

second mastery is to put order into the chaos of the mitote --- into all
of the voices inside our mind --- to face our fears, to transform our
fears, and to get results. The result we want is the freedom to live our
own life instead of the life of the Parasite or the belief system.

The Mastery of Transformation is achieved by changing our agreements and
reprogramming our own mind in our own way. The Four Agreements are a
summary of the Mastery of Transformation.

The result of the rst two masteries is a mind that is Parasitefree, and
that is the third mastery, the Mastery of Love, or the Mastery of
Intent. From the Toltec point of view, love or intent is

that part of life that makes the transformation of energy possible. It

is Life itself; it is unconditional love. Everything is made with love
because everything comes from God or Life. When we master love, we
master the dream of our life, and when all three masteries are

accomplished, we reclaim our divinity and become one with God. Then
every action we take is an expression of the One Being. This is the goal
of the Toltec.

For those of you who want to explore the third mastery, I have

written a book called The Mastery of Love, which shows you what a dream
based on love looks like. The Mastery of Love is the result of the

rst two masteries, and it o ers a better way of living our life

with love. But for now, the third mastery is not what we will focus on.
The rst two masteries are the subject of this book. In the

rst part of this companion book, before we talk about

applying The Four Agreements, the emphasis is on awareness. What do we
want to be aware of? In Part One, we focus on three things:

1.

Human su ering begins with domestication. When we are

children, other people hook our attention and teach us to dream the way
the society dreams. This is how our attention is used for the rst time
to create the rst dream of our life.

2.  Humans are creators, but our power of creation is invested in our
    beliefs. The power of our word, which is the same as our intent, our
    will, our faith, and our love, is trapped inside a rigid

structure of beliefs. This leaves us with little power to change our
dream.

3.  The function of the human mind is to dream, but we have learned to
    dream without awareness. Once we are aware that we are

dreaming, we awake from the dream and recover our power to change the
dream whenever we choose.

When we discover that we have the power to create a dream of

heaven, we want to change our dream, and The Four Agreements

are the perfect tool for that. In Part Two of this companion book, we
explore several ways to master the art of dreaming:

4.  Using your will and attention for the second time. In the dream of
    the second attention, you choose to believe what you want to
    believe, and that includes believing in yourself.

5.  

Using The Four Agreements to change your actions--reactions.

Every choice you make has a consequence or result. When you change the
action, you change the result, and you change the dream of your life.

6. Using attach--detach to surrender to the angel of death. The angel of
death can teach you to live in the present moment instead of

the past or the future. When your attention is in the present moment,
you enjoy life more intensely because you are fully alive.

This companion book will give you more information about the rst two
masteries, but information is not enough. Information is

merely the seed in your mind. What will really make the di erence is
action. If you practice The Four Agreements, you will master The Four

Agreements.

Eventually,

after

many

repetitions,

these

agreements will become a habit, and you will see how your life is
transformed. There is a beautiful story about Jesus telling his
disciples that

his words are like seeds and he sends his seeds everywhere. Some

seeds land on rock and never grow. Some seeds go into land that is
fertile on the surface, but hard underneath; these seeds start
sprouting, but soon die. Then there are the seeds that go into land

that is very fertile, and they grow strong and become big trees. And you
will know the tree by its fruit. I love that metaphor. It is wonderful
to see how many people

who have practiced The Four Agreements have already grown into trees
that bear fruit.

Just imagine if you could live in a society where The Four

Agreements were a habit for everybody, where this habit was the way they
expressed life. Imagine living in a society where everybody practiced
love until they mastered love. It will happen; it

is just a matter of time. There is already a new dream in this world

that is ready to be dreamed by humans, Parasite-free. The sun has
already changed; the light has changed. We just need humans to dream the
new dream.

By using The Four Agreements in our own life, we modify our

personal dream, and soon our new dream will modify the outside

dream. There is no need to actively try to modify the outside dream.
This happens naturally as a result of our own transformation. Deciding
to focus on our own freedom isn't sel sh; it is the greatest gift we can
give to humanity.

PART ONE Mastering Awareness

1

DOMESTICATION Human su ering begins with domestication During the
process of domestication, we form an image of perfection in order to try
to be good enough. We create an image of how we should be in order to be
accepted by everybody, but we don't t this image.

All the su ering and drama in your life is the result of what you have
learned. Whatever you learn is alive. The image that you have of
yourself is alive, and it lives in your mind. That image is not you, but
it will use everything it perceives to justify its own existence. It is
not you, but it is eating you alive and destroying your happiness.

The voice of knowledge inside your mind controls the dream of your life.
The Toltec call it a Parasite; the Bible calls it evil. It is a living
being that exists in your belief system, and lives by eating your faith,
your intent, your happiness. What is sad is that you believe the
knowledge is you; you believe the image is what you are. The program, or
Parasite, is really the one who is living your life, not you. But this
program was not there when you were born.

When you were born, your mind was completely innocent. You had no
concepts about good or bad, right or wrong, beauty or ugliness; you had
no concepts at all. You had no idea what it means to be a human, to be a
man or to be a woman, but you saw other people outside of you, and you
recognized them as your own kind.

When you are one, two, or three years old, you cannot see yourself. The
only way to see yourself is to look at your image in a mirror, and other
people act as that mirror. You don't know what you are, but your mother
tells you what you are, and your father tells you what you are, and your
brothers and sisters do the same

thing. The other humans around you have the capacity to project an image
onto you, which means they tell you what they believe you are.

What your mother tells you is not exactly what your father tells

you that you are, or what your siblings, or the television, or the
church, or the whole society tells you that you are. Every human in

your life projects a completely di erent image onto you, and none of
these images are accurate. What you believe you are is a distorted

image of yourself that came from other people --- from mirrors that
always distort images. Because you cannot see yourself, you believe

them and you agree with them. As soon as you agree, the image is

programmed in your memory, and now you believe this is what you are.
What were the images others projected onto you? When you

say, "I am smart, I am stupid, I am beautiful, I am ugly," it is really

the program who says I am. These images are only knowledge or a lot of
concepts, but they aren't you. You perceive all the distorted images
others create for you, and

at a certain point you take all these images and try to make sense of
them. You create another whole image of yourself, and project it to

the outside world: I am good in school; I am bad in sports. Then you
practice that image until you master it. And because people are
projecting di erent images onto you, you are always asking them about
yourself. You are asking for the projections to support what

you already believe, to support the distorted images you have about

yourself. In the same way other people project their beliefs onto you,
you agree, and they become yours. They teach you to judge the way

they judge, to gossip the way they gossip, to create dramas the way they
create dramas. You begin to play with all these concepts, all this
knowledge, and that is how you learn to dream. The Toltec call this the
dream of the rst attention because it is

the rst time you used your attention to create a whole reality. And

because your attention is hooked from the outside, your whole world is
projected to the outside. You begin to search for yourself outside of
you because you no longer trust who you are. You search

for what you believe you don't have: justice, beauty, happiness, and
love, when all of these were always inside you. Can you see the
beginning of all the su ering and drama in

your life? You need a mirror in the world to see yourself, but there

isn't a clear mirror to tell you what you are. So you agree with the

image others create for you, but you are not that image. Of course you
modify the image and you change it all the time, but where is the real
you? It gets lost because there isn't a good mirror to re ect

what you really are. After years and years of trying to please other
people's images of what you should be, after attempting di erent kinds
of rebellion and trying to nd who you really are, you nally give up and
accept

other people's images of what you are. But there is something inside you
that longs to be free; it is always telling you, "This is not who I
really am. This is not what I really want." You are not free to be who
you really are because you are trapped by images of what you think you
should be. Your whole point of view of your whole reality is based on

what you believe you are, but what you believe about yourself is

just a concept. It is knowledge, but knowledge does not mean it is the
truth. Knowledge only means it is what you know.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING AWARENESS THE IMAGE OF PERFECTION
.............................................................................................................
.......

The most important agreements are the ones you made with yourself. In
these agreements you tell yourself who you are, what you feel, what you
believe, and how to behave.

Are you aware of all the distorted images you have about yourself? What
are the images that others projected onto you as a child? What did you
agree to believe about yourself? Consider any agreements that tell you
what you can and cannot do, what you can and cannot be, and what you can
and cannot have.

This practice idea will help you to become aware of the agreements you
have made with yourself, and to recover the awareness of your authentic
self. The objective is to become aware

of any agreements that limit the expression of your creativity, your
happiness, or your love. Try to recall your earliest memories of what
your mother,

father, and closest family members told you about yourself. Then

consider what other people outside your family projected onto you ---
friends, teachers, and other people who may have in uenced you.

Pay attention to your emotional response to each question

below. Which agreements come from fear, and which ones come from love?
Record your thoughts and answers to these questions in a notebook or
journal. What were the images that others projected onto you? When I was
a child, I was told that I was...

What limitations were you told you have? I was told that my limitations
were...

When you were a child, what did others tell you about what it means to
be a girl or a boy?

I was told that girls should always...

I was told that boys should always... Did you t the ideal image of what
it meant to be a girl or a

boy?

What do you believe today about being a woman or being a man? I believe
that a woman should always... I believe that a man should always...

Make a list of all the qualities you were told you should have, both
personal and physical.

I was told that I should be...

Make a list of all the qualities you believe you have. I believe I am...

Make a list of all the qualities you believe other people think you
have.

I believe that others think I am...

Make a list of all the qualities you lack, but wish you had. I wish I
could be like this...

Our image of perfection is the reason we reject ourselves; it is why we
don't accept ourselves the way we are, and why we don't accept others
the way they are.

Describe your image of perfection. What would you look like? What type
of personality would you have? My image of perfection is...

What would you have to change about yourself to live up to this image?
To achieve my image of perfection, I would have to...

Are you willing or able to make these changes? Why or why not? Is it
humanly possible for you to attain this image of perfection? Why or why
not?

Does your image of perfection inspire you to do your best, or does it
merely discourage you?

We judge others according to our image of perfection as well, and
naturally they fall short of our expectations.

What is your image of perfection for other people in your life? My image
of perfection for my partner is... My image of perfection for my child
is...

My image of perfection for my parents is... My image of perfection for
my best friend is ... My image of perfection for my co-workers is... My
image of perfection for my boss is...

We know we are not what we believe we are supposed to be and so we feel
false, frustrated, and dishonest. We try to hide ourselves, and we
pretend to be what we are not. The result is that we feel unauthentic
and wear social masks to keep others from noticing this.

What social masks do you wear around others? My social masks are...

Do you wear these masks because you are afraid of other people's
judgments?

I wear these masks because...

What would happen if you took the masks o ? If I take the masks o ...

What would it be like to express who you really are? If I expressed who
I really am...

After domestication it is no longer about being good enough for anybody
else. We are not good enough for ourselves because we don't t with our
own image of perfection.

On a scale of one to ten, with number one being the distorted

images you agreed with, and number ten being your authentic self, where
do you presently reside on this scale?

On the authenticity scale, I reside at number:
1...2...3...4...5...6...7...8...9...10

List at least four new agreements you can make with yourself that will
honor who you really are.

I intend to honor my authentic self by...

Make a commitment to move a step closer toward your authentic self by
practicing your four new agreements.

THE BOOK OF LAW Without question, whatever is in that Book of Law, is
our truth. We base all of our judgments according to the Book of Law,
even if these judgments go against our own inner nature.

One of the biggest mystery schools in the world, Christianity, tells

the story about Adam and Eve who lived in paradise, Parasite-free. They
perceived everything with their awareness, and they had a

beautiful dream, but they didn't have knowledge. In the middle of the
garden was the Tree of Knowledge, and

God warned Adam and Eve not to eat the fruit from this tree. Do

you remember who lives in that tree? The evil serpent lives there. Well,
I like to change the name of the serpent, the devil, to the

Parasite. The Parasite lives in the fruit of the Tree of Knowledge, and
it's just like the little worm you sometimes see inside an apple. If you
eat the apple, you eat the Parasite. The serpent or evil goes into your
mind through knowledge contaminated by the Parasite.

Humans accumulate a lot of knowledge, and 95 percent of that

knowledge is not true. Instead of using knowledge as a tool for
communication, we become puppets of knowledge. We give life to that
knowledge, and that knowledge begins to create a lot of drama and su
ering because it isn't based on truth.

Six or seven hundred years ago everybody knew that the earth was at.
This didn't mean that it was true; but they knew, and they

believed, and for them the earth was at. When they unlearned that
knowledge, their perception changed, the concept changed, and now we
know that the earth is round. This kind of concept is

harmless really, but other concepts are deadly --- especially the
concepts that try to rule people's lives.

As children, we never chose what to believe or not to believe.

We didn't choose our religion or moral values, or any concept at all.
But we agreed with these beliefs, and once we agreed, it was stored

in our memory. The outside dream hooked our attention and put knowledge
inside us via other humans --- via our parents, our teachers, our
church, our society. This knowledge sets us up to be slaves of the dream
of the planet.

Knowledge itself isn't good or bad or right or wrong; knowledge

is just a program. It is nothing but concepts. But the Parasite that

goes with knowledge is evil --- it is alive. That Parasite grows in

your mind and takes control of the mind. Once that Parasite takes
control of your mind, the real you is dead. You are not alive; there is
something else that is living your life. It is not you because the real
you is not evil; the real you is not self-destructive.

We eat knowledge, ingest the Parasite, and get sick from what

we eat. This is what happened to all of us. When we understand that

evil is nothing but a disease of the human mind, we understand why

human societies are the way they are, why there is all the injustice,
violence, and war. We have ingested Parasites in the form of beliefs, in
the form of concepts, in the form of distorted images. All of the
personal drama that we experience --- all the emotions that burn us

up, that lead us into self-destruction, into addictions, into lies, into
dogmas and fanaticism --- are the result of our beliefs, the result of a
program.

If we can see that we get sick by eating knowledge, then using logic,
how can we heal ourselves? What happens when we eat food

that is contaminated and we don't feel well? If we throw up and get rid
of the poison, we are going to feel better. Well, if we get rid of

the knowledge that harms us, guess who goes out with that knowledge?
Once we take the Parasite out of the mind, the mind will heal and will
function much better.

The story of Adam and Eve tells us what happened, and in all

the traditions around the world, in one way or another, they have

come to the same conclusion. The whole dream of the planet is not real;
it is not true. When you awake from that dream and are aware of what is
going on in people's minds, you see Parasites everywhere

in everyone. You see all the emotional poison coming out through

those Parasites. By being aware, you see that wherever you go, people
react the same way that you react; they have the same fears,

the same jealousy, the same anger, the same sorrows. You can see
yourself in each one of them, and they mirror your projections, but we
don't have to judge it as good or bad or right or wrong; it is just the
way it is.

To be aware of what happened with our mind and with the

whole humanity is what the Toltec call the Mastery of Awareness.
Awareness means to open your eyes to see the truth, and no longer

to be blind. We are born with awareness, but we accumulate

knowledge and we practice not being aware; we learn to deny what we
perceive. We are born without knowledge, of course, but we accumulate
knowledge when we are domesticated. That knowledge

is like a wall of fog that doesn't allow us to perceive what really is;
it keeps us from having awareness. The challenge is to maintain our
awareness in the midst of that

fog. More than that, to shift the knowledge, lift the fog, and recover

our awareness. If we can practice being aware all the time, just the
awareness will change our whole reality. When we master awareness, we
almost master the dream.

There is a movie called The Crucible that portrays how the evil

serpent enters people's minds through knowledge. In the movie, a real
man of knowledge came to town carting several large books. He had spent
all his life learning about witchcraft, and was full of that knowledge.
The church knew there were witches among them, and

they were determined to clean up the town. They judged the whole town
based on those books, and many people were killed. One little

girl had the power to condemn whomever she wanted to condemn

by lying. If she said, "I see the devil in that person," they went to
trial, were judged and found guilty, and they were killed. The whole
town was possessed by fear, but where was the evil? Was it in those

people who were killed? No, the evil was in those books of knowledge; it
was in that man who was determined to apply the law in the name of that
knowledge.

Well, each of us has the same kind of book in our head. We

have our own book of knowledge, our own Book of Law, and we use that
book to judge ourselves, to nd ourselves guilty, and to punish
ourselves. Many times we even deny ourselves the right to be alive.

Again, it is important to understand that our mind is infested with a

lot of little Parasites or concepts that other people put in our mind.
Together those Parasites create one big Parasite, and they stay in our
mind by agreement.

The belief that you are not good enough is one of the little

Parasites in your mind. It is evil because it is destroying you. It

causes su ering because it limits your life, it limits your creativity
and your happiness. The belief that nobody likes you, the belief that

you are not worthy of love or happiness, the belief that you are always
right --- these beliefs are not true, and they lead you into
self-destruction. By always being right, for example, you have to

make someone else wrong. By making someone else wrong, you create an
enemy and then you are hurting yourself because sooner or later that
enemy will go against you.

All these concepts are alive and they work together, but they

need your mind, they need your dream, they need your emotions to be
alive. They only live because you believe them. These Parasites

are what the old religions called gods or demons. They have many names,
but they are truly alive, and they are in control of the human mind.

Every concept, every belief in your mind has its own

personality that wants to express itself. You have millions of voices in
your head, a whole society inside your mind, and just like a democracy,
what the majority wants is the way you live your life.

That inner society is governed by rules that dictate the way your life
should be, the way each part of you has to behave. The whole dream of
your life is based on the rules in your Book of Law, and whatever
happens in your life will be interpreted according to that Book of Law.

And there are two other parts that live in your mind: One is the

Judge, and the other is the Victim. The Judge is doing its job
perfectly. Its job is to judge, and it uses the Book of Law to judge

everything. Every action and reaction lives under the tyranny of the

Judge. The part of you that receives the judgment, or sometimes the
reward, is the Victim. Whether the Victim receives a reward or a

punishment will depend on whether or not you follow the Book of Law.

The Judge and the Victim have no doubt that the Book of Law

is the supreme truth and nothing but the truth. They rule the dream

in the Book of Law without any doubt, which means they rule with faith.
That is how you live your life, but the big question is this: Is

there justice in that system? In The Four Agreements we have already
found that there is no justice in that system. All the su ering of
humanity is in that Book of Law, that book of knowledge, because it

isn't based on truth. Again, more than 90 percent of that knowledge is
not true, but for the Judge and the Victim, it is absolutely true.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING AWARENESS THE BOOK OF LAW
.............................................................................................................
.......

One by one, all these agreements go into the Book of Law, and these
agreements rule our dream.

Are you aware of the agreements that govern your life? What does

your Book of Law say about how you should treat yourself? What

does it say about how you should relate with other people, with other
forms of life, with God? Does your Book of Law give you the

freedom to be who you really are? Does it give you the right to be

happy, the right to express your creativity, the right to be generously
rewarded for the gifts and talents you share with others?

Keep a separate journal for recording all the agreements you

have made in your life. Label this journal "The Book of Law," and make a
commitment to record every law, every rule, every

agreement or belief that you become aware of for at least one full year.
Keep your Book of Law within easy reach so you don't forget!

Below are some suggestions for chapter headings and subtopics

in your Book of Law. This is your Book of Law, so feel free to make up
your own headings, to use words and descriptions that you personally
relate to.

Personal Agreements: Your Body and Your Self Personal Appearance Health
and Diet

Masculinity and Femininity

Social Agreements: Family and Friends Love and Sex

Marriage and Family

Friendship and Social Interactions Spiritual Agreements: Life and God
Religion and Spirituality Death and Loss

Nature, Animals, and All Forms of Life Financial Agreements: Work and
Career Your Unique Skills and Talents Money and Financial Matters
Success and Failure

After you have entered the headings for your Book of Law, consider

what you were programmed to believe about each of these areas of

your life. What did you learn about yourself, about others, about work,
about life? One way to get started is to ask "good or bad" or

"right or wrong" questions for each topic within a chapter. For example:

What is good or bad, or right or wrong, about... My personal appearance?
My personality?

Being a woman or being a man? Being married?

Having children? Making money?

Being successful?

My religion and my spirituality? My job and profession?

Consider how you were domesticated as a very young child. How did other
people hook your attention? How were you rewarded? How were you
punished?

What did you do to hook the attention of other people? What did you do
to avoid being punished? What did you do to get the reward?

List four of the most important values you learned from: Parents,
siblings, and other family members School or church

Baby-sitters, or other in uential adults Friends and acquaintances
Society at large

Do you agree with each of these values?

As a child, were you punished if you didn't honor these values? As an
adult, do you punish yourself for failing to honor them?

List some of the self-abusive agreements you have made with yourself.

List some of the self-nurturing, self-loving agreements you have made
with yourself.

As you become aware of any other agreements you have made, record them
in your Book of Law.

THE JUDGE The inner Judge uses what is in our Book of Law to judge
everything we do and don't do, everything we think and don't think, and
everything we feel and don't feel. Everything lives under the tyranny of
this Judge.

Are you aware of the Judge inside your mind, the "voice of knowledge"
that judges everything and everyone?

Make a list of every person in your life, including yourself. Consider
how each person conducts his or her life in each category in your Book
of Law. Brie y describe your judgments about each

person. How do you feel about the way each person lives his or her life,
including you? What do you admire about yourself and every other person
on your list. What do you dislike or even despise?

Remember: We make the assumption that other people judge us

the way we judge ourselves, but this isn't true. Other people judge us
according to their own Book of Law; they live in a completely

di erent dream. And we judge other people the way we judge

ourselves because all of our judgments come from the supreme truth in
our Book of Law.

How do you judge yourself?

I am a bad person because...

I should be ashamed of myself because... I am guilty of...

I am so stupid whenever I... How do you judge others?

That person is bad because...

That person should be ashamed of herself because... That person is
guilty of... I think it's really stupid when someone...

List four mistakes you have made in your life. How do you punish
yourself? How do you abuse yourself?

How many times have you paid for each mistake? Do you abuse your
physical body?

List four mistakes other people have made that you cannot forgive. How
do you punish others? How do you abuse others?

How many times have you made each person pay for his or her

mistake?

Do you abuse other people physically?

List four things you have accomplished that made you proud of yourself.

How did you reward yourself?

List four things others have accomplished that made you proud of them.

How did you reward them?

Now that you are more aware of your Judge, describe in detail what your
Judge is like and how it uses the Book of Law to rule your life.

Is your Judge ever fair and forgiving, or is it always harsh and
unforgiving?

Consider giving your Judge a more personal or descriptive name so you
can easily identify whose voice is talking inside your head.

YOUR ANSWER TO THE JUDGE The next time the voice of the Judge is judging
you or anyone else,

you now have four answers to give the Judge. You can decide which answer
is most appropriate for the situation. Get a bright piece of

paper and black marking pen, and create a note to remind yourself of
these answers. Then post the note where you will see it every day.

Big deal.

Who cares? So what?

Why not? And if none of these answers seem to satisfy your Judge, then
remember this: It doesn't matter.

THE VICTIM

The Victim carries the blame, the guilt, and the shame. It is the part
of us that says, "Poor me, I'm not good enough, I'm not intelligent
enough, I'm not attractive enough, I'm not worthy of love...."

Are you aware of the Victim inside your mind that receives the
judgments, carries the blame, the guilt, and the shame? The Victim is
that part of you that feels helpless, hopeless, or powerless. What makes
you feel ashamed of yourself? What makes you feel guilty?

What makes you feel helpless or victimized? When do you feel unworthy of
love? When do you feel regret or sadness? When do you feel betrayed?

Complete the following sentences: I am to blame for being... I don't
deserve to have...

I can't do what I really want to do because... I am powerless when it
comes to...

Poor me, I am not good enough to...

Poor me, I am not intelligent enough to... Poor me, I am never going to
be...

Poor me, I am never going to have...

I am unworthy of self-love because...

I am unworthy of self-respect because...

I am unworthy of being too happy because...

I am unworthy of nancial abundance because...

Look at your answers to the statements above, and ask your heart, not
your Parasite, whether each statement is true or false.

Here's a hint to let you know when you are telling yourself a lie: Any
belief that generates fear or feelings of unworthiness is false; it's a
lie. The Parasite thrives on the emotions that come from fear, su ering,
and drama. Our authentic self would never abuse us; it comes from love.

Describe in detail what your Victim is like. When does it believe

the Judge? Why does it believe the Judge? Consider giving your Victim a
personal name so you can identify its voice in your head. On a scale of
one to ten, with number one being a life that is

governed by the Parasite (the Judge, the Victim, and the Book of Law),
and number ten being a life completely free of the Parasite, where do
you presently live your life?

On the Parasite scale, I live my life at number:
1...2...3...4...5...6...7...8...9...10 Spend the next

fteen minutes considering what it would be

like to live your life without the Judge and the Victim. Imagine if

you could take back the power you gave to the Judge years ago, and

rule your life based on principles of love, joy, and freedom. Imagine if
your Victim was transformed from "poor me" to an empowered person who
refuses to be abused one minute longer.

Imagine what your life would be like if your personal code of

conduct was based on The Four Agreements. When you try to

imagine these possibilities, do you nd yourself meeting resistance?
Complete the following sentences: I cannot live my life without the
Judge because...

I cannot live my life without the Victim because...

I cannot rule my life the way I really want to because...

I cannot live my life by The Four Agreements because... What kind of
excuses does your Parasite give you? Write these

down so you can respond to them with truth instead of lies. As you read
your answers to each of the above sentences, counter each excuse with a
reason why it would be possible for you to do it. Come up with at least
one answer to each statement that completely refutes the excuse.

As you counter each excuse, imagine yourself moving up the

scale toward a life that is Parasite-free. Keep answering your excuses,
and continue to imagine yourself moving up the scale until you reach the
number ten. At this point, you no longer have any doubt that you can
accomplish what you want. You have recovered your faith from the belief
system, and your faith is 100 percent. Here is an example: I cannot live
my life without the Judge because... 1. I would be completely
irresponsible and out of control. 2. I would do bad things. 3. I would
be lazy and never get anything done.

Your answers to the above statements might be: 1. I would never be
irresponsible or out of control. I am a

responsible person and if I praised myself more, and judged myself less,
I would be happier and more capable of assuming responsibility.

2.  I would never do anything bad. In fact, if the Judge wasn't always
    judging me, I would do greater things than I do now. If I accepted
    myself without judgment, I would accept others without judgment.

3.  I am not a lazy person. Perhaps I would take it easy for a while,

but then I would enjoy doing what I need to do and would accomplish even
more without the Judge always criticizing me.

Complete your response to each limiting belief, then take

another look at the Parasite scale and ask yourself where your life
resides. Were you able to move your position a step closer to

number ten? If not, why not? What will it take for you to reclaim your
personal freedom?

This practice idea can be used for almost any area of your life

in which you nd yourself challenged. Start by making a statement

about something you want, but fear you will not get. Consider all

the reasons why you cannot have what you want. Then come up with a
statement that completely negates each of these excuses. Imagine each
excuse as a physical object that is standing in the way of your goal.
Imagine yourself moving up the scale as you remove each obstacle from
your path.

Keep working with both lists until you reach the point where

your faith is completely invested in your desire instead of your doubt.
At this point, you will be at number ten on the scale.

The agreements that come from fear require us to expend a lot of energy,
but the agreements that come from love help us to conserve energy and
even gain extra energy.

You should now be aware of some of the judgments, beliefs,

and agreements in your Book of Law. The next step is to challenge

the agreements in your Book of Law. Go through your Book of Law and ask
yourself these questions:

Which of these agreements lift me up and give me joy? Which of these
agreements bring me down?

Which of these agreements are based on truth? Which of these agreements
are lies?

Identify each limiting, fear-based agreement, and write a new

agreement based on truth and self-love to replace it. Begin each

week with one agreement that seems the easiest to break. Focus your
attention on that agreement until you can break that agreement and adopt
the new one in its place.

Practice your new agreement until it becomes a habit. As you break each
agreement, your enthusiasm and self-respect will

continue to grow until you recover enough power to break all of the
agreements that limit your freedom and happiness.

2

THE POWER OF THE WORD Humans are creators, but our power of creation is
invested in our beliefs Through the word, you express your creative
power. It is through the word that you manifest everything. Regardless
of what language you speak, your intent manifests through the word.

Our power of creation is the word. The word is the most powerful tool
that humans possess. It is the tool of magic. The word creates the
light, and because light is the messenger

of Life, the word is Life or God. The Gospel of John in the Bible
expresses the power of the word quite clearly: "In the beginning was the
word, and the word was with God, and the word is God." Regardless of the
language we speak, our intent manifests through the word. Through the
word we manifest everything; we express our

will, our intent, our love, and our faith, which are all the same thing.
Let's consider what it means to have faith. Whoever masters faith,
masters the dream. Why? Because faith is the impeccability of

the word. To have faith is to believe 100 percent without a doubt. Faith
is how the word is manifested; it is how we guide our intent. To have
great faith is to have great power because our intent, our will, is
undivided. When our word isn't dissipated by doubt, the power of our
word is even stronger.

The great leaders of humanity have a lot of personal power because they
have great faith. But their faith comes from the heart, not the head.
Their faith comes from love instead of fear, and from wisdom instead of
knowledge. The kind of faith that comes from the head is blind faith
because it comes from knowledge, from false

beliefs, from fear. Blind faith is a faith that leads to fanaticism and
dogmatism, which explains all the religious wars, all the fear that

other people don't believe what we believe. Blind faith is a faith that
we have to defend and impose on other people in order to feel validated
and safe. Humans are powerful creators. We are born with all the faith
of

the universe, and everything we create is based on faith. That faith is
really our personal power, but what has happened with our faith?

We invest all our faith in our beliefs and agreements, and we are left
with little power to change our lives. Imagine that every agreement is
just like a brick. Humans

create an entire structure out of bricks, and we glue it together with
our faith. We believe without a doubt in all the knowledge inside that
structure. Our faith gets trapped inside that structure because

we put our faith in each agreement. It's not important if it is or isn't
true; we believe it, and for us it is true. All of our power of creation
is invested in our belief, and because we believe it, that's the way it
is. If we believe our

knowledge, whatever we perceive will be ltered to make it t into that
knowledge. We create a personal dream that justi es the knowledge, and
the outside dream proves to us that what we believe is true. The outside
dream re ects our personal dream; it will justify

every belief. During all the education we receive, which means all the
knowledge that is programmed in our mind, we create the concept

of the I am. Everything we believe we are, everything we know about how
to be a human is the I am. The Toltec call this the human form. We are
not talking about the physical body, but about our own

dream. When we say, "I am a man; I am a woman; I am a human, and this is
my whole reality," everything is judged by that

knowledge, and of course, the dream becomes hell. That is the drama of
humanity. The dream of our life is so limited because we take all the

power of our creation and put it in a little box, and with all our power
we seal the box. And we live inside the box, trapped inside that little
box. Well, that little box is the human form. It is our creation, and
all our will is invested in that I am.

Your faith is so strong that when you believe "I am never going to be
this," thy will be done, you are never going to be that. If you believe
"I cannot do it," thy will be done, you cannot do it. Whatever

you believe, you put your faith in that belief, and your faith will

make it true. The power of our word is behind every agreement we make.
To break an agreement, we need to have at least the same amount of

power we used to make the agreement, but we nd that we no longer have
enough power to break an agreement just because we decide to. The
classic example of this is the agreement to smoke.

Our reasoning mind can understand that it's not good for us to smoke,
and we decide not to smoke anymore. Our mind says, "I will not smoke
anymore because it's not good for me." Then we open the package, light a
cigarette, and keep smoking. We don't want to

smoke and we try not to smoke, but we still smoke! The temptation to
smoke is stronger than our will; or we can say our will and our faith
are not yet strong enough to keep our word.

Why don't we have enough power to break our agreements?

Imagine that we had one hundred units of power, and we put four

units of power into the agreement to smoke. In theory, we need at

least four units of power to break this agreement. But the problem is
that the other ninety-six units of power are already being used to keep
all the agreements of our whole reality alive. Then the day we

decide not to smoke anymore, we don't have enough power to change the
agreement. All of our power has been taken. What happened to the other
ninety-six units of power? Let's

look at the way we spend energy. In The Four Agreements, we talked

about this example: Imagine you awake one morning with a lot of energy.
You can hardly wait to do a lot of things. You go to eat your breakfast,
and for whatever reason, you have a big

ght with your

spouse. All these angry words are said, all these painful emotions come
out, and after the ght, all you want to do is go to bed and sleep. The
ght drains all your energy.

To save energy you need to change your routines, change those
agreements, and no longer react with those emotions. If your spouse
wants to ght, and you don't ght, then you still have that energy. You
just eat your breakfast quickly, and leave the room. It's up to

you whether you will allow yourself to spend all your energy on your
emotions. You don't have to be the victim of your emotions.

The emotions that drain you are the emotions that come from

fear; the emotions that give you more energy are those that come from
love.

Most people spend all their energy on personal importance, on

defending their image, on defending their opinions and what they

believe. They spend a lot of energy trying to be right and making
everybody else wrong. This nonsense behavior is funny when you see it
from the outside, but it becomes a big drama when you are in

the middle of it. That drama drains our energy. To believe what we

believe, to keep all these agreements alive, we have no energy left. Our
power of creation, the word, is dissipated by the big mitote in our
mind, by all those con icting agreements we create. The result is that
we feel powerless.

As we have said, the Book of Law, even though it isn't physical,

creates a strong and rigid structure made by agreements, and we call it
a belief system. From a single letter to a whole ideology,

everything we believe goes into that structure, and it is almost as
rigid as our physical body. The agreements we make control our

whole dream, and the structure is so strong that it looks like it's
impossible to break. Well, what happens if we start taking bricks from
that

structure? At a certain point the whole edi ce will collapse. And

that is what happens when we practice The Four Agreements. The Book of
Law starts falling apart little by little, and at a certain point, it is
no longer strong enough to control the dream of our life. The belief
structure collapses, and we lose the human form, the I am.

When that happens, the dream of our life looks like chaos. It looks like
chaos because it is chaos. When we lose the human form,

the old order no longer exists, the old dream doesn't govern our life
anymore. Our emotions get stronger, the poison starts coming out,

and it's a great opportunity for cleansing. Even though it is chaos, we
now have a chance to rewrite the Book of Law and create new agreements
with knowledge.

If we keep practicing The Four Agreements, we are going to break all
those images we created for ourselves, all those images that were
projected onto us by our mother and father, our brothers

and sisters, our friends, society, everybody. Of course, for years we
have practiced all those images, we create attachments, and those

attachments come from our faith. We are so attached to our images,

to our beliefs, that if something challenges our beliefs or takes them
away from us, it hurts. And because it hurts, even if those beliefs
create a life of drama and emotional pain, we resist the change.

That is why breaking the belief structure and losing the human form
should be gradual, not fast. In certain cases it can happen fast, but to
take o

your social masks and lose your images can create a

strong emotional reaction. In the end, of course, the truth will set

you free, but the truth is painful to discover because most of your
attachments and resistance to life are not based on truth, but on lies.

Losing the human form can be emotionally painful because you are going
against your own beliefs. The Judge and the Victim know you very well
and will use anything they can to go against you. If

you have a strong desire to change your Book of Law, it is going to

happen, but you cannot expect the change to come without crisis. You are
breaking your beliefs, your awareness is expanding, and you are learning
to dream in your own way. You have to go step-by-step; you cannot expect
the transformation to happen from one moment to another. In theory, of
course, anything is possible. Maybe it is possible to jump from
elementary school to college, but you cannot

expect that at all. If you lose the human form, then even more things
are possible. As you break all those beliefs that tell you what

isn't possible, incredible things start happening to you because you
don't limit yourself anymore.

Even though you are di erent, people assume you are the same; they
hardly notice the change unless you express yourself. But at a

certain point, you no longer play their game. You don't take on their
addictions, and you don't join in their gossiping. You no longer care so
much about their drama, about their anger, their jealousy,

because you know they are dreaming. And you know they don't mean it when
they tell you something unkind.

You love and respect yourself so much that you don't allow

other people to disrespect you. You put boundaries on their wounds,

not because you want to avoid them, but because you don't allow that
poison to come to you. You don't judge other people, but you don't
accept their poison because accepting their poison is going against
yourself.

Once you lose the human form, you

nd out that you don't

know what you are, and you no longer care about what you are.

When you break the image of what it means to be a human, you are

no better than a rock, but then, nobody is better than you either. In
this society, to be human means to be at the top of evolution on this
planet, to be superior to other kinds of life in this world; to be
superior to dogs, cats, plants, and rocks. But when you reach a certain
level of awareness in your mind, you are no longer human

from that point of view. To be human is no longer important, because you
see life from a whole new perspective. You are the same as everything
else that exists in the universe; you come from the same source, you are
made of the same light. And if you are no

better than anyone, and no one is better than you, then where is
personal importance?

The Mastery of Transformation is the process of unlearning

what you have already learned. If you learn by making agreements, you
unlearn by breaking agreements. When you unlearn, that knowledge is no
longer in your mind. If that knowledge is no longer

in your mind, the voice of knowledge, the Parasite, is no longer in your
mind either.

By applying The Four Agreements you are going to free your

faith, free your word, and unlearn the knowledge. It is best to start by
breaking agreements that are very small and require less power.

As those smaller agreements are broken, your personal power will
increase until you reach a point when you can nally face the big demons
in your mind.

Every time you break an agreement, the power of your faith

that you invested in that agreement comes back to you. You no

longer need to spend your power to keep that agreement alive. You
recover your personal power, your will becomes stronger, and this

gives you the power to change another agreement, and another, and
another. As you keep applying The Four Agreements, you discover

something very interesting: Most of the small agreements are broken

almost immediately. You start seeing results right away, and your

personal power increases right away. Every time you read The Four
Agreements again, you see how you used the word against yourself

again, you see why you don't need to take anything personally or make
assumptions again. Then you can face the bigger agreements, and start a
cycle of rebuilding your personal power. Every time you read the book,
your will grows stronger because you recover more

and more of your integrity. You become more and more of who you really
are because you are breaking the domestication.

Once your Book of Law is broken and you lose the human form,

knowledge and the Book of Law is no longer the big tyrant in your life.
Knowledge is still there, but it doesn't have the order that it did

before. The structure is broken, but now you are in a position to choose
a new structure.

You no longer believe in all your knowledge, and your

relationship with knowledge changes completely. Before, knowledge had
you enslaved inside that little box; it controlled your life. Now,

you have power over knowledge. You still use knowledge as a tool of
communication, but knowledge no longer abuses you.

Understanding how the structure of our dream is made, gives us

an opportunity to challenge our beliefs, and change our dream. But
awareness is always the

rst step toward our freedom. Without

awareness there is no way out of the structure.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING AWARENESS THE POWER OF THE WORD
.............................................................................................................
.......

The word is not just a sound or a written symbol. The word is a force;
it is the power you have to express and communicate, to think, and
thereby to create the events in your life.

Are you aware of the power of your word? Take a moment to consider the
power of certain words you were told as a child. Can you remember a time
when someone you know "put a spell on you" with the power of his word?
How have these words a ected your

life? Now think of a more recent time when you or someone you know used
the power of her word with the intent to spread emotional poison. You
must understand what the word is and what

the word does. The word is a vibration of sound that has the tendency to
manifest its physical equivalent. And just as a seed carries the
potential to propagate a forest, the word carries the potential to take
root in your mind and spontaneously generate thought forms of a similar
vibration. Eventually, your personal dream will re ect the type of seeds
that have rooted in your mind.

CONTEMPLATE THE POWER OF THE WORD Spend the next twenty minutes
considering the power of the word.

If you have a dictionary or thesaurus, look up the origin and meaning of
your favorite words. Make a list of these, and then ask yourself what
you like about their sound and their meaning. Notice

how di erent words can a ect your emotions, how some lift you up and
others bring you down. Ask yourself this question again and again: What
is a word? Contemplate this question until you are satis ed that you can
feel the power that lies within the word.

Once you are truly aware of the power of the word, you will nd it easier
to choose your words carefully, to speak with integrity,

and to say only what you mean.

BEWARE OF COMMON PHRASES AND CULTURAL EXPRESSIONS Every culture has
common phrases, sayings, and expressions that

people learn early on and then mindlessly repeat. Since habitual

thoughts and words tend to manifest in physical form, do we really want
to reinforce these messages? Identify four or more things you

hear people say repeatedly that go against themselves. Here are some
examples: I'm getting too old for this.

I'm sick and tired of doing that. I'm dying to...

I can't a ord to... Identify four or more things people mindlessly tell
others that go against themselves. Some examples are:

You're a pain in the neck (or elsewhere). I'm going to kill you.

Why don't you drop dead? I wish you would get lost.

Do you also have the habit of saying these things? Do you curse yourself
or other people when you're feeling frustrated or angry?

Look at your lists and make a commitment to clean up your speech.

Garbage in, garbage out. Poison in, poison out. Lies in, lies out. Truth
in, truth out. Love in, love out. Like attracts like when it comes to
the word.

You can measure the impeccability of your word by your level of
self-love. How much you love yourself and how you feel about yourself
are directly proportionate to the quality and integrity of your word.

SELF-LOVE BEGINS WITH SELF-RESPECT Imagine how you would speak to
someone whom you love and

respect immensely. If you have a pet dog or cat that you love and adore,
how do you speak to your animal friend? Now consider how

you speak to yourself. What do you say to yourself every day when you
look in the mirror, when you are bathing or dressing or going

about your day? If you speak to yourself in a critical, judgmental

way, it's because you have learned to do this from others. You agreed to
treat yourself this way, then you practiced this habit until you
mastered it.

Now that you are aware of the agreement, you can choose to

break it by saying: "I no longer agree to treat myself with disrespect.
Every time a self-critical thought comes to mind, I will forgive the

Judge and follow this comment with words of praise, selfacceptance, and
love."

Make a list of at least four things you say to yourself about yourself
every day. Then review your list and decide whether these words are
kind, respectful, and loving. Treat yourself as you would

treat a queen or king, an innocent child, or your favorite pet. Choose
to be impeccable with your word. Self-love begins with selfrespect.

When you become impeccable with your word, your mind is no longer
fertile ground for words that come from black magic. Instead, it is
fertile for the words that come from love.

PUT AN END TO GOSSIP Are you aware of the destructive power of gossip?
Gossip is black magic because it spreads emotional poison, perpetuates
fear, and keeps others down. Consider the harm that has been done by
gossiping about yourself or about others. At

rst it may be di cult to avoid gossip entirely, but

eventually you will see how breaking the agreement to gossip will
transform your life. Are you ready to make a new agreement about the way
you communicate with others?

Take note of when, where, and with whom you engage in

gossip.

Do you also gossip about yourself ? How does gossip make you feel about
yourself ? Do you

said?

nd yourself feeling guilty for something you have

How does gossip a ect your relationships with other people? List four
reasons you enjoy gossiping about yourself or about

others.

List four compelling reasons to put an end to gossip. List four times
when gossiping caused needless su ering for you

or someone you know.

List four steps you can take to avoid gossiping or to discourage

others around you from gossiping (such as changing the subject, saying
something positive, walking away, or remaining silent). Break the
agreement to gossip, and make a new agreement to

be impeccable with your word.

Pay attention to your conversation with others. Stay aware and

stay awake. Refuse to engage in gossip.

Practice avoiding gossip for one day, then one week, then two

weeks, then an entire month.

Keep practicing until you break the habit of gossiping and

establish a new habit of sharing truth and love.

When we believe something, we assume we are right about it to the point
that we will destroy relationships in order to defend our position.

LET GO OF THE NEED TO DEFEND YOUR OPINIONS AND ALWAYS BE RIGHT Complete
the following sentences: I know that I'm right because ...

Other people are usually wrong because ... I need to prove that I'm
right because ...

It's important to defend my opinions and my point of view

because ...

Your opinion is nothing but your point of view. It is not necessarily
true.

List four times when defending your opinion caused emotional

drama in your relationships with others.

List four compelling reasons not to defend your opinions or

always be right.

Make a commitment to spend one hour, then four hours, then

one day, then one week at a time without defending your opinions.

Being impeccable with your word is the correct use of your energy; it
means to use your energy in the direction of truth and love for
yourself.

USE THE POWER OF YOUR WORD IN THE DIRECTION OF TRUTH AND LOVE Complete
the following sentences: I am not impeccable with my word when I ... I
could be impeccable with my word by ...

I can use the power of my word in the direction of truth by ... I can
use the word to share my love by ...

List four times when misuse of your word caused needless

su ering for you or someone you know.

List four compelling reasons to be impeccable with your word.

Make a new agreement with yourself to be impeccable with

your word, and write this agreement on paper.

Nurture your seeds of love by reading your written agreement

every day for at least four weeks or until you habit of being impeccable
with your word.

rmly establish the

Use the word to share your love. When you are impeccable with your word,
you feel good; you feel happy and at peace.

SYMBOLIZE THE POWER OF YOUR WORD Select an object to symbolize the power
of your word, and to remind you to be impeccable with your word. Be sure
to place the object

where you will see it every day: on your dresser, in your car, on your
desk, in your kitchen. It's important that the symbol be meaningful to
you. Here are some suggestions:

Imagine the word as a seed with the potential to produce an

entire

eld or forest of its own kind. Some seeds will create a

beautiful eld of owers or an enchanted forest of trees; others will

create a eld of weeds and thistles. (Any seed such as an acorn can
function as your symbol.) Imagine the word as a sword with two edges.
One edge

represents "truth" with the power to create a dream of heaven; the other
edge represents "lies" with the power to create a dream of hell. (Draw a
picture of a sword, or look for a miniature in a toy store.)

Imagine the word as a magical stone with the power to cast a

spell or to break a spell. One side of the stone is black; the other
side is white. (Any stone will do, and you can paint it yourself.) The

magical stone could also be a gemstone that you wear as a piece of
jewelry: a ring, a necklace, or a bracelet. If you select a piece of
jewelry, you can wear it every day.

Imagine the word as a musical note or a sound on a musical scale. Some
words that you play in your mind will bring you up and lift your spirit;
others will bring you down. (Draw a picture of musical notes or nd a
miniature musical instrument.)

AGREEMENT TO BE IMPECCABLE WITH MY WORD THIS AGREEMENT is made on
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ (date) for the purpose of

increasing my happiness and personal freedom. I am responsible for
creating my personal dream of heaven on earth, and it begins with the
power of my word.

I choose to be impeccable with my word. I promise to honor

myself, to speak with integrity, and to choose my words carefully. I
intend to use the power of my word in the direction of truth and

love. I will pay attention to how I use the word. I will take action

every day to keep my word impeccable. I will repeat this action until
the habit is rmly established and no longer requires my attention. The
symbol of my commitment to this agreement is \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_.
Signed: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ Witness:
\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

3

DREAMING The function of the human mind is to dream, but we have learned
to dream without awareness And he realized that everyone was dreaming,
but without awareness, without knowing what they really are. -- The
Smokey Mirror

From the Toltec perspective, your entire life has been a dream. You are
dreaming right now with the brain awake, and you also dream with the
brain asleep. I know this may be a little di cult to understand, but if
you use your imagination it will be very clear. Imagine a perfect mirror
that

re ects what exists outside of it. Of course, we cannot touch what is
inside the mirror because it's only an illusion. What we see inside the
mirror is a virtual reality, and we know that it's not real.

It's the same with the human mind. The retina inside the eye is just
like a perfect mirror. Everything you see right now is an image created
in the retina of your eye. The di erence between the mirror and your eye
is that behind the eye is the nervous system that

analyzes and interprets everything we perceive. The eye, the brain, the
mind work so perfectly together that we can swear the image is real. But
what we see inside our mind is a virtual reality created by images of
light. This re ection of light is the dream. Light reproduces every
image in our eye, it re ects every object, and because it can project an
image in such perfect detail, we don't notice that it's light we
perceive. The nervous system

doesn't notice that we are dreaming. Light creates the human mind with
all the di erent components including the emotions, and it is nothing
but a dream.

The dream is ongoing everywhere, not just in humans, but in plants, in
rocks, in everything because light puts all the information

that comes from Life inside each form of matter. Light is the messenger
of Life; it contains all information, all power, all

possibilities, and all potential of Life. Light comes from everywhere,
and lls everything. Di erent frequencies of light act as a mold or
blueprint for all the di erent forms of Life. There is only one living
being manifesting in billions of forms.

We perceive light that comes from outside us and that light creates the
frame of the dream, but we also perceive light re ected in the virtual
reality inside our mind. We perceive our own dream, which is also light.
When our brain is asleep, the dream has the tendency to change rapidly
because there is no frame. Whatever we put our attention onto, whoosh!
--- our dream changes instantly.

When our brain is asleep, everything is possible. We can y and do

all those wonderful things we cannot do when we are awake and the
reasoning mind makes our beliefs so rigid. When the brain is awake, we
give form and direction to the

whole creation, and we see it as a totality. With that frame we have a
notion of time and space; we think it's this day and this hour. The

reasoning mind creates the illusion of time and space to justify the
dream in our mind. Thinking is dreaming with a language; it is nothing
but the e ort of the mind to justify the dream. Time and space are an
illusion; they are in the virtual reality. All that exists is here and
now.

The old shamans would use hallucinogenic plants like peyote to distort
the perception of the brain and give you the awareness that you are
dreaming. But imagine the brain as a perfect computer. If

you pour a cup of co ee inside a computer, you will understand

what happens when the human brain is given hallucinogenic drugs. What
happens is that it malfunctions. The perception is no longer perfect;
the colors mix, the stability changes, and suddenly it is obvious that
the mind is running a program; it is dreaming.

Your brain, your eyes, your mind usually think so perfectly that

if you see colors mixing, the reasoning mind tries to justify it by
saying, "I see God; I am having a spiritual experience." But it's just a
malfunction, and it shows us that our brain can create the illusion of

a whole reality in this way. I never recommend taking drugs or using
power plants because they can hurt the brain, and this is not

the point. There is no need to hurt our brain to prove that we are
dreaming.

We are living in a world of billions of our kind who don't know they are
dreaming. Everyone is also participating in a bigger dream, a society
dream. Our dreams overlap and we each dream a part of

the entire dream, the dream of the planet, which is made by the
projection of billions of personal dreams. Each of us lives in a virtual
reality. We have no choice; the

mind is programmed to dream, and that can be so beautiful. If you

meet someone and you hook his attention, you can start exchanging
information, and soon you know a lot about that person's dream.

You learn about his friends, what he does, his favorite movies, sports,
you name it, depending on what that person projects to you. All those di
erent possibilities are there, and it's a whole distinct reality that is
ongoing and as real as any other one.

It can be very exciting when we understand that we are

dreaming. Why? Because as soon as we have the awareness that our

dream is made of light, then we also know that we can change as

fast as light, and our life starts changing right away. We know that we
can change our beliefs any time we need to change them because they are
no longer rigid. The worries in our life don't look

real anymore; we know that it's a dream and it can shift. All the
elements of the dream that used to be our knowledge, that used to be
trapped inside the belief system, are no longer rigid; they are not the
truth anymore, and we know that.

Once we understand that we are dreaming, knowledge doesn't control our
faith anymore. Instead, the opposite happens: our faith controls our
knowledge; our faith controls our agreements and beliefs. We accept that
it's our responsibility to change the dream if we don't like it, and we
surrender to being responsible. Once we understand that we are dreaming,
we know that

everybody around us is also dreaming, with or without awareness. Then we
realize that the point of view other people use to see the world has
nothing to do with us. At this point we no longer even try

not to take anything personally. We don't take anything personally

because we know others are dreaming, and it is only their point of view.
Of course, people around us will take things personally. They will use
their Book of Law to judge us and to judge everybody else,

but now we don't even try to defend ourselves against their Book of Law.
We know they are never going to believe what we say anyway unless they
change the way they dream.

We don't expect that people will understand us. They are still

ruling their lives by their personal Book of Law, and they are still
comparing notes with everybody else. We will understand them

because we used to be the same way, but they will not understand us.

At this point, we no longer make assumptions. We know it is a fact that
others are dreaming, and in their minds whatever they say

right now can change the next day or the next instant. The dreamer and
the dream are constantly changing and shifting, so how can we make
assumptions when we know that everything is changing? We also know that
we cannot make the assumption that others are

going to be what we want them to be. At this point, we only have

two choices: we love them the way they are and respect all the changes
in them, or we walk away. We are no longer attached to the outcome,
because we have our faith. Before we are aware that we are dreaming, we
make

assumptions constantly because knowledge has power over us. Once

we have power over knowledge, there's no need to make assumptions.

Knowledge

becomes

a

tool

that

we

use

to

communicate. We can ask and we can understand; we can express ourselves,
and we can listen to other people express their own

dream. At this point, our whole life becomes magic. Miracles happen, and
they happen all the time. There is only one thing we can use to guide
our actions, reactions, and our interactions with all those

dreamers who don't have awareness, and that is our integrity. Our
integrity is who we really are, the totality of our own self.

Those who are ruling their lives by the Book of Law, have the

illusion of integrity, but they don't really have it. Every time they
reject themselves, it's a lack of integrity. Every time they believe
they are not perfect, it's a lack of integrity. Every time they su er,

every time they get jealous or angry or envious, every time they

create a drama, they are going against themselves, and it's a lack of
integrity.

We recover our integrity when we are impeccable with our

word. We lost our integrity the

rst time we broke our word, the

rst time we went against our own self. Self-betrayal is what breaks

our integrity. From that point on, all our loyalty was to the Book of
Law. Whatever goes against the Book of Law looks like it goes against
our integrity, but that is not exactly true because we are

using that book against our own self. We are using it for selfrejection,
for all those agreements that lead us into emotional drama.

Once we are aware that we are dreaming, the Book of Law is broken, we
recover our integrity, and we can feel it. Before the Book of Law is
broken, we are not following our integrity; we are

following the rules of the book. Concepts like guilt, blame, right,
wrong, loyalty, and patriotism for the country, all a ect us very

deeply because we believe in them. And this makes us very easy prey for
manipulation by the dream of the planet. Even concepts

like what is beautiful or ugly are agreements that control society and
later control the individual mind. We give our power to these
agreements, we become a slave to them; then other people use those
values to manipulate us. Once the Book of Law is broken, these values
are no longer a tool of manipulation between humans.

When you recover your integrity, you can no longer go to

someone and ask him for his approval, because you are asking for the
approval of his Book of Law. The only answer he can give you is
according to his Book of Law, which isn't any good to you. You need

to trust yourself. You cannot go to someone and say, "Is what I'm doing
right? Is what I'm doing wrong?" No. You are alone, and

thank God you are alone because it means you are free to be

yourself again, and your integrity will not allow you to go against
yourself. You will know that you have recovered your integrity

when you feel good, when you feel happy. Every time you don't feel

good it's the result of a self-judgment, and that judgment is using the
Book of Law to nd you guilty. Now you are ashamed of yourself, and
that's why you don't feel good. The Four Agreements help us to align
with our integrity. The

rst agreement, impeccability of the word, is completely aligned with

our integrity. The second and third agreements, don't take anything
personally, and don't make assumptions, give us immunity to the Book of
Law and to everybody else around us. With that immunity, we

can be assured that the outside dream will not choose our beliefs for us
again. And the fourth agreement, always do your best, is the engine that
moves us forward; it is the action.

The dream is alive, and it can change as fast as light, as fast as

Life. When our awareness is there --- in the light instead of the fog,
in our faith instead of our knowledge --- we recover our faith, our
will, and our power. And we

nd that we have the power to make

choices, to take risks, to project, to perceive, to interact, and to
master the dream. We can become a dream artist and create the most
beautiful masterpiece of art with the dream of our life.

To create a masterpiece instead of a nightmare, instead of

emotional dramas, can be very exciting. But if we are not aware that

it's a dream, there is no way to change the dream. Most people are

born, grow old, and die, and never notice that all of life is a dream,

so they become trapped in their own nightmare. When we live without this
awareness, something inside us is telling us all the

time, it is a dream, this can't be real. But we are not sure that it is
a dream; it could be real.

The reasoning mind is in the virtual reality, and it has no

awareness that it's in the virtual reality, so it tries to justify,
explain,

and make sense of everything. The reasoning mind always wants answers.
Even if the answers are wrong, those answers make us feel safe. That is
why humans make all those assumptions, create all

those theories, and all that knowledge that is completely untrue. Look
at the knowledge of European society ve or six hundred years

ago, and you see a lot of books explaining the world of the angels,

the world of the demons, life after death, going to heaven, and going to
hell.

That mythology is beautiful, that art is beautiful, but it's not truth.
It is nothing but mythology; it is candy for the reasoning mind

and it's far from the truth, but it provided a structure that made those
humans feel safe. Yet that knowledge was also used to judge

people, condemn people, and even to kill them. How many people

were killed during the Inquisition? How many people were burned to death
because they were believed to be witches or because they

didn't believe that the earth was the center of the universe? Humanity
has progressed a lot. Just by having the awareness that the whole
society is dreaming, you can see all the possibilities; you can see that
we are going in the right direction. But of course,

in order to change the whole society, we ourselves.

rst have to change

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING AWARENESS YOUR AUTHENTIC SELF
.............................................................................................................
.......

Once he knew what he really was, he looked around at other humans and
the rest of nature, and he was amazed at what he saw.

Your integrity is who you really are, what you really are, the totality

of your authentic self. Spend a few moments every day to get in touch
with the memory of what you are. Allow yourself to imagine the
possibility that you are made by a certain frequency of Light. Light is
the messenger of God; it contains all information, all possibilities,
and all power. Imagine that you are made of Light, of Spirit. There is
nothing you need to do. There is nothing you need to

be except what you really are. Remember what you are, and the dream of
your Life will have no limits.

PART TWO Mastering Transformation

4

THE SECOND ATTENTION Using your will and attention for the second time
Now it's up to you to choose what to believe and what not to believe.
You can choose to believe in anything, and that includes believing in
yourself.

The rst time our attention is used, we are innocent. As children we are
programmed to dream the way the outside dreams; we have no choice.
Someone either hooks our attention to teach us, or we focus

our attention to learn. The attention is that part of our mind that can
discriminate and concentrate on whatever we want to perceive. Where we
put our attention, is what we experience --- our personal dream. The
dream you are living right now is the result of the humans

around you hooking your attention and feeding you all of their beliefs.
If someone hooks your attention, you think it's your decision and will
to do it, but that decision is nothing but a habit; it's only a program.
It is just as if the outside pushes a button and everything inside you
knows what to do; it knows what reaction to have. We say that humans
have free will, but this is hardly true. Our will is controlled by the
dream of the planet; our attention is hooked by the outside dream, and
we follow the will of the outside. In the program mode, we push a button
and start walking; we push another button and we walk to the right, we
walk to the left, or we stop. Just by action--reaction we automatically
have the response ---

physical, emotional, all kinds of responses that are already in the
program. If we had free will, would we choose to be angry, or sad, or

envious? It's obvious to me that it's not our choice. Of course, we

can lie to ourselves and say, "I have free will; I can make a choice."
But every time we su er, that proves we don't have the power to

make a choice. If we had free will, we would never choose to be
victimized because when we are victimized, we are angry, we have all
that fear. If we had free will, we would never choose anything that
would hurt us, ever. And we would certainly never choose to hurt the
people that we love.

What the Toltec call the second attention is about learning to use

our attention for the second time to begin the transformation of our
dream. In the dream of the second attention, we control our attention
from the inside, escape the dream of the planet, and create

a brand new dream: our personal dream of heaven on earth. In the dream
of the second attention, we live in the same world, but with a di
erence. The di erence is that now we are no longer

innocent; we can choose to believe whatever we want to believe. Using
our awareness, we can focus our attention in our everyday life to
reprogram ourselves in our own way. In the dream of the second
attention, we

nd out that we are

responsible for our choices. What we agree to believe is our own choice,
not the choice of the images we think we are, not the choice from our
ego who pretends to know everything, but a choice from

our own integrity. In the new dream, we only put our faith in agreements
that support Life, which add to our joy, to our happiness, to our
freedom. We break the agreements based on lies,

and we make new agreements based on truth. The whole meaning

and perception of our dream changes because our agreements have changed.
In the dream of the second attention, we nd that

everything is possible. But to dream this way, we control our attention
from the inside.

rst need to

Let's say someone calls my name, "Miguel." That hooks my attention and I
turn and say, "What do you want?" That person says what she wants, and
if I'm interested, if I care about it, I'm there. But I make the choice
whether I care about it or not. The moment

I'm not interested, I just unhook and say, "Forget it," and my attention
goes in other directions.

That's the reason some people think I have a bad memory. It's

not because I'm getting old or something else going on with my brain.
What happens is that people hook my attention, and I put my attention on
what they tell me. If whatever they say is not aligning with my dream,
with my beliefs, then I see their dream and share a

conversation, but their dream is not my business, and I let it go. I
unhook my attention and I am living in the moment. I'm not living

in the past; I'm not carrying those thought forms any longer. A few
minutes later, I just forget what the conversation was about because
there is no place in my dream for all the drama humans create. If
someone asks me what that person said, I don't remember. It was long ago
even though it was just that morning.

But let's say I nd something very interesting. My attention is hooked,
and I'm there in every moment because that is my choice.

Then, yes, the outside can hook my attention, but what hooks my
attention and keeps my attention --- that's another story. I will not
give my attention just because the outside requires my attention. It's
not necessary for me to be interested in what someone else is doing. I
will not go against myself by keeping my attention where I don't

want it to be. Whatever I do, I'm going to be there in a way that is

interesting to me, in a way that I can do my best because I want to,

not because I have to; in a way that ful lls me more, and is better for
other people too.

Of course, this doesn't mean the outside dream has given up;

the outside dream is programmed to dream the dream of hell. The outside
dream still has all that knowledge, all those opinions, and it will try
to put those seeds in our mind and hook us again from the outside. One
of the easiest ways is through gossip. The agreement

humans have with one another is to interact using the transference of
emotional poison. How do we transfer emotional poison from one person to
another? By hooking the attention of the other person.

If we have a lot of anger, for example, we know the way to feel better
is to release the anger. But we have learned that to release the anger,
we need to hook someone's attention. By hooking someone's attention and
expressing and venting the anger, we feel better, but now the other
person has that poison. Now the other person feels the anger, or the
jealousy, or whatever emotional poison was sent.

By hooking the attention, almost any kind of energy can be transferred
from one mind to another mind, including love. Humans

are always searching for someone whose attention they can hook and
manipulate because we were all domesticated to compete for the control
of one another's attention. That's why you see the war of

control in human relationships. It's a war between the inside dream and
the outside dream --- a war between humans and the dream of the planet
over who will control the attention. The outside dream controls the
personal dream by hooking the attention of whoever doesn't have free
will. It can and will strike

hard even at those who do have free will. In any moment we can be hooked
by the outside dream. If this happens, the key is to unhook

ourselves as fast as we can and keep the awareness. For example: Imagine
that I said to you, "You're a liar." If you believe it, your attention
gets hooked, and it's a sign that you really believe what you're
hearing. Just because I said that, I put your

attention in a wound that you have. If you control your attention from
the inside, you see the wound, and you can use your attention to shift
your belief. In this moment, you can choose to no longer believe you are
a liar; your attention controls the belief, and you are

healed. An hour later, if I come to you and say, "You're a liar," you
have no reaction anymore, because it is no longer your belief. But if
you get hurt, it's because you still have that wound; it's because you
believe me.

Without free will, your beliefs control your attention. If you

control your attention from the inside, you decide when your

attention is hooked by the outside and you recover free will. Once you
recover free will, your attention controls your beliefs.

Everybody around you is a mirror that is going to re ect your wounds.
Whoever comes and lets you know where your wounds are

is doing you a big favor. That person is putting your attention on the
place where you have a wound, but perhaps you didn't know

you had one. And if you have free will and your attention controls your
beliefs, just by putting your awareness on the wound, you can shift it.
You can say, "Oh, thank you for being a mirror and letting

me see my wounds." Whoever crosses you becomes the best mirror, the best
way for

you to measure your own evolution. You don't know how well you

are doing before you have the challenge. When it's just yourself, it's

hard to see. You can think you are doing so well, and you can go to an
ashram and stay there for spend

ve years. Maybe you meditate and

ve years not eating meat, not having sex, and doing other

things to transform your life. You feel very good about yourself, but
then someone comes and crosses you, and boom! You need another

ve years in that ashram. In a situation like that, if you don't react,
you see your own

evolution. You can see that the way you used to be is no longer true.

You observe it and think, "Wow, I'm doing well. I'm in a situation where
you are going against me, and look at me, I'm happy. I even love you."

We don't need to escape from life; we don't need to deny our own nature.
What we need is complete awareness and selfacceptance. We need to learn
to make our own choices and

nally

control our will from the inside. With that, if someone crosses us,

we just shift our attention and recover our free will. That is what
makes us a dream master. Where we choose to put our attention is what
creates the miracle.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING TRANSFORMATION THE DREAM OF THE SECOND
ATTENTION
.............................................................................................................
.......

One way to change your beliefs is to focus your attention on all those
agreements and beliefs, and change the agreements with yourself. In
doing this, you are using your attention for the second time, thus
creating the dream of the second attention or the new dream.

Are you aware of how you use your attention? Imagine what your new dream
will look like when you create it the way that you

choose. What does your new dream say about how you choose to treat
yourself? What does it say about how you choose to relate to

other people, to other forms of Life, to God? In the dream of the second
attention, you have the right to be happy, the right to express your
creativity, the right to have abundance, the right to be who you really
are.

The Book of Law practice ideas at the end of Chapter One

focused on identifying the self-limiting, fear-based beliefs that limit

your personal freedom and rob you of your happiness. By now, you have
taken an inventory of many of these beliefs and agreements, and through
this process you have begun the transformation. Now you are going to
rewrite your Book of Law by creating a new set of agreements based on
love and truth instead of fear and lies.

Use a brand new journal to record the beliefs and agreements

you will choose in the new dream of your life. Here are some title ideas
for your journal:

The Dream of the Second Attention The Art of Dreaming My New Dream of
Life My New Book of Law

Just as you did before, create chapter headings for at least four
important areas of your life:

Personal Agreements: Your Body and Your Self Social Agreements: Family
and Friends

Spiritual Agreements: Life and God Financial Agreements: Work and Career
You may want to use the same headings, words, and

descriptions that you chose for your

rst Book of Law. After you

enter the chapter headings in your journal, consider what you choose to
believe about each of these areas of your life.

Go back and review all the self-limiting, fear-based beliefs you

identi ed earlier, and the new agreements you wrote to replace

each one of these beliefs. Then consider how you can transform your
habits and routines by controlling your attention from the inside.

You have to know which agreements you want to change before you can
change them.

To change an agreement, focus your attention on the agreement you want
to change. Only you know which agreements are not working for you.

Begin by asking yourself the following questions: What areas of my life
present a challenge for me at the

moment?

What speci c problem do I want to resolve? What unpleasant emotions am I
feeling?

What actions or choices are leading me to these unpleasant

feelings?

What agreements have I made that support these actions?

What actions can I take to change the reaction? What agreements would
support these actions?

Look at your answers to the above questions. Even if an action

appears to go against someone else, if it makes you feel guilty,
ashamed, or unhappy, it goes against you too. Here is an example:

The area of my life that is most challenging for me at the

moment is being a parent.

The speci c problem I want to resolve is to be a better parent to

my children.

The unpleasant emotion I am feeling is guilt. The actions I am taking
that lead me to this feeling are: 1. I am yelling at my children when
they don't listen to me. 2. I spend most of my time taking care of
chores, and I don't spend quality time with my children.

The agreements I have made that support these actions are: 1. I have
agreed that it's okay to yell at my children when they don't listen to
me.

2.  I have agreed that it's okay to let other things pull my attention
    and keep me from spending quality time with my children.

The actions I can take that would change the reaction are: 1. I can stop
yelling at my children.

2. I can spend more time with my children. The agreements that support
these actions are: 1. I don't agree that it's okay to yell at my
children. I choose to speak to my children in a rm but loving tone, even
when I am upset with them.

2.  I don't agree that it's okay to let other things take my attention
    away from my children. I choose to spend quality time with my
    children every day.

Remember, you achieve the Mastery of Transformation by changing

the agreements that make you su er, and reprogramming your own mind, in
your own way. Another way to do this is to adopt

alternative agreements such as The Four Agreements, and make them your
personal code of conduct. Using the above example, go through each of
The Four Agreements and ask yourself what actions

you would take as a parent if you were living your life by these
principles.

We can declare a war against the Parasite, a war against the Judge and
the Victim, a war for our independence, a war for the right to use our
own mind and our own brain.

DECLARE A WAR AGAINST THE PARASITE The decision to adopt The Four
Agreements is a declaration of war

to regain your freedom from the Parasite, which is the Judge, the
Victim, and the Book of Law. Write the following statement out

three times, and place each copy of the declaration where it will remind
you of your commitment to personal freedom: "I declare a war against my
Parasite for the freedom to use my

own mind and body, for the freedom to become the architect of my

own life, to design the life of my dreams, and to create a masterpiece
of art."

The old agreements that rule our dream of life are the result of
repeating them over and over again. To adopt The Four Agreements, you
need to put repetition in action. Repetition makes the master.

TOOLS FOR TRANSFORMATION Take a moment to consider how you memorize a
phone number.

The number doesn't get stored in your memory until you agree to store
it. Once you agree, you use your will and your attention to

commit the number to memory. Keep this process in mind as you create the
dream of the second attention. Use the tools of intention, attention,
action, and repetition: Intention: Attention: Action:

Set your intention; make a commitment to change the agreement. This
paves the way for action.

Learn to control your attention from the inside.

Be aware that so many things in the outside dream will compete for your
attention.

Take action. Without action, there will be no change, no growth, no
reward.

Repetition:

Practice and practice the action until the new

agreement is rmly established and programmed in your memory. Repetition
makes the master.

For example: Intention: Attention:

I intend to master The Four Agreements. I will pay attention to my
thoughts, feelings, and actions each day.

Action:

I will take the following actions every day to ensure that I keep my new
agreements:...

Repetition:

I will repeat these actions for at least four weeks.

Just like hell, heaven is a place that exists within our mind. It is a
place of joy, a place where we are happy, where we are free to love and
to be who we really are. We can reach heaven while we are alive; we
don't have to wait until we die.

HEAVEN ON EARTH What is your idea of heaven on earth? Have you ever
taken the time to consider this? Describe your dream in full detail. Are
you aware of what gives you the greatest joy? I feel the greatest joy
whenever I...

Are you aware of what inspires you, or what makes your spirit soar? I am
most inspired whenever I...

THE LAST JUDGMENT Spend the next twenty minutes using your imagination
to dream a new dream.

Imagine how your life would be if today was the day of your

last judgment; if after today, you no longer judged yourself, and you no
longer judged other people.

Imagine if the voice of knowledge in your head no longer talked

to you; if that voice in your head left you alone, and you only followed
your heart.

Imagine if the voice of knowledge was silent because you don't

need to think about what you know; you don't need to learn to be what
you are.

Imagine if you could express what you are with joy instead of

judgment.

What does it feel like? Capture the feeling and remember the feeling.
This is the beginning of a new dream.

5

ACTION--REACTION Using The Four Agreements to change your
actions--reactions Dream masters create a masterpiece of life; they
control the dream by making choices. Everything has consequences, and a
dream master is aware of the consequences.

Every action has a reaction, and for all of our lives we repeat our
actions and su er the same reactions. Perhaps we cannot see the action
or the choices when we make them, but we are always going to see the
reaction, the result of what we do. Many times there are things in our
lives that we don't like, that we want to change, but we make the same
mistakes, the same choices, expecting that the result will be di erent.
Well, it will not be di erent. The only way to change your life is to
change the choices, to change the actions. If there is something in your
life that you don't like, rst you have to be aware that it is the result
of something that

you do. It's the result of a choice that you made. Then if you take one
step back and focus your attention on what is happening just before that
result, you will nd what you did that isn't working, what you did that
caused the result you don't want. Once you nd out what action you took,
the next step is to

forgive the reaction and change the choice, change the action, and see
what the reaction is. If you don't like the result again, you change it
again and again until you have the result you want. Perhaps you cannot
control what is going to happen around you, but you can certainly
control your own reaction. Your reaction is the clue to having a
wonderful life. Why? Because what makes you happy or unhappy is not what
is happening around you, but

how you choose to react to it. If you can learn to change your own
reactions, then you can change your habits and routines, change the
program, and change your life. Imagine that ten years ago you made a big
mistake in the eyes

of everybody. Everybody judged you harshly, and you judged yourself
harshly also. But just because you made a mistake, does that mean you
should su er for the rest of your life? This is not fair. Your reaction
is that you live with shame, with guilt, and low self-

esteem; your reaction is that you feel you are worthless and you want to
end your life, and perhaps you don't even know why. Well, take a step
back, and you will

nd out why. It's because

you are still taking the same action, and that leads to the same
reaction. You think you are still su ering for what happened ten years
ago, but that is not true. The truth is that you are su ering for

what happened a minute ago, or thirty seconds ago. The excuse for your
su ering is "I made a terrible mistake ten years ago." The truth is that
you judged yourself thirty seconds ago. If you

nd that you are living your life in shame or guilt right

now, look one step before you felt guilt, and you will see that you
judged yourself. What was the action--reaction? The action was
selfjudgment; the action was self-rejection. The reaction is that you nd

yourself guilty, and you believe it. Your faith is there and your faith

says, "I need to be punished." Thy will be done; you are going to be
punished.

Now let's see how The Four Agreements can help you break the

old agreement to judge and punish yourself, and create a new agreement
to forgive yourself.

Thirty seconds ago when you judged yourself, you were not

impeccable with your word. When you judged yourself, you used your word
against yourself.

Thirty seconds ago, you took it personally --- something that

happened ten years ago! It is a ghost in your mind, it is no longer
true, but you took it personally. Thirty seconds ago, you made a big
assumption that everybody remembers what you did ten years ago, and that
everybody is still condemning you.

Thirty seconds ago, you didn't do your best, because the action

you took made you feel miserable.

Now you know you feel miserable because thirty seconds ago you judged
yourself. If you don't want to feel miserable, you have to change the
action that caused the reaction. First, you have to be

impeccable with your word. You really make a commitment to be
impeccable. Whenever you have the memory of what happened ten years ago,
instead of judging yourself, you can change the action and say, "I
forgive myself." Then the reaction will also change. Isn't

that logical? It is just common sense. "I forgive myself." Now you are
impeccable with your word. Second, you will not take anything
personally. That means even

if you made a mistake, and other people react and judge, it's nothing
personal. You know that they live in their own dream. Third, you don't
make assumptions about what other people think of you. There is no way
you will ever know what is in their

head or how they dream.

Finally, you are going to do your best. But there is only one way to do
your best, and that is doing it. Not saying "I will do it," or "I will
try." It's the action that will make the di erence.

The action is rst to use your awareness, to be aware that if you are
unhappy, it is because of an action you took. Second, to use your
attention to focus on the action--reaction and identify what action you
took. Look one step before you began to feel unhappy, and you

will see what the action is. Third, to shift your attention to The Four
Agreements and apply them to every action--reaction. Using this process,
every action-- reaction of your life can be shifted like this:

awareness, attention, action--reaction. The result is very powerful. My
suggestion is to keep focusing your attention through your

integrity, and make choices that don't go against yourself. By focusing
your attention and following your integrity, you can measure your
choices by your action--reaction. This choice comes

from love; that choice comes from fear. This choice makes me happy; that
choice makes me su er.

The di cult part is to be aware. Everything we learn from the outside
dream goes against awareness; we practice every agreement

we create, and our agreements go against our awareness. But we can also
practice awareness until we recover awareness. To recover our awareness,
we have to break our agreements with knowledge, and rea rm our
commitment to honor The Four Agreements.

The Four Agreements go against the majority of the agreements

in our Book of Law and help us to detach the information from the
Parasite. They will help break the code of the program in our mind,

but they need to be practiced, and the only way to do that is by
focusing our attention.

To change our agreements, we rst have to know which agreements we want
to change. Then we have to have enough personal power to change our
agreements because it is not our

reasoning mind that can change them. The way to do it is to focus

our attention on the agreement we want to change, and use the power of
our word, our intent, to make a new agreement that we

will not believe the old agreement. If we don't believe something, we
agree that it's not true, and we unlearn that agreement.

For every agreement we break, we need to replace it with a

new agreement. If there is an agreement that makes us su er, and we
break it but don't replace it with another agreement that will make us
happy, the old agreement will come back. If we withdraw our faith in the
old agreement, and invest it in the new agreement,

then the old agreement is gone forever and now we believe the new
agreement.

Practicing the new agreements in our lives is how our best

becomes better. Once we learn a new agreement, we don't need to focus
our attention on it any longer; it becomes automatic, and our

response is always the same. All those old agreements we have that

rule our dream of life are the result of repeating them over and over
again.

Let's look at an emotional routine like getting angry. Anger is

fear with a mask, and at a certain point in your interaction with

someone, you were afraid and got angry. Your anger pushed that person
away, he left you alone, and you found that getting angry

worked. The same situation happened again and again, and anger

became a routine. It became an agreement with yourself that you

need anger to feel safe. Later you discover that anger pushes people
away even when you don't want it to, and you are alone. People don't
like you because of your anger, but by then you forget why you were
angry in the

rst place. You don't know why anger has

become a normal reaction for you or why every time you are afraid

you get angry. The routine has been repeated thousands of times and it
becomes a normal reaction for you; you are conditioned to behave that
way. That is the challenge: to be aware, to change the routine,

to change the action. Again, the rst step is always to be aware and to
practice awareness until you master awareness. Without

awareness, there is no way for you to change your choices or change your
actions. With awareness, you focus your attention, put repetition in
action, and change your agreements and routines.

The repeated action of using The Four Agreements will break

many of the agreements that make life so di cult and unpleasant. It

takes a lot of time and courage because it's easier just to take things
personally, make assumptions, and react the way you react all the

time. But that leads you into emotional pain, and your reaction is to
send the poison back to other people and increase the drama. When you
can stop the drama at the very beginning, you solve the problem right
away, and there is nothing else to do after that.

In the beginning, create something to remind you to keep your

attention on this process and to practice it again and again until you
master it. Once you start, you will see the results, and it gets easier

and easier. Eventually there will come a time when it becomes automatic.
Once it becomes a habit, the transformation of your life

starts happening fast, and you start changing as fast as life changes.
You see the changes and your self-respect increases, your enthusiasm
rises, and self-acceptance returns to your life.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING TRANSFORMATION AWARENESS, ATTENTION,
ACTION--REACTION
.............................................................................................................
.......

You need a very strong will in order to adopt The Four Agreements, but
if you can begin to live your life with these agreements, the
transformation in your life will be amazing. You will see the drama of
hell disappear right before your very eyes.

DIRECT YOUR OWN DRAMA Think of a recent event in your life that caused a
lot of emotional

pain. Now try to imagine this event from a "distant" perspective;

that is, try to detach yourself emotionally from the actions--reactions
that are part of this event.

Once you create some emotional distance between you and the

event, imagine yourself as the director of a dramatic play in which

the same scene is unfolding upon a stage. As you view the stage from the
balcony of the theater, you can clearly observe the part

each character has in the play. You also have the power to direct their
actions--reactions in any way you choose.

Make a list of the cast of characters involved in this event. Who

took the action that reaction?

rst triggered the drama? What was the

Here are some additional questions to consider: Who had the leading role
in the play? What was your role in this drama? What actions did you
take?

What were the reactions of the other people involved in the play? How
did you react to their actions? What other actions did you take? What
were the results?

Now consider the above information from the perspective of applying The
Four Agreements:

Were you impeccable with your word? Did you take anything personally?
Did you make assumptions? Did you do your best?

Instant replay: what might have happened if...

You had been impeccable with your word? You had not taken things
personally? You had not made assumptions? You had done your best?

What might have happened if all the other characters in the drama ...

Had been impeccable with their word?

Had not taken things personally? Had not made assumptions? Had done
their best?

Use your imagination to envision this event so that: (1) you can

practice mastering awareness of your part in the drama, and (2) you can
practice mastering transformation of the dream by using The Four
Agreements to create a more satisfying outcome.

Can you imagine yourself avoiding this kind of drama in the

future? If not, why not?

Think of another emotionally painful experience and repeat the

steps above. Practice transforming these events in your imagination with
The Four Agreements as your guiding principles. The next time anything
threatens to sabotage your happiness, you will be prepared to use The
Four Agreements to transform your

actions--reactions and experience a whole new dream. Keep a record of
each dramatic event in your journal so you can track your progress.

6

ATTACH--DETACH Surrendering to the angel of death The Parasite wants us
to carry the past with us, and that makes it so heavy to be alive. When
we try to live in the past, how can we enjoy the present?

Everything that exists is in an eternal transformation. Everything in
nature, all of creation, is changing. Creation is happening in the
moment. It has no beginning, it has no end; it is ongoing. Energy is
always transforming because it is alive. Life is the force that makes
the transformation of energy

possible. The force of Life that opens a ower is the same force that
makes us grow older. Look at your physical body, and just imagine how
you used to look when you were ve years old compared with now. It still
is you, but the body is completely di erent. It has changed. The dream
of the planet is also changing, but more slowly than the personal dream.
Even matter, the frame of the dream, is always

changing. Some things change so slowly that we don't notice them
changing, but in one year we notice the change, or in ten years we
notice the change. The buildings we live in are changing, although very
slowly. The trees and the mountains --- all of nature is changing
because Life is passing through everything and everything

is reacting to Life. Our personal dream, the whole interaction between
the dream

and the dreamer, is constantly shifting and changing. But in the virtual
reality in our mind, we try to stop things from changing. Humans get
attached to the dream; we resist the transformation of Life. And this
attachment, this resistance, creates emotional pain.

By resisting the transformation of Life, humans create the illusion of
death; we su er from every "loss" again and again. Humans have a
powerful memory and we witness our own dream. In our memory we attach to
what is past, we try to bring it back to life, and in the virtual
reality we succeed. We create a whole movie in our mind that we can
repeat as often as we want to. If we close our eyes and use our
imagination,

we can see the movie again and again in the same way, from our

point of view, of course, with our own interpretation that is only true
for us. We modify our memories and distort the images; what we remember
is not the way things really happened, but the movie keeps playing in
our mind. Life is what is happening; death is what is not happening. A

moment after something happens, it is already dead. Whatever happened to
us as a child, in school, with friends, in love

relationships --- whatever was true thirty years ago --- is no longer
true. Our whole personal history is dead, but we become so attached that
we bring back the ghost in our mind. We carry the memory of

our whole life knowing that it is dead, that it is no longer true, and
yet it a ects our everyday life. It is true that the memory happened,
but it's also true that it is not happening anymore. It is gone; it
isn't real. If it was real, it's no longer real.

In our dream, we keep death alive because we attach to what is dead, but
death doesn't really exist. Only Life, only creation, exists. The past
is just an illusion. The angel of death teaches us to live in

the present moment, which is the only moment we truly have. When we
resist transformation and want to live in the past, we are still

living in the present moment, but we are focused in a past dream.

By focusing our attention in a past dream, our attention is not in the
present, and we are not fully alive.

Toltec mythology tells us that the angel of death is always beside us,
ready to take everything away from us. Everything belongs to the angel
of death. Nothing is ours to keep, including our physical body. Knowing
this, we surrender to the angel of death and

accept the transformation of Life. The angel of death takes everything
away from us little by

little. But for everything the angel of death takes away, Life gives us

something new. If we become so attached to what the angel of death is
taking away, then we cannot receive the gifts of Life. What the Toltec
call "surrendering to the angel of death" can

also be called "detachment." Detachment doesn't mean that we stop

loving someone or something; it only means we accept that there is
nothing we can do to stop the transformation of Life. Detachment is

so powerful because when we learn to detach, we respect the forces

of nature, which means we also respect the changes in our own life. By
nature we are born with the capacity to adapt to transformation, to
adapt to constant change. When we are little

children, we always live in the present moment; we don't worry about the
future, and we don't care about the past. Instinctively we let go of
what is past, and we accept every gift that life brings. If we are
playing with a toy and we get bored, we let it go; we leave it in the
grass and we no longer care about that toy until it hooks our attention
again. If we lose the toy and it's no longer there, we turn our

attention

to

another

toy.

Little

children

accept

the

transformation of life, just as all animals do. Domestication teaches

us to try to live in the past, and to project into the future. After
domestication, humans hardly ever live in the present moment. One way to
practice surrendering to the angel of death is by

practicing what I call "attach--detach." Perhaps by calling it "attach--

detach" you can see that it is something you can practice in your daily
life. When something comes to you, you attach and enjoy it as intensely
as you can. As soon as the moment passes, you detach and let it go. You
don't need to pay attention to what is gone, to what is

already dead. When your attention is in the present, you aren't carrying
the burdens of the past. If you can master attachment and detachment,
you will keep

your attention in the present moment. With awareness and practice, you
are always going to enjoy your life because whatever is before you, you
are going to give 100 percent of your attention. You are

going to take all the action necessary to enjoy your life, and detach
from whatever is gone. For example: I may love a woman very deeply, but
as soon as I

want to own her, I am attached, and I don't want to let her go. No
matter what I do, she is free, and every time she walks away from me, if
I am attached, it's going to hurt. If I am detached, I respect her
freedom. She can do whatever she wants to do, and it doesn't hurt me at
all. By being detached, I respect my own freedom as well. When

you are around me, I enjoy your beauty and your presence, and I attach
to you. But when I walk out of the door and I do not see you,

then I detach because if I don't detach, it's going to hurt. The key is
to nd an equilibrium between attachment and detachment.

Attachment helps you to live your life intensely in the present

moment. With attachment you can increase your desire to

accomplish whatever you want to accomplish, and with detachment you
don't have to su er what you didn't accomplish. You simply let go. The
practice of attach--detach can be used with business, with

homes, with cars, with pets, with everything. But it's even more

important with knowledge. Humans become very attached to knowledge. We
are so attached to what we believe that we don't

want to let go of our beliefs even if these beliefs are not true at all.
Even if our beliefs make us su er and create a big drama in our life,
they also make us feel safe because it's a behavior that we know so
well. For all of our life we have carried a corpse with us. That corpse

is what we believe we are; it is the human form and all those distorted
images we identify with. It is dead and heavy and it rules

our life, but we don't want to let it go. We know our limitations, we
know how to su er, we know how to react with jealousy, with anger, and
all that emotional drama makes us feel secure. As we

said before, letting go of what we know, of what we believe, always
creates a little fear and anxiety because we are going into unknown
territory.

We don't have to attach to our beliefs. If we are not attached to

our beliefs and a better concept comes to us, we can let go of the old

concept, adopt the new concept, and improve our life much faster. We can
let go of the distorted images we identify with. We can

detach from the agreements and beliefs that limit the expression of our
creativity and our love. This frees our energy to create a new dream.
And what we create is a masterpiece of art: our own life.

.............................................................................................................
.......

PRACTICE IDEA FOR MASTERING TRANSFORMATION ATTACH--DETACH
.............................................................................................................
.......

Yes, you are going to have memories of the parasite --- of the Judge,
the Victim, and what you used to believe --- but the Parasite will be
dead.

Make a list of everything that you feel a strong attachment to,
including people, things, events, feelings, agreements, and beliefs.

How much energy do you spend trying to resist change or transformation?
If you have ever tried to paddle a boat upstream,

you know how much energy is wasted by going against the currents of the
stream. To resist transformation is to spend energy ghting against the
current instead of owing with it. Consider the following questions about
the items on your list of attachments:

How much emotional and physical energy is required each day

to maintain your attachments?

If you could assign a price up to \$1000 for each attachment,

what does each one cost you?

Is this really how you want to spend your energy? What else could you do
with the energy you invest in your

attachments?

Are you ready to practice attach--detach with any of the items on your
list of attachments? Start with an object you own that you

adore and feel an attachment to. On a scale of one to ten, with number
one being total attachment and number ten being total detachment, how
would you rate your attachment to this object? On the attach--detach
scale, I would rate this object ...
1...2...3...4...5...6...7...8...9...10 If you selected number ve,
perhaps you experience a good equilibrium between attachment and
detachment. You really enjoy this object and "attach" when it hooks your
attention, but if it were

damaged or taken away, you could "detach" without su ering through weeks
or years of regret. If the number you selected falls below the number

ve, you may want to practice a little

detachment. Begin by listing the reasons you believe you are attached to
the object.

Here are some examples: It was a gift from someone who is special to me.
It is one of a kind; there is none other like it in the world. It cost a
lot of money. It is very old and irreplaceable (an antique or
collectible). Now consider how much energy you spend each month on your
attachment to this object. How much of your attention and physical
energy is spent ... Protecting this object from other people?

Keeping this object in perfect condition? Paying for maintenance or
protection of this object? Worrying about this object for whatever
reason? Look at your answers to the above list. Is your attachment

based on fear? For example: fear that this object can never be

replaced if it's lost; fear that you will lose the good feelings you

associate or "attach" to this object; fear that you won't ever have the
money to buy another object like this; fear that if you do let go of
your attachment, something terrible might happen; fear that you have to
control Life because you cannot trust Life.

Try to remember a time in your life when something you were

attached to was lost or taken away from you. What did Life give to

you in return for what was lost? What personal qualities, such as

compassion for others, did you develop as a result of this experience?

DETACHING FROM YOUR BELIEFS Go back to your Book of Law and look at the
list of fear-based agreements you want to change. Are you attached to
any of these beliefs and agreements? If so, what purpose do these
agreements serve? It is up to you to choose the kind of knowledge you
attach to.

Set your intention to practice detaching from the knowledge that

goes against you or anyone else. Just imagine all of the energy and
personal power you will reclaim!

ZOOM IN, ZOOM OUT Think of a problem in your life that has caused you to
worry or su er. Imagine that you can view your life through the lens of
a

magical camera. When you zoom in, you see and feel every detail and
facet of your life; anything that touches your life comes into focus
within the frame of the view nder.

Imagine that you can also zoom out whenever you choose in

order to see the larger picture of your life. In the zoom-out mode,

your focus is no longer on all the details. The rst thing you see is the
house you live in from hundreds of feet above the ground. In the
zoom-out mode, you observe ever-widening panoramic views of rst

the city where you live, then the country, then the continent, until
suddenly you are staring at the earth from outer space.

Pause for a moment to consider your life from this perspective.

Your life and all your troubles are a tiny speck on the face of the
earth. All your dreams, all your desires, all your hopes and fears are
there in that speck on earth. You are there in the midst of billions of

people just like you who share similar emotions and dreams. Stay in the
zoom-out mode, and continue on your journey into outer space

until you can see all the planets in our solar system. Keep going

farther and farther until the entire Milky Way is visible from
lightyears away. Who are you? What are you? Where is your place in this
vast

universe? Why do humans su er over so many small things in life

when there is a universe of beauty and wonder to behold? When we
consider the span of eternity, and the entire history of humanity,

our life is over in a mere fraction of time. How will we choose to spend
it? What will we invest our energy in?

Keep zooming out until you detach completely from your

problem and can see that it is insigni cant in the greater scheme of

Life. Remind yourself that every problem carries the seeds of
opportunity to learn, to love, to grow in awareness, and simply to be
happy to be alive. When we attach to an object, to our beliefs, to a
person we

love, it is just as if we are stuck in the zoom-in mode, and all we can
see is the smallest part of Life. We can only see our own life, our

own problems; all our worries and attachments come into focus and

ll the entire frame of our dream. As we zoom out, our problems

represent a smaller and smaller percentage of our entire universe, and
we nd that they really don't require much of our attention at all.

The next time you

nd yourself focusing incessantly on a

problem, imagine zooming out with your magical camera. Detach from all
the details, and put your attention on the wider picture of

your life. Remember that nothing in life is truly serious. Imagine that
you can enjoy every person, every material possession, every event in
your life as a magical experience that continues to unfold.

Zoom out and keep going farther and farther into space until

the cord that keeps you attached to your fears nally snaps. As soon as
you detach from the fear, you detach from the problem, you detach from
the outcome, and you are free. You are

oating

e ortlessly in the stream of Life. When you have no fear, you have

no resistance. And when you have no resistance, the solution to

your problem is there in the Light, and it comes to you. The solution to
every problem of humanity is in the Light.

You are alive, you are free, and you are powerful. You are not a

victim of your beliefs, your desires, your society, or your
circumstance. You are an active participant in the art of dreaming.

PART THREE Living The Four Agreements

7

A DIALOGUE WITH DON MIGUEL The Four Agreements were created to assist
you in the Art of Transformation, to help you break the limiting
agreements, gain more personal power, and become stronger.

THE FOUR AGREEMENTS Question: You say that practicing The Four
Agreements is the best way to make a transformation in your life. If we
are using these tools and practicing The Four Agreements, what if
something doesn't happen? don Miguel: If you do it, it will happen. If
you practice, it happens. Question: If we follow The Four Agreements,
what signs will show us that we are changing? don Miguel: First, you
will see changes in your personal life, in the

way you feel about yourself, including changes in the way you judge
yourself, the way you carry your guilt, your shame, your anger, your
jealousy. You can measure your progress by your own happiness. If

you are happy, if you feel good about yourself, that means you have
improved a lot. You can see progress when you are no longer afraid to
say the truth, when you can say, "I want this instead of that," or when
you no longer say, "Why even try? It will never work; I always lose." Of
course, you will need mirrors to see yourself also, and the best kind of
mirrors are the people who challenge you. An example:

You have a problem with your boss at work, and the situation may be the
same as before, but now you see less drama in your reaction;

you react less to other people's points of view, to other people's
poison. You are happy in your world, even with that boss. The challenges
in life help you to measure your progress. If you don't have challenges,
how do you know if you are evolving? It's the

action--reaction that makes the di erence. It is not about mentally
saying, "I know that." Who cares if you know or don't know

something? What is more important is to take the action, to be alive, to
be yourself.
.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: When I

rst read The Four Agreements, I was so excited

about using these principles in my life. But now I look around and

see the people around me living in their own hells, and it's

discouraging. How do I keep my enthusiasm when I am surrounded by so
many people who are in an old dream? don Miguel: If you know The Four
Agreements, by now you know that you don't have to take personally the
way other people dream; you know that their dream has nothing to do with
you. But if you

really want to help other people, you can share The Four Agreements with
them. If they know your personal mythology, and

if they agree with you, very soon you can share that awareness, and have
agreements to support one another. But if they don't have the

awareness, they never will try to change, and it's not up to you to try
to change them.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Are there any belief systems that The Four Agreements

are not compatible with? I was raised in a very religious family. Do I
need to abandon my religion to follow The Four Agreements, or is there a
way to incorporate them into my religion?

don Miguel: It doesn't matter what religion or philosophy you have; The
Four Agreements can be applied by anyone, in any religion or in any
philosophy in the world. The messenger is completely neutral; it is not
giving you a philosophy or a religion to

follow. It is not telling you how to live your life if you want to be
safe or don't want to be condemned. The information can go in

many di erent directions because it's based on awareness; it's based

on common sense. The Four Agreements can be used to help you raise your
children, to improve the relationship with your beloved, your

parents, anyone. They can help you to explore and adopt alternative
beliefs, but you will transform your dream in your way, not mine. I am
not interested in changing your concepts or beliefs; this is up to you.
Imposing our will on others only creates more dogmas, more

separation, more excuses for war. This is not what we want. We want to
be happy, we want to be ourselves, and this is a very simple way.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: The Four Agreements have helped me so much. I would

love to be involved in helping children learn these agreements so they
can avoid a lot of the su ering most adults have gone through. Do you
have any thoughts on this?

don Miguel: Someone recently asked me, "Miguel, why don't you work with
children?" And my answer was, "They have parents." The

answer is to work with the parents and to work with the teachers to

apply The Four Agreements. Then the adults will domesticate the children
in a di erent way. There is a program starting in Colorado that will
share The Four

Agreements with parents and teachers, who will work together to
introduce it to the children. If this program works, then it will spread
to other schools. If we domesticate our children with a

di erent kind of knowledge, both at home and at school, a new generation
of people will take control of the whole society in the future. The
whole dream will change even faster.

BELIEFS AND AGREEMENTS We didn't choose these beliefs, and we may have
rebelled against them, but we were not strong enough to win the
rebellion. The result is surrender to the beliefs with our agreement.

Question: When we try to change our beliefs, and we say to ourselves, "I
am beautiful, I am smart," aren't these still beliefs that we are just
choosing to make us happy?

don Miguel: Whatever you believe is still a belief. It doesn't matter

if it is true. To be beautiful or to be ugly is just a point of view. To
be smart or stupid, right or wrong, is just a concept. Neither is true.
Either way, it is just a concept, it is just a dream. What we nd out is
that every action has a reaction. If I look at

myself in the mirror and say, "I look ugly," that is going to make me
feel bad. But if I look in the mirror and say, "I look beautiful," then
I'm going to feel good. It doesn't matter if it's true; it's just a
choice. You choose happiness or you choose to su er --- that is the
whole point.

Response: Mostly I nd myself saying the same thing over and over again,
even when it makes me su er. don Miguel: If we cannot stop su ering even
if the reasoning mind says, "I don't want to su er," it's because it
isn't the reasoning mind

that makes the choices; it's the belief system; it's the program. You
can try to lie to yourself and say, "Yes, I believe I am beautiful," but

deep inside, you believe that you are not beautiful. The belief is what
you have to change --- not what you want to believe, but what you really
believe.

Everything is stored in the mind by agreement, and if you

believe that agreement without a doubt, your faith is there. If an

agreement is strong, it is because you have practiced it all your life,

and it becomes automatic, without thinking. The reasoning mind can say
"I believe," but it's lying to you. The only way to break an agreement
is to replace it with another agreement, and to practice exactly the
opposite. Practice makes the master.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: When you broke the structure of your beliefs, do you

mean that you no longer have a structure, or do you mean that you keep
building a new belief system?

don Miguel: I am like water, which is formless. Water takes form

according to the container, and I change according to what I need in the
moment. If I don't need structure, just like water I adjust to whatever
is. But if I do need structure, I create the structure, and

use the structure. For me, all the knowledge of humanity is mythology,
and it's beautiful. Knowledge is just the description of a

dream; it is just a tool of communication that is in my pocket. I use

it to speak the same language, and I can use language to go in any
direction from sports to science, and to speak about almost anything and
make sense about things that have no sense. But I hardly use the
reasoning mind to talk to myself anymore; I just open myself to feel and
to perceive. Those who know me in my private life will see

that I am very quiet. I don't talk too much because I hardly have
anything to say. But at a certain point when I have to, I create a

whole structure and I speak the same language as everybody else. I know
it is acting; it is just controlled folly, but I enjoy it.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Why bother creating a new structure, a new belief system, if
it's all just beliefs and not really the truth?

don Miguel: To change your beliefs is your personal choice. You

don't have to change your beliefs or change your dream, or do anything
at all. You can live your life in drama; you don't have to stop su
ering, or stop your anger or your jealousy or your shame. You don't have
to stop your self-abuse or stop punishing yourself, or

stop all those disagreements you have with the people you love. You

don't have to stop being what you are. But there is a better way to do
it. It's not that you have to change your beliefs. It's a choice; it's

there, and it's been there for thousands of years. It's nothing new.
Buddha taught us how to do it; Jesus taught us how to do it. Many

other teachers around the world have said the same thing. They

discovered a better way to be, a better way to interact with one
another, and they shared it with others. I would never tell you that you
have to change; I only tell you that there is another way. You can take
it, or you can leave it. But to love is a choice also, and that's the
point; there is another way.

PARASITES From the Toltec point of view, all humans who are domesticated
are sick. They are sick because there is a Parasite that controls the
mind and controls the brain. The food for the Parasite is the negative
emotions that come from fear.

Question: I always thought Parasites were an important part of life. If
I look at my own life, I don't think Parasites are the problem, but
rather my reaction to Parasites is the problem. I'm stuck because I

hear you saying that Parasites are always negative, but I don't know if
that's true.

don Miguel: By de nition, a Parasite is a living being who lives o

you, with no bene t to you. From our point of view we can say that

Parasites are evil, but this is only our point of view. To those

Parasites we are just food; it's nothing personal. Those Parasites see

the humans as we see the chickens, the cows, and the fruit trees.

Yes, we put all those cows together in a pasture, and it looks like we
are taking care of them, but we will kill them to eat the meat. It looks
like the Parasite takes care of us also, but this is not true. What
Toltec mythology calls a Parasite refers to a living being

that is living through people and eating them alive. By taking life from
those people, it is destroying them, in many cases even killing

them, as in suicide or addiction to drugs. Parasites lead people to
self-destruction.

Knowledge, or thought forms that don't destroy you, that give you more
life instead of taking life away from you, are no longer

Parasites. Then we can call it a symbiotic interaction, which is
completely di erent. The Toltec call these beings allies. In many
traditions in the past, they called them gods.

In the Toltec tradition, if you face the Parasite and win the war

against the Parasite, then the Parasite becomes your ally. It is no

longer destroying you, but is facilitating what you do. If you have all
those beliefs that go against you, you break the agreement, you shift
it, and now the new belief will facilitate your creation, your
happiness, your love. Knowledge becomes your ally; it is no longer

your enemy. As I have said before, knowledge is not good or bad or

right or wrong; it is the Parasite that contaminates knowledge that we
can call evil.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: If we are here to have fun and be happy, why can't we enjoy
our Parasite?

don Miguel: If you learn to make fun of yourself, you will enjoy your
Parasite, and by making fun of your Parasite, you take a big step toward
breaking many agreements. Nothing in the entire world is serious.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Wouldn't it be boring to live a life with no drama, no
sadness, and no su ering?

don Miguel: No! You can have drama and sadness and still have a boring
life. What makes you bored is inaction. Boredom has nothing to do with
the Parasite. The Parasite can keep you crying and very occupied. You
can cry so much that you get bored, or you can laugh

so much that you get bored. It doesn't matter if you are in heaven or

in hell, if you don't have action, if you decide not to participate in
life, you are going to be bored. It is our nature to create. Just like
our creator, we love to create, and if we are doing that we don't get
bored.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Aren't we going to su er anyway because we're human? don
Miguel: Many times when we su er we say, "Well, it's because we are
human." The concept of human in this society has a lot of

limitations. The concept of "human" is a belief, it's just a concept,
and the belief is that a lot of things cannot be possible. Humans have
the need to know, and we su er because we know what we

believe. What do we believe? That's the big problem. Humans

divide everything into duality: good and bad, right and wrong,

beautiful and ugly. We have a need to be right about what we believe,
even though it's not the truth. Knowing that we are not

what we pretend to be or what we want to be, makes us su er, feel shame,
and reject ourselves. Su ering is a habit, an addiction like any other,
but more powerful. Imagine how di cult it is to stop smoking, and it is
a

thousand times more di cult to break the addiction to su ering.

Su ering comes from the agreements we created. We su er because we know
our agreements. Then we become attached to su ering

because we know su ering so well; it makes us feel safe. To change the
dream, we need to change the agreements.
.............................................................................................................
....... Question: You have said that truth restores our integrity and
sets us free from the lies we believe, but how do we know whether we are

going against the Parasite or going against our own integrity? don
Miguel: This is the tricky part because the belief system that

breaks our integrity has our loyalty, and when we go against the belief
system, it looks like we are going against ourselves. To see the

truth is extremely di cult, but what is easier to see is what is not the
truth.

Response: But how do you see it when you're in that position? don
Miguel: Well, rst a couple of rules. Don't believe yourself, and don't
believe anybody else. If you don't believe, what is not true will
dissolve in front of your eyes. Only what is true will remain because

what is true doesn't need anybody to believe it. Also, go inside and
listen to your body, because your body will never lie to you. Your mind
will play tricks, but the way you feel in your heart, in your guts, is
the truth.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: If we start to use the truth with our children, can we
inoculate them from the Parasite?

don Miguel: Children are going to have their own Parasites because each
child is going to be domesticated. Domestication is not a bad

thing; it just is. And if you do not domesticate your children, someone
else will. It's better that you domesticate them not to believe other
people's opinions, and always to listen to their own

truth. This will help them when they grow up to ght against their own
Parasite.

Children live their own lives. You can only do your best to

teach them responsibility for their agreements, and that action is your
love for the child.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: When you talk about Parasites eating our emotions or humans
using black magic, isn't this just mythology?

don Miguel: Yes, it's just mythology. In all the di erent cultures, it
has always been a challenge to put this information into words. The
story of Adam and Eve with the evil serpent, for example, makes it

easier to explain what happens when we eat knowledge. Through the story,
we can create an image and send that image to others. The kind of
mythology we use to explain why we su er just depends on how we use our
imagination. In the Toltec tradition, we talk

about the allies. When I say that humans are the best black

magicians because we use our word to put spells on ourselves, it's

just mythology. It's not really black magic that we use. The truth is
that it's simply action-- reaction. We learn, we believe; that is our
curse.

In The Four Agreements, I have tried to take away most of the

mythology and superstition, and keep the common sense. I only share four
agreements to make it as simple as possible. If we use as little
knowledge as possible, it is better for us.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Will there ever come a time when humanity is living without
Parasites?

don Miguel: I have no doubt that it will happen. Humanity is going

in that direction. The whole big Parasite will shift into an ally and
become a whole new dream. Even if we resist, it is going to happen

around the world. We will not destroy ourselves. That is what the
Parasite wants, but the Parasite is our creation, and that makes us more
powerful than it is.

If you look at the last seven or eight hundred years, you can see

how the dream is evolving. The way we dream now is very di erent

from the way we dreamed even one hundred years ago. If you

imagine yourself living that dream of eight hundred years ago, the dream
you have right now is heaven compared with that dream. Even compared to
the king, or the priest, or the pope of that time, you are in heaven.

Now imagine someone coming from seven or eight hundred

years in the future, from the most advanced society of that time, and
she sees the way you dream your life and sees the whole society you

live in. Can you see the evolution of the dream, the direction it is
going? Compared with the past, this is heaven. Compared with the future,
this is hell.

So there is a healing process happening in the world. In the

interaction between the dream and the dreamer, the whole

humanity is evolving as one living being. This is because new

dreamers with enough power send their dream to the outside dream and
start modifying the dream. If we have awareness, we are going to change
the dream, and

be Parasite-free. And we are doing it; that is the good part. If I can

do it, you can do it. If you can do it, the whole world can do it. It

can happen for all of us. The only thing we have to do is heal the
dreamer: heal our personal importance, heal our own mind, and take our
place in our own way.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Is there something we can do to facilitate the healing
process?

don Miguel: You only have to be who you really are. Our natural state is
to love and be happy. It is easy to be happy. It is easy to enjoy life.
It is easy to make fun of everything. It is easy to always

live in a romance with life. You don't have to follow any tradition,

you don't have to follow any dogma. It is not about acquiring more
knowledge or mental concepts; it is about being alive. The mission each
one of you have is to be happy and that is all. With awareness

and action, you can break your own domestication, and live your life
based in love instead of fear. With practice, you can become a dream
master and transform your entire dream.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: So our mission is to be happy and not to add poison?

don Miguel: That is a choice. It took me a long time not to add poison.
It took a lot of awareness, a lot of practice, because I had mastered
the opposite. You know, all the poison I used to spread was because I
had practiced spreading poison. I then practiced the opposite until I
mastered it. Action--reaction: If you cut your nger,

it hurts; but if you keep it clean it will not get infected. Cleaning
the

body is a habit. Not to take anything personally, and not to make
assumptions are also habits.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: When you say "I," do you mean your body or your mind? don
Miguel: The answer is I don't know. But I know that I am alive

and I am here. Then whoever is here is the one who answered your
question.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: You say your mission is to be happy, but what do you do when
someone you love dies, or you lose your job, or you lose your health?

don Miguel: Well, those things are going to hurt, and while it hurts

I may not be happy. But it is not my choice that my loved one dies; I
don't choose to lose my job. I don't choose to have cancer or to have
the

u, but it happens because this body is alive. Anything can

happen to this body. If I am here, I can be hurt by people's poison. I
can be cruci ed, I can be shot, or someone can beat me up. If I am

in the jungle, I can be bitten by a snake, or a tiger can get me. I am
here, and I am exposed to life like everybody else.

The only di erence will be that I will not take it personally. If I can
avoid it, I will avoid it; it will not be my choice. If my mother dies,
of course that will hurt. If I cut my

nger, that will hurt too.

But I will not contaminate it with poison. I will not try to justify it
or blame anybody. I will not say, "Oh God, why did you take my

mother?" Why even bother? Or if my wife leaves me, God bless her. I will
not ask her, "What did I do to make you leave me? Give me a reason why."
Whatever she says can only be used against myself. I

don't need to understand why. If she wants to go, God bless her, and
bye-bye.

BE IMPECCABLE WITH YOUR WORD All the magic you possess is based on your
word. Depending upon how it is used, the word can set you free, or it
can enslave you even more than you know.

Question: If someone asks me what I think about someone else, and I tell
the truth, I feel like I'm gossiping. If I don't tell the truth, then
I'm lying to that person. What should I do?

don Miguel: Just don't give any information. It's the same advice as my
grandfather used to give me: "Don't put your nose where

nobody wants it." Just say, "I have no opinion" or "It's not my
business."

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Does being impeccable mean that you always tell the

truth, even when it hurts someone's feelings? How can I be impeccable
without damaging my relationships or hurting others?

don Miguel: Well, you are also impeccable when you don't put your nose
where nobody wants it. You don't have the right to try to

x

other people's points of view. You don't need to be right and make

them wrong because of what you believe. They have the right to su er if
that's what they want to do. Many times, people don't want you to tell
them the truth; they only want you to tell them what

they want to hear. You have to be wise enough to understand that

when they ask you something, they are expecting a certain answer.

You can go along with the game or not; it's up to you. But you don't
need to create a lot of enemies by telling them what you think is true.
That is not what they want to hear.

Again, it's just common sense. You can avoid the question, or

you can tell them that you don't have any opinion about that. The
problem is that they can take your words and change your words,

and use them for gossiping. Many people only want your point of view to
get evidence of what they believe about themselves or about

someone else. They will come to you and ask, "What is your opinion? What
do you think about this or that?" and you can give

your sincere opinion, but they will change it. And then they will say
that you said that about them, and involve you in gossip.

This reminds me of another thing my grandfather used to tell

me. He said, "When you know you are going to make a mistake,

shut your mouth; and if you already made a mistake, shut your mouth even
tighter." Don't even try to

x it; you can only make it

worse because people will change everything you say.

Sometimes you give information to your friends because you

trust them and believe they are loyal to you. Maybe it's your best
friend, and you gossip about yourself and tell her what you feel

about yourself, about other people, making the assumption that she

will not share it with anybody. And perhaps this is true, until she is
no longer your friend. If something happens and she gets hurt or angry
and breaks the friendship with you, a way for her to get even

with you is to gossip about all the information you gave her. Something
you have to learn about gossiping is that it begins with yourself. Don't
gossip about yourself.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: If I have a relationship with someone who is not a good

communicator or who doesn't like to communicate with me, how do I
establish good communication?

don Miguel: If someone doesn't want to listen to you, why do you have to
waste your time trying to talk to that person? If the person

wants to hear what you have to say, he is going to try to use his
attention to understand you. But if he doesn't want to even pay
attention to you, why do you have to bother spending your time

with that person? It's not really your problem. One thing I used to
teach my apprentices is to practice

communicating to a wall. A wall doesn't react, and you don't expect

it to understand what you're trying to say. You look for many ways to
say the same thing, and by practicing in this way, your

communication skills become stronger. Then if it's really important to
you that this person understands you, you're going to look for all

the di erent ways to communicate what you want to say. And if that
person doesn't understand your communication, it's not up to

you. You did your best; you don't have to worry about that anymore.

Response: Okay, but what if someone is willing to communicate but
doesn't know how to express his feelings? Is there something I can do to
help him communicate?

don Miguel: Well, just let that person know that he has your full
attention, that you are willing to listen, that you are willing to

communicate. You invite him to communicate, but you cannot force

him to communicate. If that person is very important to you --- if it's

your own child, or your mother, your spouse, your sister, someone whose
presence you cannot avoid --- then you can make yourself

available to communicate. But if that person doesn't want to

communicate, just accept him the way he is. And if it's someone you
really don't need to be around, then you don't have to be around that
person, because it's not fun really if there's no communication.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: When someone is gossiping, what is the most tactful way of
stopping the gossip?

don Miguel: The best way to stop others from gossiping is by not
reacting to their gossip. If you react, you encourage them to gossip

even more. If you don't react, and they see that it's not a ecting

you, at a certain point they just let it go. If you don't accept the
poison they send, that poison doesn't a ect you.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: I have di culty knowing how to tell my friends and coworkers
that I don't want to gossip anymore. I have tried to make an agreement
with my best friend not to gossip, but she still gossips.

How can I keep my agreement not to gossip without looking arrogant and
losing my friends?

don Miguel: While you are breaking your agreements, you will be dealing
with people who are not involved in this process and you

have no control over them. Their behavior is the result of their beliefs
and their wounds. What they do about it is not up to you; they are not
your business or your problem. All you can do is work

to change your agreements with yourself, and the agreements that you
make with other people. The agreements with other people have two sides,
and each person is responsible for his half only. If

you make an agreement with someone and they break the agreement, you
need to make another agreement if you want to

remain in a relationship with that person. You are lying to yourself

if you pretend the agreement is still in place. If that person is not

keeping her word, it's up to you to stay there or not, according to your
personal integrity.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: If I am talking to a friend of mine about another person we
both know, does this mean I am gossiping even if I don't say anything
bad about that person?

don Miguel: Gossiping can have good intentions, bad intentions, or no
intentions at all. But even when the originator of the gossip

doesn't have a bad intention, the receiver of the information can change
it into a bad intention. Whoever hears the information digests the
information, and then changes it according to his or her perception.

Whatever you tell people can also be used by their Parasite.

Their Parasite will change and manipulate the information you give them
according to their point of view. That's why it's better not to gossip
at all.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: What if you are trying to live your life with impeccability of
the word, and you have a child who because of society or their

friends or school, grows up to not be impeccable with her word? Of

course I want my child to be impeccable. What would you do about this?

don Miguel: Because I love my children, I want them to be whatever they
are going to be. Response: Whether or not they are happy? don Miguel:
Their happiness is not up to me; it is up to them. It is not my love
that will make them happy, it is their love that will make them happy.

.............................................................................................................
....... Question: Self-love is a concept that is hard for me to grasp.
Where do I start with that?

don Miguel: Start by accepting who you are, as you are right now,

even though you know you are not perfect according to your image of
perfection. It's always easier to start with self-acceptance.

When I discovered that I was mentally sick, that I had a

Parasite in my head, of course I rebelled against the Parasite, but I
accepted myself just the way I am: an angel with a Parasite. I now see
it is okay to be sick. It is not wrong to be sick. A mental disease is
like any other disease: You will not judge yourself because you have the

u.  We have a disease with a Parasite in our head. You

don't take it personally, of course. But once you know about the
Parasite, you want to be healed. You want to heal your because you think
you are bad because you have the

u not

u.  You are

not guilty because you have the u. You just don't want to have the u.

If you don't accept yourself, you are really rejecting yourself.

Then because we make the assumption that other people believe

what we believe and feel what we feel, we make the assumption that other
people will reject us for the same reasons we reject

ourselves. Before other people can reject us, we reject ourselves. Once
you accept yourself, you also make the assumption that others

accept you as you are. The whole cycle of action--reaction is broken
just by accepting yourself the way you are.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: Whenever I start to think about improving myself, I get
confused because then I'm not accepting myself exactly as I am. How can
I accept myself exactly as I am and still try to improve myself?

don Miguel: You can be aware that you want to improve yourself,

but not because you believe you are not good enough. It is possible to
improve yourself without rejecting yourself.

Let's say that you are unaware of your emotional reactions for a

long time. Then nally for whatever reason, you are aware of your
emotional reactions. Before you were aware of them, you used to

judge yourself and punish yourself for having those reactions. With
awareness you nd out that those reactions were how you practiced

being yourself. But just because you know this doesn't mean you will
stop having those reactions. As soon as you accept yourself, even if you
have those reactions, you no longer judge yourself the way you did
before. Just like magic, if you accept yourself the way

you are with your reactions, you don't judge yourself or

nd

yourself guilty for having those reactions. If you don't nd yourself
guilty, you will not punish yourself. You are not adding more drama

to your reactions. As soon as you accept yourself, right away things
start changing for the better. By having the awareness and not judging
yourself, you have already improved.

If we judge ourselves because we have a Parasite, we are giving

more power to the Parasite. Remember, the Parasite is very clever; the
Parasite makes a proposition, and the Parasite accepts it. When

the Parasite is discovered, it will say, "I don't want to have the
Parasite anymore. Let's get rid of the Parasite." And we agree with it.
Do you understand the trick? That is the Parasite who is

speaking, and the Parasite who is listening at the same time. The

Parasite says, "Okay, let's rebel," and we say, "I am going to be a
great spiritual warrior." Later the Parasite will say: "What kind of
warrior am I? I still take things personally, I still make assumptions."
It is because the Parasite makes the proposition and the Parasite agrees
to it.

It is the Parasite who is thinking, thinking, thinking. Where are

you? That snake in the Tree of Knowledge is really a genius. It took
possession of all of us. Once we accept ourselves --- okay, we have a

Parasite --- no problem. We don't play the game of the Parasite. We

learn to control the emotions; and when we control the emotions, we
don't feed the Parasite anymore. The only way to control the

emotions is by accepting ourselves just the way we are. When we learn to
make fun of ourselves, we start behaving in a way that the Parasite is
not expecting. Of course, the Parasite will then try to

propose an agreement and accept it about making fun of ourselves.

That's why the Toltec teach us how to be hunters, how to be aware

of what the Parasite is doing. Because the Parasite is always hunting
us, we must learn to hunt the Parasite.

DON'T TAKE ANYTHING PERSONALLY All people live in their own dream, in
their own mind; they are in a completely di erent world from the one we
live in. Even when a situation seems so personal, even if others insult
you directly, it has nothing to do with you.

Question: The second agreement, "Don't take anything personally,"

is the agreement I really want to master in my life, but I can't see how
someone's criticism of me is not personal. If my friend or my

boss says something that really hurts my feelings, how can you say this
isn't personal or that it's not about me?

don Miguel: I want you to imagine that one day you awake in France or
Italy seven or eight hundred years ago. You understand the language very
well, but you are going to see that society from the point of view that
you have right now, with all that you know

right now, with all the beliefs you have about yourself, about society,
about science, psychology, sociology, everything.

I want you to imagine the way people treat one another in

France or Italy during the Middle Ages. Imagine what they believe

about everything --- about religion, death, science, medicine. There

are people who don't bathe for months because it is a sin. Imagine

the moral judgments of that society: what is right, what is wrong,

what they believe is right or wrong. Imagine what it would mean to

be a woman then, with the mentality of the present time. If you start a
romantic relationship, how are you going to deal with that relationship?
Put yourself in that place, just for a moment.

What are you going to do when the people in that society start

judging you? You could be the greatest teacher in that society, you

could be a great angel or messenger for those people, and they may kill
you because of your beliefs. If you know that they can kill you for what
you believe, how are you going to deal with them?

Knowing what you know, and knowing what they believe, the

way they dream, are you really going to make assumptions? Are you

really going to take personally what they say to you, what they believe,
the way they judge you? Are you going to feel emotionally hurt for the
judgments they have about you when you know the way they dream? It is
silly to even think that you are going to take

it personally. It is silly to think that you are going to feel
emotionally hurt because they judge you.

Response: Well, I guess that's true, but I would also understand that
these people have a di erent worldview.

don Miguel: Everybody you meet has a di erent worldview, even

now. Imagine your boss at work with those beliefs of eight hundred

years ago. With the way you think right now, you will not even su er
because whatever tantrum the boss has is not going to a ect

you. It is going to be funny. Of course you will refrain from laughing
because that could have dire consequences. Laugh about the priests eight
hundred years ago, and you were dead. Then you had to learn not to laugh
at them.

It's the same thing now. It's simply that people have di erent

points of view. You know, the behavior of other people's Parasites is

funny. Believe me, I could laugh if it was not so dramatic at the same
time. One of the things I always suggest is to learn to make

fun of yourself. If you learn to make fun of yourself every time your
Parasite gets you, or another person's Parasite gets you, then instead
of judging yourself or judging that person, you are going to have a

great time. Of course, when you deal with sick people, you are going to
re ect them, that's all. But it's going to be funny to see every
reaction of your Parasite.

Response: Okay. I get it now. Still, it's going to be a challenge to
think it's funny when someone is putting me down or yelling at me.

don Miguel: Many of the funniest things that happen in our lives

don't look funny when they are happening. Later we can laugh, but at
that time we are possessed by our Parasite, which means our mental
disease is having a crisis.

When the anger comes out and overtakes us, the Parasite is

obvious because of the crisis, but even when we don't feel the Parasite,
it doesn't mean our mind is healed. We may not have a

crisis right now, but the Parasite is there, waiting for the moment to
come out. It comes out when we have a crisis, and the crisis can

manifest in di erent ways, but we look like the little girl in the movie
The Exorcist who is possessed by demons.

When I awoke from the dream of the planet, what I discovered

is that everybody around me is possessed just like the little girl in
that movie. But they don't know it because it's normal behavior for

them. People are possessed and what possesses them is so amazing

to see. The Parasite is living their life. The big Parasite is made up
of all those teeny, tiny Parasites that eat our emotions. I call them

garbage eaters because they eat garbage from my point of view. The next
time you get angry, or jealous, or sad, put a mirror in front of your
face and see your expression; compare your face with

the little girl in the movie. Who is behind that face? It is nothing to
be afraid of; you don't need to start praying right away. You have been
like that all your life and it hasn't destroyed you. The Parasite

has already tried its best to destroy you, so it cannot get worse than
that, it can only get better. Just remember this: any time you see

any human in anger, any time you see the envy or the jealousy of
someone, he or she is possessed. It is nothing personal.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: I am doing my best not to take anything personally. I
understand that it's not about me, but when people criticize me or

say something hurtful, I still feel really awful. What am I doing wrong?

don Miguel: There is nothing you are doing wrong. You feel like that
because you believe what they say, because you align your

beliefs with them. What someone says will only a ect you if you believe
it.

Imagine that you are a child, and you make a little mistake that

angers your father. You don't even know what the mistake is, but your
father is angry and says, "You are a stupid child; you should

feel ashamed of yourself." You agree with your father, and put your
faith in that agreement; you believe it 100 percent without a doubt.

You grow up and now you say, "I am intelligent; it's not true

that I'm stupid." But when someone comes and says, "What you did

was stupid; you should be ashamed of yourself," you react right away
with anger and it's because you believe what that person said.

You kept that knowledge in your head, the agreement that it's true

that you are stupid. Later, when someone touches that little splinter,
the reaction is a lot of emotional pain. But if you don't believe what
he says, you don't react. You are going to laugh.

If you believe you are worth it, and someone says, "You don't

deserve that," it doesn't a ect you because you don't believe it. You

agreed that you are worth it, so you just laugh about it, and say, "Oh
sure," but you don't believe it. And because you don't believe it, it
will not a ect you.

DON'T MAKE ASSUMPTIONS We have the tendency to make assumptions about
everything. The problem with making assumptions is that we believe they
are the truth. We make an assumption, we misunderstand, we take it
personally, and we end up creating a whole big drama for nothing.

Question: How does a person stop making assumptions? My mind goes o and
starts to think of all these things, and then I su er all the time for
no good reason.

don Miguel: The problem is that you think too much. You are way

too smart. Think, think, think. Your mind is like a wild horse that

takes you wherever it wants to take you. You have no control over all
that thinking, all those assumptions --- not just one assumption, a

whole universe of assumptions. You think too much. Why do you

need to think at all? Something I teach my apprentices is to become a
master of thinking.

For me thinking is a tool for communication. I hardly think. For

hours I just don't think, and not because I'm stupid. I don't think
because I have no need to think. What I know, I know. I'm full of
knowledge, but why do I need to think about what I know?

Thinking, thinking, thinking: What is she doing? What is he doing? What
about this? What about that? What if this happens? What if that happens?

Just thinking "What if?" creates a huge drama in our life. Every

human can think a lot, and thinking brings fear. It's two o'clock in the
morning, and you are still thinking, thinking, thinking. You need

to tame the horse, and learn to ride the horse. The horse has to obey
you and take you where you want to go.

You know, there is an impeccable way of thinking. If you have

a problem, it's time to think. Once you make a choice about how to
resolve the problem, it's time to stop thinking and take action. Now you
know the solution; it's over. But guess what? You have a

problem, you think of the solution, and you don't stop thinking. You're
still thinking, and you

nd another solution, and you still

don't stop. You keep thinking, and you come up with another solution.

If you have just one solution, you have all the power of intent

and you can resolve it. If you have two solutions, you divide intent in
two. Three solutions --- you're losing power. Soon you're

confused, and you have to think about which of the solutions is the
best. When you feel confused you feel powerless, and you need

someone else to tell you what to do. Making assumptions is all

about thinking. If you just stop thinking, you no longer make
assumptions. You need to learn to tame the horse.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: My question is about knowledge and assumptions. I was
wondering if the voices I hear in my head and what you call "knowledge"
are the same as assumptions? don Miguel: What is an assumption?
Response: In my case, it's thinking that I know, so it's knowledge.
Okay, you answered it.

don Miguel: We can divide everything into what we know, which is the
known; what we don't know, which is the unknown; and what we will never
know, which is the unknowable. We only know what we know: our knowledge.
We only know the information

accumulated in our mind by agreements. We know the whole reality that we
perceive, we know our dream, we know our point of view.

The unknown is another story. Do you see the woman sitting

next to you? You create an image and project it on her. You only

know about her what you project, and this is the known for you. But what
she has in her mind is unknown. You can make the assumption

that you know what she has in her mind. You can make the

assumption that you know your children, or your father, or your

mother, or even your dog, but you don't know them. You only know what
you believe about them; and it's only true for you, no one else, because
it's your dream. The truth is that you will never know them. You hardly
know yourself, but you pretend to know other people. the

You only know what your knowledge tells you. You only know judgments

that

you

can

make

about

everybody,

the

interpretations, your personal point of view. You don't know what

other people feel, what they think, what they believe, what they are

dreaming. And you make the assumption that they believe what you
believe, that they feel what you feel, that they see the world the way
you see the world. And it's knowledge that controls you.

As I said before, if we control knowledge, it becomes a tool of

communication. We don't make assumptions, we ask. We ask, and

other people will tell us what is in their world. Then we know what

they have in their dream, they can communicate. It's that simple. We
don't have to make assumptions, but we also know that they will tell us
what they know. It doesn't mean it's true.

Response: Now I really see how making assumptions causes a lot of
misunderstandings between people.

don Miguel: Even if we don't make assumptions, it's easy to see

why humans hardly understand one another. People send us a

distorted image of themselves, because it's only what they want to
project to us, then we perceive the distorted image they send, and

we distort it even more with our own beliefs. This is just the way it
is. That's the way humans dream; the way we interact with one

another. People project the image of their dream to us, and we distort
it according to what we want to believe. We have to make everything we
perceive

t into what we already believe, just to be

sure that what we believe is true. That's why we are more interested in
hooking the attention of other people to project our point of view than
in listening to what other people want to say to us.

ALWAYS DO YOUR BEST In your everyday moods your best can change from one
moment to another, from one hour to the next, from one day to another.
Your best will also change over time. As you build the habit of the four
new agreements, your best will become better than it used to be.

Question: I always try to do my best, but what should I do when

someone asks me to do something that I don't want to do or that I'm too
tired to do? How do I do my best when I am exhausted or just

need time for myself? I feel like I'm always disappointing myself or
someone else.

don Miguel: First, you have to be honest with yourself and see if

you want to do whatever someone is asking of you. If you don't want to
do it, and you have the opportunity of not doing it, just be

honest and nd the easiest way to say, "I will not do it." Sometimes, of
course, this is not possible. You might have a contract with

someone, or feel you have to do it because you know it's going to help
you in your life.

Then instead of believing that you don't want to do it, it's up to

you to change your belief, create desire, and do it. Use your reason,

your knowledge, to talk to yourself and say, "Yes, I want to do it," and
tell yourself why it's good for you to do it, even if you really

don't want to do it. In that moment you will do your best, but rst you
have to change your mind, change the action, because whatever you do,
there will be a reaction.

If there is something you don't like to do, and avoiding it will

only cause a bigger problem for you, then you're not really being
impeccable. If you have a problem, even if you don't want to face it,

it is better to face the problem, whatever it is, and do your best. Once
you have done that, you don't have to worry about it anymore.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: I have been taking care of other people my entire life.
Recently, I decided to put myself

rst and take care of some of my

own needs. As soon as I decided this, the Judge came up and said,

"No, no, no. You are being sel sh; you should be taking care of
everybody else." Well, that is how I've lived my life, and I've been
totally empty.

don Miguel: People around you are used to you helping them and sacri
cing yourself for them. They can ask you for whatever they want, and
they know you will do it for them. Well, the day you stop

doing that, what happens? Others will tell you that you are sel sh.

Who is really sel sh? Are you, the martyr, the sel sh one, or is the one
who takes advantage of you the sel sh one?

You no longer need to take care of other people, but you believe that
you do; it is one of the agreements you have with yourself. You can
break that agreement by doing exactly the opposite. By

practicing the opposite, many other agreements that limit your freedom
will go along with it.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: I have been doing my best to improve my life, but every time I
start making progress and begin to feel happier, I fall right back into
my old habits. Why is it such a struggle?

don Miguel: Because you believe what you know without a doubt, and
whatever you believe is what rules your life. People believe 100 percent
in what they believe they are. That is why they live their

life the way they do. If you believe you are a loser, what is going to

happen? Because you believe you are a loser, thy will be done. Your
reasoning mind can say, "I want to be rich, I want to be healthy,"

but what you believe is not in your reason. What you believe is in your
Book of Law, and your faith is trapped inside that book. When you are a
child and your mother says, "You are never

going to learn to dance," if you agree with her, then that's it --- you

are never going to learn to dance. Even if your reasoning mind says,

"I don't know why I can't learn to dance," it is because you really
believe you cannot learn to dance. If you believe that you're not good
at sports, then you're not good at sports. If you believe that

you're not beautiful, then that's it --- you don't feel beautiful. Those

beliefs are the Parasites, and they are eating you alive. People are

exactly what they believe they are because they have complete faith

in what they believe. That faith is their word, and they are using the
word in the wrong way: against themselves.

.............................................................................................................
.......

Question: I have always tried to do my best in everything I do, but
after reading The Four Agreements, I realized that I do it because I'm

looking for the approval of other people. Then if I don't get the
approval, I feel victimized, or if my husband makes a critical

comment, I feel discouraged and wonder, "What's the use?" Can you
comment on this?

don Miguel: During our domestication, one of the most powerful
agreements we make is the need for approval, and the result of that

is amazing. Because of the need for approval, one opinion can lift us up
or completely destroy us. Searching for approval becomes a big routine,
and that is how the outside dream has power over humans and manipulates
us like puppets. We have to ask other people for

their opinions: "How do I look? Did I sound okay? How am I driving? Am I
doing okay?"

We need the support and acceptance of others; we need to be

good enough for someone else. We even need someone else to need us in
order to feel like we have a reason to be alive. What people

think about us is so important that we try to please everybody else, and
leave ourselves until last.

Doing your best does not mean to try to be good enough for

someone else. The fact is that you will never be good enough for

someone else. The truth is that with all your agreements you will

never be good enough for yourself either. No matter what you do it won't
be right. You can try to do more than your best, but you could kill
yourself trying to be the best. Your best is never good enough because
you made those agreements with the Judge in your mind. And the agreement
with your Victim is such that even if you try

your best you are not good enough, you are not strong enough, you are
not intelligent enough. There is no hope. You will never please the
Judge who lives in your mind because that Judge is very strict, very
strong, and very abusive.

There is only one way to silence the voice of the Judge, and

that is to make new agreements with ourselves. If we are going to have
agreements, let's have agreements that make us happy.

8

TRUE STORIES OF AWARENESS AND TRANSFORMATION

In this chapter, people who have applied The Four Agreements share their
experiences

BE IMPECCABLE WITH YOUR WORD Breaking the agreement to gossip at work

It has been di cult for me to break the gossip habit, especially at

work. I have always used gossiping as a way of being included in
conversations with others. Whenever someone gossiped about a manager or
co-worker, I would automatically believe the gossip, and judge that
person based on what I had heard about him, rather than on my own
experience.

Since reading The Four Agreements, I remind myself not to believe what I
am hearing when other people gossip. Mostly I make sure not to pass any
gossip along. I let it stop with me, and I release it without believing
it to be the truth. I focus on sharing love in tiny ways instead of
trying to feel better about myself by gossiping about others.

No more bad news

I had been married to a man who always brought me the bad news at the
end of each day. It didn't matter whether it was personal or

global bad news; he would deposit it with me. I agreed, under the
assumption of being a good wife, that it was my duty to receive this
verbal garbage. I didn't know it at the time, but all this garbage I

had agreed to receive was slowly poisoning me. Later we divorced, but
remained close friends. Throughout the years he continued to

bring me his gossip, but after reading The Four Agreements, I knew it
was time for me to honor the rst agreement. In a great act of personal
power, I told my former husband that I was no longer available to accept
the garbage he brought to me. I told him that if he could

nd some other way of communicating about the world I

would be happy to listen, but I was no longer available for the poison.
We don't talk much anymore, but I have much more joy and self-respect.
Being impeccable

The rst agreement inspired me to observe my thoughts. Every time I had
an impulse to speak, I would pay attention to the need behind the words.
Often it was a need to be noticed, to gain someone's

approval, or to show someone what I know. It was a painful process,

because suddenly I could see how often I am not impeccable with my word.
Being impeccable with my word taught me to communicate

with self-respect and love. I've learned to stop gossiping about myself
and others. If I am having a bad day, I can say, "I'm having a

bad day," but I don't blow it out of proportion. If someone around me is
having a bad day, I don't take it personally, and I do my best to be
impeccable with my word, even if I feel wounded by other people's words.

Being impeccable with my word has opened many doors for

me. I have learned to speak my truth without all the drama I used to

create. This allows me to experience deeper, more meaningful
communication in my personal and professional relationships. Using the
word with children

The rst agreement, be impeccable with your word, is helping me to be a
better parent. I am more aware of the importance of communicating with
my children with impeccability. One morning, I was frustrated and yelled
at my daughter for taking so long to get dressed. I realized immediately
that I had not been impeccable with

my word because of my own fear of being late. I later bought her

owers and apologized for my harsh words, letting her know that I

was having a di cult day. It felt good to share my feelings with her in
a respectful way. Using the word to judge

The rst agreement made me realize how much time I spend either judging
myself or judging someone else. I live my life in total

judgment! I am so determined to reclaim the part of my mind that is
simply running a program, that I have begun to track my thoughts by
setting the alarm on my watch to go o

every twenty minutes.

Each time I hear the alarm, I take note of where my thoughts are: Am I
judging? I keep a notebook to record my thoughts throughout the day.

At the end of the day, I look at the list of thoughts and ask

myself, "Is this what I want to be thinking?" This simple technique
makes me aware of my thoughts and helps me to change the way I use my
word. It has also helped me to see if the thoughts I am

thinking are truly my own or if they are simply the unconscious program
that is running.

Constructive self-talk

One morning as I walked past a mirror, I turned and smiled at

myself and said, "You look beautiful today. I love you." This was a
profound turning point in my life. Until that day, I had always looked
in the mirror and said, "I look fat. My hair doesn't look so good today.
My skin looks awful!" To

nd myself

something positive to myself was a huge triumph.

nally saying

DON'T TAKE ANYTHING PERSONALLY Healing the mother-daughter relationship

I have been engaged in a battle with my mother for most of my life. I
have judged my mother and rejected her based upon those

judgments, and I have used her to victimize myself. One day, as I was
reading The Four Agreements, I began to see that by judging my mother
and using the power of my word against her, I was not only

punishing her, but also punishing myself. I wanted to apply The Four
Agreements in my relationship with

my mother, so I began by carefully listening to what she said to me.

Instead of instantly reacting like I usually did, I simply noticed when
she said things that triggered a reaction in me. I found that by not
taking what she said personally, I could see my own dream more clearly.
I began to hear the critical voices inside me that re ected

her voice. I became more aware of all the times when I treated

myself with disrespect and cruelty. Each time I took responsibility for
my own self-judgments, I slowly began to release my mother as the target
of my abusive thoughts. I allowed myself to start believing that she
really had done the best she could.

My relationship with my mother has changed dramatically. It

hasn't healed entirely, but I now see her through eyes

lled more

with love than with judgment, and a heart that does not need to protect
itself from her. I do the best I can each time I am with her. Some days
are better than others, but as long as I remember The

Four Agreements and apply them to each situation, I know that I am
moving one step closer to the kind of life I want to live. Not taking
ourselves personally

I was daydreaming when I noticed that parts of my mind were

running along without me. I was fascinated by all the voices in my mind.
I would put my attention on a thought, it would shift, and I couldn't
catch what the voice had been talking about! Until that moment, I had
always thought it was me who was

doing all the thinking. I began to understand what don Miguel

means by the Parasite. The Parasite thinks without me, and had me

fooled all this time that it was me. My attention gets hooked, and most
of the time the chatter is centered around a myriad of things

that might go wrong in my life. After reading The Four Agreements, I
have pierced a hole or two

in the belief that the Parasite is the real me. My work is to stretch
those holes larger and larger each day until they are big enough to step
through to the real me. Now I

nd it much easier not to take

even my own thoughts and feelings personally because nine times out of
ten, they aren't me.

The Judge and the Victim at work

I had a boss at work who was very judgmental. No matter what I did, she
would nd fault with it and make a point of correcting me in a very
cynical way. I really struggled with this. I would go to work and ask
myself, "Why am I letting myself be abused this way?"

I was ready to quit my job when I read The Four Agreements.

What struck me the most was the term "spiritual warrior," and "the
discipline to be ourselves, no matter what." I decided to use the
situation to become a better "warrior," and began by making a commitment
to always do my best.

Over the next couple of months, I discovered that I was

constantly afraid of being judged. This actually allowed my boss to be
judgmental; I was playing the role of the Victim, and she was playing
the role of the Judge. I continued to react to her judgments,

and in some ways it was more di cult because I was so aware of my
reactions. I would get angry, or feel betrayed whenever she criticized
my work.

One day my boss said something to me and the dream suddenly

shattered. What I saw was a woman who was herself. When I

ercely critical of

nally understood that she was living in her own

dream, and I was living in mine, everything shifted for me. In her

dream, her own self-judgments caused her to be judgmental toward me, but
it had nothing to do with me. In that moment, I felt compassion for her,
and I never again took anything she said personally.

Whenever she judged me, I looked at my work and decided for myself
whether I had done my best. Even if I made a mistake, if I knew I had
done my best, I would move on and correct the problem. Before, my Judge
always agreed with her Judge, and I'd spend the day beating myself up
emotionally.

I worked at this o ce for another year and even though my

boss could still be judgmental, she started to change. She began to

compliment me on my work! By having compassion for her Judge and putting
my own Victim to rest, our relationship was transformed. All I had to do
was change my agreements!

DON'T MAKE ASSUMPTIONS Making assumptions at home

A minor incident with a new roommate showed me the problem with making
assumptions. During the summer we agreed to turn on

the air conditioning only when we were at home. For three days in a

row I came home to nd my roommate gone and the air conditioner on full
blast. Of course, I made the assumption that my roommate

had left it on. By the third day, I was furious and was planning to

ask her to move out. I imagined confronting her, and having to nd
another roommate. I was worried that I might lose the house if I
couldn't nd someone else to share the rent.

Later my boyfriend discovered that the air conditioner had been

preset to go on at a certain time by the previous tenants. I felt so

foolish for blaming my roommate. I had made an assumption, didn't
question my assumption, and put myself through many hours of

emotional turmoil. If I had asked a simple question, I would have
avoided a lot of su ering.

Making assumptions at work

Last month my boss called me and asked me to come into his o ce. I had
no idea what he wanted, and my mind immediately went to

the project proposal I had just written him. What if he didn't like it?
I had been in a hurry at the end. I must have made a mistake. I really
didn't do my best on the proposal. If I get

red, what will I

tell my family? Maybe it is about that new person, and he wants to
replace me. On and on the chatter went. Instead of waiting to

nd

out what my boss wanted, I created a hundred disaster scenarios in my
mind. It turned out he wanted to thank me for the extra e ort I put into
getting the proposal to him on time.

Making assumptions about ourselves

My friend Anna and I tend to make very di erent assumptions about
ourselves. I tend to overestimate myself. I am constantly taking on new
projects, assuming that I can t them all in to my life, and end up
having to disappoint people. My friend tends to underestimate

herself. She is a very capable artist, but often turns down projects
because she assumes she doesn't have the skill she needs.

Now before I take on a new project, I call Anna, and we discuss

whether it is too large a project. She calls me when she is asked to do
something she's not sure she can handle. We help each other ask

the pointed questions that allow us to make clear decisions, instead of
decisions based on assumptions.

Making assumptions about a handicap

I was born with no forearms, and small hands that come out just

below my elbows. For me, learning not to take anything personally, and
not to make assumptions was a revolution in my life.

I was raised to believe that my physical disabilities don't have

to limit me, but it wasn't until I read The Four Agreements that I saw
how many choices I had made based on assumptions and taking

what other people said or did personally. I had been struggling with
career and money issues for a long time, living o

my disability check and going to college. I asked

myself, "If I do not make the assumption that I am limited in any way,
what would I want to do?" I knew in my heart that I wanted to be

nancially independent, but I had always assumed this was

impossible. Now I am studying to be an accountant. I have stopped taking
other people's beliefs about having a disability personally. I know that
is their dream. My dream is one of unlimited potential. I used to make
the assumption that many doors were closed for me.

Now I do my best in each moment, with no expectations of being rejected.

ALWAYS DO YOUR BEST Taking action because you want to

As a manager of a restaurant, I was supposed to be the

rst one at

work in the morning to open the doors. Every morning I scrambled

out of the house, drove through tra c frustrated because I was late, and
arrived just seconds before the rest of the sta

arrived.

Sometimes I didn't make it on time, and my Judge would really

come down on me. I knew I was not doing my best. My choices were
creating a lot of anxiety in my life, but I loathed the idea of getting
up any earlier.

One day I asked myself, "How can I do my best in this

situation?" I decided to make a new agreement with myself to get up an
hour earlier. From that day on I actually enjoyed the time I spent
driving to work. I would arrive a half-hour early, and make

co ee for the sta . They would arrive to nd me relaxed and happy to see
them. Doing my best was a huge gift that I gave myself. Doing your best
--- no more, and no less

"Always do your best" is my favorite agreement. I'm a perfectionist and
tend to overachieve. I had always thought that doing my best meant
giving 110 percent at all times. Because of this, I was exhausted and
often resentful. I ran from task to task, afraid that I

was not doing enough. Now I give my best, no more and no less. I've
slowed down, and I take the time to savor my work and my relationships.
Life is so much more enjoyable! No guilt or blame

Always doing my best has helped to keep the Judge at bay. All I have to
do is ask myself: "Was that really my best e ort?" If the

answer is yes, there's not a lot the Judge can say. My Judge is harsh,
but even my Judge knows that a person can only do her best. If I

make mistakes, I do my best to correct them, and if I do my best, then I
have fewer mistakes to correct.

The Four Agreements at the o

ce

One of our managers was constantly talking about The Four Agreements and
encouraged us to try them. So a group of us

decided to see what would happen if we agreed not to gossip, and

not to make assumptions. When the gossip in the o ce decreased, all the
drama did too! People began to ask questions to clarify any
communication that was unclear. We stopped assuming that

someone else would take care of what had to get done, or that no one
would help us if we were overwhelmed. By using The Four

Agreements as a team, we reminded each other to be aware, and everyone's
productivity increased. The Four Agreements have completely transformed
our work environment!

New agreements save a crumbling relationship

I devoured The Four Agreements in one afternoon, and when my

husband came home I could not stop talking about the book. The next day
he listened to the book on tape while commuting to work. When he got
home we talked, maybe for the

rst time ever. We

talked about the way we had been taking each other's comments

personally; about all the assumptions we had both made about each other;
and mostly, about not being impeccable with our word.

I had been speaking to my husband as an enemy. He had been

thinking of me as the enemy and moving toward protecting himself

from me. We made the decision to keep these Four Agreements alive in
ourselves and in our relationship. Now my husband is no longer my enemy;
he is my ally. Keeping these Four Agreements transformed our life from
one of con ict to one of companionship.

I also passed The Four Agreements on to a woman who works at

a homeless shelter and was thrilled to

nd out that the sta

was

devouring the book as I had. One day she called in high drama, totally
engulfed in "she said, he said," and all I had to say was "Why are you
taking it personally?" The drama disappeared in a second.

My sister was ending a twenty-six-year marriage and was

completely steeped in melodrama. I sent her The Four Agreements, and
after reading the book only once, her relationship was

transformed into one of respect, compassion, and amiable dissolution.

What I have learned is that my emotional pain is never about

the other person. It's not about my spouse, my children, my parents,

my friends, or the stranger in the grocery store. It's always and only
about me. Whatever anyone else is thinking or doing is never about me;
it's always about them. What an incredible relief!

ABBREVIATED GLOSSARY The Book of Law Just as a government has a book of
law that rules the society's dream, our belief system is the Book of Law
that rules our life. Whatever is in our Book of Law is our supreme
truth. We base all of our judgments on this Book of Law, even if these
judgments go against our own inner nature. The Domestication of Humans
Humans are domesticated the same way we train a dog or other animal:
through a system of punishment and reward. In human domestication,
information from the outside dream is conveyed to the inside dream,
creating our whole belief system, and teaching us how to be a human.
Dreaming Dreaming is the main function of the mind, and the mind dreams
twenty-four hours a day. When the brain is awake, there is a material
frame that makes us perceive things in a linear way; when we go to sleep
we do not have the frame, and the dream has the tendency to change
constantly. The Dream of the Planet Society's dream, or the dream of the
planet, is the collective dream of billions of personal dreams. Together
these create a dream of a family, of a community, of a city, of a
country, and nally a dream of all humanity. The dream of the planet
includes all of society's rules, beliefs, laws, religions, governments,
schools, and social customs. In this dream it is normal for humans to su
er; fear is an important part of this dream. The Image of Perfection
During domestication, we form an image of perfection to please other
people, to be good enough for them. But we are never perfect from this
point of view, and so we begin to reject ourselves. The image of
perfection is the reason we abuse ourselves; it is the reason we reject
our own humanity. We also judge others according to our image of
perfection, and they can never measure up to that ideal. The Judge The
inner Judge uses what is in our Book of Law to judge everything we do,
everything we think, and everything we feel. Every time we do something
that goes against the Book of Law, the Judge says we are guilty, we
should be ashamed, and we need to be punished. Mitote

The Toltec use this term to refer to the condition of the human mind.
The mitote can be compared to a huge marketplace where thousands of
people are talking at the same time, and nobody understands each other.
The mitote is also like a fog that blinds us from seeing the truth. The
Parasite The Toltec compare the Judge, the Victim, and the belief system
to a Parasite that invades the human mind. The Parasite is a living
being made of psychic or emotional energy. It can also be compared to a
program that dreams through our mind and lives through our body. From
the Toltec point of view, all humans who are domesticated are sick
because we have a Parasite that thrives on the emotions that come from
fear and su ering. Personal Importance During the period of our
domestication, we learn to think we are responsible for everything: "Me,
me, always me." Personal importance, or taking things personally, is the
maximum expression of sel shness because we make the assumption that
everything is about "me." The Victim The Victim is the part of our mind
that receives the judgments, and carries the blame, the guilt, and the
shame. The Judge decrees, and the Victim su ers the guilt and
punishment. The Victim is always crying, "Poor me" because of a deep
sense of injustice: It doesn't matter what the Victim does to please the
Judge, it is never good enough.

ABOUT THE AUTHORS Don Miguel Ruiz was born into a family of healers and
raised in rural Mexico by a curandera (healer) mother and a nagual
(shaman) grandfather. The family anticipated that Miguel would embrace
their centuries-old legacy of healing and teaching and carry forward the
esoteric Toltec knowledge. Instead, distracted by modern life, Miguel
chose to attend medical school and become a surgeon.

Late one night in the 1970s, a near-death experience changed his life.
Having fallen asleep at the wheel of his car, Miguel suddenly awoke at
that instant his car careened into a wall of concrete. He realized that
he was not in his physical body as he watched himself pull his two
friends to safety.

Stunned by this experience, he began an intensive practice of
self-inquiry. He devoted himself to the mastery of the ancient

ancestral wisdom, studying earnestly with his mother, and completing an
apprenticeship with a powerful shaman in the Mexican desert. In the
tradition of the Toltec, a nagual guides an individual to personal
freedom and don Miguel Ruiz has dedicated his life to

sharing his unique blend of ancient wisdom and modern-day awareness
through lectures, workshops, and journeys to sacred sites around the
world. His teachings have been translated into 46 languages and are best
known for transforming complex human issues into simple common sense ---
a talent that has earned him millions of fans and international acclaim.

For information about current programs o ered by don Miguel Ruiz and his
sons, don Miguel Ruiz, Jr. and don

Jose Ruiz, please visit: MiguelRuiz.com

Janet Mills is the founder and president of Amber-Allen Publishing and
coauthor, with don Miguel Ruiz, of six books in The Toltec Wisdom
Series: The Four Agreements, The Mastery of Love, The Four

Agreements Companion Book, The Voice of Knowledge, The Circle of Fire,
and The Fifth Agreement. Mills is also the creator of "The Four

Agreements for a Better Life" online course, editor of Deepak Chopra's
international bestselling title, The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success,
and publisher of the world-renowned "Seth Books" by Jane

Roberts. Her life's mission is to publish books of enduring beauty,
integrity, and wisdom, and to inspire others to ful ll their most

cherished dreams. She has donated thousands of books to prisons

and charities across the country, and lends support to charitable
organizations that bene t children, animals, and the environment. For
more information about the author or the online course, please visit:
TheFourAgreements.com

ALSO FROM AMBER-ALLEN PUBLISHING by don Miguel Ruiz with Janet Mills

The Four Agreements Based on ancient Toltec wisdom, The Four Agreements
o er a powerful code of conduct that can rapidly transform our lives to
a new experience of freedom, true happiness, and love. (Available in
paperback, ebook, audiobook, online course, and Spanish.)

The Mastery of Love Using insightful stories to bring his message to
life, Ruiz shows us how to heal our emotional wounds, recover the joy
and freedom

that are our birthright, and restore the spirit of playfulness that is
vital to loving relationships. (Available in paperback, ebook,
audiobook, and Spanish.) The Voice of Knowledge

In this life-altering book, Ruiz reminds us of a profound and simple

truth: The only way to end our emotional su ering and restore our joy in
living is to stop believing in lies --- mainly about ourselves.
(Available in paperback, ebook, audiobook, and Spanish.) The Circle of
Fire

A beautiful collection of prayers and guided meditations that will
inspire and transform your life. (Available in paperback, ebook,
audiobook, and Spanish as Oraciones).

The Four Agreements Toltec Wisdom Collection This handsome boxed set o
ers three of Ruiz's most widely

acclaimed works: The Four Agreements, The Mastery of Love, and The

Voice of Knowledge. The Fifth Agreement

Ruiz joins his son, don Jose Ruiz, to o er another powerful agreement
for transforming our lives. The Fifth Agreement

encourages us to see the truth, to recover our authenticity, and to
change the message we deliver not only to ourselves, but to

everyone around us. (Available in paperback, ebook, audiobook, and
Spanish.) For information about other bestselling titles from AmberAllen
Publishing, please visit: AmberAllen.com

"THE FOUR AGREEMENTS FOR A BETTER LIFE" Online Course Take the course
and begin a journey of personal transformation

unlike any other. Watch inspiring videos, deepen your understanding and
practice of The Four Agreements, and become a member of a worldwide
community of people who are dedicated to

changing their lives for the better by practicing The Four Agreements.
For information about the course, or for inspiration and encouragement
to live by The Four Agreements, please visit us online.

TheFourAgreements.com \|

TheFourAgreements

Receive a 20% discount when you purchase the course by entering coupon
code EBOOK at checkout.


