Beyond Fear

Beyond Fear A Toltec Guide to Freedom and Joy The teachings of DON
MIGUEL Ruiz as recorded by MARY CARROLL NELSON

PRAYER Please join me as I begin with a prayer. First, read the words of
the prayer and then take a few moments to close your eyes and do this
little exercise yourself. Whenever you are feeling alone or without
love, repeat this prayerful ritual and you will feel whole again. Put
your attention in your lungs. Feel the pleasure of breathing. To breathe
fulfills the biggest need of humanity. When we fulfill a need, we feel
pleasure. Feel that strong connection between your lungs and the air.
Just to breathe is enough to make you happy. You can always feel that
pleasure of the strong communion between your lungs and the air. That
communion is love. When the archangel created humans, he put a gift of
love in the air for them. This gift of love fills all of your being when
you breathe with awareness in every cell of your body, in every emotion
of your mind, and in every piece of light that creates you. Today, Oh
Father/Mother God, we ask you to come to us and be always with us. We
offer ourselves to you so that you can use our eyes, our voice and our
hands to share your love with yourself, because we are One. In every
direction from an electron to the stars, from matter to spirit, from
every emotion to the energy of light, God help us to be like you are -to
love with no conditions. Help us to love ourselves just the way we are,
without judgment, because when we judge ourselves we find ourselves
guilty and we need to be punished, and we suffer from the punishment.
Help us to be like you are, to accept everything the way it is, to love
the way you love, with no conditions.

Love is changing the whole world. Love is your real name and we are your
children, so we are also Love. Oh, Father/Mother God, help us to be just
like you are. Amen.

CONTENTS Prayer ..............................v Regreso a la Vida
................. viii Return to Life ......................x Author's
Statement ................ xii Foreword: A Dream journey .......xiii
Chapter One Teotihuacan, The Place Where Men Become Gods
..................1 Chapter Two The Vision of Teotihuacan .........19
Chapter Three Silent Knowledge and Elements of Toltec Wisdom
..............27 Chapter Four The Dream of Hell ................49
Chapter Fine

Mind, Evolution and the Dream ....59 Chapter Six Tools for
Transformation, Part One - The Mitote and the Inventory ....67

Chapter Seven Tools for Transformation, Part Two. ............ 81
Chapter fight

The World of Justice ....................... 107 Chapter lline Life
After Death ........................... 111 Chapter Ten The Way of Death
at Teotihuacan ............. 125 Chapter Eleven The Ways of the Nagual
in the World .......... 149 Chapter Twelve Gaya's Story-The Wisdom of a
Nagual Woman .. 165 Chapter Thirteen Prophecies
................................ 191 Epilogue .................206

Note: Throughout the book, the words of Miguel Ruiz are denoted with the
body of the serpent.

REGRESO A LA VIDA

Miguel Angel Ruiz

RETURN TO LIFE

Miguel Angel Ruiz

AUTHOR'S STATEMENT t has been my privilege to know Don Miguel Angel
Ruiz, and his lovely wife Gaya, for several years. Miguel and I have
shared numerous conversations in Santa Fe and Albuquerque, New Mexico
and in Teotihuacan, Mexico. On each occasion I became aware, for the
duration of our talk, that we had been in another dimension where the
possibilities for transformation are boundless. In this other place,
where Gaya also dwells, affirmation, a positive viewpoint and a
profoundly holistic sense of the sacred prevail. My task has been to
collect, record and shape Don Miguel's wisdom. Though I am neither an
apprentice nor a shaman, through the years of writing this book my
imagination has been penetrated by nagualism with its eternal promise of
heaven on earth, and I am grateful. Mary Carroll Nelson Albuquerque, New
Mexico May, 1997

Foreword A DREAM JOURNEY his book will take you on a dream journey into
your imagination. Your destination is heaven on earth and your guide
will be Miguel Angel Ruiz. Miguel is a nagual. Nagual is a word passed
down from ancient times through the Aztec language, Nahuatl. The word
nagual is making its way into English, particularly in discussions of
shamanism. What is a nagual? According to Toltec tradition everything
that exists is one living being, which manifests itself by creating
everything that we can perceive and everything that we cannot perceive.
This living being is the only one who really exists. All else, including
ourselves, is an emanation of this great and wonderful being. This being
controls our planet by supervising the energy of the sun, and the sun
also is an emanation of the one being, whereas all the planets orbiting
the sun are emanations of the sun. All life on the Planet Earth is an
emanation of the sun in an interaction with the Mother Earth. To
understand the emanations of the one living being, the Toltecs divided
everything into the nagual and the tonal. The nagual is everything that
exists that we cannot perceive. We could call it the unknowable and the
unknown. The tonal is everything that we

can perceive with our common sense. The tonal and the nagual can only
exist because of intent. Intent is that connection or that force which
makes possible all transference of energy between the nagual and the
tonal. Without intent, neither the nagual nor the tonal would exist.
There would literally be nothing in existence at all. Intent is life. It
is eternal transformation and eternal interaction. Intent is what we
call God. Intent is life by itself; it is God and it is Spirit. In terms
of our modern science, everything that exists in the world is energy.
Light is energy and everything, at its root, is light. Energy has
billions of manifestations, millions of different vibrations. The nagual
is all the energy in the stars and between the stars that we cannot
perceive. This is "el nagual." The kind of energy that we can perceive,
and prove that it exists, we call "el tonal." The solar system is a
living being with its own metabolism, with its own nagual and tonal. The
tonal is the sun, with all of the planets, moons, comets, meteorites and
satellites... everything that we can perceive with our eye and the
instruments that give increased power to our eye. The nagual is the
energy that comes from these planets and moons, including the energy
that emanates from the earth. Planet Earth is also a living being with
its own nagual and tonal. It, too, has its own metabolism. Like the
human body which has many organs that work together to maintain a
perfect equilibrium, the earth also has organs. Among these organs is
the human organ composed of all human beings together. As an organ,
human beings also have their own nagual and tonal. Emotions are energy
that we cannot perceive, but we call them tonal because we experience
them in our senses. The tonal in humans is the energy we know and also
the energy that it is possible to know. The nagual is the energy that we
cannot know with our reason. In the Toltec tradition, we call God "the
Eagle," which means the spirit. All human beings are the

Eagle. All human beings are the nagual, the tonal and also intent,
whether they are living or dead. When we refer to a person as a nagual,
we mean that the person has a characteristic energy which creates a
direct connection between the nagual and the tonal. The nagual can split
emotions from actions. The nagual is born with a strong will and is not
paralyzed by fear. A human being who is not born as a nagual is often
paralyzed by fear. Nonetheless, in theory, anyone can become a nagual by
intent. Some seers can see a person's characteristic mind energy in the
energetic field that surrounds the human body. If the person is a
nagual, the nagual energy field around the body has a shape like a
double egg. The form is that of a mandorla, a slightly pointed oval. A
nagual is a person who has the ability to teach or guide others to the
spirit by convincing them that inside of each person is a powerful force
linking one to God. This is the force of pure intent. Usually, the
nagual is the one who guides others to find who they really are, to help
them find their own spirit, their own freedom, their own joy, happiness
and love. Miguel Angel Ruiz was born a nagual. From the moment of his
birth, he had a precocious awareness of spirit. He was an incipient
Master of Intent. From a young age, he received training from his family
and also through visions. Miguel is dedicated to spreading his spiritual
knowledge as broadly as possible. For a decade, he has drawn upon his
visions to impart to his students a vast amount of wisdom that has been
hidden for centuries. They learn from his lectures, workshops and
journeys. For those who may never meet Miguel, the material in this book
has the power to replace fear with joy. We are all inculcated with fear.
Miguel says fear is the normal result of our domestication in childhood.
Fear is the root of the reality we usually

perceive around us. Fear is the source of disease, of war, and of
alienation from the joy that is our birthright. The greatest fear,
subsuming all other fears, is fear of loss or death. The path Miguel
follows is straight into the heart of our fear of death. His wisdom is
derived from a vision of the Toltec spiritual center in Teotihuacan
where ancient masters discovered a process for ridding ourselves of
fear. Miguel has journeyed to Teotihuacan with his students each month
for years. While there, he has led them along the Avenue of the Dead. He
has directed ceremonies at various stages of the path and guided his
apprentices to confront their fears and to release them. From this
process, they awake to a new view of reality in which the world is one
of justice and happiness. You do not have to visit Teotihuacan in order
to benefit from Miguel's wisdom. It is enough that you lend your
imagination to the inner journey of your own spirit.

Chapter One TEOTIHUACAN, THE PLACE WHERE MEN BECOME GODS eotihuacan,
"the Place Where Men Become Gods," is the sacred center of the Toltecs,
thirty miles northeast of Mexico City. The Toltecs retained and passed
down through oral tradition secret knowledge of healing and spiritual
transformation which remained intact for thousands of years. Miguel
Angel Ruiz is a direct descendant of the Toltec tradition. Through his
heritage, he has an innate psychic connection with Teotihuacan. A former
practicing medical doctor and surgeon, he received the spiritual
training to become a nagual, or a Master of Intent, from his mother's
family. Who were the Toltecs? Miguel says they were not a distinct race
of people such as the Maya. Traditionally, the word defined a group of
people from a number of tribal groups who achieved a rarified level of
spiritual enlightenment. They became known as Toltecs. Their elevated
state of consciousness made them eligible to live within the sacred
precinct of Teotihuacan. Miguel recapitulates the history of
Teotihuacan. He has learned the elements of this history through
visionary journeys to the past and to other cultures. The story begins
during the Third Sun, more than 20,000 years ago. At that time, there
was a race of people who maintained a perfect

equilibrium of body, mind and spirit. Their immune system was so strong,
illness was almost unknown. Science and technology reached a level
higher than that of our present civilization. Within that total race of
humans-at least as large a population as todaythere was open
communication, and it was the result of an unrestrained communication
within each human mind. Humans were not restricted by the concepts of
guilt and judgment. The Third Humanity held in their minds a dream of
reality that came close to being heaven on earth. It is remembered still
as Paradise. Humans are not the only beings with powerful minds.
Attached to humanity are unseen beings who also are an organ of the
earth. They share the metabolism of the earth, just as humans do. These
beings form a spectrum from benevolent to harmful. Sometimes they
possess human bodies. Many traditions are aware of them. They have been
present alongside the human race from the beginning and have been called
"gods" by various people. The destiny of these beings and that of humans
is very close. The Toltecs called them Allies.

The Allies lack a brain, which means they have no factory to create
emotions, but they need the ethereal energy of emotions to sustain their
life. Human beings are in a relationship to them much as cows are to
people. We, as human beings, take in energy from sunlight through our
food which

is already processed by other living beings, such as plants and animals.
Our brain transforms the material energy into the ethereal energy of our
emotions. Emotional energy supplies food for our own minds and for the
Allies or gods. We are just a resource for the gods. Allies push humans
to create traumas in order to create fear, which they feed upon. We are
born with the disadvantage of being controlled to a certain extent by
these gods through our dreams. The function of our mind is to dream. All
of our life is a dream within a framework of matter. Dreaming gives us
the sense of reality. We are born into a dream of war and violence. This
is our challenge. What if we all woke up? What would happen to the
Allies if we wakened from the nightmare and found bliss? They would also
have to evolve and eat love, not fear. Our souls already depend only on
love and resist fear. In order to know if a thought is "of God," we can
check to see if it creates fear. A fearful thought is not from God,
although it may come from an Ally. The true God of love has nothing to
do with fear. Note: Throughout the book, the words of Miguel Ruiz are
denoted by the body of the serpeant.

To resist the coercion of the Allies, you must become aware of them.
Even now, they are feeding on our emotions, so one should be careful
what kind of emotions one is transmitting. Our emotions attract the
attention of beings of a like kind. If we feel happiness, we attract
more happiness. If we feel depressed, we attract depression.

Each nation has its own god. The destiny of humanity is the story of
these gods. Jehovah is the god of one nation. Allah is the god of
another. The identities of the gods are as real as the Israelis and the
Arabs. When war comes, it is not just a war among people. It is
literally a war of the gods as well. Long before the building of
Teotihuacan, the gods were afraid that humans could reach heaven. During
the period of the Third Sun, the Allies became anxious for humans to
produce more intense emotions, which they in turn could use as food. In
order to achieve their own ends, they pushed humans to be more and more
divisive. They did this by interfering with the perfection of human
communication. The result was discord among nations. We find their
destruction of world peace recorded in the Biblical story of the Tower
of Babel. The three major population centers then were: the Land of Mu,
which we know as India and China (Miguel does not subscribe to the idea
that Mu or Lemuria sank into the Pacific Ocean); the Land of Monkeys,
which is North America today; and the Land of Atlantis, an island
continent between Europe and America. For centuries, these nations had
lived in harmony. The destructive influence of the "gods" led Mu and the
Monkey nations to join forces against Atlantis, which they destroyed in
a massive nuclear war. (Here again, Miguel's viewpoint differs with
those who believe Atlanteans were destroyed by their corrupt use of
genetic power and the crash of a comet.) An account of this worldwide
nuclear war is found in the sacred Vedantic scriptures of India in the
Ramayana, the Legend of Rama. Miguel states that in the mountains of
northern India buried remains of tall, strong humans from the Third
Humanity are yet to be discovered. A nation of people living on the
northern half of Atlantis were pyramidbuilders. We know this nation as
either the Titans or the Atlanteans, a darkskinned race. Through their
advanced system of communication, they were

responsible for the building of the Great Pyramid at Gizeh in Egypt.
Miguel says that the Great Pyramid is a monument to the Third Humanity.
Following the destruction of Atlantis came a time of decay in which the
level of human life sank to that of an animal. In our present
perspective, we are aware of only one evolution. We think we are an
outgrowth of protohumans. Miguel identifies our primitive forebears as
the Fourth Humanity, the degraded descendants of the majestic race who
preceded them. The Fourth Human race were short-lived, sickly creatures
of low intelligence. They lived their life spans of twenty-five or
thirty years in such deep hell that they left hardly any history, but
they were compensated by their prolific power of reproduction. The
Fourth Humanity repopulated the earth after the nuclear war. Here and
there, on isolated islands, remnants of the Third Humanity held out for
eight generations. These people retained their knowledge of science,
technology and spiritual development from before the war. They knew
their time was limited, due to the effects of radiation. Since their
power to reproduce was weak, they tried to use their remaining strength
to teach those of the Fourth Humanity. They would visit the population
centers of these primitives without getting too close, for fear of the
disease that was so prevalent. Third Humanity people focused on teaching
basic knowledge of agriculture and hygiene. Fourth Humanity humans
thought of these taller, more intelligent beings as "gods." A memory of
them can be found in sacred scriptures, for example, as the Elohim of
the Bible. Third Humanity survivors attempted genetic experimentation to
improve the race. They also sought a way to retain the knowledge of the
time before, when people lived in harmony and knew what it meant to have
perfect equilibrium. Even then, the area of Teotihuacan was known as a
sacred

place. Some of the ancient wisdom was stored at that site for later
generations to discover. The Toltecs believe that the sun is the source
of intelligence in the solar system. The remaining Third Humans prayed
to the sun for help in safeguarding the knowledge of achieving perfect
harmony. The sun responded. A new quality of energy came from the sun in
the form of messengers. Light is the messenger from the sun. In this
case, the new quality of light manifested as angelic beings who coupled
with humans to begin a mixed race with the potential for a new evolution
of intelligence. Enoch was among these mutated beings. There is a belief
among many current teachers and other wise people that the present
generation of humans was seeded by beings who came to earth from outer
space in spaceships. They claim that extraterrestrials performed
breeding experiments using their own genes mixed with those of the
protohumans. Miguel does not believe the seeding came from another
planetary race. His vision is more mythic and seems to substantiate the
possibility of virgin births, or of births stimulated by angelic beings
sent from the sun who were not human. Whichever image seems to be
correct, there is an element of "magic" to the mutation which altered
humanity and led to our current race. The change at that time in the
sunlight that controls life on earth marked the beginning of the Fifth
Sun. The Fifth Humanity-a race of mutants -is our own. We are partly
celestial and partly of earth. To accomplish this mutation, the sun
modified DNA to produce an improved human being with a better mind. The
effort of the present evolution is to recover the perfect inner
communication once known on earth but then lost, and the peace and
harmony such communication produces. Once again, we are becoming aware
of our human kinship.

We have rediscovered such concepts as peace, love and justice. We have
created laws. We are attempting to raise the living standard of
humanity. Still, we suffer from our lack of inner harmony and we needed
an influx of new energy to continue our spiritual evolution. Since
January 1992, the sunlight has once again changed. Its vibration is
different and it includes more violet rays. We now find ourselves at the
very beginning of the Sixth Sun. We are witnessing the birth of the
Sixth Humanity. Forerunners of this new race are already alive among us.
They know once again the basic dream of heaven on earth. All around the
world, knowledge stored from the days of the Third Sun is emerging. Many
native traditions are releasing their wisdom while, simultaneously,
advanced thinkers among scientists and philosophers are discovering
concepts that lend themselves to a growing holistic movement. Today,
there is a global proliferation of advanced individuals who have
achieved mastery over their inner communication. Earlier avatars, such
as the Christ, the Buddha and Krishna, served as models. There have
always been living masters, but we have been too afraid to accept their
simple, single truth: We come from the light. We are of God. Once this
truth is accepted, we can give up fear, selfhate, guilt, jealousy and
suffering. Teotihuacan is one of the places where this ancient wisdom
has been preserved. Miguel Angel Ruiz, while visiting the site, has
recovered more and more of this knowledge during trance states. He
believes his source is the rocks with which the various temples have
been built. The rocks function like a data bank, and he has access,
through his mastery, to the information left there by earlier masters.
It was in one such trance that he "saw" the original builders of
Teotihuacan when they, too, recovered the dream of heaven on earth from
the site even before the temples were built. Around four thousand years
ago in the time of the Fifth Sun (which has lasted five thousand years),
a group of spiritually advanced people who

came from the north went into a cave which has recently been located
under the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan. They shared a dream of a
huge snake. One member of the group, Smoky Mirror, directed or guided
the dream in such a way that the others would become aware they were
dreaming.

Smoky Mirror found a way to stop the suffering around him and to teach
others to become the loving beings they really are. He knew that inner
communication had been broken in the Third Sun, when humanity had
reached its highest level. He was aware that a Judge and a Victim had
been forced upon our consciousness by the gods. Self-doubt then
destroyed our inner communication. Smoky Mirror saw that the gods are in
a wrestling match with humans. They want us to stay in hell. The gods
invade the human mind during the domestication process each child goes
through. One of the troubling beliefs planted by the gods is "I'm just a
human being." However, being human is not a limitation. The human soul
is bigger than the gods, and the human mind is as immortal as the gods.

The gods try to instill a sense of injustice, which is like a knife that
wounds the mind. Injustice creates emotional poison which is expressed
as sadness, jealousy and fear. The sore of the wounded mind can hurt.
Once the mind is wounded it creates more poison. When others "touch our
button" we feel the pain. We try to cover it and not allow anyone to
touch our wounds, but this cover is a lie. It is like our armor, a
mechanical system of denial and defense. We know that injustice is not
fair and we try to touch others' wounds just to get even. Toltecs were
followers of Smoky Mirror. They were spiritual warriors who knew that
they were in a battle with the gods who thrive on conflict. The
warriors' purpose was to become gods themselves, to lose all fears and
regain control over their own minds. To do this, they had to create love
in place of fear. With this knowledge, they could shift the world to
Paradise. Modern spiritual warriors are also aware they are battling
against the gods

who possess them. The possession is broken as soon as you declare your
own right to dream your own dream. Free will can take you past personal
pain and toward personal freedom. Smoky Mirror discovered the primary
wisdom left behind by the Third Humanity, that we are children of the
sun. He found out that everything is made from light. We "eat" light and
the light brings us messages from the sun which controls life in the
solar system. Following the directions he received in his dream, Smoky
Mirror designed and directed the building of the first temples at
Teotihuacan. His wisdom was built into the very rocks of the temples. In
later years, these structures were expanded and others were built. This
group of magi, or wise people, founded a wisdom school, or mystery
school, at this place where men become gods. For several thousand years,
the masters of Teotihuacan taught advanced spiritual seekers how to
surmount fear and live as though they were in heaven, rather than the
hell most humans perceive around them. In preColumbian times, the
spiritual site was surrounded by a large population center of some two
hundred thousand people. It was also the major marketing and production
area of central Mexico. No one could apply for training with the Toltec
masters. A candidate had to be selected. Moving incognito among the
residents, the masters sensed who was ready to enter into apprenticeship
with them. Without being detected, they applied different tests to
determine the worthiness of those whose way of life they were observing.
When the masters perceived that they were nearing the end of the cycle
of power in Teotihuacan, they were sufficiently elevated to do the same
thing that scripture tells us Jesus did. They ascended. They left their
physical bodies, became one with the light, and ascended to the sun.
Left behind was

a vacuum of leadership among the group of spiritual aspirants who were
at various levels of learning but not yet at the stage of mastery. When
an invasion of barbarians from the north overtook Teotihuacan, the
remaining Toltecs in training were unable to withstand them. Many died.
The barbarians intermarried with the people of Teotihuacan and attempted
to adapt Toltec spiritual practices to their more primitive beliefs in
jealous gods who demanded human sacrifice. The bodies that have been
discovered buried beneath the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan are
probably those of the spiritual seekers who defied the invaders and were
ritually murdered. Corruption overcame Teotihuacan. Around the year 700
A.D., it was abandoned as a spiritual center. Its temples were
deliberately buried. Twentieth-century archaeologists are uncovering the
site and making it accessible again in time to coincide on an esoteric
level with the emergence of the Sixth Humanity. There was an exodus of
the remaining Toltecs in training from Teotihuacan. Some of them went
south and merged with the Mayans who were at that time in a state of
complete decadence. From that merger of the Toltecs and Mayans came the
new Mayan Imperium. Others formed a new community at Tula, where at
first the knowledge of the Toltec masters was retained. Little
organizations in the vil lages tried to preserve the knowledge like a
religion. The villages fought for control. The high priest came from the
most powerful city in the Tula area. The high priest was considered the
incarnation of Quetzalcoatl, the Feathered Serpent, who was one of the
Twin Brothers. The other twin was Smoky Mirror. In the Toltec religion,
these twins were the representation of the nagual and the tonal. They
took turns carrying these two energies. At

times, Smoky Mirror carried the nagual energy while Quetzalcoatl carried
the tonal energy. Then they would reverse places. The Toltec knowledge
was eventually corrupted by the leaders of Tula who succumbed to
temporal power. They misused the silent knowledge of Teotihuacan in
their efforts to escape death. Miguel says some of the worst black
magicians the world has ever known were there. They turned Quetzalcoatl
into a demon in much the same way that later powerful Christians used
the name of Jesus as a demon. The Aztecs became the most powerful little
country in Mexico. They built Temple Mejor in Mexico City and they tried
to instill the wisdom from Tula. The Aztecs became the new Toltecs. Two
groups of spiritual warriors among the Aztecs preserved the Toltec's
wisdom for five hundred years following the Spanish Conquest. They were
the Jaguar Knights, who were warriors in training, and the Eagle
Knights, who were fully trained naguals. Jaguar Knights were initiated
into death in a ceremonious ritual involving water and fire, during
which they renounced fear, anger and jealousy. After their training and
initiation they saw the world in a new way, as a world of justice. They
then became Eagle Knights. The highest of Eagle Knights was the
Tlotoani, the representative of God on earth. Any Eagle Knight could be
a Tlotoane. Miguel's family were Eagle Knights. The Eagle represents
divinity. All Eagle Knights, even to the present day, are in daily
contact with Divinity. They are in a state of constant happiness. The
practices they follow to achieve an awareness of bliss were also
followed in Ancient India, Egypt and Greece, and remain as living
traditions among native people. In early times, Teotihuacan was
connected

worldwide with many other sacred centers. All of them shared the same
basic silent knowledge. The Toltec way of life promotes a perfect
equilibrium of body, mind and soul. In most traditions, some functions
of the body are judged to be undesirable. Elevated spiritual warriors
who follow the Toltec way are not required to be celibate. A basic tenet
of their belief is to respect the human body as a temple, perfect just
as it is. The effort of the Toltecs is to become fearless, without
judgment, without victimization, and in a state of love. Miguel makes
frequent references to other traditions. He has a special love for the
Bible and the story of the life of the Christ. He also reveres the
memory of the Buddha. In his lectures, he connects the Toltec way to the
lives of these avatars. All paths, he says, are basically the same, but
the major religions have all been infiltrated with guilt, judgment and
fear. The Lineage of Miguel Angel Ruiz

Miguel is the thirteenth child of famed healer Mother Sarita. During his
early childhood, she was a locally known curandera, or healing woman.
When Miguel was eleven years old, Santa became seriously ill with
gallstones. The doctors wanted to operate but an underlying heart
disease made general anesthesia dangerous. Santa's mother took her to a
familiar healing center for psychic surgery. During this procedure,
Sarita had a vision of a doctor and three nurses operating on her gall
bladder. She asked for them when she opened her eyes, but the only
person there was the medium. The surgery healed Sarita of both her
gallstones and her heart problem. Thereafter, she dedicated her life to
healing others by using her inherited wisdom. Miguel was brought up with
an awareness that another dimension beyond the visual affects the
material level of reality. His older brothers and sisters told Miguel of
the times they had sat around the fire with their maternal

grandparents, long before Miguel was born, hearing the stories of the
little people who lived nearby. His siblings saw such creatures playing
in the trees around the house. The town of his mother's birth,
Juanacatlan, was a special place, what Miguel calls "a magical town."
One of the town's residents, Don Nachito, owned the pharmacy and served
as a substitute for a doctor. He liked to give gifts to children,
especially gifts of money. "My brothers used to get money from him. He
would make the money. He said to my older brother, \`I'm going to put a
coin in this box. It's yours. Put it under your pillow. Every day it
will have another coin inside."' His brother waited to open the box
until driven by curiosity, but when he opened it he found it was filled
with coins. Hearing these extraordinary tales while he was growing up
conditioned Miguel to accept that there is a magical level of life
beyond the visible everyday world. In his third year of medical school,
Miguel had his own traumatic introduction to this other dimension during
a violent car accident when he had an out-of-body experience. From then
on, his inner visions accelerated. Miguel graduated from the University
of Mexico medical school. He then served for one year in the village of
Alta Sonora in the Sonora Desert.

It was a whole year of wonderful experience. I met frequently with a
master who was a skinny man in his late forties, about 5' 5" tall, named
Don Esteban. He took me as his apprentice. He showed me amazing things
and he taught me to go deep into the dream state and to explore the
dream. Don Esteban took me into a cave where he taught me a way to
control the elements with an invocation. This is a powerful way to
control the energy between life and death, a way to communicate with the
different organs of the planet, like the wind, the water and the
forests. He made me face most of my fears. He always challenged my
reason, challenged my intelligence

and mainly challenged my personal importance. He taught me the way to be
humble and to respect everything that is, just the way it is. He taught
me to respect nature and to respect humans, just the way they really
are. Don Esteban was a wonderful man. He was powerful, loving and kind,
but every time I saw him I knew he was going to chal lenge my fears. I
always wore a defensive mask with him.

One year after I left the town, I went back looking for him and it was a
big surprise to find that nobody knew him. No one had ever heard of him.
It was as though he never existed. In those little towns, everyone knows
each other. Then, I began to doubt in my mind whether he really had been
born in flesh and blood... or was he just another state of consciousness
in which I made him in the way I preferred him to be. Today, I
understand that there was a close connection between my grandfather, Don
Leonardo, and Don Esteban. After serving for one year as a village
doctor, Miguel joined his two older brothers, both doctors and surgeons,
and established his medical practice in Tijuana in 1978.

In 1980, Sarita asked Miguel to begin an apprenticeship with her. Each
Sunday throughout his intensive training for the next three years, he
spent between eight and twelve hours in trance. In an altered state of
consciousness he journeyed to ancient Egypt, Greece, India, China and
Persia and learned their belief systems. These experiences had the same
vividness and authenticity as traveling in real life. Miguel's etheric
journeys yielded such viable, authentic information about these historic
traditions that he could compare them with contemporary Hinduism,
Buddhism, Zoroastrianism and Christianity. He concluded that all systems
of belief have a similar core. Trance Travel to Egypt

One Sunday during the second year of Miguel's apprenticeship, twentyone
of Santa's apprentices (including three of Miguel's brothers) gathered
with her and Luis. They were going to enter the trance state. The
practice was familiar to Miguel. He had been trained by the old man who
served as his teacher in the desert where Miguel served his year of
public service as a newly graduated doctor. He moved easily into the
dream state where he found himself in a long underground hallway.
Although he knew he was dreaming, he had a vivid experience. In real
time the trance dream lasted eight hours; in dream time it encompassed
nearly a year.

I was in the entrance. Behind me, I heard a door shut and I was inside a
hall illuminated by torches. I knew from experience I could control my
dreams as if I were awake. No aspect of dreams scared me, yet this dream
was different. I was in another reality and I could not control it. This
dream

exists in the memory of the planet. It is available to anyone who has
the training to enter it. A tall, skinny, bald man appeared to me. He
was dressed in a wrapped Egyptian garment of white cotton. He seemed to
be fifty or sixty years old. Around his eyes there was a strong, dark
shadow. He held himself severely in an authoritarian posture. I knew I
would be tested. Since I could not control the dream, I decided to be
the Stalker. (This means I would have to be acutely aware of everything
that happened to me and in me throughout the dream.) I opened my ears
and determined to learn as much as I could from the man, not only from
his words but from his attitude, as well. He was clearly a learned man.
He impressed me. I could not play games with this man. He was very
humble and serious. Right away he tried to intimidate me. He was testing
me. He asked, "Do you know why you are here?" I said, "I came here to
learn." I was not sure where I was. I only knew it was a sacred place, a
holy place where the intention was to find esoteric knowledge. "Do you
know where you are?" he asked. "I am in a sacred place where there is
hidden knowledge," I said. "If you are here to learn, you cannot leave
this place until you learn," he said. Inside, I felt the words "to learn
what?" although I did not say anything aloud. The old man took a torch
from the wall and began showing me images on both sides of the corridor.
This hallway of images still exists in ruins, but at a certain level of
vibration it still exists in prime condition.

That is the vibration ary level I reached in my dream. The same
frequency can be found in other sacred sites in Greece, Teotihuacan and
Peru. We could say that the frequency is the same as that of the
Christos, although that is merely our way of understanding it. A
vibration is a frequency of light in the memory of light. Everything is
light. Light has a strong memory. To vibrate at the same frequency as
anything that ever existed is to access it.

I did not recognize the images the old man was showing to me. Yet, from
the style of the glyphic figures, I knew I was in Egypt. Also, the man
himself reflected what I knew of Ancient Egypt. In my mind came the
words, "That man is a Hierophant."

The Hierophant said, "You must tell the meaning of these figures on the
wall before you can leave. Don't be concerned about food or drink. Just
try to understand." Then, he left me alone. I tried to understand but I
had no idea of the meanings of these images. Days, weeks passed. At a
certain point, I felt a fear that I would never learn and I could never
leave. Even though I was in a trance, it could not save me because I had
entered someone else's dream. I was overcome by panic. Something changed
very quickly and I surrendered to the experience. I was no longer in a
hurry to leave. I felt it would be all right if I stayed there forever.
I do not know how long I struggled before I surrendered, but suddenly, I
started communing with the energy of the figures on the wall. Miracles
happened. Surrendering is a way of being happy in any circumstance. I
accepted that place as my new world. Everything began to make sense to
me. I was no longer concerned about time. I just accepted the
interchange of energy as the figures seemed to come alive. A state of
communion is a state of vibrating at the same frequency. I was not using
my reason. The Hierophant returned and I was sure that I knew the
meaning of the figures and I wanted to tell him. I felt calm. But, he
just smiled and said, "You may go." This was another test. I was not
allowed to ever say what I had learned.

When I woke from my dream, all the group were already awake. They had
been waiting for me for a long time. I shared my vision with them. Each
person shared his or her dream, too and wrote it down in Sarita's Book
of Life. Later, Sarita burned the book. This single dream gave Miguel a
totally basic reference against which he could test everything else. He
understood that the images on the wall of the Egyptian hallway were
illustrations of The Book of Thoth. This ancient collection of wisdom is
known by other names: The Egyptian Book of the Dead and The Book of
Hermes. It is thought to be at least 35,000 years old. Miguel realized
that the images he had seen are the source of what we today call Tarot
cards. For a time, Miguel studied the Major Arcana of the Tarot in order
to absorb energy from the images. In his studies, he made the discovery
that no set of Tarot cards is entirely accurate, but those designed by
Pamela Coleman-Smith under the direction of Arthur Edward Waite are
based in love. The cards designed by Aleister Crowley are based on fear.
To check this out, try a comparison of the Fool in the two decks. The
happy fool in the Waite deck is transformed into a monster in the
Crowley deck. From his understanding of the original Tarot, Miguel says
that Judgment should properly be called Resurrection. The World is
actually the Universe. Strength is more accurately named Courage.

The Tarot illustrates Gene Li, and by arranging the cards in a certain
order, one can see a similar structure to that of the Avenue of Death at
Teotihuacan, which is the source of Toltec wisdom. You can try this
arrangement yourself:

Miguel will write a future interpretation of the Tarot, but for our
purposes, he says the Fool is Everyman dreaming that he does not know
where he is going, while carrying all his attachments in his hobo bag.
But, in his hand, he also carries the lotus of divine consciousness.
Outside the Avenue of Death, four cards represent hell. These are the
Devil, the Tower, the Wheel of Fortune and the Hanged Man. Inside the

Avenue, the Sun is the archetype of perfection as in Ra, Horus, Hermes,
the Christ, Krishna. Caught within the pattern are four cards that
represent the Archangels. Ariel is the Lovers, and this stands for Fire.
Temperance is for Raphael and earth. The Chariot is both Michael the
Warrior and Water. The Messenger is Gabriel and also Air. If the pattern
is looked upon as a glyph, it becomes the Eye of Ra, which is the
Doorway to Infinity or the Doorway to God. The outer row alone is the
double snake of Teotihuacan. A by-product of initiation through the
trance system of initiation is learning to see into the depths of
symbols. Miguel has a profound talent for grasping the linkages between
symbolic systems. He senses the Oneness at the root of all the esoteric
wisdom that is being released to human consciousness at this time.
Mother Sarita was satisfied, following his apprenticeship, that Miguel
was a fully trained nagual, and she declared him to be a Master of
Intent with full control over will, spirit and unconditional love. When
Miguel compared nagual healing techniques to allopathic medical and
surgical curing methods, he concluded that his nagual energy made him a
more effective healer. Although he believes some diseases and medical
problems are best treated with direct medical intervention, he came to
realize that conventional medicine was not enough to heal the sickness
of spirit pervading this planet. After long inner debate, he decided to
give up his medical practice and devote himself to his inherited
tradition. This decision was not an easy one to make for it meant giving
up the identity he had worked so long to achieve. Over the next four
years, he taught and did healings at Mother Sarita's healing temple in
San Diego, California. Miguel lectures, conducts workshops and guides
meditations. He also leads journeys to sacred sites and gives counseling
and healing in private sessions in Santa Fe, San Diego, Los Angeles,
Sacramento and elsewhere in the United States and in Mexico. The
outreach of his work is steadily

expanding. He has founded the Sixth Sun Foundation, an outgrowth of the
earlier healing temple, Nueva Vida, which he built for his mother and
has now closed. "I am still working as a doctor but I no longer heal
just the body. My goal is to touch the spirits of people and let them
know they have a choice," Miguel says. Miguel's earliest contact with
Toltec lore came in stories told by his maternal grandfather, Don
Leonardo Macias. Don Leonardo was also a nagual, but he shared his
knowledge with only a limited number of associates. His daughter Sarita
divulges her wisdom to those who seek her help. Miguel has always known,
from the age of six, that his family expected him to share his family's
knowledge as widely as possible. Some months before Miguel was initiated
as a Master of Intent, Gaya Jenkins consulted Mother Sarita for a health
problem. Sarita suggested she attend the classes Miguel was teaching. As
soon as Gaya walked into the classroom, Miguel recognized her as the
woman from dreams he had experienced since his youth. She had the same
boldly beautiful face, the same voice and the same manner. From that
meeting came the partnership and marriage of Miguel and Gaya. Long
before, Don Leonardo had warned Miguel that the energies in ancient
sites still have great power, and he told him not to go to them until he
was ready. Miguel had never visited his ancestral site of Teotihuacan
before March 1988, when he took Gaya there on a sight seeing honeymoon.
As they entered the first gate of the site, Miguel and Gaya felt like
ordinary tourists, but it soon became apparent to both of them that they
were so affected by Teotihuacan they found themselves locked into
separate, private dreams. Miguel's visions from that day initiated the
rapid synthesis he has made of Toltec wisdom with sacred knowledge from
other cultural

traditions that comes to him more and more frequently in dreams and
trance states. In the following chapters, you will share the wisdom
Miguel has received, which was formerly held secret awaiting this
particular moment in history when all knowledge retained for centuries
among native people is being revealed. Prepare yourself to enter another
dimension, parallel to the one you know from daily life, in which magic
is a normal occurence. You already visit this dimension in your night
dreams and daydreams, but you may not have been doing it consciously. To
follow the Toltec path to freedom from fear, you will do as the nagual
does. You will enter and leave this parallel universe by traveling into
your own mind.

Chapter Two THE VISION OF TEOTIHUACAN s Miguel Angel Ruiz and his new
wife, Gaya, sat on the peak of ,the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan, a
vision unfolded in his inner eye. Looking to his left some two thousand
feet away, he saw the Temple and Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl, the Feathered
Serpent, and its forecourt. The plaza he now saw, in a flash of insight,
is the head of a snake whose open mouth reaches up the steps of the
temple. Slowly turning his head, Miguel traced the "body" of the snake
out of the plaza to the north where it joins the Avenue of the Dead. He
looked down on this route 210 feet below his perch and followed its
progress another three thousand feet to the Pyramid of the Moon on his
right. There again, he saw that the plaza is a snake's head whose mouth
is the steps of the temple attached to the front of the pyramid.
Immersed in his vision, Miguel suddenly remembered the dream that first
came to him in childhood and recurred as he grew older. In this dream,
he always felt himself being drawn into the mouth of a huge two-headed
snake. It swallowed him whole. Beyond the ferocious head, the snake's
body opened into a tunnel filled with demons. He believed that the
tunnel represented the experience of death. Miguel sensed that he no
longer had a body. He was only his consciousness. The deeper he went
into the tunnel, the more his fears fell away. They were replaced by
feelings of peace.

Miguel had this dream a number of times. Each time the dream returned he
went further into the tunnel before wakening. Finally, he went all the
way through the serpent's body and fell into the second head. He was
then disgorged in a transformed state, deeply aware that he was a part
of everyone and everything, completely connected to the entire universe.
The dream had mystified Miguel, but he could now see that it represented
Teotihuacan. Another memory flooded his mind. Don Leonardo had once told
him, "In Mexico, a giant snake has been sleeping for hundreds of years.
Soon, a man of knowledge will awaken the giant. When it awakens, the
planet will change. Humans will change the dream of the planet." This
story also connected with Teotihuacan, and it seemed related to his
dream. "My dream was an echo of an ancient dream. I was attuned to this
other dream which someone else had, that inspired the building of this
place. This other person was Smoky Mirror. Smoky Mirror and I are one
being, because I am connected to his vibration," Miguel explains. All of
us have a potential ability to contact the vibration pattern of anyone
who has ever lived. These patterns of lives, called the Akashic records,
exist at an etheric level. Miguel's concept is that, by contacting a
former life pattern, a soul reincarnates that pattern in itself. Our
soul may not have lived as another person, but when we are in an altered
state we can access another life vibration. By tuning into it, we
reawaken a permanent part of our memory. Miguel reawakened Smoky Mirror
and dreamt his dream. Teotihuacan provoked such a profound sense of deja
vu in Miguel that he tuned into yet another life pattern. He saw himself
standing in the Plaza of the Temple of Quetzalcoatl amidst a crowd of
worshipers, people who had come from great distances faithfully
expecting a miracle. The year was 1929. The self he envisioned was a
Hindu monk wearing an orange robe. Miguel entered this experience just
as the monk said to himself, "I am going

to be born in Mexico to a family who will teach me the knowledge of
Teotihuacan." In 1952, a few months after this monk died, Miguel Angel
Ruiz was born. Therefore, his soul had entered Sarita's body prior to
the death of the monk. This episode conforms with classical Eastern
beliefs in reincarnation. It is not surprising that the event involves
India. In his present life, Miguel could be taken for an Asian Indian.
He is a small man with wavy, dark hair. His face is animated by large,
wise, dark eyes. It would be easy to imagine him wearing a robe or a
dhoti at home among other Hindi. India has attracted him so strongly
that he went there and performed a ritual death in order to sever his
connection to that country and free himself to live his present life.

I no longer feel I am from India. I am from this world now. The same
ancient silent knowledge is available in India as in Mexico, but the
discipline is different. In India time moves very slowly. It is
appropriate there to meditate for hours and hours, to stop the reasoning
mind and to transcend. However, for us to go to India and try to
transcend is difficult. In the West, we have a sense of urgency to
understand everything, which the Indians lack. As a result, our way is
faster than India. It is easier to adapt the knowledge of the Toltecs
(or other systems of native Western knowledge) and learn to transform
here than it is in India.

The feeling of having been to Teotihuacan before as an Indian Hindu
stayed with Miguel and so did his identification with Smoky Mirror. Both
visions confirmed that Teotihuacan is a spiritual place, the place where
his dream came true. Before they climbed down from the Pyramid of the
Sun, Miguel turned to Gaya and said, "I will be bringing a lot of people
here." At that moment, Miguel accepted the responsibility to carry out
what Don Leonardo had suggested years before when he said that Miguel
would spread the knowledge far and wide. Acting on faith, Miguel
organized his first group tour of the site in May 1988, only two months
after his visit there with Gaya. He subsequently guided over 60 tours to
Teotihuacan. These visits strengthened the ceremonious process he has
recreated spontaneously from his vision about the majestic original
purpose of Teotihuacan. The site at Teotihuacan is a large and
mysterious place which has been the centerpiece for many years of
exploration and speculation. It lies in Mexico's Central Highlands, 35
miles northeast of Mexico City. The complex of pyramids and temples is
laid out along a perfectly straight, wide walkway called the Avenue of
the Dead.

Archaeologists agree on a calendar of successive occupations of
Teotihuacan, stretching from around 1500 B.C. to 750 A.D. when the area
was mysteriously abandoned. From 200 to 600 A.D., during the Tzacualli,
Tlamimilolpa, Xolalpan and Metepec phases, defined in the history of
Mexican art as the Classic period, Teotihuacan was the most influential
city in all of Mexico. Priests and spiritual warriors, both male and
female, were the only residents of the city. A large population lived in
surrounding compounds and towns beyond the boundaries of the sacred
space that formed the complex. Seven small villages on the outskirts of
the site today are living reminders of this once thriving urban center.
Today it is known for its pyramids, temples, murals, clay objects and a
few religiously significant stone sculptures. Ignacio Bernal, in Great
Sculpture in Ancient Mexico, explains, "There are few civilizations in
which religion has influenced art so thoroughly as in that of ancient
Mexico. Although religion is always important as a source of aesthetic
inspiration, in this case it had an unusually stimulating effect on the
collective imagination, providing innumerable esoteric meanings which
were not only translated into art but embodied in the most ordinary
objects of everyday life, transforming the real world through symbolic
connections which had no counterpart in reality." (page 8) Bernal
directed the restoration of Teotihuacan from 1962 until 1964, and he was
the director of the Museo Nacional de Antropologia in Mexico City for
nearly thirty years. He speaks of Teotihuacan as the Classic city par
excellence, and possibly the largest capital in ancient America," and he
says that Teotihuacan "retains an air of severity" and it was "deeply
rooted in its air of imperial security, its preoccupation with rigorous
planning..." (page 20). The study of archaeology is mainly concerned
with reconstructing the layers of civilizations in a given site through
the changes in styles of

artifacts. Archaeologists seek explanations about why and when a given
people moved to a place and how they lived. They infer beliefs and
customs of the various residents from materials found in the area. While
visiting Teotihuacan one might well be interested in the objects found
on the site, but it is even more probable that the place arouses a
curiosity about its meaning. Controversial but consistently intriguing
author Zecharia Sitchin believes the shrines of Teotihuacan may have
been built by "gods" who visited the earth from space. He has theorized
that these gods landed first in the Middle East. Later the gods directed
the Olmecs, who had African features, and another race from the Middle
East with Semitic beards and profiles, to begin building Teotihuacan.
Their first structures were made bigger and handsomer by later groups of
people whose intentions differed from the Olmecs. In his series of books
titled The Earth Chroizuele\<i, Sitchin theorizes that explorers from
the planet Niburu came to earth to search for gold. In their laboratory,
they created the first human beings from their own genes blended with
that of primitive proto humans. The crossbreeds, who were designed to
serve as slaves in the gold mines, at first revered the "gods" who
created them. Over time, however, these created slaves developed the
intelligence to challenge their creators. Their fertility led to
populating the planet with a more advanced form of humanity. Our present
cycle of evolutionary history begins with them. In Sitchin's theory,
Teotihuacan was originally built for the gods to be a mile-long gold
refinery. Water and raw ore were directed downward on a ninety-foot
slope to the south through an intricate system of channels whose purpose
was to extract gold. The gold was not used at Teotihuacan; instead it
was shipped back to Niburu via an interso- lar supply system.
Fascinating as such exotic speculation might be, there is another
interpretation of Teotihuacan. This is the one that Miguel Angel Ruiz
has

synthesized from his Toltec ancestry, his repeated visits to Teotihuacan
and his visions while in trance. Hell on Earth

Fundamental to Miguel's teaching is the concept that earthly life is
hell. Hell is the combined dream that all humans share. Both individual
and collective dreams are actually nightmares. Every individual has a
dream of reality, and likewise, so does each family, each community,
city, state, nation and the whole of humanity. We all contribute to the
dream that is characterized by fear. An ultimate healing would mean to
waken from the dream and to thereby be liberated from hell. Teotihuacan
was designed for this purpose, to free humans from their fears. Such
freedom restores the knowledge that humans are of a divine nature. They
are gods. This the source of the nameTeotihuacan, which means,
literally, "the Place Where Men Become Gods." Through visions, Miguel
understands that the people who first set tied in the Valley of
Teotihuacan came from the Place of the Swans, or Aztlan, somewhere
within the Northern United States or possibly Canada. These people were
indigenous to the Western Hemisphere, neither nomads from Asia nor
refugees from Africa. When the Aztlans entered the valley, they found a
number of caves in which they developed a system of interconnecting
tunnels. One of the caves, known as "The Heart of the Universe," became
a ceremonial shrine dedicated to the Mother Earth. The cave, a four-part
structure in cloverleaf form, has recently been located under the
Pyramid of the Sun. The pyramid was deliberately built on top of it.
Author John B. Carlson (in "Rise and Fall of the City of the Gods" in
Archaeology, November-December 1993, pages 58-69) claims that this was a
dry four-chambered lava-tube. Miguel senses that within the cave at one
time there was a lake fed by a river.

In this cave, a man who personified the Smoky Mirror had a dream of
being swallowed by a two-headed snake. Smoky Mirror dreamed he was being
digested in the body of the snake until all that was left was his
essence.. .a beam of light and love. From that original dream, he
conceived the entire layout of Teotihuacan as a manifestation of the
snake. By attuning to Smoky Mirror's plan, the properly prepared pilgrim
can be led through this site to his own divinity. He can become
eternally free from fear. The original purpose of Teotihuacan was to
change the dream of all those who survived an initiation into freedom
through a ceremonial process. When Miguel entered into Smoky Mirror's
advanced consciousness through his dream, he gained the power to
interpret Teotihuacan and to revitalize the ceremonial spiritual passage
once conducted there by the original priesthood. Miguel's intention is
the same as Smoky Mirror's: to share the knowledge of how a spiritual
warrior can follow the Avenue of the Dead from hell to freedom. The time
of Smoky Mirror was long before the eventual decadence that overtook
Teotihuacan. In the later period, there were human sacrifices and
hallucinogens were used to reach higher states of awareness, but in the
early time of purity that Miguel has tapped into with his vision,
neither of these rites were practiced. On his first visit to
Teotihuacan, still affected by overlapping visions, Miguel made his way
to the Pyramid of the Moon where Smoky Mirror's spirit is manifested. In
the Plaza of the Moon, he felt Smoky Mirror's energies and identified
himself with that place where the soul finally exits from the snake's
second head in a state of transformation. The visions Miguel had in 1988
marked the end of his first cycle of work as a nagual healer and
teacher. They provoked a new level of synthesis in his shamanic
understanding. He had absorbed elements of the nagual

tradition from Don Leonardo and he had learned about unconditional love
from Sarita, but he had gained a profound knowledge of ancient belief
systems while in trance states. Later, he had identified completely with
Smoky Mirror's dream. Yet, Miguel's own vision is separate from any of
those he has been taught or has envisioned. He has transformed
everything he has received. The world view he teaches is a form of
magical physics.

Chapter Three SILENT KNOWLEDGE AND ELEMENTS OF TOLTEC WISDOM To grasp
the brilliance of present-day advanced scientific knowledge requires
extensive study. This was also true in prehistoric times when
intellectual leaders passed on their scientific knowledge to selected
students. Miguel's teachings are a merging of his intuition and his
education, including an awareness of astronomy, physics and biology. His
wisdom applies on a shamanic level, a different dimension of reality
from the one most scientists study in their laboratories. He offers an
effective explanation of the natural world at that place where
metaphysical concepts intersect with materiality. Miguel's students
enter a spiral path when they commit themselves to learning what he
knows. He repeats the same primal concepts again and again, slowly
adding increments of new material. With each repetition, in slightly
altered words, his ideas echo in their minds, as he builds a new
structure for their world view. This book follows that spiral path in
which Miguel's teaching gradually widens to encompass related ideas
grouped around core thoughts. At the originating point of the spiral is
a key idea that is known to native people of wisdom throughout the world
far back in time: the universe ai a firing, highly intelligent being.
Miguel also teaches that the sun is a living being.

Every planet is an organ in the solar being. Together, the sun and all
the planets are one being. Each unit from an electron to a galaxy is a
single being united into larger beings. Our universe is a being made up
of the whole system of smaller beings. There are many universes and
together they constitute a gigantic being.

In any of the atoms of the body, the electron is like a planet. Living
beings on the third electron looking out from their home would view a
human body as stars in the same way that people looking out from the
earth see stars. As above, so below. The macrocosm is reflected in the
microcosm. The same chemical and physical laws affect both the human
body and the planets.

As inhabitants of our solar system, we acknowledge the primacy of the
sun as our center. Though it is a minor star in the galaxy, the sun is
our major star. It provides the light whose energy sustains life on the
earth. All along the life chain, living organisms ingest light. Living
creatures take in energy from food and oxygen. The light eaten by humans
has

already been transformed into food by plants and animals. The human
brain transforms this energy from matter into ethereal energy. How does
this happen? In the process of perception we always have an emotional
element. The brain creates the emotion and the emotion is a state of
energy. Emotion is no longer matter. It is a form of energy. Material
energy is that which is detectable and provable by scientific methods.
Ethereal energy cannot be proved within the limits of mainstream
science. We cannot prove that hate or love exists, but we experience
their effect. Emotional energy is ethereal energy. For several hundred
years, scientists in Europe postulated that the basis of matter in space
is an energy known as ether. Miguel says that ether actually exists and
the theory of ether is beginning to make its way back into the
consciousness of non-mainstream scientists. Efforts to build so-called
Space Power Generators which make use of free energy-ether-in working
motors are being funded in a number of countries. (See "Around the Free
Energy World in Thirty Days," by Toby Grotz, in Neu' Science Newe, Vol.
III, No. 2, page 2.) Shamans have never doubted that space between the
stars, planets, moons, asteroids, galaxies and universes (and within the
atoms of our own bodies) is filled with ether. Ether is the medium of
transportation through which information moves.

A basic myth encircles the world in which the following elements are all
present:

Father Sun brings light and heat to Mother Earth. Mother Earth creates
life, the human body and the mind. Just as the sperm carries to the womb
all the information necessary to create a human being, so the sunlight
brings into the earth the energy and the information needed for earth to
create life. This myth is honored by native people everywhere and it is
the reason that God is so often represented by the sun. Examples are
Apollo and Ra. Mother Earth is the womb. The sun receives information
from the center of the galaxy. Light comes from other stars as well as
the sun. The universe communicates with itself through light. Condensed
light is a nerve found throughout the universe. Throughout the universe
there is a constant flow of information. Data moves in beams of light
from the sun and other stars. Light beams are therefore messengers, and
one synonym for messenger is "angel." A light ray is an angel. An angel
is a being of light carrying information outward from the center of our
galaxy, star to star, sun to planet.

Our seemingly solid bodies are created from condensed sunlight, making
us vessels of light, just like angels. Our true identity is angelic, or
lightfilled. We are beings filled with the information that comes to
earth in light. The primary source of all information is at the center
of the universe. In our region of the universe, the source is at the
center of the Milky Way, our own galaxy. Locally, our source is the sun.
(There are numerous universes besides the one we inhabit.) The
information carried by light is known as the silent knowledge. The
secret of this wisdom is the coded method of continually renewing life.
This life-preserving data in our sunlight is decoded by Planet Earth.

The earth is both an organ in the body of the solar being and a complete
system, or living body, in itself. The earth transforms the energy of
light into ever-renewed earthly life. Within living cells, the silent
knowledge is stored and passed on in DNA; therefore our own bodies are
storehouses of this wisdom.

Earth has its own metabolism and it also has organs. The sun's energy is
processed by the organs of the earth and then is released back to the
sun, like an inhalation and an exhalation of breath. Among the earth's
"organs" are its atmosphere, which functions like the skin of the
planet, the oceans,

the forests and all animals. The totality of human beings forms an organ
of the earth. The function of the human organ is to transform energy
from matter to the ethereal, and conversely to transform ethereal energy
into matter. Native people even now recognize each organ of the earth as
a god. There is a god of the ocean, a god of the air, and a god that
represents all humans. There are personal gods and family gods, and a
god for each nation. Instead of calling them gods today, we speak of
"the spirit of the nation," but it is still a god. Gods are created in
the mind of humans. What does God mean? God means an entity superior to
a human. It protects the earth to think that there is a god for the air,
a god for the sea, and to venerate that godlike energy. One can imagine
the positive result if the majority of humans praised each of the
earth's organs, including the whole of humanity. In addition to the gods
who represent earth's organs, humans have revered other gods who came
from elsewhere in the universe. We are now at a momentous point in the
history of life on earth. Some celestial programming is underway. All
hidden ancient traditions are being opened at once. The opening of the
silent knowledge is a response to a signal from the intelligence at the
center of our galaxy, the Milky Way, via our sun. Miguel states that we
entered the Sixth Sun on January 11, 1992, just as it was predicted in
the Aztec calendar. Energy from the sun abruptly altered on that day.
Miguel was in Teotihuacan for the anticipated event with a group of his
students. He saw the color of the light change. The vibration of our
sunlight became faster and gentler. Miguel channeled the new light and
performed a ceremony to receive the birth of the Sixth Sun. He describes
what happened there as a miracle. His companions noticed a change in him
and then felt it in themselves as they stood within the complex of
temples

where the new sunlight was received with a special charge. All life on
the planet and the planet itself are affected by the change in DNA.

DNA, (deoxyribonucleic acid, the basic substance, which takes the form
of a double helix, found in the nucleus of every cell which is
associated with the transmission of genetic information) is a specific
vibration of light that comes from the sun and becomes matter. Every
kind of life on Planet Earth, from the stones to humans, has a specific
vibration from light that comes from the sun. Each plant, animal, virus
and bacterium has a specific ray of light. It is condensed by Mother
Earth and the information carried in the light becomes matter. This
reproduction is the method whereby the silent knowledge is passed down
from generation to generation of different life. DNA is specific to
every form of life. Science has not yet differentiated the subtle
distinctions in forms of DNA.

We have come to the beginning of a new dispensation. It could mean a
relaxation of the harmful attitudes we have been harboring, but there is
an implicit sense that we might not change as fast as necessary to avert
predicted natural disasters. Changes in the earth's axis, in climate and
in the crust of the earth are possible because earth is experiencing the
new energy as an opportunity to heal itself. The change in vibratory
energy coming into the earth has not gone unnoticed among certain
scientists. Ron Radhoff writes, "...in 1962, the year many say we
entered into the Aquarian Age, we began to enter into the influence of
(the) photon-belt encircling the Pleiades. We will pass into the center
of it by the year 2011....St. Germain... refers to the photon-belt as
the Golden Nebula, a parallel universe of much higher vibration. Little
by little it is absorbing our universe. As we merge with this higher
vibration universe, it will become the catalyst for massive changes."
(Neiv Science News, Vol. III, No. 2, page 7) During the years of the
Fifth Sun, incoming solar energy had a harsh effect on human beings, and
through us, on the earth. The pur pose of the present change in energy
is to alter the dream that humanity is projecting onto itself and the
earth. We will move from a nightmare of hell to a dream of heaven on
earth. Heaven is a place without fear. Elements of Toltec Wisdom

The Toltec tradition forms a chain. Miguel learned from his grandfather,
Leonardo Macias, and he learned from his father. Father to son. Miguel
can trace his family to the early 1700s, but he does not know where the
chain began. He says, "I come from the Toltecs, people who lived
thousands of years ago and are still alive. Toltec means 'men of
knowledge'... that's what all of us are."

The Toltec tradition is a way of life, not just a way of knowledge. The
goal of this way is happiness. To achieve happiness, you need to express
who you really are, not the person other people expect you to be.
Through a process of self-scrutiny, you can discover who you were before
you were domesticated. Then you can recover the freedom to use your own
mind, your own body, your own brain to express yourself outside the
dream which is life. To achieve that freedom, the Toltecs developed
three masteries. 1. Mastery of Awareness. Through this mastery, one
becomes aware that humans are dreaming all the time, day and night. They
are creating the dream of hell. The way out of the nightmare is to know
where you are, what you are and what kind of freedom you seek. II.
Mastery of Transformation. This is also known as Mastery of Stalking.
Through this mastery one gains control over one's emotions.

Once we have the awareness that in our minds we are the slaves of the
Judge and the Victim who dictate our emotions, we can, through the
Mastery of Transformation, challenge our whole belief system. Our goal
is to recover who we really are, to be ourselves and to allow our spirit
to express itself into the outside dream. By choosing our actions and
reactions in everything that we do, the Master of Transformation becomes
a master of freedom, a master of surrendering and a master of love.

III. Mastery of Intent. This is the mastery of the spirit and the will.
The Master of Intent becomes One with God. God works through the
master's mouth, mind and hands. In that state, with every action the
master does, there is God. The Toltecs' goal is have communion with the
Creator, the Spirit. They seek to go back home. In their teaching, they
say we came from the Creator and we will return to the Creator. Miguel
speaks of the Creator as Father, and he uses the masculine pronoun.
Eknath Easwaran, in his book Meditation, explains his use of the word
Lord in a way that is in empathy with Miguel's. "When I use words like
'Lord' or 'God,' I mean the very ground of existence, the most profound
thing we can conceive of. This supreme reality is not something outside
us, something separate from us. It is within, at the core of our
being-our real nature, nearer to us than our bodies, dearer to us than
our lives." (page 30) The Toltec tradition is a map that tells you how
to go home. Because it is a map, you have to begin at the point where
you are. Your first task is to become aware of what you really are, and
this is a mystery.

To explain what you are, you could just say your name. Or, you could
say, 'I was born and I'm going to die.' You are a human, a man or a
woman. You are a doctor, a lawyer, a teacher, whatever you do. You are
your body. You think that you are what you feel. But is all of that
true? Is that what you really are? We ask eternal questions. What is
God? What is the universe? What is death? What is the Planet Earth? What
is matter? What is light? Science tries to explain material questions.
There is an amazing amount of knowledge available to us, but behind that
knowledge is the mystery. What is behind electrons? What is behind
galaxies? What is behind the spirit? Did we exist before we were born?
What happens when we die? We say, 'I am,' but what does it really mean?

As a medical doctor, I could say "I am a human body, a perfect
biological machine with a marvelous brain that has been made by billions
of little computers that are the neurons. It is made by little living
beings that are the cells that make organs and muscles. I am that
complex which is human."

What makes that possible? What is the human brain? How does the brain
work? We have tried so hard to explain it by microscope and electronics.
We have had amazing results from our experiments, yet we still do not
know what the brain is. You are going to die, but now you are alive.
What is life? It is useless for us to reason in order to understand
something that is impossible to understand. Our reason tells us what is
truth and what is not. Reason makes the decision, this is what I am and
this is what I am not. However, these decisions are merely limits, not
possibilities. If I say I am happy, you can understand me. You have a
concept of happiness. When I feel pain, either physical or emotional
pain, I have to use words and concepts to describe it, yet they do not
explain it. Anger and jealousy are nothing but concepts. The truth is we
are a great mystery. Because I have the Mastery of Transformation, I am
aware that everything, including myself, is energy in motion. Miguel
refers to an object that seems to be solid, yet we can prove
scientifically that it is composed of atoms. Atoms are constantly
moving. Although the object seems solid, it is actually moving energy.
The space between atoms is larger than the mass of the atoms themselves.
We perceive things as stable, but everything is in constant motion.

What we see is nothing but the light reflecting from objects. Reflected
light gives them apparent form. We have agreed to accept our visual
perception of reality as the truth, but this truth derives from an
arrangement or consensus in which we are a partner. Perception is a
miracle that demonstrates our power to create the outside reality. We
perceive the natural world, but we actually created it in our mind and
brain.

We have created language, and we use it to name all the animals and
plants and other components of this universe. Naming things seems to
authenticate the world of illusion. The reality we have made gives us a
false sense of security.

We feel we have our feet on the ground. We see the sky. We sense the
wind and the rain. It is familiar to us. It is all a dream made by the
mind. It is a dream with matter and structure because we made it that
way with our own magic. All of us are magicians. Because we have the
power to create this reality, we are related to everything in this
reality. What I see with my eyes and hear with my ears is true only in
this reality. If I shift my point of view a little, it is not truth
anymore. We are all traveling together on the spaceship of Planet Earth.
We are moving through space at tremendous velocity. Because we are all
moving at the same speed, we feel as though nothing has moved. If we
could stop just for a moment while the rest of the world moves, we would
see a different reality. When we shift our point of view, we see that
our body is matter which is energy that allows us to move. Another kind
of energy is all around us that is also us, and this is the mind. The
mind is energy but it is not matter. We think. We feel. We dream. But we
cannot take a piece of a dream into the laboratory and prove that it
exists. We cannot take love into the laboratory and say, "This is love."
We do not prove that an emotion exists, but we know that love exists
because we can feel it. It is not matter, but it is energy. It is energy
because it exists. Everything that exists is energy. Energy cannot be
destroyed. It can only be transformed. Energy has no beginning and no
end. This sounds familiar. When we go to church, we hear such words said
about God. God and energy are exactly the same. Everything is made by
energy and everything is made by God. There are billions of
manifestations of energy. There are billions of manifestations of God
because everything is God.

The mind is energy that is not matter. The mind is ethereal energy. All
energy is alive, so the mind is alive. Not only is the body alive, but
the mind is also and we are the mind as well as the body. We mix the
material and the ethereal energy in the concept "I am."

At the same time that we are talking, our mind is actively thinking. It
is dreaming. Our eyes perceive the light, but the mind makes an
interpretation of that light and creates this reality. It is possible to
reach a point at which the separation of mind and body dissolves and
reality itself will change completely. Individuality is a false concept.
We are not individuals. We are just a little piece of the chain that is
life. Your human body is made by billions of cells. Every little cell is
a living being that can exist outside of your body. It can even
reproduce outside of your body. You are that cell also. The cell itself
has many inner elements and each of them is alive. The cell is part of a
chain. With billions of cells we make a human body. You can say, "I am
the body." Meanwhile, each cell can say, "I am a cell." The cell lacks
awareness that many cells together make an organ. The liver, the heart,
the intestines, the brain, the eyes-all the organs together form a human
body, which is a unity. Each of us is a human being. Yet, just like a
cell, we think we are separate and we are not. All humans on the planet
create another organ for a larger living being, which is the earth.
Planet Earth is a living being. We are the Planet Earth. A single cell
is human. A single person is the planet. All humans form only one of
earth's organs. There are many others. The trees, the atmosphere, the
ocean, rocks and animals are all organs of the earth. The earth has
etheric energy just like humans do. It has a soul. It has a mind. It is
alive. It is a living being. It has a metabolism through which it
receives energy from the outside. It transforms energy that it takes in
and sends out its own form of energy. Planets receive energy from the
sun and transform it. On earth, animals eat plants and transform the
energy they receive. Humans eat plants and animals and transform the
energy they receive from them.

What is the function of the organ in earth's body that humanity
constitutes? It is to transform material energy into ethereal energy. We
receive food and oxygen, and with our brains we transform the energy of
matter into ethereal energy.

We work for the earth twenty-four hours a day, just like the bees and
the ants. The work we do for the planet is to make emotions. Making
emotions is the main function of the human mind. We are dreaming when we
are awake and when we are asleep. When you sleep and dream, your dream
creates emotions. When you are awake and dream, the dream has a
structure. Even though we are dreaming, we are interpreting everything
we experience. To do so, we impel our brain to create emotions. This is
our function. Planet Earth is one element in a chain. The whole universe
is alive. It is a living being. This planet is just a little piece of
the living being that is the universe. Who we are is now somewhat
expanded. We are the body. We are the mind. We are also Planet Earth.
There is information in the large chain that is the universe. The same
information is in the earth. Likewise, all the information in one human
body is in one cell of the body. One cell has all the information needed
and all the power to create its own universe in the form of another
human being. One human being has all the power and information it needs
to create another planet. Such an act of creation does not depend upon
reason. This creation from within depends upon the silent knowledge.
Even the cell is as powerful as the human body, and the human body is as
powerful as the earth, and the earth is as powerful as the whole
universe. At each step in this chain, it is necessary to change one's
point of view to perceive the analogue. From the microcosm to the
macrocosm, one system is operating. It is all a mystery. From outside
the human point of view, it is possible to see the complexity of the
human being and to see the

relationship of the human to the total mystery of the universe. Wherever
we go, we are there waiting for ourselves.

Each human being compares with a cell in a muscle. We are the same
interchangeable cells. If I am you and you are me, I have no reason to
hurt you. If you are me, why do you have to hurt me? If I am my planet,
why do I have to destroy the planet? Why don't I understand the planet?
Why don't I understand you? We might recognize ourselves by our names,
our personalites, our separateness, but when we alter our point of view,
the concept of individuality seems very limited. We are not individuals.
We are One. That One is ultimately all universes together. This is the
big mystery. This is God. God is only a concept. It is a title, like a
lawyer or a doctor. The concept of God is too small for the reality of
what God is, but it is an explanation that our reason accepts. We lack
adequate words to explain God, but the word God is understandable to us.
In reality, God is life. Life is action. We are God and God is us. As
part of the human organ of the planet, we are connected with every other
part of the planet. Whatever happens to the planet affects everyone
within the human organ; and vice versa, whatever affects a single person
within the human organ, affects the entire planet. Like a single cell
that has the power to create a human being, deep inside of us we have
the power to create a whole universe. Our reasoning is so limited that
it prevents us from understanding the scope of our power. We have the
power to change everything. We can transform. We can build or destroy.
Our power is greater than any atomic bomb. Our power is our intent, our
spirit. This is our silent knowledge.

Reason does not know that we know. Reason is only a small part of the
mind. Reason does not make decisions. It has one function and that is to
connect two different dreams, the dream of the planet with the
individual dream.

The mind is made by emotions. Emotions are the code that builds the
mind. Just as numbers are the code for mathematics, and notes are the
code for music, emotions are the code for the whole mind. Every emotion
is alive and is a living being. Just as every cell in our body is alive
and creates the human body, so every emotion is alive. The mind is also
alive and is a living being. Mind connects all human beings. All human
minds together form the largest part of the mind of the planet itself.
The strongest scientific point of view today is still focused on earth
as an object. When a volcano erupts or a hurricane howls, science offers
a technical explanation for the event. In Toltec wisdom, the earth has
decided to take these actions. The planet is a living being who can
think and make decisions for itself. Toltec ancestors understood that
earth is a living being. Such a world view is still held by native
peoples all around the world. If the ground is parched, they dance to
bring rain. They play the drum and sing. They build a fire. The
important part of their ritual is that they make their intent to Mother
Earth to bring them water and earth responds. They do not consider the
relationship of their intent and the earth's reaction to be a mystery.
This level of relationship cannot be understood through the reason
alone. The native point of view is that of a shaman. In order to
transform, humans will need to recover the shamanic perspective. We
cannot see an electron with our human eye because our eye is not
designed to see it. Our eye operates within a certain time and space.
The electron's time and space of operation are completely different from
the eye's. To see an electron, we would need to be another electron in
an identical time and space. Because we are Filled with electrons, we
can grasp the concept of electrons. We have emotions, so we can
understand emotions. We do not perceive them with our eyes. This kind of
perception is closer to the intuitive and shamanic than it is to the
analytical process of

our reason. We are connected with everything and we affect everything
through our intent. Our intent is a different part of our mind than our
reason.

One human being within the earth's organ of humanity compares to a
neuron within the human body. One neuron can make a decision and the
whole body will obey. Likewise, one human can make a decision and the
elements will obey. The elements are obedient to human intent. To bring
on the rain, you must transform your point of view and become one with
the rain and the atmosphere. When you are in harmony with their
vibration, anything can happen. You can apply this same principle to
identifying with an animal, or any other organ of the planet. We can
extend this process to include the entire universe, not just the earth.
When the relationship of the human to the whole universe is understood,
it is easy to see that there is truth in astrology. Astrology is a
science rather than a tool of divination. Ancient Toltecs knew that the
universe is a living being that has a metabolism. Astrology was a study
of the metabolism of the universe. The Toltecs were seers who knew what
would happen to the planet because they could interpret the quality of
energy the universe needed from the earth. We create emotional energy
and this is the main form of energy that the earth transmits to the sun.
From the sun, emotional energy is radiated outward to the rest of the
universe. The sun controls the earth and it makes decisions that affect
the earth. The sun sends us light. In sunlight is all the information
the sun intends to send to earth. Light is energy. All energy has
memory, so all information can be stored in light. Sunlight carries
information for the whole planet. It causes reactions in the earth. The
earth contains ethereal, material and emotional energy. In reaction to
the information coded in sunlight, the earth will respond by sending the
energy intended by the sun.

Teilhard de Chardin, the great Jesuit philosopher, gave the name
"noosphere" to the quality of mind and thought which encircles the
globe. The noosphere is the mind organ which is made of all human minds
together. Such an idea explains the simultaneity of inventions and the
manner in which an idea moves swiftly from mind to mind and leads to
changes in human thought. Rupert Sheldrake is a British biochemist who
proposed the theory of formative causation, in which each natural
system, from crystals to humans, shares a morphic field. The individual
entities within each field inherit a collective memory. Their memory
directs their habits of behavior and reproduction according to their
kind. Within a specific field, a "morphic resonance" operates across
space and time. Each field is a whole and all fields are in constant
evolution, from atoms to galaxies. Over time, systems have died out and
disappeared. Sheldrake writes, "According to the hypothesis of formative
causation, these fields in some sense still exist, although they cannot
be expressed because there is nothing to tune in to them. Even the
fields of dinosaurs are potentially present here and now; but there are
no appropriate tuning systems, such as living dinosaur eggs, that can
pick them up by morphic resonance."If for any reason-for example a
genetic mutation or an unusual environmental stress-any living system
comes into resonance with the fields of an ancestral or extinct type,
then these fields could be expressed again, and archaic structures could
suddenly reappear..." (The Pr&ience of the A wt, pages 285-286).
Sheldrake's hypothesis is in keeping with Miguel's Toltec visions in
several ways. Miguel himself must be a living system who is in resonance
with the ancient Toltecs, because their dream has come alive in him and
he is developing a field of others who will share the dream.

Miguel's explanation of the relationship of the sun, the earth and human
life is similar to Sheldrake's concepts. Miguel directs us to the sun as
the center of all information and intelligence in the solar system.
Although the sun is also a recipient of information from an even larger
living system in the center of the galaxy, for us living on earth, the
sun is the source of our evolution. Miguel describes a continuous river
of light moving from the sun to the earth that contains the vibrations
of each individual and each field of life on earth. The light from the
sun is the cause of effects within an individual, or within the entire
field of related living beings. For an evolutionary change to occur, the
sun emits an altered vibration of sunlight. The receptive organism
responds and transmits its response back to the sun in a constant
interaction of energies. A nagual such as Miguel can "see" this river of
light. This is how he could see the light change in January of 1992
during his visit to Teotihuacan.

At the moment of the change in the light, we began metabolizing a
different quality of energy. It is difficult to test in a laboratory
because, through science, we do not understand light as a living being.

Our eyes "eat" this new light in the form of food, which is now of a
higher quality. It will affect our minds, not our genes. It is basically
undetectable by our limited science now, but in time we will prove that
light is a living biological being with intelligence, and the source of
our own intelligence. Each human has some frequency of light, which is
always existent in the sun. This frequency is always connected like a
river to earth. This river is permanent, as long as the sun and the
earth exist. If we shift our point of view in terms of time and space,
it is possible to see that river of light as something solid in the same
way that, in our time and space, we see a human hand as something solid.
We already know that, if we shift our point of view to a smaller,
swifter time and space, we no longer see the human hand as solid.
Instead, we can see all the atoms, all the electrons as a field of
energy that is moving and is not solid. The river of light, like any
river, keeps its form but it is never the same. A ray of light has
perception and awareness. Billions of light rays connect the sun and the
earth. From this light, humans are brought to life and they "eat" this
light in a continuous process of action and reaction.

Information within the body changes the cells, in the brain and
elsewhere. A single human changes the way he metabolizes sunlight in
reaction to the sun, and transmits his or her response back to the sun.

The sun processes the change. The whole river of light has a new
quality. It then affects the whole of humanity because this particular
quality of light reaches all humans. Such a system of action and
reaction explains the efficacy of prayer. The prayerful intent of human
beings goes back to the sun in the river of light. The nagual is the
human who develops a small replica of the sun within his will. We call
this the black sun because it is light that cannot be perceived by the
human eye. The nagual perceives the river of light that connects with
all life on the planet. It is a huge river. The nagual can see even in
the light river, all the separate rays, a separate ray for each person.
Other naguals have witnessed the line of consciousness, the ray of
light, as humans modify their own consciousness. The light is now
intensifying human creativity, imagination and intelligence. We find a
similarity between the process of change in the whole of humanity (the
human organ of earth) and the normal hormonal process of a girl becoming
a woman. There is a whole universe within the girl's body, including her
organs, blood, nerves, digestive system, brain and all communicative
systems that operate between systems. The sun and the earth are part of
one living system. We can say that when the earth is mature enough it
sends a message to the sun. The sun reacts and sends its message to
trigger an evolutionary change in humanity. The sun acts as the brain,
just as the woman's brain initiates the hormonal change in her body that
brings her to maturity.

Humans lack the means to transcribe the exact code in which information
comes from the stars, but parts of the mind and soul can understand it.
We can channel this information. Earth, as a living being, easily
understands the messages it receives.

The earth emits light, but not at a frequency seen by the human eye. In
response to receiving messages in sunlight, the earth replies by
transmitting its own light. This light can be etheric or emotional
light. There are many extraterrestrials on earth. Most of them are
nothing but light. Once they have arrived on the planet they can take
different forms. The easiest way to travel in space is not on a
spaceship, but through light. Toltecs used to do that and so did the
Egyptians. They traveled from one planet to another via the light. We
all have the power to do this. The Mastery of Awareness from the Toltecs
will remind us that we have this power. I am not teaching anything. I am
just reminding others of what they have remembered that they know. The
knowledge I bear is not my own. It is in everyone. Around the world, all
cultures have the same knowledge. All human beings have the same
information inside. It might be phrased with different words, but the
knowledge is exactly the same. The Mastery of Awareness is so extensive
that it demands commitment of time and practice to remember the silent
knowledge we each have within us. The call is to recollect all of the
knowledge and to be what we really are so that we can use our inner
power. We aspire to become One with God. In the second Mastery of
Transformation, we learn to be the stalker. This is how to recover what
we are. In this mastery, we learn to clean the mind, to stop suffering,
to become warriors, to become masters, to become free, to become one
with love. The third Mastery of Intent is the result when we are no
longer the body and no longer the mind. We are no longer the soul. We
are just love, because love includes everything. Love is the real name
of God. Love is everywhere. Everything is made of love.

Love has billions of expressions, including fear. Fear is a reflection
of love, but it is only a small part of love's expressions. Fear will
control the mind. The mind will control the brain. What you do is
according to what you perceive, so if you are feeling fear, what you
perceive will be analyzed

with fear. We see in the eyes the expression of what a person has in his
or her mind. You will perceive the outside dream according to your eyes.
If you have eyes of sadness, you will feel sad whether it is raining or
sunny. If you have eyes of love, you will see love wherever you go.
Trees are made by love. Animals are made by love. The water we drink and
the rivers and oceans are made by love. If you perceive love, you will
connect with anything else that is made by love. You can become the
eagle. You can become the wind, or the rain, or the clouds. All becomes
One. You will recognize that everything is perfect just as it is. Our
path to the silent knowledge is through awareness. We go deep into hell
and we suffer in order to acquire awareness. This is why we decided to
take a human form and to have a human mind which dreams this kind of
dream, the nightmare we call hell. To get from hell, we need awareness
which we acquire through intent and spirit. We become Godlike because we
have awareness, not just because we have silent knowledge. Knowledge
alone is not sufficient. We must express our knowledge in action. There
are many ways to become aware. In India the path is through devotion and
effort. In Christianity, it is through guilt, until we discover we have
no reason to be guilty at all. Guilt is a manmade emotion to make
ourselves suffer for something we really want to do. How ridiculous it
is to suffer for something we want. My way is in nagualism. On this
path, everyone has a chance to become aware because nagualism avoids
judgment. The way to freedom through nagualism is to stop judging and to
stop vic timization. The way is open to everyone. We do not need to be
special. Even the person who is addicted to drugs or alcohol can make it
on this path. Sometimes it is fast and other times it is slow, but it is
available to all. This map of how to get out of hell,

how to transform from being a victim to being a free warrior, does not
place the end goal in the afterlife.

In nagualism, you can bring heaven to earth. You can live in heaven
while your body is alive. You can do it because I did it. If I can do
it, you can do it. Jesus told us the same thing. Information that is
essential to our escape from the dream of the planet is vital to the
expansion of science as well. When science accepts the notion that earth
is alive, scientific theory will expand and grow. With the further idea
that the universe is alive and all of us are fundamentally connected,
science again can move forward. All our minds become One. This concept
will alter psychology. Other basic ideas from the Toltecs-such as that
the mind is made by emotions, that we are dreaming twenty-four hours a
day, that we have a Judge and a Victim within us as a result of our
domestication (and we are domesticated animals), that the mind is alive,
that every emotion is a living being able to live inside and outside our
mind, that we create emotions and send them to others telepathically-are
the ingredients for a far more expansive philosophical basis for life.
One mind-boggling Toltec concept is that we can transfer our
consciousness from our reason to our will. This shift is the source of
our potential power to completely transform the planet and to become
God. We can control ethereal energy. We can control our own dream and
have a beneficial effect on everyone else's dream. Each of these
thoughts can have far-ranging consequences in the mind of humans. From
acceptance of Toltec silent knowledge, the individual has access to a
form of magic that is innately human, but this magic is rarely presented
through orthodox channels. Exercise:

Please record on tape in your own voice the following exercise. Then
close your eyes and listen. Use your imagination to dream this story.

In this dream I find myself in the most beautiful forest at midday. I am
completely comfortable surrounded by beauty. I see the sunbeams lighting
the trees and the flowers. I see butterflies and I hear the sound of the
river. I walk to that river where an old man sits beneath a big tree.
With his white

beard and strong, kind eyes, the man emits a radiant aura of beautiful
colors. I sit in front of him and wait until he feels my presence and
looks at me. I ask, "How can you send out these beautiful colors and can
you teach me how to do it?" He smiles at me. "Your request brings back
memories for me because one day I saw my own teacher doing the same
thing and I asked him the same question. As an answer, he opened his
chest and he reached in and pulled out his own heart. From within it, he
took a radiant flame. He opened my chest and put that flame inside my
heart. From that moment on, everything changed inside me because that
flame was unconditional love. I felt the flame of that love and it
became a consuming fire."I shared that love with and gave unconditional
love to every cell in my body. That day I became one with my own body.
"I decided to love my mind. I loved every emotion, every thought, every
feeling and every dream. That fire transformed my mind completely and my
mind loved me back so much that the fire grew even more and I had the
need to share my love even more."I decided to put my love in every tree,
in every flower, every blade of grass and all the plants in the whole
forest. They reacted to my love and they loved me also and we became
one. "But, still my love grew more and more so I had an even greater
need to share my love. I decided to put a little piece of my love in
every rock, in the dirt, in every metal on the earth, and they loved me
back. We became one."My love still grew. I decided to put a little love
in every animal that exists, in the birds, the cats and the dogs. They
loved me back and they

protected me. We became one. "My love still grew and I decided to love
the water. I loved the rain, the snow, the rivers, the lakes, the
oceans, and I became one with the water."When my love continued to grow,
I decided to love the atmosphere, the breeze, the hurricane, the
tornado, and we became one and they loved me back. "My love did not end
there. It grew even more and I turned my face to the sky where I saw the
sun, the moon and the stars. I decided to put a piece of my love in them
and they loved me back and we became one."Again, my love expanded and I
decided to share it with every human, with the elders, with every man,
woman and child, and we became one. "Now, wherever I go, I am there
waiting for myself." Then that old man opened his chest with his hands
and took his heart out before my eyes. He took a flame from his heart
and he opened my chest and my heart and he put that flame in my heart.
When I awoke and opened my eyes, I felt that flame become a fire. Now I
share my love with you. At this moment, I open my chest and in front of
your eyes I open my heart. I take a small flame and I open your chest
and your heart. I put that flame in your heart. That flame of my love is
the flame of the Christ. And that is the dream.

CHAPTER FOUR THE DREAM OF HELL ell is a concept that is found in more
than one religion. Hell is described as a place of suffering, fear,
violence and injustice, where everybody punishes everybody else. Hell is
a human mental state. Other animals have no hell of their own, although
they may be victimized by human hellishness. Hell is not in the body or
the soul, it is only in the human mind. Hell is the way we humans dream
our life.

Let's begin our study of "getting out of hell" with a prayer. Put your
attention on your heart. Put your hands on your heart and feel your
heartbeat. This is the motor of your body. The heart is a wonderful

biological machine that serves you. It's a gift from the Angel of Death
to you, from the Angel of Life to you. You use your body to express what
you are. As you feel and perceive the world around you, all the energy
becomes one with the universe inside you. Feel that life. Your body
without you is nothing. Without you, your body can collapse at any
moment. It is the same with your mind. Without you, your mind cannot
dream or think. Without you, your mind has no memory. You are the force
that makes it possible for your body to have life. Your soul, mind and
body are gifts for you. Without you, your body dies. Your mind
collapses. Your soul dissolves. All life is ONE and the same. We ask you
Lord to make your manifestation to us so that we can perceive what we
really are. We ask you Lord to grant us the opportunity to experience
what we really are. Let it be for everyone the way it is for me. I know
what I really am. Each of us is really a manifestation of love. I am you
and you are me. Thank you Lord. Amen. I want to review some basic
concepts that give us a better understanding of what it means to get out
of hell. I like to see hell from outside the dream.

The human mind is a living being, but it is a different kind of being
than a body. The body, made from material energy, is a biological
machine. The mind is a biological machine that is made from ethereal
energy. Ethereal is another name for the energy we experience, but we
cannot prove it exists.

The body's existence can be proved. We know we have a mind, emotions,
reason and intellect because we perceive them. We have named them. Our
mind is made by our emotions. Everything the mind perceives has an
emotional component. When light of varying frequencies strikes material
objects, it is reflected into our eye. The brain translates these light
images of material energy into matter, and what the mind creates we
perceive as reality. Actually, this reality is a dream. We dream
twenty-four hours a day, whether our brain is awake or asleep. The brain
can change energy in both directun s. It has the capacity to transform
material energy to ethereal energy. We create ideas and ideas are
ethereal energy. When the brain converts ideas into words and writing,
we make a manifestation in the material world of what is happening in
our mind. The mind creates imagination and the imagination dreams. The
way we dream leads us into suffering and emotional pain. The priest says
to his congregation, "If you don't do what the church says, you will go
to hell." Well, I have bad news for him. We are already there. We suffer
because of our interaction with other humans. In our interactions, we
are constantly judging and struggling to understand. Due to the lack of
communication that creates chaos among people, our interpretation of
human interaction leads to the dream of hell. Most relationships are
marred by the need to control each other. In forming your relationships,
you had a choice of thousands of humans. When you choose a person to
love, you have to pick someone who is right. You need a partner who
accepts you as you are because you will stay as you are. If you want to
change another without being changed, look for someone else, otherwise,
you are creating your own nightmare. If you accept a job and refuse to
train for it, then you have a problem. Fear is all around due to these
things.

Each of us has a private dream. Our family shares a dream, too, with its
own goals, rules and conflicts. Every group has a shared dream, from the
individual to the nation to the planet. The dream of all humanity is the
dream in the mind of Planet Earth. The earth's dream varies from place
to

place. Each area has its own rules, based on separate dreams that are
part of the whole dream. Thus we can see that beyond our private dream
is the collective dream of all humans, which we share. Our despair rests
on the fact that we don't know we are dreaming. This is the reason we
live in the nightmare of hell. The fears in one human mind become bigger
when they are projected outside. Our community is a society of fear,
injustice and punishment. Our teenagers are killing each other, and we
find crime and hatred in all parts of the world. Even our entertainment
is studded with violence. Hell is a disease in the human mind. The whole
world is a hospital. Heaven is exactly the opposite of hell. It is a
place of joy, love, peace, communication and understanding with neither
a Judge nor a Victim. In heaven there is clarity. You know what you are.
You no longer blame yourself or others. Miguel reminds his students that
all humans dream together. A dream is a living being. We create the
dream. The dream creates our life. A culture is a dream of many people
together. Every person, family, city, society, and the world has dreams.
Our gods are created in our dreams. Each god has a beginning, a middle
and an end. The god accrues power as it grows. It conquers and rises to
the top. Then, people start looking for justice. When they cannot find
it, their god decays. We can now witness the decaying years of our gods
and the state of injustice that our beliefs have created. Throughout the
two thousand years of the Piscean Age, which is just coming to an end,
our dream and our gods have not been in harmony. All humans are dreaming
little dreams which together make up the nightmare of hell that we call
reality. We have only to look at the news to see the war,

violence, crime and distrust that prove the night- marishness of our
collective dream. One of our widely-shared dreams is of Jesus, but our
dream of him is far from the one that this radiant spirit meant to bring
to the world. His effort was to reform the dream of his people with his
message of love and compassion. His dream was one of heaven on earth.
The Jews of his day were sacrificing animals in the temples and using
the temples as marketplaces. Jesus claimed that his father god did not
ask for blood. He drove the moneychangers out of the sacred precinct. By
his actions and words he threatened the status quo of Jewish and Roman
leaders who defended their positions by plotting against him. As a
result, Jesus mostly failed in his mission to change the dream of the
planet, but his influence played its assigned role in the evolution of
the human species. A portion of Jesus' message was preserved in its
original form. Through the centuries, the Christ energy has benefitted
generations of the faithful whose ideals have changed the dream of the
planet to a certain extent. However, Jesus' dream of love was exploited
and corrupted by successive power seekers among his followers,
particularly by Charlemagne who "converted" to Christianity in order to
weld its influence to that of the Roman Empire. Miguel says that the
name of Jesus became a demon. As Europe was conquered, the name of Jesus
and the Christian message were misused for the sake of power. The true
message of the Christ went forth as beams of light that entered into
sacred sites around the world, just as the ancient wisdom of native
people was driven underground. The reigning powers in the world
destroyed the spiritual self-confidence of the people they ruled. Among
their destructive ideas are original sin, the separation of humans from
each other, from nature and from God and the fear of eternal punishment
in hell. Institutionalized religious, economic and political

powers have held people in thrall. The Crusades and the Inquisition were
instruments of expansion and control to maintain secular and religious
power structures. Conquest and coercive religious conversion were also
means used for domination. Miseries spread in Jesus' name became the
nightmare of the Western Hemisphere, too, and it remains so, although
the nightmare is in a weakened condition. In areas of the world where
Jesus does not stand for the demon, another demon takes his place. The
nightmare is the dream of almost everyone on earth. Mohammed is
demonized by the Muslims who use his name to wreak vengeance on their
enemies. Human degradation in Asian countries comes from an indifference
toward life based on a misunderstanding of Buddha's dream. In
totalitarian countries, suffering for the good of the state is praised.
All versions of the nightmare are prompted by fear. Miguel reveres the
pure vibrations of the Buddha and the Christ and many other spiritual
souls who have gone before us. His teaching is not meant to be
irreverent toward, nor destructive of, deep faith in the pure nature of
these avatars who brought the pearl of truth to earth and inserted it
into the collective mind of humans. Though the nightmare of hell has
triumphed, a memory of life without fear has left its trace in human
consciousness. Miguel's intention is to awaken people to the harmful
effects of the distorted fears that encrust the original inspirations of
advanced souls like the Christ and Buddha. In their present state of
corruption, religions sustain the nightmare of hell. It is necessary to
add here that Miguel does not believe it is beneficial, at this stage in
our human evolution, to withdraw religious training from our children.
He stresses that a child must learn the full system of thought that
leads to our dream of hell before he or she can transform the dream into
one of heaven on earth.

Almost every sacred book holds a memory of a human race prior to our own
that had an advanced civilization. Their race had some means for aerial
flight and a worldwide communication system just as we have today.
Miguel teaches that this race was the Third Humanity that lasted for
thousands of years in harmony before it destroyed itself through nuclear
war and the ensuing radiation. This early race-and it is only one of
many that lived on earth before our time-offers us a warning that our
beliefs, like theirs, could lead us to a similar fatal result if we
continue to hold onto false ideas that create imbalance, disharmony and
fear. Our contemporary reverence for science and technology, and our
denial of the validity of information available through intuition and
revelation, are driving us further from our divine nature and closer to
the fate of our predecessors. In most areas of the world, we have given
primacy to a totally masculine image of God. At the same time, we have
excluded the feminine aspect of God's nature. Earth, which expresses the
feminine principle, has been abused because of our belief that mankind
was given dominion over the natural world. The advanced race that was
destroyed has left signs and warnings for us at certain key places on
the earth that have been recognized as sacred. The Great Pyramid at Giza
is one of these sites. Hermes Trismegistus (the Greek name for the
Egyptian god Thoth), from whom the word "hermetic" is derived, is the
legendary author of works on alchemy, astrology and magic. Miguel
believes such a man did indeed live in Egypt. Hermes rediscovered
ancient knowledge that explained the importance of Giza, a structure
built long before his time. Through a dream connection, Hermes shared
this knowledge with Smoky Mirror, the dreamer of Teotihuacan, so there
is a

fundamental relationship between the size and form of the Great Pyramid
of Giza and the Pyramid of the Sun at Teotihuacan. Teotihuacan is a
sacred site, one of the most powerful places on earth. Miguel says that
the original spirit of Jesus resides in Teotihuacan, where he entered in
his pure form as a beam of light. He and some of his followers sense
that the spirit of the Christ resides in the Palace of the Jaguars
behind the Palace of the Butterfly at the northern end of the Avenue of
the Dead. Both Hermes and the Christ lent their power to Smoky Mirror.
With their help, he recovered his own divinity and he designed a series
of structures that would empower people to release the fears that keep
them in the nightmare of hell. Our long dream of hell has been filled
with suffering, sadness and anger. The quality of our emotions is
controlled by our dream. If we change our dream from hell to heaven on
earth, then the energy that the brain produces will be altered to
vibrations of harmony and love. We might well ask, which comes first,
the dream of love or the vibrations of love? The impulse which leads to
a change of vibration in the human mind comes from the sun. The energy
of the sun is pushing us to enhance love and reduce fear. We will find
ourselves producing a different kind of dream, less of hell and more of
heaven. The new dream began in the sun. Miguel estimates that it will
take two thousand years -the complete age of Aquarius-to totally change
the dream of humanity, but the change has started and we are already
being affected by it. Within his lifetime, Miguel anticipates he will
see a crisis of transformation because the old dream will resist change.
Regressive groups will want to cling to the power they gain by promoting
the nightmare. Yet, fear has to be cleansed from our dream if we are to
move away from the hellishness of the present state of humanity. A new
dream cannot come in without the death of the old dream. This enormous,
anticipated change will bring with it worldwide chaos which will

follow the collapse of all systems based on fear. From chaos the new
dream will grow and flourish. We have already begun this stage of
evolution. All around us we can see the actions and reactions of change.
Trying to avoid change is a fruitless and unhelpful path. Change is
inevitable. If humans do not make the decisions to change, natural
disasters will make them for us. We have already had warnings of earth's
impatience in recent floods, fires and earthquakes, which can be
interpreted as the earth healing herself of the wounds we have created.
Troubled population centers attract natural disasters because the
quality of the shared dream is more violent in densely populated areas.
Miguel tells us that we can prevent disasters by being a little wise. A
sign of changing consciousness can be seen in the exodus of people
leaving huge cities to adopt a less destructive technology and a simpler
lifestyle in smaller communities. The wars that have plagued this
century are the result of our hellish dream, but humans are not
necessarily warlike. As the dream changes, Miguel predicts that wars
will eventually become only a dis tant memory in humans' minds. Miguel's
message is that we have nothing to fear. The way in which the world is
evolving is just and right. Consciousness is changing and therefore
evolution itself is changing. In the past, each major change in
evolution was marked by a change in the energy sent from the sun. The
sun represents the active, masculine principle and the moon is linked to
the feminine, intuitive principle. When we return to our pure state of
energy at death, our destination is the sun. Going home means going back
to the sun. The moon is an analogy for this return process. Just as the
moon reflects sunlight back to its source in the sun, so individuals are
able to metaphorically return to their source in the sun by means of the
"smoky mirror" of the moon.

At Teotihuacan Smoky Mirror is a presence in the Pyramid of the Moon,
with its great front plaza. The feminine aspect of this area is affirmed
by a sixteen-foot high stone carving of a goddess weighing twenty-two
tons that was removed from the plaza at the Pyramid of the Moon during
major restoration work begun in Teotihuacan in 1962. It is now on
display at the Museo Nacional de Antropologia in Mexico City. Although a
similar, unfinished stone carving has been found near Texcoco, no other
massive freestanding stone figure was discovered at Teotihuacan.
Archeologists have given the goddess personified in this work the Aztec
name Chalchiuhtlicue, Goddess of Water and spouse of the God of Rain,
Tlaloc. She once wore turquoise earrings and a jade skirt. Before it was
stolen, she had a golden pendant in the center of her chest. Sitchin
links the pendant to the search for gold that brought the gods to earth,
but he agrees with other scholars that the Pyramid of the Moon
symbolizes a reverence for the divine feminine. An equal reverence for
water, symbolized by the Feathered Serpent and the head of Tlaloc, the
Rain God, on the Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl, unites the major structures at
Teotihuacan to symbolize the oneness of divinity. At Teotihuacan, these
are the only deities who are portrayed, a male and a female. The statue
of Chalchiuhtlicue was discovered a century ago, lying face down among
ruined temples on the west side of the plaza of the Moon. It was known
as the "Fainting Stone" because people who lay on it were overcome with
a feeling of lassitude. (See Treasures of Ancient Arnerica by S. K.
Lothrop, page 41.) Now, separated from the vibrations of the other rocks
and the pyramid, the statue seems alien and hard to read, but it was
placed at Teotihuacan for a purpose. Even today, the work has meaning as
a sign of our need to restore the feminine principal to our collective
dream of God, and of the urgency that we protect water, which is like
the blood of the earth.

At Teotihuacan, the dream and the gods were totally harmonious. This was
truly the place where men could become God. During this time when the
knowledge that is retained in sacred sites is coming into the minds of
specially trained people, we again have access to the harmonious dream
that once prevailed at Teotihuacan. Miguel's practice of returning to
the trance state at this site, on monthly trips for five years, has
inspired his interpretation of Teotihuacan. Part of his work as a
nagual, as Miguel Angel Ruiz sees it, is to penetrate the sacred purpose
built into the pyramids and temples at Teotihuacan. Architecture and
archeology alone cannot explain that purpose. Miguel's intention is to
reclaim and to reenact the mysteries that were practiced at Teotihuacan
centuries ago. The process of transformation was then and is now
associated with the dream of entering a huge two-headed snake,
manifested in the Avenue of the Dead. The Avenue of the Dead ends at the
Pyramid of the Moon where the pilgrim is symbolically disgorged from the
snake. From there, the transformed seeker moves on to the adjacent
Palace of the Butterfly, which symbolizes heaven, to be born again in a
pure state of detachment and bliss. Each step of the journey through the
snake is meaningful. Before undertaking the process of liberation on the
walk along the Avenue of the Dead, a person must become familiar with
certain esoteric concepts that Miguel teaches. The next chapter is a
review of key Toltec ideas that Miguel has recovered through his visions
at Teotihuacan.

CHAPTER FIDE MIND, EVOLUTION AND THE DREAM n Miguel's teachings he
reiterates that all of our ideas and dreams come from the sun. We can
only perceive things through reflected light which originates as
sunlight. Reality as we know it is the recreation in our minds of
reflected light. When the Bible says, "In the beginning was the Word and
the Word was with God," it is both shamanically and scientifically true.
Sound is akin to light and it has the same generative power as light.
Sound is energy vibrating at varying speeds. Pure energy has the
qualities of sound, color, temperature, motion, memory and awareness.
Life also possesses these qualities. Einstein, in his theory of the
universe, compared energy with mass and velocity of light. The Toltecs
made a similar observation in different words: "Everything is light.
Everything we know is light-based." From an etheric standpoint, human
life on earth was created in order to dream. Humans create the reality
they perceive in their dreams. Whatever we perceive is a manifestation
of our dream. The transformation of energy into the dream begins in
matter. The light we perceive reflected from a material object we then
recreate as an image inside our eye, always indirectly. This process of
perception involves our emotions. The images we recreate in our mind
from reflected light are

processed through our emotions and this activity develops our mind. Our
mind is made from emotions, just as our body is made from atoms.

At birth, the baby has no mind. It has the equipment-the brain -but it
is immature. The child has to learn everything. The brain is a complex
of blank computers. It is not conscious. Although the newborn child has
the cellular memory of evolution and a few emotions, it does not have
the mind to create the dream. The child is born with all the knowledge
of the universe, but it cannot think. It just knows. Its DNA carries the
silent knowledge of life. As soon as the neural system is developed in
utero, it functions, but before birth it is not directly in contact with
the light outside, only indirectly through the mother; therefore the
child receives little of the information carried by light until birth.

For several years after birth, the child is still free like a wild
animal. It is not domesticated yet and therefore it has not accepted the
dream that is passed to it by its family, religion and culture. As the
child is domesticated, the development of its mind comes through
emotions caused by punishment

and reward. Gradually, the child learns all the rules of the system it
inherits. It learns to behave in a certain way. It absorbs the dream of
its society, but it did not choose the dream. Domesticated youths
usually rebel against the dream imposed on them. They are no longer
innocent. In the Westernized culture that dominates earth, young people
see violence everywhere. Violence is fashionable in entertainment and in
the gangs that youths identify with in all parts of the world. The
system of violence swallows them. They look up to accepted idols, such
as the macho male and the female as sexual object. The criminal becomes
a hero. The models our young people follow are hellish. They contribute
to the nightmare that encroaches upon the world. The woundedness Smoky
Mirror saw around him continues today, but now the crisis affects the
whole of society. We are looking for a better way to relate to one
another. Matrimony, which is the basis of society, is now mired in a
need to control; it must change to a relationship of respect. At the end
of the Piscean Age, we find that our collective dream is hell. We can
see that it has poisoned us and the earth, and we assume that it is
poisoning the universe itself. For the sake of the earth and the
universe, the human dream is due for a correction as we move into the
Aquarian Age. Changing our dream is an evolutionary step forward. With
each Zodiacal Age or each Sun in Aztec terms, evolution progresses.
Evolution was directed for millennia toward the development of the human
capacity to think, to dream and to create reality. The next step is to
grow beyond fear and into the practice of love. Love generates benign
creative energy. We are discovering the energy frequency of love and its
benefits in healing, education, politics and spirituality. The Judge and
the Victim

There are two main rulers in hell-the Judge and the Victim. In our mind,
our Judge blames us. Our Victim receives the blame and feels guilty.
These two aspects of ourselves hate each other. Communication between
them in each of us was broken during the process of our domestication,
no matter which beliefs were held by the elders who raised us.

Humans are domesticated animals. Before we were born, the dream of the
planet already existed, with all of its rules, beliefs and hopes. In the
dream they are there waiting for the new humans to grow up and develop
their minds in order to continue to control the dream. A pure, normal
human being would be one who is still free, as he or she was in
childhood before domestication, at the approximate age of one-and-a-half
to three years of age. At that age, the child has developed enough mind
to understand the abstract and to control language enough to communicate
with other humans. However, the process of education has not yet taken
place. This little human follows the normal tendency to play, to
explore, to laugh and to enjoy life. Almost all the child's emotions are
coming from love unless he is angry or in pain. This little human is
free to be and he lives in the present. He does not worry about the
past. He is not worried about the future. The adults live constantly in
the past and they are so worried in their effort to build their future
that they avoid living in the present. For the adult, all the dramas of
life are serious, but for the child nothing is really that important.
The dream waits to teach the small child how to join the old dream of
the planet. Our parents, older brothers and sisters, our teachers, the
school, religion, society and the media all contribute to keeping the
dream of the planet alive through domestication. Domestication comes
through reward and punishment. Mom and Dad domesticated us just the way
they were domesticated. They introduced us to the concepts of good and
bad, by rewarding the good and punishing the bad.

Usually, when we feel the punishment we have the sense of injustice and
we rebel. That opens a wound in our mind and the result of that wound is
to create emotional poison. We feel that pain in our heart as an
emotional, not a physical, pain. From this wound, the emotional poison
gets into our mind.

Fear begins and starts controlling our behavior and our mind. We become
afraid of receiving punishment and we also fear not receiving a reward.
The reward comes to be a sign of acceptance. We struggle to be worthy of
it in the eyes of our parents, our teachers and friends, and society
itself. Many times during the day as we grow up, we are subject to the
judgment of others and to the polarities that our society supports, such
as right and wrong, beautiful and ugly. Soon, we begin making our own
judgments. Domestication becomes so strong that we no longer need anyone
to domesticate us because we take over the task of our domestication by
punishing ourselves and occasionally by rewarding ourselves. Three
components in our mind are actively engaged in our self-domestication.
The Judge is that part of our mind that judges what we do, and what we
do not do, what we feel and do not feel, what we think and what we do
not think, and it also judges everything and everyone. The Victim
receives the judgment and usually the Judge finds the Victim guilty. The
Victim has a need to be punished. The Victim part of our mind feels
unworthy and repeats over and over again, "I am not good enough, nor
intelligent, nor strong, nor beautiful enough. I am a loser. Why should
I try?" The third part of the mind involved in the judgment process is
the belief system we have been taught which includes all the rules on
how to dream our life. The belief system is a kind of constitution or
holy book where everything that we believe without discussion is our
truth. I call this belief system the Book of Hell. The inner Judge bases
all judgments in the belief system. Once we recognize this, we see that
there is no justice in our own mind. If there were justice, we would pay
for each of our mistakes once, but our Judge makes us pay a thousand
times. We pay when we make a mistake and when we remember the mistake,
or when anyone reminds us of the mistake. Each time, there is the Judge
finding our Victim guilty and punishing us again.

Our belief system comes to us from society during the period of
domestication. We absorb it from our family, the school and religion. At
no time does the small child have a choice of what to believe.
Throughout the domestication process, the small child rebels, but he
lacks the power to change anything. We rebel also as teenagers when we
are searching for our identity. At this crucial time in our lives, we
see how the belief system represses our normal human instincts and how
adults manipulate young people. Depending upon how much resistance we
meet during our teenage rebellion will be our future self-esteem. We
might find some support and become a success in life, or we might
succumb to fear. The Judge, the Victim and the belief system or Book of
Hell are together a Parasite in our mind. The Parasite is a living being
made from ethereal energy. To survive, the Parasite feeds on emotions
that are created by the human brain. These are emotions that come from
fear, anger, sadness, depression, jealousy and victimhood. The Parasite
controls the dream. It creates a dream of fear, a nightmare, in order to
control the brain which is the factory of emotions. The Parasite
controls the production of those human emotions which are necessary for
its survival. At the same time, the brain stops producing the emotions
it needs for the growth of the soul, which are the emotions that come
from love. The Parasite functions in a similar way to a virus which
attacks a cell. The virus controls the reproduction of the cell so that
it cannot produce the properties it needs for the cell's own growth.
Instead, it produces what the virus needs for its own growth. The virus
lives at the expense of the cell, and it damages the cell little by
little until it is destroyed. We see all around us that human beings are
engaged in self-destructive behavior. This is the outward sign of the
self-destructive mind controlled by the Parasite.

The Toltecs were aware of the Parasite's existence and they knew that
humans have only two choices in regard to this invasive force. One
choice is to surrender to the Parasite, but the other choice is similar
to that made by the little child and the teenager-rebel, declare war
against the Parasite and

declare the freedom to be oneself, to have one's own dream, to use one's
own mind, to create the emotions that feed the real person we are. The
Toltecs, of course, chose to rebel. That is why they are called
warriors. This is the real meaning of a warrior. A warrior is that human
who has the awareness of the Parasite in his or her own mind and
declares a war on the Parasite for the purpose of selfhealing. The
importance of the war is not to win or to lose, but to try. Every value
system has its own Book of Hell. One book or the other is passed on in
any family. The Judge and Victim are present in us regardless of the
rightness or wrongness of the belief system we have absorbed. The
warrior's task is to rebel against our inner Judge and Victim. By
following the Avenue of the Dead at Teotihuacan in the Toltec way, the
warrior can get beyond the Judge and Victim. In every contemporary
culture, there is an emphasis on suffering. A belief in suffering begets
suffering. The Christian heritage teaches that it is necessary to suffer
in order to copy Jesus. Miguel says this is a false dream or an
illusion. Jesus himself preached that love was the answer to life.
Placing a high value on suffering is just one example of beliefs that
permeate our minds and our collective dream. In such phrases as "no
pain, no gain," we reveal how deeply we have accepted the idea that we
have no right to the joys of painlessness.

Even before we begin following the Avenue of the Dead in the Toltec way,
we can do a mental exercise that is like an active prayer. The intention
of the ritual is to become happy as we were meant to be. Ask to die to
the dream of the planet. Prepare to leave hell. Imagine yourself in
heaven on earth.

CHAPTER SIX TOOLS FOR TRANSFORMATION

PART ONE: THE MITOTE AND THE INVENTORY The Mitote

here is an ancient practice among several Mexican ways of knowledge
called the mitote. Mitote is an Indian word that has been adopted by the
Spanish. The word means chaos, but it is used to signify a cacophony of
voices without agreement, such as the gossip of a marketplace or the
Tower of Babel. The Toltecs used to say that an ordinary human mind is a
mitote. Men of power and knowledge can be sorcerers. In the past,
sorcerers took their apprentices to certain places where they partook of
plants like peyote to stop their minds so they could understand that
this reality is actually a dream. Today some sorcerers are still
following this practice and it is called the mitote. Both the condition
of being out of harmony and the practice used to clarify the confusion
are called by the same name.

The only way to harmony or heaven is to end the mitote. For the Toltecs,
this refers to the chaos caused by the breakdown in communication within
our own mind between the Judge and the Victim. The normal state of the
mind is hell. I conduct the practice of the mitote without drugs. I do
not believe in drugs. I tell my students that we need to work together
to end the mitote in order to change our way of life. In the Toltec
tradition, you face the mitote and do not deny it. The mitote is so
powerful that we need help to disempower it. We ask the Creator to help
us and to give us clarity. We ask to receive courage to bring order to
the mitote. In their practice of mitote, the Toltecs discovered that all
knowledge comes to us. The mitote is an onion in our

mind. We peel it back to find the lies and false images. When we have
enough clarity and courage to go deeper, we find out who we really are.

We learn about all the agreements we have made and we see the
possibility of shifting them. We learn to explore and control the dream.
Mitote is not only a nighttime practice, but a day one, also. To do the
mitote, we make it our intent to put order where there was chaos. Once
you start the mitote, it becomes the purpose of life to replace chaos
with order. This is the Way of the Warrior. Today, in some places, the
mitote is corrupted in its usage. For Toltecs, the first mitote is an
initiation into the silent knowledge, but the mitote does not end at the
close of the first ritual. I was initiated into the mitote in the desert
with the teacher who was introduced to me by my grandfather. The mitote
goes through the night and ends at dawn, or else it lasts for two nights
in a row. Doing the mitote means going into the space between sleeping
and awaking. It energizes people so that they do not end the long mitote
ceremony in a tired state. During our mitotes with apprentices, in the
center of the group, we have a fire and the students take turns guarding
it by staying awake. They are the Guardians of the Fire. The other
students begin chanting love and expressing love. It seems like a
commotion at first, but then they take the dreamer position, sitting on
the floor, wrapping their knees in their arms and hanging their heads.
They are wakened every fifteen minutes and change positions so a
different person becomes the Guardian of the Fire. There are many
chances to observe the exact moment when sleep begins. We guide the
students to explore their dream by becoming aware of the exact moment
when their brain goes to sleep. They must use their imagination. The
mitote is the Dreamer's Way. To do a mitote at home, I recommend you not
try to do it alone. Your reason will try to sabotage you and it might

bring on nightmares. Form a group and do it together. Ideally, you need
a guide. The Inventory

The inventory is that part of the Mastery of Transformation which
challenges our belief system. The inventory is a review of one's belief
system (which we have already described as the Book of Hell) where we
have stored everything that we know. In making this review, the warrior
recapitulates everything he believes. Miguel's students are instructed
to make frequent personal inventories. The purpose of the exercise is to
recover one's free will. The inventory is your armament when you
challenge your Parasite. The Parasite is a composite made of the Book of
Hell, the Judge and the Victim within your mind. Look at your personal
dream of life. Be honest with yourself. Are you happy or not? Your
inventory will be based on the concept of happiness. The closer you are
to happiness, the closer you are to the dream of heaven on earth.
Remember that your beliefs were given to you; you did not choose them.
The beliefs that make you happy are worthy of being retained. The
beliefs that cause you unhappiness can be reviewed and altered. Your
goal is to reprogram your beliefs to achieve freedom from fear. Free
will is our right to make our own decisions. When we behave as a
warrior, by using our free will, we have a second chance to choose what
to believe. The problem we face is that our old belief system penetrates
our entire mind. When we make our first review of our belief system, we
do not see any space for new beliefs, but we make space for new beliefs
each time we transform an existent belief.

The inventory is a very old practice from the Toltecs. It is a
recapitulation of your whole life, of whatever has happened to you. It
allows you to let go of all those beliefs that create the dream of hell.
The Breathing Technique for Cleansing Emotions

Cleansing our emotional poison is a simple process. All it takes is the
thought of love and our breath. We hold the wound in our mind briefly.
Then we breathe deliberately while thinking of the word "love." We can
apply this cleansing routine to old wounds and new ones. When we clean a
wound, it heals itself. We cannot clean a wound by sharing the poison
with someone else. Such an action increases the poison. We are in a
jungle full of poison from which everyone is affected. If you are
attacked, just remember your attacker needs your energy. When you become
a Master of Transformation, nothing will harm you nor will you find that
you have interiorized any poison from others. As you cleanse the wounds
from your past, you will become alert in your daily life and no longer
add emotional "baggage" to your soul. It will become habitual to cleanse
your emotions everyday, if not immediately at the time they are felt
then later before going to sleep. In your review there is no Judge or
Victim. This concept has far-reaching implications for the field of
therapy. In the Toltec way, getting rid of poison is a self-realized
activity. It does not require a therapist. Making the inventory brings
into our mind all those beliefs and events in our life that carry
emotional poison. Miguel teaches this breathing technique:

Focus on your breath. Breathe in the love that is constantly in the air.
Breathe in pure love. Breathe out pure love. Breathing is a direct
connection with love. With your breath of love, cleanse each emotional
memory as it arises. Clear your mind. Stop your mind. Make it blank.
Judge nothing. Train your mind to bring back your memories without
thinking. Whatever you remember is significant. Trust the memory that
comes. Put your awareness in your will. The will calls forth the memory
of emotions. Pray into your will to bring up memories. Variation of the
Breathing Technique for Women

After putting your awareness in your will, become aware of your heart.

Transfer the heartbeat to your womb. Then, transfer your will to your
womb. Now transfer your breath into your womb. Start the inventory. Let
memories come spontaneously. This process becomes even more powerful if
you connect your womb with the full moon. Recapitulating Your Dream

Now that you know the technique for cleansing your emotions, you can ask
yourself, "What do I believe that makes me suffer?" You will start from
that point. As each painful memory or guilt-causing belief arises, apply
the cleansing breath to it. Ask yourself, "How open is my belief
system?" If your beliefs are held rigidly, you may feel afraid when you
question or interpret your Book of Hell privately. It is for this reason
that apprentices develop their awareness before they undertake the
inventory. Toltecs discovered the Mastery of Awareness when they became
aware that this plane of life is a dream. They learned to observe the
dream of the planet without any emotion and they recovered clarity of
mind. Awareness and clarity lead to change. Change is possible if you
make use of the Toltec masteries. See everything the way it is, then you
have a chance. Awareness gives you an opening. By following this simple
plan, you will begin your exit from hell.

We don't need to wait to go to heaven until we die. But we have to get
there before we die. It is far easier to leave the dream of hell while
we are living than it is after we are dead. Between us and freedom from
hell, one of our traps is our own self-importance, with its pride and
its fear of shame and punishment. In recent years, many gurus are
teaching others to blame their suffering on their parents, spouses or
other people. They are teaching their clients to be victims. The Toltec
system teaches that we are no longer little babies, or helpless. We are
strong enough to change everything. No matter what conditions you find
yourself in, you have the power to change them. Even those who have been
raped can change their reality. The effects of your wounds are lessened
if you realize you are dreaming. You can change your inner movie because
you are the director, writer and actor, and you have all the power to
change the story you are living. Our sleeping dream usually continues
our daydream from the same viewpoint as when we are awake. Our brain
interprets what we perceive. The only part of the dream humans agree on
is the frame. The frame is the same for all of us. The frame is the
agreement we have made about our surroundings, our home on Planet Earth.
It is the support that makes us feel safe and grounded. It gives us a
sense of time and space. There are cycles of life all around us which
create a sense of stability in us. We notice the changes in cycles of
the moon, year and seasons. Although the frame is not real, we just
accept it, so we all see the same world. However, as soon as we
interpret our experience, our dream becomes separate and private.

We don't understand why we suffer. We don't realize we have a choice,
but we DO have a choice. We are not totally responsible for the dream
because it was here when we were born. In spite of the nightmarish
dream, we are trying to make this a better place for our children. The
dream of the planet has evolved through the millennia, so the dream is
changing and the

tendency is toward something better, but it is still a nightmare and it
is still hell. Our task is to use this lifetime to extricate ourselves
from the dream. We cannot afford to wait for the dream to evolve into
fearlessness. We must act for ourselves. At first, it does not look as
though we can leave the nightmare. The structure of the dream humans
have created appears perfect. Nonetheless, we don't have to suffer any
longer. Once we are aware of the dream, we can attempt to get outside of
it. Awareness makes it possible for a person to leave hell permanently.
We begin by noticing that we suffer for the little things we feel belong
to us, that we need to control and defend. We can watch ourselves as we
overreact to injustice. We can see our selves in our need to have
revenge and we realize there is no end to getting even.

Every human becomes a demon for the rest of humans and keeps the rest in
hell. Each time we remember our partner's mistake, we make him or her
pay again. Either the wife or the husband can become the demon through
the act of revenge. We use a lot of emotional blackmail. We use guilt
and

blame to control the people that we love. We make promises. We fill our
life with expectations and obligations. We have no eyes for real
justice. Each person feels he or she is always right and everybody else
is wrong. We believe our opinion is the most important. We have to lie
to ourselves and to everybody else. Everybody lies in this world. To say
you are lying is not to make a judgment. It is just the way it is. Lying
is a defense based on fear. We don't want to see our personal wounds,
our anger and jealousy, or to see that we are afraid. We are playing
with false images of ourselves in our lies. There is no communication
between humans because of our lies. As warriors we have come to the
point of changing our life. We are going to transform it. We will stop
the lies. We will give up our self-importance and exchange it for the
freedom that comes when we make an inventory and use our cleansing
breath to get out of hell. We will progress to making a new set of
beliefs that do not cause suffering. This is a creative process like any
other form of art. It takes an act of courage to start deliberately
carving away any belief that causes you to suffer. Perhaps you do not
believe you have the power to make your own reality, but if you did
accept this premise, you could then create a different reality from the
one that causes you to suffer. You will add those concepts that reduce
your suffering to the new system that you are creating. As your
personally created belief system grows, you will recover your birthright
and regain the free will to make a choice whether to suffer or to be
happy. Until an inventory is made, you will lack the power to make the
choice. This inventory is only the first of many. On the Avenue of
Death, you make a provisional inventory. On your personal path, you
begin with a

provisional inventory as well. It gives you enough power to continue on
your way to freedom. Remember that before you were domesticated, you
were happy. You will try to recapture that happiness, not with the
innocence of childhood but with the awareness of maturity. To search for
God within is the purpose of Teotihuacan. It is like a map that will
guide you to recognize yourself as God. The Toltec system of the
inventory is meant to bring about the recovery of your totality. You are
incomplete as you are now. Continuous reviews of emotions and thoughts
known only to you ferret out your fears and substitute love. As you
distinguish emotion-ladened memories in your mind, you will discover how
many of your beliefs are reflections of other peoples' emotions.

Become aware. Be honest with yourself. Know that you are in hell. Look
at it. Don't deny that it is hell. Express what you are. Love others
just as they are, whether or not they love you back. It is the love that
comes from you rather than the love that comes to you that makes you
happy. Once you have awareness, you will find you have strong resistance
to change because you have made an agreement with the dream of the
planet and with yourself all your life. When you were younger, you might
have made an agreement to smoke. If you try to stop smoking, you might
say, "I know all the reasons I should not smoke but I can't stop." It is
the same with overeating. It is not easy to break an agreement that has
been in effect for a long time.

The answer to discontinuing a habit lies in your personal will. To give
up something, you need to put the same amount of power behind giving it
up as you did to form the agreement to do it. To quit smoking, you have
to make that your intention. You may have started smoking to be cool, to
look older, to be one of the group. When you began the habit you now
want to break, you invested your power in making the decision to take
and continue to take this action. Think of the effort required for a
spaceship to break free of the earth. There must be a force exerted of
sufficient strength to at least match the gravitational force that keeps
the ship on the planet. It is the same in your personal efforts. You put
a certain personal power in every agreement you have made and you need
to put the same amount behind giving up the agreement. Impeccability is
the correct use of any kind of energy. By practicing impeccability, you
can store up enough power to break your agreements. Use expands your
power. After you expend your power to break an agreement, it will return
and grow bigger. The inventory, or the Recollection, is a way for you to
achieve power. Miguel asks a person to make four agreements to study
with him. He says that these four agreements will break eighty-five
percent of your agreements that keep you in hell, but they do not work
unless you practice. You accomplish miracles by practicing a little at a
time until your power is strong enough to control all your agreements.

1. Be impeccable with your word. This agreement has deep meaning and it
can take you out of hell almost by itself. The word is the strongest
expression of the spirit. The word is the most powerful tool we have as
a human. The word is divine. It is pure magic. It is pure power. Say
only what you mean. Real magicians manipulate the word in the best way
and have the highest respect for the word. However, it is important to
remember that each of us is a magician. We use the word to hurt each
other, to blame, to blackmail, to gossip, gossip and more gossip. Pure
blackmail is destructive. With the word we keep each other in hell. Just
by giving our opinion, we can build a person up or down. For instance,
we say, "You're a coward." It affects the person for ages.

A little girl of six was singing as she played. Her mother had a
headache and she had been having a hard day. The singing annoyed her.
She went to her daughter and said, "Shut up. Your voice is like a crow.
Shut up." The little girl won't ever sing again. She thinks her voice is
ugly. Her mother has

put a curse on her. We do this to many people. We give our opinion
without thinking of the damage we cause. The little girl made an
agreement with herself, "My voice is awful." For her to break that
spell, she must use the same amount of power to break the agreement.
First she has to know how it happened. Everything we do is based on
agreements. An agreement is a binding force and it magnetizes energy to
itself which adds to its strength and apparent correctness. The dream is
based on agreements and so is suffering. Most agreements are limitations
on ourselves. The inventory brings up our awareness of how we react in
certain ways. We can then work out a way to break old, limiting
agreements. 2. Don't take anything personally. We take everything
personally when our personal importance leads us to make the assumption
that whatever happens is because of us, which is why we continue to hurt
each other and brood about what we call injustice. 3. Don't make
assumptions. We make an assumption if we think that others know what we
mean, or that we know what others mean. We have to have the courage to
ask the other what he means, or what he wants, and the courage to say
what we really want. Without assumptions, there is nothing to make you
frustrated and there is no one to blame. You owe nothing to life and it
owes you nothing. 4. Always do your best. When we always do our best, we
avoid selfcondemnation and we rarely become frustrated. When we are sick
or tired, our best will be different from when we are well. Our best is
always changing, but we continue to do our best. When we are fresh and
healthy, our best is always changing. If we do our best under any
circumstances, we will feel good about ourselves. In the inventory, you
go into your mind and

explore your belief system and find the agreements you have made and
break them one by one.

Another way to become aware is to find the real dream and real dreamer.
It takes courage to go into the dream. There is no safe place for the
dreamer until you let go of reality and discover that you are the dream
and the dreamer. Clarity tells us this is nothing but the dream. If you
can shift your point of view and control the dream you can create
another reality. At first, it is difficult, but soon you find this
reality less real. Afterwards, you will find it harder to adapt to what
you formerly considered reality. Toltecs combined both ways of becoming
aware. They did the inventory and they also went into their dream. They
knew that everything is a dream, so their goal was to become a dreammas-
ter. They worked at gaining complete control of their personal dream
until it obeyed them. Their goal was to be happy. They were no longer
afraid to die. I teach the Toltec way of using both the inventory and
the journey into your personal dream. Toltecs are not ascetics. They
have high respect for the material world. There is no need to be poor,
or greedy either, in this system. You use the material world, but you
know it isn't yours. Most agreements represent attachments. We say this
is my body, my house, my family, my life...but it is not true. If you
are afraid to lose your material or emotional acquisitions, that is
hell. As Toltec naguals, we give our body total control of the body. We
let the body claim its personal power. We honor and love our body and
allow our body to be just what it is without shame or revulsion. We also
honor our mind. We allow our mind to control the mind. The mind loves
the body. We allow our body, our love, our mind and our soul to be just
what they are.

Chaos comes when the body feels "I am what I feel" and the mind feels "I
am the body and I am what I think." To solve the chaos, let the body do
the best it can, but not less than it can or more than it can.

Over time, inventorying becomes so automatic that the process can be
carried on in dreams. Miguel has had the experience of an inventory of
dreams in which all his old dreams returned. He felt it changed him as a
person.

All that earlier information was taken from my brain. I do not remember
those dreams that came one by one, but I am a new man created from that
inventory of dreams.

When we review the past, it is important to remember that the Judge and
the Victim are unwelcome at the inventory. We must see the inventory
with the eyes of love. If we review our life without love, we will
reopen old wounds and create more emotional poison, and we will justify
the pain we carry in our whole life. Usually we store the events of our
past in accordance with the interpretation we made of whatever happened.
That interpretation will be keyed to our emotional state at that moment.
Let's imagine that a couple has had a fight. The fight is witnessed by
the mothers of the wife and the husband. It is also witnessed by a
person who has no emotional attachment to either of the couple. The
interpretation of the fight will vary in each of these five persons. The
four who are related might write four different stories of the fight.
The story closest to the truth will be that of the impersonal witness
who lacks emotional connection to the participants. It is likely that in
making our own inventory with the eyes of the Judge and the Victim we
will bring into our mind the original interpretation of the remembered
event with all its blame and self-justification. This is why we try to
assume the role of the impartial witness to our inventory. We practice
the special type of breathing when we do the inventory. We bring in love
while doing the exercise. Whatever we recall, if we respond to it with
love, we can transform even those memories we think of as injustices.
With love we go into forgiveness. We forgive what happened and we
forgive ourselves. The result is that our agreement changes and we
recover a little more of the totality of ourselves.

Before beginning the inventory, a good technique is to write down a list
of what it is you want to remember. Just writing things down as they
come into your mind will initiate the process of remembering so you can

recapitulate an event, an emotion, an interaction. You could speak your
list aloud, but writing is more powerful. You can make your list
according to events, people, or dates. It is easiest to recall one
person after another person as they came into your life, remembering as
much about each one as you can. This is an effective way to review the
interactions of your life. Eventually, you will do an inventory of your
emotions. You can write lists many times. With every inventory you cut
the hooks that keep you trapped in this reality. The fewer the hooks you
have the more power you accumulate for making your escape and developing
your own mastery. If you perform a recapitulation or an inventory each
time you go to bed, you will add no more hooks. To do a daily inventory,
just before sleep, pull your emotions back into your mind in a review of
your day. When you waken at night it is a good time to do an inventory.
Force yourself to sit up and begin. Big inventories release your whole
life of emotions, but everyday inventories of all your interactions and
emotions are easier and faster than doing reviews of emotions long
stored and unprocessed. The inventory is a meditation exercise. An
inventory is not an examination of conscience. There is no Judge nor
Victim. It is a review of feelings. Ways to initiate this exercise might
be: to put a candle in your room and look at it while focusing on your
breath; to look deeply into a mirror; to sit in a darkened room with
your feet on the floor and your hands in your lap; to lie down with a
blanket over you with your hands crossed over your chest; or to sit on
the floor with your arms wrapped around your bent knees while leaning
back against a support. These are all techniques for going into a light
trance state. They can enhance your power to make your inventory deeper.

Give yourself a command. "I am the Dreamer." Keep your eyes open. If you
close your eyes, you will start dreaming, which is not the same thing as
remembering. With your eyes open, your reason cannot deny what you are
seeing. You need to convince yourself that you can see. You can go back
to incidents of high emotion in your past as they come into your mind.
After each inventory, you return to your dream of life with different
eyes.

CHAPTER 5EUEH TOOLS FOR TRANSFORMATION

PART Two n this planet, all humans are hunters. Everybody becomes prey.
You have a certain amount of energy. To survive and to grow, you have to
acquire more energy. Wherever there is energy, whoever has it, you
require it and by instinct you will try to take it. The hunter is a
stalker. The word as it is used in the Toltec tradition comes from the
vision of the jaguar. The jaguar is a land animal who is always alert,
always awake. It moves slowly to seize its prey. The jaguar sees
accurately from close at hand. He lives in the present. The stalker also
includes the vision of the eagle. The eagle flies in the air with an
overview of the scene. It does not see in great detail, but it can move
directly to its prey. The eagle is the dreamer. By being the eagle with
a panoramic viewpoint, it is easier to become a Master of Awareness, a
hunter whose prey is the emotions. The eagle's viewpoint makes us
quickly aware of our emotions, but they are harder to reach from such a
distance. The stalker can be like the spider who spins a beautiful web
and waits for its prey. Humans hunt like a spider when they create
situations that pull people into their web with charisma or with
cunning. Human prey is always attracted by something it wants, such as
power, position and money. The warrior is a stalker. When you become the
stalker, you become the hunter, which means the warrior is the hunter
who hunts power. You will stalk each of your emotions and every word
that comes from your mouth. Once you begin stalking, you will learn to
live in absolute freedom.

Stalking is a quest for transformation. On this quest, every action,
thought and spoken word takes on significance. For example, we might be
in a conversation that becomes filled with gossip. To protect ourselves
from this poison, we will have to cleanse the wound the gos sip makes in
us by using the breathing technique. The warrior is the hunter who hunts
for the power required to attain a level of mind that transcends the
material plane. Power is a living being. This living being is the dream
of the planet. Most human beings are working for this living dream,
using all available power so the dream continues to grow. We trap our
fellow human beings in the dream and we trap the new humans we bring
into the world by teaching them to judge, to feel victimized, and to
create poisonous emotions. In the dream of the planet, the word is our
most powerful way to spread poison. The word can destroy or save. Its
effects ripple outward to an enormous extent. Through the word others
force their poison on us. When we feel hurt or angry, we might say a
word that has special potency. This is black magic. All of us are
magicians trapped by the power of the word until we learn to stalk
ourselves. The highest achievement of the stalker is to become
impeccable. You become impeccable when you realize that all you do is an
act of power for which you are responsible. You almost escape the dream
by developing impeccability, but it is still necessary to discipline
your emotions. In order to be impeccable, you must stop spreading
poisonous emotions or accepting them from outside yourself. From
Awareness to Stalking

The Master of Transformation must already have the awareness that we are
multidimensional beings. This awareness is the prime requirement for
becoming a Toltec Warrior. The Mastery of Awareness could also be called

the Mastery of the Mind. However, it includes two points of view -not
only the viewpoint of the mind, but also the viewpoint held by the
physical body.

Everything is a dream and only the dream exists. To explain ourselves
and the world, we like to make divisions. The two main divisions are the
dream and the dreamer. The dreamer dreams, yet the dream is there even
without the dreamer because many other dreamers are maintaining it.

We adapt to the same frequency as the dream of the planet. The dream
guides the dreamer, not the other way around. We are what we believe we
are, but our position in the dream changes as our awareness changes. We

become aware of how we dream and of our position in it. Once we are
aware that everything is a dream, we discover the dream is a nightmare.
With Mastery of Transformation we can change the whole dream. It must
happen at the personal level. Only by transforming ourselves, one person
at a time, will the whole dream eventually be changed. In history, we
see that human beings have always searched for eternal happiness. We
seek a state of grace or a state of bliss in heaven or Nirvana or
Olympus. With the kind of dream that dominates this planet, it seems
impossible to reach our goal of happiness. The Toltecs knew how
difficult it is to be happy. They explored how to change the dream and
they discovered the first two masteries: The first is awareness and the
second is personal transformation. The major tools we use to develop
Mastery of Transformation are stalking and the inventory (which is also
called the recapitulation). I think of the inventory as an art of
dreaming, and the art of the eagle. We use our memory to go into our
past and recover it. Therefore, we would say that the inventory is about
the past, whereas stalking is about the present. The art of stalking is
the art of free will, choices and taking risks. It is the art of being
alive, always in the present like the jaguar. The way to control the
dream when we are awake is by making choices. Throughout the universe,
there is a process of action and reaction. The dream reacts to our
choices. The art of stalking has to do with our control over our
reactions. We begin by stalking our actions. Here, we must return to the
theme of domestication. Domestication taught us how to dream and to
adapt to the dream of the planet. It programmed our mind with a whole
belief system. It provided us with our position in the dream, in our
family, in the community and in ourselves. Our position is the image we
hold of ourselves at any moment. Our position is

what we believe we represent in any situation. In every position we take
we attempt to prevail, and everyone else is also trying to prevail. This
leads to chaos and confusion.

Our dream and our position in that dream are the results of what we
believe we are. This belief is controlled by emotions, not by reason.
Reason feels victimized because our experiences are not logical.
Everything we experience has an emotional component. We react
emotionally, for example, to beauty. The emotional body has only one
purpose and that is to feel. The intellect makes an interpretation of
what we feel and attempts to justify our emotional reactions. The
intellect tries to repress the emotional body and to cover our wounds
with lies to avoid pain. In this way, we develop our denial system. We
begin denying our experiences as a little child when we react to what we
consider to be injustices. The interaction between the emotional body
and the intellect creates a growing conflict and a lack of
self-acceptance. Mainly, we don't accept our emotions. Particularly in
Western society, we are embarrassed by our emotions and we often deny
them. When we are alone, we really believe in the image of what we think
we are. This image is not real. It is a part of our dream. It carries
the guilt and blame that are remnants of our domestication process. Many
of us hate ourselves so much we cannot enjoy life. To be honest with
ourselves and to uncover the lies we have been taught to believe takes
courage. The process of opening our wounds is painful, but this is what
the Master of Transformation does when he or she stalks. When we are
awake, the art of stalking consists in always being alert to our
thoughts, actions and reactions. The novice begins by focusing inward.
We always begin with ourselves. From this self-study, we can understand
others who are doing the same thing we are doing based on their own
belief system. When we are asleep, the art of stalking gives us control
over the dream of life. We can become dream masters.

The stalker uses free will to make choices and does not rely upon
emotions. By letting the Judge and the Victim decide things for us, we
give up responsibility and we lose our free will. The stalker
deliberately takes his or her choices back from the Judge and Victim.

Life is always action. Action makes the difference in the world. The
stalker can make a dream come true in material reality. The dreamer
cannot do that. The stalker has the power to change the outside dream
within the limits of his position in that dream. The dreamer is unable
to do this. After stalking within and gaining mastery, the new master
nagual starts stalking the outside dream of the planet, which is that
dream shared by all humans. Once the stalker has a cleansed mind, he or
she can begin expressing to the outside dream. As the dream changes for
one stalker after another, we will see that there is no place for
poverty or for the passive acceptance of degradation. Action creates
abundance. A master is almost finished with the inner work of
transformation when he or she starts to create in the outside world.
Like a doctor or an engineer, we become experienced before we can
practice what we have learned. In terms of the study of Toltec mastery,
one must transform all one's inner wounds to get rid of
self-destruction. One must heal the dark side of one's nature. The
emotional body is filled with wounds and is starving for love and
justice. Once these wounds are healed, the transformed warrior expresses
only love. The Master of Transformation is also a Master of Love, or we
might say a Master of Intent. These are synonymous terms. The warrior
learns that the truth is love. To Learn the Art of Stalking

Miguel takes a sequential approach when he teaches the art of stalking.
He continuously restates these core ideas:

We must remember that we are humans who are in hell, trapped by the
dream of the planet.

We use stalking as a tool to acquire awareness, change our dream and
escape from the dream. The stalker in ourselves helps us to stop the
nightmare and to start getting into position for an escape from hell. In
our normal state, we have the idea that we are here to suffer for our
whole existence. We dream the nightmare and we develop a faulty memory.
We can barely remember yesterday. We think we know a lot about
ourselves, but the truth is we know hardly anything about ourselves.
Last night I spent the whole night dreaming of power but I cannot
remember the dream. I know only that it was about power. I remember a
few things about when I was eight years old in second grade, but I do
not recall what I said and did then. Illusions blind us. We live in a
false environment that causes amnesia. There are whole parts of myself I
do not know. It is the same with each of you. I present this sequence of
concepts to my apprentices who are becoming Masters of
Transformation: 1. We are born in this world with a certain amount of
energy encased in an egg. The egg houses our body and all spiritual
energies that surround the body. 2. We have a physical body at birth,
but we develop a mental body after birth. Although the newborn baby has
no mind, its soul can be strongly felt. 3. In order to grow, we take in
energy from the outside world. We need to feed our various bodies with
different kinds of energy. The physical body needs food, but that is not
the only ener gy we require to grow. We are like a living being that
needs to grow into a fruit. Some other being will use the fruit for its
own food. Our fruit is our awareness. Every kind of energy has
awareness, but human awareness is separate and different from the

awareness of other beings in this and other realities. Our human
awareness is knowledge.

4. With our mind we create energy. The collective mind pressures our
inner mind to create energy. Fear teaches our mind how to dream. 5.
Reason connects our inner dream to the outer dream. Reason gives us its
own special awareness. It is not the same as the body, mind or soul
awareness, nor is it like any other energetic system that is human. 6.
Awareness grows through personal importance. Reason encourages our sense
of personal importance which creates a false position or image of
ourselves. From our false image, we create the fruit that is awareness.
Then we discover the value of reason that produces its special
awareness. 7. Reason stores a huge amount of energy. Many other organic
and inorganic systems around the level of human awareness feed on our
stored energy. 8. We derive energy for our awareness by absorbing it
from other humans or from the dream of the planet itself. The dream of
the planet loans us its energy. Later it will claim the final
product-our awareness. The dream of the planet makes an investment in
our growing awareness in order to take the fruit. This is like planting
a seed and later eating the fruit. 9. For the dream of the planet and
other energy systems around the planet, human awareness is very
valuable. This explains why there are so many humans. 10. The dream of
the planet pays for the fact that human awareness is destructive. At a
certain point, human awareness goes out of control. Many other energy
systems then try to control the production of humans. At this time we
can see that human awareness is like a cancer out of control from points
of view other than human. We are destroying the environment of our
planet. Humans need to be stopped, but at the same time there is an
abundance of the fruit of human awareness, which means there is an
abundance of energy.

11. From the outside, we can see the huge living being that is the dream
of the planet which enslaves humans to work for the dream. Humans are
trapped in this reality and it is difficult to escape. The relationship
of the human to the dream of the planet is a form of symbiosis.

The dream of the planet provides the energy for human growth, but the
price is high. There is no freedom. Humans live in slavery on Planet
Earth. 12. Dying is not the way to escape. The body dies but the soul
continues and it can be trapped by the energetical system of the earth.
When the body dies, the dream of the planet takes that part which
belongs to it. Little by little, it absorbs all the emotions that belong
to the dream. Other emotions remain with the soul and the reincarnation
plan of the soul. 13. When a new cycle begins, the process is repeated:
the loaning of energy, growth of awareness, and claiming of that
awareness by the dream of the planet. Souls remain trapped in earth's
environment life after life until they learn the art of stalking.
Self-Love and Transformation

Always look first for happiness. Happiness can come only from inside us.
No one can make us happy. Happiness is an expression of our love coming
out of us. We are not happy because others love us, but because we love
them. The purpose of Toltec training is to convince a person to love
herself or himself.

Everything is here so that we may love it, including ourselves. When our
love for ourselves is conditional, our love for others is also
conditional. Through our woundedness, we first deny ourselves love and
then we deny it to others. Therefore, self-love has to be the first
goal. If you have enough self-love, you do not need the love of another
person. You can enter a relationship because you want to do it, not
because you need it. If you are needy, you can be manipulated. If we are
happy, we do not need another person to make us happy. We share our
happiness, not our loneliness. Selflove makes us lovable. Others always
move toward the person who is at peace with himself or herself.

Miguel tries to make people aware of the blocks in their lives that come
from their belief systems. Naguals play tricks on their apprentices to
help them loosen their blocks. Firewalking is a trick to bypass the
belief system. It opens possibilities to the apprentice stalker. The
goal is to stop being rigid. The poottton we assume in any situation is
our way of dealing with circumstances. Our position is always changing.
When we think of

ourselves with detachment, we are free to change our position from
moment to moment in a graceful spontaneous response to circumstances,
without self-judgment. We become aware that we are always acting. We are
all wearing masks. We can shift in any way at all. Such awareness could
lead to duplicity and chicanery, but when a person has cleansed all
wounds first, then the self-awareness becomes a powerful tool for
remaining free of the dream of the planet. In the ancient days of the
Toltec at Teotihuacan and Tula, and in the Mayan cities, many masks have
been found. These masks were not only an art form of the Toltecs, they
were a purposeful part of the teachings. The masks were hung on the wall
and the apprentice would stand in front of one mask and practice making
the same facial expression until he or she could feel the same emotion
that the mask expressed. At first, the apprentice only aped masks
without eyes. Then, with increasing proficiency, the apprentice moved on
to imitate the expression of masks with eyes. The practical use for this
discipline was to send apprentices into town to study the facial
expressions of ordinary people. The face in repose is the real face of a
person. With mastery, the Toltec could analyze the condition of the
person in much the same way as another might study an aura. Great
precision in understanding human beings was developed through this
practice. A master needed only a glance to know the feelings behind the
expression on a face. By copying the expression, the master could
experience the emotions of another person. It was especially useful in
determining if someone was lying. Many people in the world instinctively
wear an appropriate mask to achieve the desired result they seek.
However, this is shamanic knowledge, part of the silent knowledge, and
it is properly taught only to dedicated apprentices. It gives a person a
power that could be misused.

In the stalking process, we come face to face with our positions in all
the varied circumstances of our life. Some of these positions cannot be
changed. One of the positions that cannot really change is that of one's
gender. If you are a woman, no real change of that condition is
possible. Sometimes in our inner dream, we do not accept these
unchangeable things. This leads to an avoidable misery. Once you
transform the inner dream, you can accept your unchangeable positions
with greater equanimity.

Other conditions may be difficult but you could change them. Perhaps you
are a Persian woman living in Iran or Iraq. You could work on this
condition. You would still be a woman but you could modify your position
in relation to your location in that culture. If you should do so,
others who notice your behavior might alter their situation also. Not
all modifications end happily. Hitler is one who tried to modify the
outside dream by making it even more hellish. Mahatma Ghandi, on the
other hand, first cleansed himself and then his actions in the world
were affective and benign. Toyland

Toyland is a metaphor Miguel uses to teach apprentices to appreciate
themselves just as they are, with detachment.

I sometimes speak of The Toy who lives in Toyland. If you think of the
whole world as Toyland, your body becomes your favorite toy. You love
your body. Without your body there is no action. Your body was made to
have fun, not to suffer and not to win a contest. With your body, you
can speak and share what you are dreaming. You can see the outside
world. In Toyland you will have gratitude for your body and you will
respect it. Anyone who wants to play with your toy has to regard it as
highly as you do. In Toyland everyone wants to be happy. All the toys
who live in Toyland are playing a game either alone or with others.
Anyone can change games at will. Every toy has its own ability, so the
result of the game depends on how each of us plays. In Toyland, you can
be a doctor, an engineer, whatever you want. You practice playing and
rediscover the emotions you knew as a child when anything was possible.
Your imagination helps you regain personal freedom. Morality is higher
in Toyland than it is in the hell that is the outside world. In Toyland,
you can change your position at any time, so there is less emphasis on
defending a position. When two toys marry, they both can seek happiness
without interfering with the freedom of the other. The idea of Toyland
works well to allow for detachment from entrenched positions. It
encourages the self-acceptance of knowing that what you are IS. With
stalking, you control your dream and you can make any dream you want.
Because everything is an illusion, stalking can be a game, like in
Toyland. We only suffer when we do not have the courage to change our
game or our position, in order to release ourselves from the game that
we do not want to play. In Toyland, we are encouraged to find out what
we really want and then to create a game to make it possible. A Toltec
apprentice warrior must reach the mastery of being a toy. This
discipline lowers one's self-importance and allows the apprentice to
witness

the comedy in life rather than the tragedy most others see. Apprentices
learn to let go. A stalker has to take risks. Stalking is like a game in
which you have nothing to lose.

Over the years that I have taken apprentices, I have seen the results of
their mastery of stalking. One student of Toltec wisdom has become a
writer about business. He gives seminars around the country. After a
short period of chaos in their minds, the successful masters have gone
on with their lives and their work. Toltec wisdom is a continuing
process. There is no time in which one could say, "Now, I am finished
with all this practice. I am a nagual." Becoming a master is a way of
life and a lifelong pursuit. Stalking the Body

We have been speaking of the art of stalking from the point of view of
the mind. The other point of view we want to address is that of the
body. One of our most vulnerable wounds is our judgment of our own body.
Our body is our most loyal, trusted friend. The Toltec way is to honor
the human

body, to keep it as clean as possible, and to think of it as perfect
just as it is, but most of us find this attitude difficult to maintain.
Most diseases of the body are derived from a mental state that is
dependent upon our position in life. Disease often comes from avoiding
responsibility for our own health and trying to justify ourselves as
victims. Negative opinions about the body affect the mind and then the
mind represses the body. In this way, the body gives power to the mind.
Some of the body's involuntary movements as well as voluntary movements
are ruled by the mind. The mind thinks, "I am my body." The mind divides
the body's needs into acceptable and unacceptable. The mind interprets
the body's needs as the mind's needs. The mind always wants quality and
quantity, so even if the body is already full, the mind might perceive
that the body needs to be fed. The Judge in the mind compares the body
to an ideal unfavorably and blames the body for "needing" food. The mind
thinks of the body as guilty and yet it is the mind that causes the body
to overeat.

We aspire to change our treatment of our body. The best we can do is to
respect the limitations of our body, to see the beauty of the body-our
own and other people's. At each age, at each stage, however it looks, we
can find its beauty.

Our body belongs to the Angel of Death. It is only on loan to us. We can
develop gratitude for all of its parts and all of their functions. In
contrast to the more Puritanical beliefs in our culture, the Toltecs
believe that our gratitude should extend to our reproductive organs and
the power they give us to bring in new children. If we become aware of
gratitude and build our respect for our body, without possessiveness,
this awareness will do eighty percent of the work to bring our body into
a more ideal form. Perfection is already here. We don't need to work for
perfection. We can monitor our way of seeking the opinion of others.
When we doubt our own opinion of our body, we ask others, "How do I
look?" One negative opinion can destroy our inner view of ourselves.
When we do this, we give away our power in our need for acceptance. We
also stimulate our Judge and victim. The needs of the body and the needs
of the mind are two different things. Physical exercise allows the body
to recover its own power. In the Toltec training of the nagual,
exercises begin with the technique of joyous breathing. At the beginning
of this book there is a prayer to ask for a reconnection with the love
that is in the air itself. Becoming conscious of the love that is
available each time we breathe is a goal of the apprentice warrior. The
Physical Regime of Transformation

Although I will not go into them in this book, I do teach a series of
physical exercises that are similar to the martial arts, yoga and Tai
Chi. The

reader can practice any system of exer cises because the purpose of
exercising is to create a flow of energy through the body without
blockages. Exercises bypass the many negative opinions most people have
developed about their own bodies and they empower the body. When you do
exercises, begin by contemplating the pleasure of being alive.

We are multidimensional beings and our bodies are composed of
multidimensional organs. We need to honor our hearts, our lungs, our
intestines ... all parts of ourselves. Each part of our body has its own

awareness. We begin our exercises with a prayer, which puts us in a
state of gratitude for our body. As we exercise, we hold postures and we
breathe consciously. I always tell my students to find their own rhythm
of breathing. I do not direct the rhythm, as is done in yoga. Each of us
has a different rhythm that we are comfortable with. Your muscles and
joints also have a rhythm. When you exercise, always listen to your
body. Attempt to awaken each part of the body and to recover its
well-being. Let go of the emotions stored in different parts of your
body. The purpose of this kind of exercise is not to develop strength
but to release emotions and to achieve inner harmony by ridding the body
of toxins. As the emotional toxins are released, a harmony develops
between the organs and a total energy flow among the chakras. Chakras
usually refers to the seven energy centers found from the crown of the
head to the base of the spine along the central axis of the body. The
concept originates with the Hindu and the Buddhist systems. While you
exercise, hold the posture and explore the intent of the movement. The
movements in all exercise systems express the beauty of the human body.
In each position, the body is like a statue. Exercising with this in
mind is an art. Begin a program that is very simple. I teach a sequence
of exercises for revitalizing the whole body that takes an hour and a
half. When done as a discipline, the exercises have a weight loss
effect. I stress the connection between our bodies and Mother Earth. The
four elements of earth, air, fire and water are represented in the
exercise system I use. The human body is earth. The spine, the brain and
the nerve system are fire. The circulatory systems are water and the
lungs are the air.

The regime I teach begins with fire breathing. Think of two main centers
of the body, the bottom of the spine and the pineal gland, which connect
with the element of fire.

The pineal gland in the center of the forehead area is light sensitive.
It is the point of connection between our body and the sun. To do fire
breathing, suck in air with a gargling noise at the back of your throat.
Blow out air between your teeth with a shushing noise. Inhale a breath
from the sun, through the pineal gland to the base of the spine. As you
inhale, visualize going to the center of the earth and giving yourself
as an offering or a communion. Exhale while visualizing that you are
bringing the answer from the earth and sending it to the sun. Through
our breathing, we make an invitation to the sun and to the earth to join
in our body. We unite the two energies of the sun and the earth. Our
nerves have direct contact with every cell in our body. Our breathing
energizes and revitalizes every cell of our body. It takes healing to
each cell. As you breathe, you can feel the flow of energy moving
throughout the body. I learned this exercise system from the teacher I
knew in the desert during my year of internship after medical school.
You will see little statues in Mexico that demonstrate the poses he
taught me. The same movements are found all over the world because all
people have discovered the power of the movements. During the meetings I
hold with apprentices, we also exercise the voice with chanting. Our
purpose is to recapture the pure, elemental nature of sound. Silence
gives form to sound. Humans are artists of sounds in language and in
music.

We practice the impeccability of the word in which we use the word
constructively. We stalk the word and we become conscious of the power
in the words that we say. We notice the power behind opinions, the
effect of judgment and blame. If we speak from a place of healing, our
words will lose the power to wound others. When we react with pain to
the words of others, we find our wounds. We search our memories to find
the source of the pain the words recalled. Then we can heal the wound.
Once these devotional practices are learned, there is no need for anyone
to attend a class to do them. They can be done at any time. While
waiting at a stoplight, a person can practice fire breathing. In the
midst of housework, one can hold a statuesque pose and breathe
consciously. The purpose of all the training is to become conscious in
the present moment.

Testimonials from Stalkers

Bernadette Vigil, an artist who has apprenticed with Miguel, is now a
fully-trained nagual. Miguel has assured her it is time to take her own
groups to Teotihuacan and to teach her own apprentices. When she
explains what becoming a nagual means, Bernadette says, "I have forgiven
myself. I have given up the role of victim. My emotional body has died.
It died during the ceremony in Teotihuacan." She speaks of the
assemblage point, which is that point in each of us where we can access
our silent knowledge. As we gain in awareness, the assemblage point can
shift and expand, which results in increased awareness. Bernadette
explains her feelings as a stalker: "In order to be impeccable, I'm very
cautious about what I say and what I think. When I teach, I shift my
center to bring in the total nagual, which is in other dimensions. The
nagual is part of an individual's total being, but it extends further
into other dimensions than merely the spiritual body. We begin our
stalking class with a prayer circle. We place our intent aloud and
listen to one another. Silent knowledge comes in, bringing a huge amount
of energy into the circle."I sense the assemblage point of new
apprentices to be at first slightly to the right on the back of their
spiritual bodies. Acting as a nagual, I touch the new student while I am
in a trancelike state. I channel energy from my will to their will. Each
student begins to realize that he or she already has silent knowledge.
"The mind is made by billions of emotions. Every emotion is a living
being, which all together create the mind. The mind is like a country
where there are millions of humans. You must ask, where and who is the
leader of this emotional country? Stop all judgment and refrain from
talk of abuse. To think about being abused is to accept being a victim.
In the Toltec tradition we disavow being a victim.

"At Teotihuacan, each step along the Avenue of the Dead is a preparation
for dying by letting go of fear. At one point, you bury the self that
you have been. Walking this route compares with climbing the chakra
ladder in the Hindu system. Each step brings more awareness as you
surrender your fears." Bernadette speaks of the egg that houses the
soul. Our body is not our border. Beyond the body is spirit, which is
enclosed figuratively in an egg. Those with special gifts have a double
egg surrounding the body. Miguel has found that most of his apprentices
have the double egg and Bernadette has found this among her apprentices
also. A student who lacks the double egg can break the single egg and
create a double egg when nagual energy enters his or her field-an event
that can be almost instantaneous for a fully committed student. Miguel's
wife, Gaya Jenkins Ruiz, who is also a nagual woman and a teacher,
reminds us that the definition of relationship is "touching each others'
wounds." "If someone comes to you and says something that affronts you,
and it stays in your mind, then there is something in you that needs to
be cleansed."We vibrate at certain frequencies. If you are carrying a
pocket of anger and you interact with Jane, you are sending your anger
to Jane. The anger hits Jane's auric field. If she also feels anger,
your anger will activate hers. However, if Jane is not feeling angry,
she will not be vibrating at the same frequency and what you send out
will just flow through her. "We do not need to protect ourselves from
anyone. We only need to protect ourselves from ourselves. If something
affects us, it proba bly stirs our sense of personal importance. We
become vulnerable when our ego is stirred. A feeling of insult or upset
is a signal that our personal importance is still active and needs
cleansing."

Gaya reminds students that if you watch your thoughts and your desires
everyday, and then, when you go to bed, you say a prayer, it strengthens
your control when you enter your dream state. One of Miguel's students
speaks of the restraint the habitual inventory has on your inner nature.
"You realize immediately, oh, now I'm going to have to recapitulate all
this stuff. If I have a conversation with someone and I see there is no
need to have the conversation except to express my self-importance, I
start to become very economical with my energies." That attitude, Miguel
agrees, is impeccability. Another of Miguel's apprentices presented his
own view of stalking, which he compared to having the point of view of
an artist. The stalker, he said, is a Master of Awareness. As he grew
more adept at stalking, he started paying attention to color, to the way
his room is arranged, the way his life is arranged, and how he interacts
with his family. It was like seeing power in the form of beauty for the
first time. "A huge doorway opened up for me. All of a sudden, it was as
if life could be fun," he said. He recommends that a student of this
wisdom take whatever shred of awareness is available and modify it, make
it grow, and concentrate upon the quality of beauty. There is power in
beauty and joy in aesthetics in general. The hunter is looking for
something personal to fill a need. For the stalker, the personal need
falls away a little bit as something deeper begins to grow, which cannot
be controlled with the intellect. You find yourself being pulled towards
beauty, but it is different for every individual. By following your
intuition, you gravitate toward that beingness, that silent knowledge
you are seeking. This wisdom is larger by far than the sense of self,
and it arises in a place of deepest desire that your soul has always
yearned for. You knew the desire in childhood because a child still has
a vital connection with soul. The stalker Finds that certainty again.

A woman who claims to be a dreamer finds that stalking makes her more
aware of action. It also prevents her going into her own pain. It helps
her to make decisions. By stalking she is becoming more selfaware and
she enjoys doing it. She questions her emotions. "Why am I feeling
uncomfortable? I try to find where the feeling is coming from. Is it my
own fear for my security or is it because I don't like the situation I
am in with other people?" When she is in a dream state, a female
apprentice explains, she can be watching an action occur, be aware of it
and pull away from it, detach herself from it, and then create from that
or make things happen from that crossover of two kinds of awareness at
once. A stalker is fearless. A stalker knows what it wants and goes for
it. Before acting, in the middle of acting, or after acting, the stalker
tunes into its intuition and listens. Then, the stalker will let nothing
get in its way. For me, another woman says, "being a stalker is just
being aware and observing my actions at every moment of my life. It is
being conscious of what masks I wear and when and how I wear them.
Again, it's really tuning in to my intuition and trusting the proper way
to be when I am challenged. At times, I wish I were a dreamer because I
am constantly confronting living as a stalker. Yet, I'm glad I am aware
and really present to observe everyone and everything that happens." A
man adds the observation that the art of stalking is also referred to as
the art of transformation. "I use stalking to pull myself out of hell. I
use stalking to wage the battle between the Judge and the Victim. So,
stalking allows me to be aware of the energies in my body that are not
helping me to be what I really am. If I observe that I am feeling
anxiety, I realize it is only because I am not in the moment. As soon as
I bring my attention back to the moment, the anxiety is gone. Because I
am able to observe what I'm feeling at any given time, I have the power
to change it. If my power is great enough at that moment, I can pull
myself out of hell.

"My assemblage point shifts to that anxiety, and I become aware of it
and shift it back by will. Without stalking I am not aware that I have
shifted to a place that is not where I want to be. Stalking is the tool
that has allowed me to be a happy person. Without stalking I could never
experience love or life. I would have stayed behind my veil of shyness.
The stalker in me is very strong and it says, 'To hell with the fear.
I'm going through it.' In order for the stalker to be effective, you
have to be extremely relentless. Otherwise, there will always be an
excuse to stay stuck." "We usually talk about stalking versus dreaming,
but that is only at one level of explanation," adds a woman. "When you
go beyond that, stalking is dreaming. Once we are aware, we realize we
are always dreaming. When someone says, 'I am a dreamer and I don't know
what stalking is,' I think, 'Well, you have to stalk or else you would
not be connected to this dream.' You have to choose whether you are
stalking in awareness or not. If there were a pure dreamer who did not
stalk at all, the person would be floating all the time. The person
would not have a clue what is going on, what his or her name is, what
day it is. All actions that we take or the direction we turn our
attention to, that is stalking... stalking the dream. At any given
moment, there are an infinite number of things we can give our attention
to. What we choose to put our attention to tells us what kind of stalker
we are. I wanted to point out that stalking and dreaming work hand in
hand though they seem contradictory. The stalker is that part which
observes with awareness and detachment from the dream you are in. You
are caught up in the dream but you are detached from it. The stalker is
able to unhook itself from an emotion or from the dream." One male
apprentice describes stalking as an evaluation of energy. If we are not
to judge, we have to have some method for evaluating. Rather than judge,
we can evaluate the energy in a person or a situation in terms of how
appropriate it is to our actions, to ourselves. Some energy will not be
important to you, but other energy will connect closely with what you
are

trying to accomplish. You have to make evaluations in order to be a
stalker moving toward a goal. There is a difference between surrendering
yourself to spirit and surrendering yourself to the domestication of old
habits. It is sometimes difficult to delineate when you are involved in
a project, whether you are doing what you want to do or whether you are
doing what spirit has contoured for you. You cannot separate stalking in
the outside world from stalking yourself. Every action you take on the
outside path is mirrored on the inside path. Stalking is an evaluation
of your energy and an alignment of your spirit energy. Miguel Counsels
His Apprentices

When you come into the world you become trapped here in a position of
being emotionally dead. You are neither happy nor unhappy until you
develop your personality for dealing with the world. Usually, you choose
a mask with different variations. The mask makes a person feel safe. The

mask is the modality that the stalker shows to the world. When you
decide, as a child, how you are going to be in the world, this decision
will affect your entire life. As a teacher, the nagual tries to discover
which masks his or her apprentices are using in order to understand the
mode or quality in which they try to deal with the world. If you can see
beyond the masks people wear, you can choose your actions when you
interact with them. Your interactions will be more effective when you
stalk. Just reacting to circumstances and people in the same old way is
not effective. Stalking in the business world would be far more
effective than being a pawn caught up in the system. Stalking and seeing
clearly give you a tremendous advantage and they protect you from being
pulled into the hell of the business world. Stalking is a way to go into
the higher realms and bring back help to lift human beings to a higher
state of awareness. Once you have cleansed your emotional poison,
someone can come to you with rage and you will not receive it. This
happens when you become masterful. You can say to yourself, "I'm going
to stay in love," and it will affect the other person to notice that you
are not changed by his rage. Mastery means not being affected by other
people's poison. There will be continuous temptations. Other living
beings will tempt us back into the dream through their manipulation of
our emotions. They are responding to the dark light of Lucifer as he is
described in scripture. With mastery we can stay clear of the tempters.
Jesus showed us how to resist temptation with love. You do not try to
stop emotions of rage, you just let them flow through you.

In Teotihuacan there is an ancient residential compound one and a half
kilometers from the Pyramid of the Sun, close to the River San Juan,
called Tetitla. Tetitla means "Place of Stones." Many murals have been
found there.

Tetitla is a place of pure black light. This is a healing energy which
goes into the wounds we carry around with us and clears away the poison
from them. The black light is pure love, or the love that purifies. Even
the wounds that you do not know you have, based on childhood fears, will
be released in this light. False images will break down. Anger may
change to sadness, which is just a symptom of the cleansing you will
experience as you allow yourself to express an emotion for the first
time after many years of repressing it under a mental image. The
experience of going to Tetitla is archetypal, a prime example of the
cleansing process. If one cannot go there, the experience of cleansing
can be brought about by your internal inventory. As a person of
perception, you have different points of view that can perceive
different rates of energy. The assemblage point makes fluctuations in
the will, from deep in the will to the surface of the human "egg." The
assemblage point is the place where you perceive this reality. Emotions
of anger, jealousy and fear occupy only a small range in this point of
view. From other parts of your total point of view, you do not perceive
them. It is possible to move out of the range at which they can be
perceived until you have almost no connection with this reality at all.
If you think of your chakras as your perceptual windows, you can imagine
that from each level you will have a different viewpoint. Perhaps from
the base chakra and the gonad chakra some of the same information is
perceivable, but from the base chakra one could not perceive all that
one could from the gonad chakra. You have a customary assemblage point,
somewhere within the spectrum of total awareness. It is not wise to try
to alter this assemblage point until you have rid yourself of fears. All
efforts in the Toltec tradition are directed to raising your personal
awareness away from the fear-driven old dream of the planet to the new
dream of heaven on earth. However, the old dream is now thousands of

years old. It is deeply entrenched in the minds of all humans. The dream
itself is a living being. It is an archangel that came from the sun.

Spirit is pushing us to change the dream. Spirit is reclaiming his
kingdom. When we entered the Sixth Sun, it gave us an opportunity to
make this change in the dream. More than an opportunity, it was a
command from the sun telling us it has to happen. If you move out of the
dream of the planet, you will completely shift your assemblage point to
the point of view of your soul. First, from the back of the soul, you
will see who faces the dream. Then you will shift to the other side of
the soul and see who sees the spirit. This is a big jump from one part
of the soul to the other. To make the shift, a part of our reason
perceives the black light of unconditional love which goes directly to
the soul, opens it and lets the spirit flow out. The spirit aligns with
that part of reason which recognizes unconditional love. Together, they
can do everything. They clean the mind completely and they express their
understanding to the outside. This is the Christ, the Buddha part of the
reason that is in complete alignment with the spirit. In the energetic
system we know as reality, reason is the king. We have the Judge and the
Victim. In the Toltec idealized energetic system, spirit is the king.
The only element of reason that persists in the spiritual energetic
system is that part which reflects the soul. The size of the soul is
microscopic at first, but it is connected with every cell in your body.
The soul is deep in the human egg. It is in the nucleus of the will, in
the bubble of perception. The spirit is a little piece of the sun
trapped in matter. Our DNA is in direct connection with the spirit. What
we are is spirit. What we are is God. Our will encircles our human egg
and it lasts until our death.

When you have a choice of two roads to go down, choose both for a while.
Soon one of the paths will not feel right. It does not matter if you
make a mistake. Try to love yourself for trying. Say to yourself, "I
love you for trying even though it blew up in your face." After a while
you get better and better at feeling. It is like a muscle you haven't
used before. You will say to yourself, "Oh boy, I had a feeling that was
going to go wrong, but I did it anyway." If you do that five times you
are going to think, "Wait a second. I've had this feeling before but I
did not pay attention." You will start to let go of reason and trust
your feelings as you react to your environment. It is a way of living
life. Second Attention: Beyond the Nightmare

The dream of life is a synonym for our whole reality. The dream of life
that we are presently living reflects who we believe we are and what we
believe about everything in our reality. This dream is the result of
what we have learned from our ability to perceive. We have created our
reality, our entire dream and our mind by learning all that we believe
through our perceptions.

Because we are multidimensional living beings, we can perceive thousands
of things at the same time. Yet, one of the magical parts of being human
is that we have the ability to discriminate. We can screen out all the
perceptions we do not choose to notice and focus on the perception that
we want to study. This power to choose one perception among millions of
possible stimuli and to focus upon it is what we call "attention."
Attention allows us to focus our perception on what we want to learn. In
order to learn to walk, to ride a bicycle or to play a piano, we must,
in the beginning, focus our attention and repeatedly practice until the
action becomes automatic. Then the knowledge of the action becomes part
of us. We use attention to learn everything that we know and everything
that we believe.

We use attention for the first time to create our reality, to create our
dream. The result of our using the first attention, or the attention for
the first time, is the creation of this nightmare that we call hell.

The tool that we can use to transform the dream is the same tool that we
used to create this dream in the first place-our attention. When we
review all that we know and think to be true in an effort to decide
whether or not we believe it, we are using attention for the second time
in the process we call the inventory. Using our attention for the second
time changes the dream. Exercising our second attention, removes
limitations that formerly bound us and it expands our consciousness.
Eventually we will discover that we are dreaming a new dream, a dream of
life where everything is possible, a dream that buoys our
selfconfidence, our hopes and expectations. The new dream we call heaven
on earth. Through second attention, our dream can carry us wherever and
whenever we want to be. We become explorers. We are no longer dogmatic
about anything. We have a wide view of the whole universe. What was not
known becomes known, but something always remains unknowable, in the
nagual of total spirit. Second attention gives us control over the dream
and the awareness that we are becoming God. Miguel was in the state of
second attention when he learned from the Book of Hermes and when he met
Jesus and the Buddha. To those in second attention, all is alive and
available all the time. Stalking Your Own Dream

As a stalker, you will design your own dream. I am designing my life. It
is a lot of work, but I love every step of the way. I try to put myself
in everything I do. When you are conscious of the power in your every
action, you are transmitting love. However, it is still possible to feel
a wound, and if this occurs another inventory may be needed to cleanse
all wounds.

If you are in a state of love, you have nothing to lose. You are in a
state of oneness. You are God on earth.

This is a beautiful concept. Once you awaken, it ceases to be an
abstract concept and becomes truth. This is what you are. But, until you
are awake, it is just a concept. You will still have the poison inside.
You will still feel personal importance. These are the traps of the old
dream. The dream will not let you go because it cannot handle love. It
is wonderful to have knowledge, but knowledge is also a trap unless the
knowledge is activated. Millions of souls are trapped because they do
not know what love is. They think they do, but they know about love only
according to the dream which traps everyone. To awaken from the dream,
one must become a stalker. Everyone, at a certain level, is a stalker.
Stalking is the only way we make something come true. For most people,
stalking is just a way of survival. For a warrior, stalking is a way to
escape. For a master, stalking is an art. We need to become artists of
stalking. If we are already warriors, we are using stalking to change
our dream of the planet. This effort is an interior "war" between the
old illusion of hell and the new dream of heaven on earth. We use
stalking to create art and to create beauty, which are the qualities of
heaven. The art of stalking is the result of years of training. You
reach mastery the moment that you gain awareness that everything you do
and everything you say is an act of power. As a corollary of this
awareness, you then accept responsibility for everything you do and for
everything you say. You will consciously direct that power to create the
new dream of heaven on earth.

CHAPTER EIGHT THE WORLD OF JUSTICE n December 1992, Miguel went on a
journey to Teotihuacan expecting to be profoundly changed when he
returned. His inner guidance told him his trip to Teotihuacan would be
more dangerous than any he had made previously. He had made the decision
to climb to the top of the Pyramid of the Sun and shamanically "jump
into the sun" by surrendering his life force to the pure spirit of
light. The act of power he contemplated would help him achieve a much
higher level of awareness, but such a self-actuated trial could have
fatal results for a master shaman who is able to shut down his breathing
and pulse by an act of will. Ancient Toltecs used this act of power to
ascend out of their bodies. Should he survive, Miguel knew he would be
permanently altered by the ordeal. He risked losing his identity, just
as he had when he gave up the practice of medicine. Miguel survived the
ordeal, but his expectation of change was realized so dynamically that
those who accompanied him felt he was no longer the same person who had
started the trip with them. In appearance he had the same body and the
same expressions, but they knew the person he had been was gone forever.
Since that time Miguel's appearance and his personality have
transformed. The new Miguel is a world teacher who travels and lectures
to an ever-widening audience, yet within himself his perception of his
role has become one of detachment.

Prior to his transformation, Miguel had believed his special destiny was
to impart Toltec wisdom to anyone who sought it. He had dedicated his
whole life to carrying out that mission. Today, he says:

Everything was gone. There was no mission. There was no man. There was
no life. Inside I felt completely full of joy, peace and love, just to
be. I no longer have to justify anything to myself or to anyone else.
The meaning of my work has changed. I no longer feel that I have a
special gift to give others. I had thought I was God's worker, and that
he sent me for a reason. That is not truth anymore for me.

Intellectually, I hardly think at all now. Sometimes I read, but I have
hardly any activity in the mind.

It is like a state of Samadhi. After this single day, I see the world
with a different perception. I see it without judgment. The result is
amazing. I'm not worried about the planet at all. I do not worry about
nature. I do not worry about other people, war, a tornado, or someone
shooting at me. I know that whatever happens, has to happen. It is done
as it should be and I trust it one hundred percent. I see a world with
justice. We are already in a world of justice. We have searched for it
for thousands of years. From this new state of mind, I can see all the
nightmares we have created in this world. It is easy to understand that
emotional and physical suffering of humans comes from what we have
created ourselves. After that day, I could see myself again at two years
old, playing all the time and having fun. I couldn't see the world of
injustice yet. I didn't know that the way humans dream is a nightmare.
True bliss is to know without the innocence of childhood this is a world
of justice. We cannot remove the nightmare if we remain innocent as
children. Children who are too innocent are like lambs. We must
introduce them to hell so they can get out of hell as soon as possible.
Miguel entered a state of radical trust during that fateful journey.
When he teaches now, he speaks from an assurance that he can trust
whatever comes through him. I don't have to rethink what I know. I have
no doubts now about whether my words are accurate. It is not important.
I have found out something very interesting about truth. Truth is
individual. What is true for me may not be true for anyone else.

Each listener at a lecture absorbs what I am saying differently. Each
one wants to hear some of the message but not all. Each believes in a
certain way. I expose what I know. I no longer ask for feedback. I ask
for questions only to clarify the way they believe.

I used to teach 'avoid judgment,' but I found I still judged myself.
After that day, I surrendered that. I no longer judge myself. I honor
myself just the way I am.

I used to have to express what I am. But there is no need. It is more
important to observe what others want to hear. I have not changed my
talks, but I have changed my method of observation. I know that nobody
really needs me, including my two sons, my mother, my wife, and my
students. Once you see a world of justice, you can be yourself one
hundred percent. You find you have a strong communication with
everybody. You are completely open to what you are and you see that
everyone else is you. It makes you closer to other people. The sense of
need is what causes rejection of other people. Once you know that no one
needs you, you have no rejection or fear of anyone. This is almost like
flying out of the body. If you can become needless yourself, you can be
there for everybody. Respect others. Respect their right to make their
own choices. Remember that you can choose to do something or not, with
kindness. You do not have to do anything if you do not want to. I
learned to respect everything just the way it is. I no longer see
problems. The injustice people feel in the world is an illusion.
Injustice does not come from outside. It comes from the decisions each
of us makes throughout our life. Those in society who seem to be victims
of injustice put themselves into their situations through choices they
have made. No one else is responsible for all the poison in their dream.
It is their own hell. Why does the dream have to control them? They have
chosen to dream this. The disease we call hell can be healed. I used to
pray. I felt sorry for them. How they suffer! How they need! But we find
we have built a society based on need. Outside of the dream, there

is no fear and no need. There is a different way to see the world and it
is much more beautiful. When you give up need, you are not afraid to be
hurt. You have no expectations. You have no need for boundaries. You
merge with everything. You don't think. You feel bliss, but not
innocence. You have to get beyond innocence with wisdom, not just
knowledge. Without need, you are wise.

The body dies and the brain dies, but the mind lives on after death and
it feels as though it is still alive. The brain needs sugar and oxygen
to survive, but the mind does not. After death, it takes time before the
mind finally notices it is dead. The function of the mind is to dream.
Even in a sleeping

dream, you feel as if you have a body and you can talk, and sometimes
you notice that you are dreaming. Your reason will try to wake you up.
Reason ceases to function at death, and therefore nothing tells you are
dead. It is an act of justice to die. If you want to experience life,
you have to take risks all the time. If you are so afraid to die, you
are not really alive. To know the joys of living each moment fully,
moment by moment, we must accept that death can claim us whenever it
wishes. Death is the natural corrollary of life, a part of the natural
continuum in which energy realizes itself. The detachment that comes
from accepting death does not imply sterility or coldness. On the
contrary, once the desperation of holding on is relinquished everything
can be savored in the moment. When a person has a terminal illness, if
there is a known cure, then I advise taking advantage of it. If there is
none, I do not advise medical procedures that prolong suffering. The
mind does not want to die, so it lets the body suffer needlessly. It
would be more) ust to let it die. When a person you are concerned about
is near death or suffering from illness, if you feel sorry for her, you
are not helping at all. You can be a more effective healer if you remain
needless and detached, yet loving, accepting the way it is. This is
justice.

CHAPTER RIDE LIFE AFTER DEATH hen Miguel gives lectures, he begins with
a prayer to our Father, Creator of the Universe. He asks that the
Creator use his voice, his eyes, his hands and his heart to share
Himself with all His children. In this chapter, taken from his lectures,
he focuses on the subject of life after death.

Death is nothing but a transformation. It is merely a concept that
scares humans when they face any transformation. Fear of death is often
especially strong when the human body begins to lose awareness at the
end of life. The body ceases to feel or to breathe. The body is aware
that it will be

destroyed, while, little by little, we return to God. Nonetheless, we
speak of life after death, which means we believe we will still be alive
after the body dies. For thousands of years, men have asked themselves
about life after death. Their answers have ranged from "Everything
stops" to "We will live again through reincarnation." There is life
after death although we cannot prove it. We cannot prove many things
that we believe, but we know they exist. The human body needs material
energy to survive, in the form of water, food and oxygen. Dreams,
emotions and the mind do not require material energy, so why should they
be destroyed? Our mind is alive. The mind is made from ethereal energy.
The mind is made by thinking. We think with the mind, not the brain. The
mind has awareness. The brain is a tool of perception. With the brain,
we can perceive light and sounds that are transformed by the brain into
ethereal energy. Whatever we perceive has an emotional component. The
emotional component will create the energy of the emotions, the
imagination, the astral mind and the dream. The main function of the
brain is to transform energy from matter into ethereal energy. This
wonderful process converts oxygen and sugar into emotion.

The function of the mind is to dream twenty-four hours a day. The waking
dream has a material structure. In sleep, the dream also seems to have a
structure. While awake, our mind is affected by cycles of energy through
the day as the light changes, and this rhythm gives the mind a

notion of time and space. During sleep, we do not perceive energy from
outside ourselves, but the mind dreams images including an image of our
own body. We can talk, see and even fly in a dream. We do not notice
that we are asleep when we are dreaming. The two different kinds of
dream flow into one another. The sleeping dream continues the waking
dream without the structure of time and space, and vice versa. We can
dream our whole life in an hour, or, in an hour, we can live five or ten
minutes. Something makes the connection between the inner dream and the
outer dream. That something is reason. Reason is the part of the mind
that tries to qualify and understand everything. Reason wants to say,
this is real and this is unreal. Reason gives us the illusion that the
dream is real as long as the dream has a material framework. We see the
material framework as reality. We do not notice that we are interpreting
reality according to the dream we are in at the moment. In our
interpretation of the dream, we make our own movie. We will find that
our interpretation is no different from that of others who witnessed the
same interaction, so that tells us that we are all dreaming together.
The mind is alive. You might think, "I am the body," or "I am the mind,"
and then your mind will be afraid to die. It is afraid that when the
body and brain die, life will be over and it will have no further
awareness, but that is not true. I had a car accident when I was in
medical school. The car crashed and was completely destroyed. I saw
myself asleep at the wheel. At that moment I was out of my body so I
knew that I am not my body.

I was completely shaken because what I had thought was real was not
real. I knew I was living an illusion. I had many goals at that time. I
was at the university with only one year left before becoming a medical
doctor. I was worried that I was leaving reality, but it was not real at
all. My concept

of reality changed immediately. That was the moment I knew that we are
not finished when the body dies. We continue. After the accident, I
began to study my dreams because I think what happens to us when we die
is like a dream. I started with the notion that the state of death will
be very similar to what happens when we dream. That is exactly true. The
body dies and the mind continues to dream. When we go to sleep and we
dream, our brain is completely shut off. Our reason notices that we are
dreaming and it tries to wake the brain. Reason's task is to say, this
is real; this is not real. Reason always needs to hook into a material
framework. The material framework makes the reason feel safe. Without
it, the reason has no support. In the death state, this interaction
between the reason and the brain cannot occur. Without the body, reason
cannot awaken the brain and make the connection with the material
framework; yet, the mind, without the brain, continues to dream. The
mind retains all our identity and memory. It keeps going even if the
supply of energy is cut. The mind is not receiving any new emotional
energy from the dead brain, but it is still attached to its memories.
The mind can suddenly become aware of its death state, and that may be a
shock. Many die without awareness of their death. Many who are living in
their own body do not have the awareness that they are dead. Those who
remain in the dream of hell are actually dead, in the point of view of
the Toltecs. We remember that everything that exists is God. In the
dream of hell we dream we are not God. We have created a God who is
superior to us. The God we have created takes away our responsibility to
be what we are, and metes out both fear and punishment.

The day the dreamer awakes and becomes God is the same as Resurrection.
First, we have to become aware that we are dead. Then we can awake.
Miguel discovered that the ancient Toltecs knew that the mind would
continue to dream after death. They worried that they would die and the
nightmare would continue, but they were not sure how long the nightmare
would last. They focused their efforts on how to control the dream while
they were alive, both the waking and sleeping dream. This was the
knowledge they taught. Essentially, they discovered that everything the
mind perceives is a dream. The Toltecs learned that the mind is not
eternal. The mind will eventually die and go back to the spirit, or to
the intent, but the mind continues to dream and be transformed for many
years after the brain dies. When the mind finally dies, that is the end
of the dream. This interval in which the mind continues to dream
explains many paranormal phenomena that happen in this world. Once we
understand the death process, we will realize why people hear ghosts and
see objects moving apparently by their own power.

Dying means the liberation of the body, and it entails losing the
connection, or losing the reason. The result of death is that the dream
is split in two. The mind continues to dream the inner dream, but it is
no longer connected with the outer dream. Even though the body might
still be functioning, though decomposing, the mind loses its rational
connection. The body is a human being, and the mind is also a human
being. They mix and are connected by the reason. At death, the mind
takes responsibility for itself. Fundamentally, we are living an
illusion. The happiness we seek is illusory, too. It is a ghost. We may
feel happiness for a brief moment but it is not sustained because
happiness is not from outside. Happiness is a state of mind like
suffering. It can only come in our personal dream, not from material
reality. Our success and happiness depend upon the quality of our
personal dream in ethereal reality. If we are dreaming the nightmare
when

we die, we will continue to do so until we discover that we are dead.
This is very similar to discovering we are asleep in the midst of a
nightmare.

There will be a moment after death that we grasp, "Oh, I am dead. I have
no body. I have no brain. All those goals I had are gone and I am
helpless, because my own creations-my own fears, my own anger-are
hurting me." At that moment, no one else will be interacting with us
that we are aware of until we discover how to control and change the
dream. The possibility of changing the dream after we die is very low,
partially because the mind will eventually be absorbed. The dream will
fade, little by little, until our inner energy that made our dream is
absorbed and the nightmare is over. Then we receive a new body, a new
brain, new parents, a new name, in a different environment-and the new
cycle begins. The process will continue, life after life, until in one
of those lives we decide that this is a dream. Everything around us is a
dream within a material framework. With that awareness, we again have
the opportunity to change the nightmare into a pleasant dream. At this
moment, you are alive. Your opportunity to change the dream is
excellent. You have only to become aware that you are dreaming and so is
everyone else around you. That single perception alters the way you
interact with other people. You see that they are dreaming, but your
dream has changed and it continues to change more and more as your
awareness grows. We see that we are dreaming with our minds, not with
our body nor with our brain, and we sense that the mind will continue to
dream beyond death. Death loses power when we accept that what dies is
the dream, not the dreamer. We are what continues. Behind the dream lies
the mind, and behind the mind lies energy. All energy has awareness,
perception and memory. We can perceive energy without ears or eyes. All
energy is alive.

This is the point. If we can perceive energy without benefit of our
physical self then we are close to the source of creation. According to
both science and religion, the source of creation is energy. Energy and
God seem to be exactly the same, but this is not precisely true.

Energy is the result of the will, the result of intent. In the Bible, we
read that it was dark and the first thing God created was the light.
From that, he created everything else. Everything is created from
energy, from light, including ourselves. We are light. The dream is
light. The dreamer is light. The soul is light. Energy is light. All
action and reaction begins in the spirit. Spirit is that property of
energy that makes any transformation possible. Spirit is the pure
consciousness that creates everything. It is light by itself. It is
eternal. It cannot be destroyed. Therefore, if we are light and light is
eternal, death does not exist. Death is a state of illusion and it only
exists in a dream. We find now that the creation of the universe is
nothing but a dream, a dream of intent, a dream of spirit, a dream of
God. If God awakes, everything disappears. He is the Supreme Dreamer. He
is everywhere because everything is energy and energy transforms at
every moment. Why be afraid of death when we have this awareness? The
body is nothing but an edifice of God's intent. An edifice of light is
light. We are not the brain. We are not the heart. We are what makes our
heart beat. We are light. We are life. Life uses all these instruments
to perceive, to transform, to express, to live and to die. When the body
dies, we will continue to perceive with different tools. The mind dies
and we still will perceive, even without tools because we are light.
This is what Jesus meant when he said, "I am the light. I am he who
gives life because I am eternal."

This is the Toltec message, too. There is only one message, because
there is just One, in all realities, in all universes. If we understand
that, we can understand everything. If we focus our intention, we will
understand it. Miguel reminds us that in the Bible, Jesus told us "I die
daily," which is in accord with the Toltec concept that there is only
transformation.

Death is transformation and it occurs constantly. Every moment that has
passed is death. Each moment gives us the opportunity to live in the
present. The past does not exist. The future has not yet come. I am
dying all the time. I am adapting to every change in the dream of life.
I die every day because I am not attached to what happened a moment ago.
I let it go, and this makes me free. That is what we call the Toltec
way, surrender to death. When we surrender to death we live only in the
moment. Many people who do not surrender to death live in the past or
the future, and thereby they miss the present. In the point of view of
the Toltecs, they are dead. The resurrection Jesus offered everyone was
that you can live now and not be trapped by the difficulties of the
past. The Angel of Death

There is an Angel of Death and an Angel of Life who teach us how to live
intensely every second of our lives. The Angel of Death clears away the
debris of our lives. Try to imagine, Miguel says with a smile, that you
have in your home all of your past lovers. What are you going to do with
them? The Angel of Death takes them away so you can experience whoever
is coming into your life. Imagine as well that everything you ever owned
was stored in your home, even the toys you had in childhood and every
discarded object you have ever had. With the concept of the Angel of
Death, you know that nothing really belongs to you. It all belongs to
the Angel of Death. Whatever comes to us, we can use and enjoy, but we
do not own it. If we lose something, we

will suffer less if we realize that we never really owned it anyway.
Traveling light, without the pressure of ownership and responsibility,
makes us ready for happiness at any moment. Jesus brought the silent
knowledge to the world two thousand years ago, but we are only now
learning that we do not have to age. If we die every moment, we can
transform our body. Time stops. Space stops. We can be many places at
once.

Everything has a reason for being, including the cycle of life in a
human body. We have the opportunity to really enjoy this universe while
we are living. The idea that we will live forever in this universe
limits our experience of other universes that may be as beautiful as
this one. Death,

the transformation of this life state into another form, is a process
that is working perfectly. There is no reason to change it. Once you
lose attachment for the body, you are ready to leave it at any time. We
can love the body, respect the body and honor the body without being
attached to it or identifying with it. Living every moment as though it
were your last chance to enjoy this universe adds zest to living. You
can put into every action the consideration that the action is between
life and death. The concept of the Angel of Death helps you to control
the dream when you are awake. By making a friend of the Angel of Death,
you can lose the biggest of human fears. Once you have nothing to lose,
everything changes. We can live for the pleasure of living. Each day can
give us supreme pleasure if we put our awareness into our breath. We can
enjoy each of our actions in the dream, and realize that they are being
absorbed by the Angel of Death who is constantly behind us absorbing
each moment. That awareness is love. Your life can be a constant
meditation. There is formal medi tation, which we will discuss in the
next chapter, but there is also informal meditation that can be carried
out in all circumstances.

The Way to Meditate

You can meditate with eyes closed or open. Contempla-tion is a way of
meditation. You are alive. You can be in a state of bliss. You can teach
others to meditate and to reach this state. This will help them to shift
their awareness and to create a pleasant dream in place of their
nightmare.

In meditation, the first step is to separate the mind from the other
organs of the body. In the second step, you go into your mind, the soul
and the spirit in ever higher levels of meditation. One of the
by-products of meditation is the break-up of the dream and the release
of intent. Intent can make miracles. Meditation becomes a way of life.
It is a prayer. It is one of the greatest methods for cleaning the mind,
not the only method, but it is one of the most powerful and easiest.
Meditation also gives you control and awareness on the level of the ego.
When you create a beautiful dream in a state of blissful meditation,
your eyes change and you begin to perceive love from everything. There
will be a love interaction between you and your action. In pure
meditation, you can be awake and expressing yourself in the world with
eyes of love. Love perceives love. This is heaven on earth, the
transformation that does not wait for death. It can happen here, in
life, by our intent.

Meditation While Eating

It is not important what you put in your mouth. You can be a vegetarian
or a meat-eater and still conduct a meditative life. Pick up the food
you are going to eat. Put it into your mouth. Close your eyes. Chew your
food very well. Use your tongue to perceive all the flavors. Feel each
flavor. It will be like hearing each instrument in an orchestra when you
listen to music. Each flavor is alive. Eating gives you so much pleasure
it is like a supreme act of love. Everything you eat will be modified by
your love. This is a ritual approach to eat ing with awareness. With
just a small amount of food, you will be satisfied. It adds to your
pleasure to hum a little as you eat and it strengthens your connection
with food. You can apply this same meditative approach to many other
parts of your day, such as taking a shower. We benefit when we enjoy
living in our body and we take good care of our body. A Witness to
Miguel's Near Death Experience

by David Dibble David Dibble is a student, associate and friend of
Miguel's who is a master teacher specializing in transforming business
by means of the Toltec Silent Knowledge and Total Quality principles. On
a journey to Hawaii with Miguel, he witnessed Miguel's brush with death
in the summer of 1994, which he describes in this story: Miguel was
taking a group of his students to Hawaii on a journey to some of the
power points that dot the Hawaiian Islands. My wife, Linda, and I very
much wanted to go with him, knowing it would be a powerful learning
experience. However, we didn't have the time or the money.

Because I was working long hours, Linda wondered if she should make the
trip alone. She decided to do the thing that had always worked best in
the past. She asked Miguel what he thought. As usual, we got an answer
we didn't expect. Miguel was of the opinion that both of us should go
with him. I had learned that when Miguel recommends an action, it's
usually best to heed his words. With many reservations, we chose to damn
the torpedoes, and donned our flowered shirts and sandals. What a trip
this would turn out to be. One of the power points we were scheduled to
visit on Maui is the Haleakala volcano, which has the largest inactive
crater in the worldover twenty miles in circumference and three thousand
feet deep. The rim of the crater, which is nearly always obscured from
below by impressive white clouds, is over ten thousand feet above the
crystal clear Hawaiian water. Looking into the crater from the rim, I
was reminded of a moonscape - black, jagged and without life. I felt a
whisper of apprehension as we started down the dark lava trail that
zigzagged its way for over five miles into this foreboding womb of the
world. We made our way to the bottom of the main crater and found
another small crater, approximately eighty feet deep with a very steep
trail falling into the pit. Miguel asked me if I thought we should go
into the crater and, with uncharacteristic caution, the words popped out
of my mouth, "No, Miguel, I don't think we should go down there." Miguel
walked to the trail and started down. I took a couple of deep breaths
and followed suit. The trail was not only steep, it was made of
sand-like crushed lava that was deep and tended to slide in
mini-avalanches with each step. I knew it would be difficult walking up
this path where everything seemed to be pulled into the abyss. I even
remarked to Miguel that this place reminded me of an Ant Lion pit and we
were the ants. A few other students joined us and we began a ceremony.

The ceremony ended rather abruptly when Miguel said it was time to go. A
few members of the group began to look for small rocks that they might
take with them. Miguel started up the trail and then turned and said to
me, "Get the others. We must go now." He began laboring his way up the
trail and I returned to gather up the others. After an exhausting climb
in the stifling heat, I found Miguel lying on a large rock at the top of
the small crater. He motioned me over and indicated that he wanted to
tell me something in confidence. I knew that something was wrong. All
the color had gone from his face and he was gasping for breath. What he
said next chilled me to my core. Miguel softly whispered these words.
"David, you must not be scared. I am having a heart attack. I have
severe pains in my chest and in my left arm. I must leave this place or
I will die. You must not tell the others because they will be afraid. If
I can get back to Gaya, she will be able to help me. I have tried to
heal myself, but I do not have the energy in this place. We must leave
this place." A wave of fear swept through my body as I realized what he
was saying. I asked him what he wanted me to do. He said that I should
help him walk out of the crater when he had regained some of his
strength. "Although we might not make it, we must try." We embarked on
the most incredible five-mile walk of my life. Most of the rest of our
group had gone ahead and were not aware of our travails. Five women and
I were the only ones left to assist the master in the event he became
too weak to walk. It didn't take the women long to catch onto the fact
that Miguel was very sick. He had to stop, sit down and rest after every
laborious one hundred paces or so.

Each time Miguel could go no further, the women would gather around him,
hold his hands or feet, send him their love and energy, and pray for his
life. I would pull energy from the sun and direct it into Miguel's
heart. About half way up the trail, Miguel stopped, sat down and gazed
into the nothingness of the blackened crater. He was as white as the
clouds that drifted slowly through the blue Hawaiian sky. He was cold,
sweaty and clammy, all at the same time. His breath was shallow and
irregular. My teacher was dying. When I looked into his eyes, I
experienced something that changed my life forever. I felt his ecstasy.
I felt his bliss and love. My fear of death, both his and mine,
vanished. I sat in bliss with Miguel and five beautiful women who had
become living angels. Through shimmering and grateful eyes, I perceived
only love where there had been fear and desolation. The color began to
come back into Miguel's face. We started walking again and I felt
compelled to "push" Miguel out of the crater. I held one hand to the sun
and placed the other in the small of Miguel's back. I told him to lean
into my hand and let me push him up the trail. The walking suddenly
became less arduous for Miguel's body and heart. As we neared the rim of
the crater, Miguel's energy seemed to be growing stronger. He related a
final request. He would not, under any circumstances, allow us to take
him to the hospital. Although Miguel had been a medical doctor and a
surgeon in Mexico, he knew he could heal himself much faster through the
proper use of energy than anything that could be done at the hospital.
Within two weeks of his heart attack, Miguel had completely healed
himself. My teacher has shown me that there is nothing to fear about
death of the human body. In the dream of the planet, there is birth,
death, and "life" is the hell that is experienced in between. In the old
dream,

encapsulated in a context of fear, being born is always a sentence of
death and despair. Outside of the dream, there is only eternal love, a
love so exquisitely complete that it is the other name for God. It is
also the other name for you, your real name. Gaya's Vision During
Miguel's Heart Attack

We are all eggs. I have discovered that the process of reproduction is
the same throughout the universe. Everything is in a constant state of
reproduction, as above, so below. The universe is an egg filled with
every kind of energy that exists in this dream we call life. In Hawaii,
while Miguel had a heart attack in the crater, I was up above on the
trail. My uterus went into spasm and I collapsed onto a rock. Across
from me, I saw a trough in the rocks. I looked up at the sun and felt a
force of energy pass through me, up that trough, and into the sky. I
birthed all of this energy... out there. I birthed an egg of energy for
Miguel. When We Are Dead We Have Wings

Miguel Angel Ruiz

CHAPTER TER THE WAY OF DEATH AT TEOTIHUACAN had a dream in the Plaza of
the Temple of Quetzalcoatl on one of my early trips to Teotihuacan. The
apprentices who had come with me were busy carrying out a ritual I had
directed for them. I sat alone on the "Island of Hell" which is in the
middle of the plaza.

In my dream, I was with old men who often were in my dreams. They were
skinny, white-haired Indians from India. I saw a man who was in the
process of dying. He was with me. He was one of the guides of my dreams.
His teacher was helping him to die.

The teacher had a dual vision of here and the place of after death. I
heard the teacher explain time and the Angel of Death. The teacher
pointed out to the man that his only way to transcend was to totally
surrender to the Angel of Death. The only reason he would suffer is
because he resisted the Angel of Death. This is true for all of us. We
suffer when we are afraid of losing what we are and what we have. The
teacher said to me, "The time is coming. This is the last time you will
be here in a human body. Still, you must accomplish all you have left to
do in your dream of life. The Angel of Death will return at the exact
moment to take you to meet your destiny, but she will bring you a
messenger and it will be someone like you who has surrendered completely
and entered Paradise to eat the fruit of eternity. It will be like a
marriage with your Creator. From the moment you eat the fruit, your eyes
will see only beauty and will experience only the feeling of love." The
Angel of Death came with another human, who was a smiling woman in a
state of ecstacy. The Angel of Death brought her in silence and left
her. The teacher said, "The Angel of Death did not come to take you. She
will return very soon. You will become like the messenger."

To see this woman, radiant with happiness and joy and love for
everything makes you want to die right away, but the Angel of Death says
to enjoy your life, enjoy your agony and enjoy your death.

I saw a strong man sitting in a chair with a sword in his hand. Behind
him was a portal with a spiral of light in it. I could see the night and
the stars. In the center of the spiral was a sacred, powerful rock and
on the rock I saw the Tree of Eternity. The warrior sitting there guards
the portal. He carries the sword of justice and truth. He cuts the
remains of whatever is not love from whomever passes him. The sword is
the last purification. I believe this figure is that of Archangel Ariel.
The spiral is the same symbol as the Garden of Eden. My message was,
"Your time is short. You have had enough time to surrender. Let everyone
you love know that you love them. You may never return, but they do not
need to worry. You will be in a state of happiness."At the moment of
death, the Angel of Death's eyes will penetrate yours completely. She
will give you a moment or two to surrender. Then she will walk toward
you and your body will be dead, but you will be aware of her eyes. You
will feel the jolt, but you will be happy and ecstatic." The Angel of
Death did exactly as the teacher said. The angel did turn and look with
a beautiful smile. As she took one step toward me, a burden was lifted.
As soon as she was in front of me, she said, "Come with me. It is your
time. I am going to take you to your wedding." She took me to the
warrior. He said, "This is the moment of your awakening, your
resurrection. You are coming to life again. You were living in a
nightmare and now you are aware of who you really are."

He swung the sword over my back and then forward. He said, "Go and
accomplish your destiny. It is your wedding day."

I floated over the spiral to the tree. Then I was married with the
spirit of God. That spiral for me is the double-headed snake. Knowing
that dream, I have no fear of death. As a warrior, long before your body
dies, you start reaching that place of happiness from surrendering to
death. We die all the time, with every loss. Death is an illusion. Live
always in the present. That is eternity. Our fear of death is an
illusion. Whatever is lost brings the new. If we resist loss, we are
dead. We are in the past, not the present. We suffer because we fear to
let go. We have eyes only for injustice. When we surrender, we have the
joy to explore. Not knowing what to expect is happiness. From my dream,
I learned what information is stored in the rocks of Teotihuacan. The
vision came from the communion I had with the rocks. I am sure that I am
not the only one to have had that vision. My vision clarified why the
builders of Teotihuacan chose the structures they did. Suddenly, the
plan of the place seemed to make sense. That place symbolized the whole
dream of humanity. Our attachments are the same, all around the world. I
had a teacher while I was practicing medicine at a clinic in the desert.
He opened me to this sort of dream. He taught me that I am just a
vibration. I can take on the vibration of the rocks or other people. My
student apprentices try to take on my vibration. Knowing that the Angel
of Death is taking you to bliss, you want to hurry to die, but when you
learn to reach heaven here on earth, you are not in a hurry. When you
marry God, you are in a state of eternal honeymoon. Even breathing is a
joy when it becomes conscious. How can anyone be unhappy

when he experiences the pleasure of breathing sixteen times a minute?
Just being you is to be eternal when you live in the present.

If you are in hell, all you can give is hell. You cannot love anyone
else until you love yourself first. To be happy, don't judge yourself.
Perfection is already here. 1. The Temple of Quetzalcoatl

As you begin your journey to the Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl, Miguel
advises, you should read about the place and then visit it mentally.
Lawrence Andrews (Magical Blend issue 47, 1995, page 25) recaptures his
journey with Miguel along the "Path of Freedom" that begins at the
Citadel of Quetzalcoatl where "the Mastery of Awareness was taught
through dance and drama." The Plaza of the Temple of Quetzalcoatl is the
symbolic head of a snake facing the Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl that rises
behind the temple. The steps leading up to the temple can be seen as its
open mouth. This temple complex is dedicated to the Feathered Serpent
and the Planet Venus, the Goddess of Love. Throughout Mesoamerica,
Greece, Egypt and Rome, Venus is the Goddess of Love. She is the morning
and evening star, depending upon the time of year. Teotihuacanos once
measured time by coordinating the cyclical movements of Venus with those
of the earth and the moon.

Miguel has discerned, between the temple and the pyramid of
Quetzalcoatl, a line that separates the human from the Divine. When you
are in the plaza of this complex, you cannot see the pyramid, but from
the top of the temple that stands in front (if you were allowed to climb
the steps leading up to it), you suddenly see the pyramid looming up and
you receive a physical sensation of awe from seeing it. The pyramid is
built in platforms upon whose frontal faces carved heads of the
Feathered Serpent, the jaguar and the pop-eyed rain god Tlaloc are
mounted. A pattern of waves and seashells identifies the place with
water and the serpent. Its surface is made of larger rocks in mortar,
surrounded by lines of smaller stones that form a graphic design. This
style prevails throughout the site at Teotihuacan. The very rocks
themselves seem to reflect the love these structures signify. This love
is superior to human love. Miguel describes it as the Christ in the
Rocks. He feels a sensation of totally identifying with the low
vibration of energy that remains in the rocks through the centuries of
time that have passed since Teotihuacan was built.

The Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl represents the spirit of God. The open area
of the plaza represents the human mind. Hell only exists in the human
mind.

It is an illusion, based on fear. In hell there is only injustice. Hell
is experienced as the emotional poison of anger, envy and greed. Neither
your body nor your soul has a hell. They respond to what is in the mind.
If you have the eyes of anger or sadness it will distort your view. Eyes
of love make everything beautiful. Our eyes are dominated by the way we
judge. Your first task along the Avenue of the Dead is to forego judging
as much as you possibly can, and to exorcize the Victim within your
mind. A small pyramid, a platform-like low temple, stands in front of
the main temple. On maps this is called the Citadel, but to Miguel it is
the Island of Hell in the Ocean of Hell. The ocean contains all fears of
the unknown and our fears are our dream of hell. Our dream forms the
inside movies we carry around with us. We are the producer, director and
chief actor in these fearladen films.

On the Island of Hell, we have the illusion of being safe. It is a place
in the mind where we hoard all that belongs to us. We think, "This is my
family, my house, my money, my car, my career, my accomplishments," and
we feel safer as we make this island bigger and bigger with more and
more attachments to what is ours. But, the island is ruled by a fear of
loss of anything we cherish. We envy the islands of others, not
realizing that they are trapped in hell in their safety zones. Each of
us is trapped by the illusions we have amassed on our islands. There is
only one way to escape from the Island of Hell and that is to cross the
Ocean of Hell and reach the snake on the stairs of the Temple of
Quetzalcoatl. This temple is the exit from hell. It is the only place on
the site where evil-also an illusionexists. Small temples are placed on
all sides

of the plaza. The pyramid itself protects the east. The temples
surrounding its plaza are the guardians who contain the evil generated
by our nightmares.

It takes an act of courage to let go and face fear. This is true in all
the traditions of the world. Demons on the outside of Christian churches
represent the fears we leave behind as we enter the sanctuary. In fairy
tales, the hero must conquer a demon or dragon to reach a happy ending.
To reach

bliss, we have to surrender to the Angel of Death and the illusions of
what we think we are. Our illusions make our hell. Hell is the Place of
the Ghosts. Only ghosts live there. Ghosts have the sensation of being
alive. To live in hell is to be a ghost. Paradoxically, we have to die
to our former life in order to escape from hell. Dying leads us to
clarity. We will recognize that what we have believed to be real was an
illusion. This is similar to the Indian concept of Maya. Each person has
the task of creating a private and sacred place that is beyond hell and
beyond the fears inculcated by society, religion and the domestication
process in the family. In the coming years, Miguel prophesies that this
will be done by individuals without the intercessor of any priest or
church. His teaching is a preparation for the time that is coming when
human beings must create their own route to God. After they visit
Teotihuacan Miguel takes his student groups to a church and relates it
to visiting the temple of Quetzalcoatl. People go to church and face the
altar, looking for God. They want to escape from the hell of their sins
and their wounds. They may succeed in releasing some of their emotional
poison, but they rarely find release from fear because today's religions
are systems that breed fear. In one sense, our religions accept the idea
that this is a place of hell. We can see this in the prevalent belief
that heaven is elsewhere in a state of off-planet freedom from judgment
and peace. Temporal punishment on earth and threatened eternal
punishment make heaven seem unobtainable to all but the few.

The ruler of hell is fear. One of the big demons in hell is the Judge.
Another is the Victim. But, the greatest demon is our belief system,
which is what rules the way we dream. We find ourselves on the Island of
Hell because we are afraid to let go of our attachments. The Island of
Hell is in the Plaza of the Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl in Teotihuacan, but
Teotihuacan is not just a sacred site in Mexico. It symbolizes the
entire world. You can create a substitute for the Plaza of Quetzalcoatl
by making an altar in your own home which will function as the exit from
hell. The real meaning of any altar is to suggest a route to God. Every
altar can be an exit from hell and a way to God. The altar in the church
is also the Eye of God,

as is the Pyramid in Teotihuacan. An altar is that place where you feel
God's observation of your inmost soul. The Ceremony:

To do this ceremony, find a place in nature where you feel connected to
the earth, where you can see the sky. You will find the perfect place to
carry out your ceremony. This could be on a mountain or beside the ocean
or simply in your own yard or a park.

Walk around your Ocean of Hell and pick up seven little pebbles in your
left hand. These represent the material things you have collected on
your Island of Hell. Collect seven stones in your right hand. These
represent your emotional attachments. Sit quietly and bring to mind the
many things in life that bind you to hell. When you feel ready, stand
up. Say a prayer to your particular angel asking this angel of God to be
alive in you. The only thing keeping you in hell is your attachments.
When you feel strong enough to relinquish them, you are ready to
continue the ceremony.

Gradually let go of the rocks in your hands as you visualize detaching
yourself from those material and emotional bonds that keep you in hell.
For a moment, you will feel a new freedom, but then you will notice that
you are still in the material world. Yet there is a new consciousness
inside of you. You have an awareness that you have died to the dream of
hell. You now know that you are dead. Imagine yourself walking now
across the Ocean of Hell in safety.

Ahead of you are the steps to the Temple of Ouetzalcoatl. Feel the
connection here to God. As you leave hell, you enter into the spirit of
God, or the Divine, by any name that you give to it. In effect, with
this ceremony, you have died to your former life, but the ceremony can
be repeated many times on one's path toward heaven on earth. II.
Crossing the River of Death

Once you have made an initial inventory of your belief system and you
have attempted to release your material and emotional attachments, you
are ready to exit from hell and proceed through the body of the snake.
Your path is to climb out of the plaza of the Pyramid of Quetzalcoatl to
the Avenue of the Dead and turn to the right. You will soon come to the
San Juan River, known as the River of Death. The builders of Teotihuacan
altered the course of this river so that it would cross the Avenue of
the Dead at a right angle. The assumption is made that you, as a
spiritual seeker, have not come to a perfect understanding of your
death, but a line has been crossed. As soon as you become aware of your
death to the world of illusion, you cannot return to ignorance. The
following ceremony is the second stage in the process of being eaten by
the snake. The Ceremony:

Imagine yourself going into the underground as a dead person. Only those
who are aware that they are dead can cross the river. You are going to
cross the River of Death, which compares to the Greek River Styx in
Hades, across which Charon ferried the souls of the dead. Your crossing
of the river is similar to the three-day passage of Jesus in the tomb,
or Odin's hanging in the Tree of Death. III. The Place of Temptation

The third stage of the journey is the ceremony at the Place of
Temptation held on the small temple in the midst of the first plaza to
the north of the San Juan River. To reach this plaza, you must climb up
the stepped wall that crosses the Avenue and down into the grassy plaza.
The temple is a short way ahead. Go there and climb up the stairs to the
flat top of the temple. Here it is filled with dirt and a few pebbles
and weeds. Whatever structure it might have had on it was probably made
of wood and palm fronds. Materially, it did not survive time, but the
spirit of the temple remains. Miguel calls the temple The Island of
Temptation. Here, you will take on the role of the spiritual warrior.
You will battle against your remaining tenacious attachments. Before
performing the ceremony you will need to quiet your mind and review your
progress. The temptation to remain in the dream of hell is a strong one.
Although you as a pilgrim have already made efforts to liberate

yourself from fear, once again in the Place of Temptation, you will
ponder the relationship between the dream, death and a life of perfect
freedom. Is there something holding you back and forcing you to cling to
the dream? Consider the question silently. The Ceremony:

Surrender to death. Just let go. What is past is dead. We live in the
moment. Usually, the Angel of Death will bring us something better than
what we have surrendered. The Angel of Death stays behind us throughout
our life, eating away the moment we have just traversed and making it

possible for us to constantly move into the future. However, we must
establish our awareness of the moment between past and future, and
center ourselves in it. We are at a pivotal point in our journey. Until
we have been successful in our surrender to death, the snake will not
allow us to proceed any further. Say a prayer to the Mother Earth and
offer her your flesh and bones. Offer the flesh and bones of all your
ancestors, as well. By doing so you give them a chance to avoid
returning to hell. In this way, the living can give the dead a gift. Ask
Mother Earth to use your flesh and bones as a sacrifice to clean the
forest and the rocks. Dig your own grave in the dirt using a pebble for
a shovel. If you cannot go to Teotihuacan, do this ceremony in any soil
that is nearby. Mark your grave with a stone. Acknowledge that you, as
you previously knew yourself, are actually dead. This ceremony can be
carried out in any quiet place of your choosing. Find a crystal to
represent your own body. Dig a small "grave" in the earth and bury your
crystal. Cover it well. Say prayers over the crystal as if it were
yourself. Include your ancestors in your prayers. Extend your prayers to
the earth itself. When troubles overcome you later, go back to your
"grave" and recover the peace of knowing you have died to temptation and
are now free to go forward. Your grave will become a source of strength.
Remember "I am now dead. I don't have to suffer from those events or
people who continue to tempt me." The Place of the Woman

Before leaving this plaza, there is a discovery to be made. On the left
where the women climbed is a temple that does not reveal its importance
from the ground level. You must be led around behind the platform to
explore the hidden depths of the complex Miguel calls the Place of
theWoman. Miguel has seen in visions that women who lived impeccable
lives were chosen to live in this enclosure. Across from their area,
males also lived a devoted life of purity. Both groups were spiritual
warriors. The stepped temple in the Place of the Woman is below ground
level. The sides of these steps were smoothly surfaced and painted a
vibrant rose. Walls within the underground structure were also painted
rose which is still visible.

In the temple, the women celebrated their menses and ovulation times.
Their devotion was to the moon. The moon is a mirror that changes its
size every day, reflecting a different quantity of light. The amount of
moonlight controls the cycles of life in the earth and also the hormonal
cycles of a woman's life. Therefore, women are sensitive to moonlight.
Most often

among early people, the full moon was the signal for ovulation and the
new moon was the time the menstrual period began. After months of living
together, women's cycles tend to harmonize. This is still true for women
in dormitories and close living conditions. A woman who surrendered to a
shared life in this compound had the intention of becoming the goddess.
She gained in selfrespect and love. Her purpose was not to procreate.
Some of these women, perhaps most of them, came into the spiritual
center after their life as mother and wife ended. This was the place for
spiritual growth and transcendence. Two remarkable signs of the
spiritual energy in this place remain. Beneath a metal cover that can be
lifted up, there is a deep well that looks like a dark vertical tunnel.
From the well comes a rush of earthy air. Archaeologists removed a large
crys tal found at its base. This well is the Vagina, and it is a
spiritual birth canal directly into the womb of Mother Earth.

Around the corner from this place is a trough high on the wall that was
used as a shower, carrying water from above. Some women visitors have
found that they bleed after spending a little time near this shower. The
spiritual energy in this chamber is palpable.

There was a long-lasting practice among women to live in this center in
reverence to the Mother Earth. They exerted the spiritual discipline
necessary to transform themselves on a personal level, but the whole
complex is also symbolic of a universal process. The universe is a
process of eternal reproduction. Every planet is a mother who
collaborates in reproduction. She decodifies information from the sun
which tells her to create life. Information is brought to earth by God's
messengers, the angels. Light and the angels are the same. Mother Earth
receives the message in the light that comes from the sun, and she
covers "the egg of the soul" with a human body. Inside the egg is the
light of the spirit, the angel light sent from the sun. What we really
are is the reproduction of angels or the reproduction of sunlight. We
are each an angel growing into an egg, which is the soul. At the same
time, we have an outer egg filled with spirit that connects with the
entire cosmos. We are also a material form of our body. We could say
that DNA, the basic information of life, is condensed light. Earth, the
mother, translates DNA into all forms of life. Each form of light has
its specific vibration of light. One such vibration from sunlight is for
human beings. DNA is an informational packet in sunlight. It is
received, modified and transformed by the earth. The Place of the Woman
reflects this elemental process. The Ceremony:

In this place, women create a ceremony of acceptance. A group of women
can create this ceremony together or you can create this ceremony
privately. You will stimulate your connection to the Place of

the Woman if you put a few objects in front of you for contemplation
that signify the beauty of the feminine, such as a statuette of a
goddess or the Madonna. A photograph of your wedding, pictures of your
husband and your children, a lighted candle, perhaps a flower, will turn
a nearby table into an altar. The reason for using these sacramentals is
to establish a sense of a sacred place. With your eyes closed, accept
the Goddess that exists in you. Accept the woman that you are. Accept
the little girl that you were. Accept yourself as the wife. Accept
yourself as the mother. Accept yourself as the Goddess. Accept yourself
just the way you are. You are the being who is half of the reproduction
of life. You are the one who carries the fire. You are the one who has
the sensitivity to give yourself totally to your groom in your marriage
with God in eternal life. IV. The Place of the Water

You climb over the next stepped wall into a second plaza that has no
temples inside it. This is the Place of the Water. The mind will split
here. Emotions that grow from love will be absorbed by your soul.
Emotions that grew from fear will return to hell. In Miguel's dream, the
warrior guardian of Paradise cuts the remaining emotions from fear away
from the dead spirit and allows it to go forward

into the spiral that leads to the Tree of Eternity. This stage of the
Avenue of the Dead echoes Miguel's dream. It resembles Baptism, when the
soul renounces Satan. It symbolizes full trust in God. In the Christian
heritage, Jesus became the Christ at Baptism. The Place of the Water has
a similar result.

Your thinking is usually out of control, like a wild horse. At the Place
of the Water, you surrender your mind. The mind is not of any use to you
now. Information that you need is in your soul. After you go through a
ceremony here, you will find you do not need to think in the habitual
way any more. Knowledge is the description of the dream of hell.
Knowledge is our last barrier because it describes an illusion. Trying
to "know" everything is what holds back our progress toward heaven on
earth. Wisdom leads us forward.

Once you let go of knowledge, you have nothing left to defend.
Everyone's truth becomes valid. This is wisdom. The digestion of the
snake continues to dissolve all of you that is nonessential. You become
an angel who requires only the energy of love for your growth. The
Ceremony:

Visualize that you are beside a great pool of water. Remind yourself
that you are approximately seventy percent water. Also remember that all
of your emotions are like an Ocean of Hell that is now clear. Imagine
Jesus or Buddha as a living ocean of love. They retain their bodies but
they are

completely free of expectations from others. They are free of fears and
filled with love. These avatars represent our own possible future.
Become aware of yourself as a soul covered by an egg. The egg is covered
by your mind, which is the sum total of all your emotions. You are
gradually leaving your body and you are leaving the fear-based emotions
that attach you to your body. Send back any remaining traces of negative
emotions to the Ocean of Hell in the Plaza of Quetzalcoatl. Pray to the
Mother Earth and offer the water from your body to her. If it is her
will, ask her to use our bodily water to purify all the water we
contaminated when we used to live in hell ...the rain, the snow, the
lakes, the rivers, the oceans.

In the distant past, thousands of people went through the ceremony of
water at Teotihuacan and for a time at that place, it was truly heaven
on earth. When your ceremony is complete, see yourself as an angel or a
beam of light. V. The Place of the Air

Along the ledges of the third plaza is the Place of the Air. There was
once a school here and dwellings. This is also the Place of the Soul.
The symbol

for this place which signifies the emergence of the soul is an egg from
which protrudes the head of a baby eagle. The same symbol is found
around the world. Now that you have been altered and you have
surrendered your fears, your emotions from hell, your mind and your
body, you are almost purely your soul. You have gone beyond polarity.
The process of digestion is completed here. The Ceremony:

Breathe deeply and feel the air entering and leaving the body. Recall
your first breath. Breathing is a way to communicate with God. With a
prayer to the Mother Earth, offer your last breath to cleanse her
atmosphere of all pollution. Remember to be grateful for your breath. As
you learn to live in the moment, you will become aware of your breathing
and it will be easier to focus on it during your meditation. Before
leaving the Place of the Air, stop to meditate upon your breath and to
give thanks for it. VI. The Place of the Fire

You leave the third plaza and enter the fourth one. This is the Place of
the Fire. Here is where your spirit is released. You become one within
yourself and you find your divinity. This plaza is comparable to the
Chakra of the Heart in the Indian system. It is the energy center of the
heart. The Ceremony:

Put yourself in the Place of the Fire and go through the ceremony in
your mind.

All of the men in the group, climb the small temple that faces the plaza
on the east. All of the women climb to the top of the western temple.
Take your time to feel the male and female nature that identifies the
physical form you inhabit in this life. Acknowledge that the opposite of
your gender forms a part of your nature, your personality, your inner
mind and subconscious. Climb down from the temple and meet in the middle
of the plaza. Exchange hugs with your opposites. Experience a sense of
oneness with others and within yourself. For this journey to be
successful, each participant must reach a feeling of unconditional love
for self and other. This ceremony of acceptance helps to build a bridge
over the usual separation of the sexes, and it reduces the polarity in
interpersonal relationships. The deeper polarity which separates the
divine from the animal in everyone is also bridged. You have crossed
that bridge, and now the you that exists is no longer an animal but is a
pure spirit. You are growing into yourself as an angel. To carry out a
similar ceremony, you might want to share with a partner of the opposite
gender. Each of you can meditate on the polarity of masculine and
feminine within each person. Build an inner bridge to join your own
masculine and feminine nature. Then share openly with your partner. VII.
The Place of the Recollection

You have arrived at the next plaza where there is no interior temple.
This is the Place of the Recollection. All your past lives come into one
now. The angel within you grows and creates an etheric double of you.
The etheric double becomes the vehicle for all leftover fears, and the
angel becomes one with the universe. The Ceremony:

Close your eyes and walk through the grassy plaza with trust as your
guide. In these moments, project yourself as far as possible and you
will have the sensation of being an enormous spirit, no longer divided
but connected with everything in the universe. Your light body must
grow. Expand your sense of your etheric body. Create an etheric double
of yourself. Concentrate on this ghostly clone and

tell it to expand to the furthest reaches of the universe. Your etheric
double carries the last vestiges of fear that still cling to you as you
move through the Avenue of the Dead. You are now free of these fears and
are fully prepared to travel onward to the second head of the snake.
VIII. The Pyramid of the Moon

You will pass the Pyramid of the Sun and move directly now to the
Pyramid of the Moon. Andrews describes it as the Place of Sacrifice.
Sense its feminine energy. Try to contact the Smoky Mirror in your own
mind. Cynthia Wooton says this energy is "... the gentle force of love
that unifies with patience, respect and kindness, and that leads us
through the labyrinths of our minds to oceans of microcosms that flow
into infinity." In this culmination of your journey along the Avenue of
the Dead you will conduct a sacrificial ceremony. The Ceremony:

Imagine that your etheric double is now expanded to the size of the
universe itself. At the base of the Pyramid of the Moon, offer your
etheric double to the Mother Earth. Your etheric double is a sacrifice
for your own freedom. Sense its dissolution into the ether that flows
through space. As your etheric double disappears, you are left in a
pure, transformed state.

The second head of the snake is here, filling the plaza. Climb the steps
of the pyramid to the top. Stop and meditate there, recognizing that
your journey is nearly over. You and your angel nature are one. Climb
down, knowing that in doing this you are exiting from the snake. Feel
yourself transformed. It is in this place that one can become the Master
of Transformation. David Dibble's Story

David Dibble has generously written the following story of an ecstatic
experience at the Pyramid of the Moon. Miguel and I and a group of his
students had been exploring Teotihuacan, and we were all brimming with
new insights and experiences. At the end of the Avenue of the Dead, in
the powerful pyramids of Teotihuacan, sits the Pyramid of the Moon, the
pure feminine, the pyramid of love. Before climbing the steps to the top
of this beautiful structure, Miguel taught us that it is traditional to
meditate and give thanks for the love that we were about to receive from
the sculpted rocks that form the pyramid. During my meditation, I felt
an energy that caused me to open my eyes and yet continue to meditate. I
watched Miguel slowly climb the stairs to the highest accessible point
on the pyramid and sit cross-legged looking out on all of Teo. As I
continued to gaze at Miguel, his body began to disappear into a faint
blue haze. The haze became sharply brilliant where Miguel had been
seated, the most divine light I had ever seen. Then, something happened
that expanded my consciousness to unprecedented levels.

The entire Pyramid of the Moon turned from rock to light, a vibrating
blue light so exquisitely beautiful that my only reaction was to sob
quietly in profound gratitude for the gift of this communion with
spirit. A moment later, I had the experience of merging with the light,
internalizing the realization that there was only One. The bliss came in
waves as my body disappeared, transformed into the light that is
everything. As my body began to reappear, so did Miguel's.
Spontaneously, I thrust my hands to the sky in a salute to God that I
could express in no other way. I looked up at Miguel and he, too, had
his arms stretched to the heavens. We were One. XI. The Palace of the
Butterfly and The Palace of the Jaguars

Anthropologists call the complex to the west of the Pyramid of the Moon
the Palace of the Butterfly and the Palace of the Jaguar. To Miguel,
they are the heaven of Quetzalcoatl. The Palace of the Butterfly is a
big, beautiful building of two stories comprised of many small rooms
where male and female masters once lived.

During the highly developed spiritual period at Teotihuacan, the masters
did not cohabit as sexual partners. They had transcended their physical
nature and lived in a sustained spiritual state. When he enters this
area, Miguel feels his connection with these masters. He believes they
are alive and their energy can still be perceived there by those who
reach the same vibration of love that they felt. Many of his apprentices
have been moved by feeling this energy in themselves. The naguals in
training who are Dreamers can actual ly see them and dream

with them. The masters welcome them. Tourists do not perceive the
vibrations of love in the palace, but when we are into that love we feel
it is like home. We have a connection with the rocks themselves. This is
one of the few places where you can see the dream of heaven on earth.
That dream had a complete realization for more than a thousand years in
Teotihuacan, around two thousand to three thousand years ago.

The dream was realized in other places as well. At an earlier date,
around five thousand to six thousand years ago in Ancient Egypt there
were masters who maintained the dream of heaven. In Greece around the
time of Pythagoras, 600-500 B.C.E., there was a limited school of
masters. Most recently, around fifteen thousand years ago, a few lamas
in Tibet were illuminated. The flowering of masters in Tibet,
Teotihuacan and Greece all took place during the age of the Fifth Sun.
The Butterfly Ceremony:

If you are with a group, form a circle in the little plaza that is open
directly to the sun. This is the place of the Communion of Love with the
Sun. Communicate with the sun until you feel it is a strong connection
with God. Turn to one another and hug each other in the center of the
plaza.

Energy will begin to rise from the base of the spine upwards towards the
head. In India, this is known as the kundalini energy. As you leave the
Palace of the Butterfly, you may sense the energy of the original Toltec
masters. The Palace of the Jaguars is adjacent to the Palace of the
Butterfly. The Palace of the Jaguars holds the same energy as that of
all the avatars who have lived on earth. If a follower of the Buddha
goes into the palace with awareness, he or she will perceive the Buddha.
A Christian will perceive Christ. On occasion, non-Christians perceive
Christ, also.

The holiest place in the entire world is the Portal in the Palace of the
Jaguars at Teotihuacan. The Portal is enhanced with frescos on either
side of the opening which include images of seashells and feathers. At
the Portal, you are in the presence of God. You feel what Moses felt on
the mountain when he received the Ten Commandments. We can feel the
energy of the Christ clearly in this place. The Jaguar Ceremony:

Stand quietly before the Portal. Allow yourself to feel a communication
with the divine energy that emanates from this place. The communication
with this energy is always at an emotional level, not in words. The
experience of being in the presence of the energy is at its height just
in front of the Portal or just inside it. Nothing more is needed. X. The
Pyramid of the Sun

Lawrence Andrews has written, "The final process in the Path of Freedom,
the Mastery of Intent, was undertaken at the Pyramid of the Sun, a place
dedicated to transcending the limits of the human experience. Here one
merged one's own intent (or nagual as it was also called) with the
intent of being of the Sun." (Magical Blend, ibid.)

We save the Pyramid of the Sun for a direct communication from the earth
to the sun. The intent of the Pyramid of the Sun is to help you find
your personal vibration of light in the whole river of light that the
masters can see flowing between the sun and the earth. Here you will
have communion with your personal ray of light. The Toltec masters went
to the top of the Pyramid of the Sun and merged with their personal ray
of light and virtually disintegrated their bodies as they ascended into
the sun.

From the air, the Pyramid of the Sun can be seen as the upside down
Figure of a man, similar to Jesus on the cross. His head appears to be
the

platform at the bottom of the pyramid. His arms are outstretched along
the two staircases of the bottom tier. His torso is the center of the
pyramid, and his legs are the top staircase. The Ceremony:

Before climbing, the group goes onto the platform that sits in front of
the pyramid. Here they say goodbye to earth.

The nagual presses the closed eyes of each person in the group so each
one will be able to see as a nagual. He or she asks them to find a
personal rhythm of breathing and to begin practicing it. The women start
walking to the right and go around the pyramid. The men walk around it
on the left. Usually, the right side is male and the female is left, but
here we deliberately use the opposite side of our own gender. This
passage awakens the pyramid. As you walk, look about three feet ahead.
You will perceive three levels of energy at differing speeds. One level
is on the exterior of the pyramid. Another is along the path you are
walking. The third is in the pyramid itself. Your will is connected with
the pyramid. By the time you reach the top, your perception will have
changed. At the top of the pyramid, according to instructions given to
each person, one couple sits in the center back to back with knees
raised. One couple faces inward from each side. The rest of the group
form circles around these figures. Find your inner silence.

From the silence, we start to create the vibrations of sound. Begin to
hum. A large sound will develop. It will not be organized. The effort is
to become one and to merge with the pyramid. Anything can happen during
this final ceremony. Although the journey along the Way of Death at
Teotihuacan is designed to release a person from fear, there is always a
reoccurence of what Miguel calls the Parasite that still connects you
with hell. He has become a master, yet he continues to make the journey
to Teotihuacan to cleanse the smallest bit of his mind that might still
hold the poison of wounds from the dream of hell. He has innovated a new
practice for himself that involves taking the whole journey backwards,
beginning at the Pyramid of the Sun and finally returning to the Palace
of Quetzalcoatl. It is his way of challenging himself with an
increasingly severe inventory.

Even though the Parasite is no longer in control, the Toltec warrior
recognizes that there is a Parasite attempting to sabotage spiritual
progress. It is possible to convert a parasite into an Ally. If this
happens, the Ally facilitates spiritual growth and the warrior feels
like he or she is making a new beginning.

With the help of the Ally, the warrior will be able to clean each and
every wound with complete honesty. It is not possible to undergo this
level of truth until reaching mastery. It is a painful process.

CHAPTER ELEUEH THE WAYS OF THE NAGUAL IN THE WORLD astery of the silent
knowledge opens one's channel to the ener gy of the nagual, which is a
living spirit that inhabits an infinite expanse throughout the universe.
Nagual energy increases awareness and intent to such a degree that a
master of silent knowledge can break free from the dream of hell that
controls the world to become filled with loving energy. While learning
the masteries of Toltec wisdom, the spiritual warrior may feel he or she
is on a solitary path of self- improvement through selfdiscipline. It
would seem that the only beneficiary of such dedication is the
individual master. However, this is not the case. Once a person has come
to a state of freedom from the first attention into a state of love,
that person can then serve in the world by being an agent of
transformation. The master can teach others to follow a similar path by
simply being a person in a state of love. An agent has obligations to
fulfill a mission. A nagual's mission is to practice all the masteries
acquired during apprenticeship and share wisdom with others. Like yeast
in bread dough, nagual masters will help in the great transition that is
taking place on earth today from a dense level of chaos into a new level
of peace and creativity. After graduating from medical school, Miguel
had to serve at a public clinic in the desert. While there, he studied
nagualism with a discarnate

teacher sent to him by his grandfather. This old wiseman made Miguel
face his fears in numerous frightening encounters. Based on those
experiences, Miguel used to teach differently from the way he does now.
In his earliest classes he exposed his students to dangerous or fearful
situations. Then Sarita showed Miguel what it means to practice
unconditional love and he saw that love works far better than fear to
develop spiritual mastery. The inventory is the basic discipline in
Miguel's approach to changing the dream to a dream of heaven on earth.
The inventory is a solution to recognizing our fears without confronting
fearful situations. The inventory is a private pursuit. It can take as
long as one needs, and it can be repeated many times. It can even take
place in our dreams. Dreaming is our human task. It goes on night and
day. One of the benefits of Toltec training is that we can learn to
change our dream. Miguel instructs his apprentices to prepare to dream
in this way:

1. When you fall asleep, keep your awareness so that you can control
your dream. 2. Practice power dreaming in which you change the dream you
are having. You will become aware that you are the dream and the dreamer
\`3. Notice that your dreaming body is different from your ordinary
body. 4. Begin to create a dream of heaven. Demons will try to stop you,
but remember you are experiencing the dream you are creating, so create
the most beautiful possible dream. (5. When you reach a state of bliss,
you become the God of pure love. With love, you will have your reunion
with God. Miguel's students become his fellow teachers. Cynthia Wootton
is now a nagual who practices the Toltec Masteries. She lists four
masteries instead of the usual three. Her fourth is Mastery of Dreaming.
Wootton writes, "Miguel's purpose is to help as many human beings
achieve their full enlightened potential (as possible) so that they can
manifest their power to create an inner and outer world of harmony and
balance in the lifestyle of their choice." Wootton says that her studies
with Miguel have transformed her life. "I have joined with Miguel and a
few others in dedicating my life to making these teachings known. There
is no doubt in my mind that human beings must evolve. When we achieve
our infinite nature, we feel a fulfillment which allows us to have a
vision of heaven on earth. Miguel, myself, and some others have chosen
to join forces to create this new dream of heaven for ourselves and
anyone else who is ready."

In her written statement, Wootton gives a fresh understanding of the
masteries. Writing about The Mastery of Awareness, she says, "As we
evolve, the etheric energy we create reflects subtler and more var ied
qualities of spiritual energy. What do we mean by spiritual energy? It
is that undifferentiated energy in which we perceive oneness with
everything around us. The feeling we have from the experience of spirit
is divine love, ecstasy or infinite freedom. This mastery brings us face
to face with choices to break free from all that limits us." Of the
Mastery of Stalking, Wootton explains that it is the basis of the
spiritual warrior's way of life. "We begin to watch our thoughts, words
or actions to see why and how we limit ourselves, we suffer and feel
unhappiness." With the Mastery of Dreaming, Wootton explains that we
gain control over the energy that goes into dreaming this "Fixed
reality" day in and day out. Once we start using the etheric energy at
our disposal, "... there are no limits to the explorations we can make
into other realities by means of what can be called etheric or astral
traveling. When we perceive etheric energy, we perceive a greater
portion of the totality of being than when we perceive (only) physical
energy." The Mastery of Intent, Wootton says, is "the Final mastery....
It is the mastery of the totality of being." This book is a tool to
spread the possibility of creating a new dream farther and wider. Around
the world there are other traditions and teachers doing the same work as
Miguel. When a sufficient number of people accept the change in world
view that allows them to live free of guilt, judgment, worry and
unhappiness, the entire earth will be more in balance. The changed
vibrations then emitted by earth will affect the solar vibration in
sunlight and, in turn, affect the rest of the universe.

Change begins within a single mind. You might be the one person needed
to encourage and hasten the turning toward peace on the planet. Miguel
advises his apprentices to begin taking students of their own to teach
them the art of stalking and to lead them on trips to Teotihuacan. In
this way, Miguel magnifies the effect of his own teaching. Certain key
teachings are making their way further and further into the psyche of
all shamanic students. It is for this moment in history that shamanism
has survived, so that teachers like Miguel can assist with the change of
global consciousness that is in progress. One of Miguel's most important
contributions as a nagual is the link he has made between Toltec wisdom
and other spiritual traditions, particularly Buddhism and Christianity.
Miguel's Story of the Buddha

The story of Buddha is similar to the story of Jesus. Buddha was born
and named Siddhartha. He was a prince and he was to be a king to conquer
all of India. When he was born, the astrologers predicted he would be
either

the greatest king or an ascetic who travels to hell and brings back the
secrets of hell to teach the world. His father tried to protect
Siddhartha. He created a beautiful world for him. He arranged for him to
marry at a young age and to have a child. He wanted to force him to
remain human. But the father could not prevent Siddhartha from reaching
his destiny. He was strong, young and powerful. He left his secluded
palace and went out into the village where he saw suffering. He asked,
"Why did you lie to me?" His father said, "I don't want you to suffer."
Siddhartha felt compassion and he felt guilt. "I have to see what they
feel," he said. He wanted to see what it really meant to be human. This
led him to hell. He had judgments against his father and others and he
felt the need to be punished. He went into the life of an ascetic and he
begged for charity. He was so compassionate that all the beggars joined
him. He brought them hope. Then he discovered that he was guiding them
in the wrong way. He began eating again and he recovered his strength.
The others felt betrayed by him. So he went alone into the jungle and he
found one of the wisest trees that ever lived. It was one thousand years
old. He studied the tree and saw the mind of the tree. He saw that light
is really the knowledge. He experienced ecstasy. Then he became the
Buddha. He went into trance and absorbed knowledge from the tree.

Trees' minds are close to humans' minds. The tree became the guide of
Buddha. Buddha saw that this is all a dream and it is alive. In the
dream were gods who ruled the dream. He saw the total evolution of all
humans. He saw that it is almost hopeless to try to escape from the
dream. For the

gods, creation and development, it is even more hopeless than it is for
humans to change the dream. The gods control the humans and lead them to
the nightmare. All the gods of fear created evil. Buddha saw that
getting out of the dream is to become light and to become God. He said
that our destiny is to transcend. Buddha had a moment of choice. He
could: 1. Be light, be God, ascend. 2. Go back and share the vision. His
compassion was so great he decided to go back. Then the dream attacked
him, just as Jesus was tempted with sexuality. Buddha saw everyone shoot
at him with bows and arrows. The arrows symbolized their criticism and
gossip about him. The arrows turned into flowers. This happened five
hundred years before Christ. In the State of Oaxaca in Mexico, there is
a famous huge tree called Tule. That is the wisest tree I have ever
seen. It has the energy of the father. You can feel the love from it.
There are few birds in it and they are usually silent. Beside the Tule
is another, smaller tree, which is female. It has the energy of the
mother. It is filled with birds. Gaya says that when people circle the
Tule tree they come to a point of facing the tree. It lifts them up and
pulls them off their feet. The Tule is the guru or wise teacher among
trees. It is the keeper of the silent knowledge. Miguel's Vision of
Christ

While he was an apprentice with Sarita, Miguel stayed in trance for
hours at a time. Among his visions were his encounters with the story of
Jesus'

life that he saw as if he were a witness. For this to happen, he had to
align with Jesus' energy vibration and then he could live the story
emotionally.

The Jesus I found in my meditations was ninety percent different from
the Jesus presented in his church. I do not agree with the last fifteen
hundred years of Christianity at all. The original Christianity was when
Jesus was in his body. He taught a way of life almost exactly like the
Toltecs. Jesus gave us immense gifts. He gave us forgiveness.
Forgiveness was his way of cleaning the poison from our mind, like the
inventory. Forgiveness is the only way to heal the roots of all the
emotional poison that we have. Forgiveness is an act of self-love. Once
you forgive, there will be scars there, but you will not hurt.
Forgiveness is the great gift from Jesus. The whole culture in Jesus'
time was placing blame. The Jewish religion was still barbarian. In the
temple, they had to sacrifice animals to a bloody god. In the Bible,
Moses describes how to make a sacrifice, how to dispense the blood in
the tabernacle, how to burn the sacrifice. It was fanatical. They
followed the letter, not the spirit, of the law. They believed in a
judging god. Jesus was in conflict with this religion that preached fear
of a God who is jealous and will punish you. Jesus practiced love. This
is his main gift. He did not say "an eye for an eye," he said to "Love
your neighbor as yourself." It was not easy for Jesus to teach his
knowledge to those who did not want to hear it, so he taught in
parables. He made his listeners understand with love. While he talked,
they were trance like and they shared the silent knowledge of
unconditional love.

Jesus was really a king from the dynasty of David. The Romans had put a
false king in place. Those in the House of David expected a messiah to
recover the kingdom.

Jesus' real father was a Zealot, a rebel warrior named Judas. He tried
to overthrow the Romans but he failed and was killed. He did not know
that Mary was pregnant when he died. Mary was just a teenaged girl.
Those who were in the House of David expected her to bear a son who
would continue the lineage. They chose a husband for her who would be a
father to her child. Joseph was a priest of the temple who was a
teacher. He was in his eighties. Mary married Joseph and Jesus gained
the spiritual instruction he needed when Joseph took Jesus to Egypt at a
young age. The community did not expect Jesus to reject being a king.
Jesus joined the Essenes, but he already had the silent knowledge and he
was more liberal than the Essenes. The Essenes were waiting for the end
of the world at any moment. They tried to be clean and pure to be ready
when the Master of Justice arrived. Jesus said, "I am the Master of
Justice and this is not the end of the world." The Essenes kicked Jesus
and John the Baptist out of their community. Two forces worked on Jesus.
One told him to become the king. The other told him to change the
beliefs of his community. The Jewish people were worshiping a force in
the temple that was not God. Jesus was dangerous to the Pharisees who
saw that he was very wellknown as the probable messiah, but they denied
it. Jesus began going in a different direction from what his followers
expected. He did not choose to be king, but to profess love, forgiveness
and truth. Then his image changed and many saw him as a prophet. He
began thinking of himself as a son of God, although not the only son. In
Israel the ideal was monotheistic, but in other countries at the time,
such

as Rome, Egypt and Greece, there was a belief in semi-gods. Caesar
proclaimed himself God. Therefore, it was not weird for Jesus to say he
was a son of God. He said we are God's children. He said God is love and
forgiveness rather than a god to fear. They had thought of God as
remote. Jesus said, "I am the son of man. You are my brothers. God is
our father. My father doesn't want sacrifices."

The people loved and followed him. The ideas he taught were a threat to
the temple and the temple leaders wanted him gone, although many priests
favored Jesus. They knew that with Jesus they could be free. There were
many meetings in the temple.

Jesus spoke of bringing heaven to earth. "My kingdom is not of this
world. It is a place of love where everyone is kind," he said. His
apostles were excited about arriving in Jerusalem. They thought they
would be victors and Jesus would proclaim himself the king. The temple
expected him to say this. If he did, there was no way the Pharisees
could stop him. They invited Jesus to the Sanhedrin, which was the
highest judicial and ecclesiastical council of the nation with seventy
members. He said, "No, I will not become the king. Do not tempt me." He
predicted the crowd would kill him. This was to be his destiny. The
Resurrection was another gift from Jesus. It means the awakening from
the dream. The Resurrection is the opposite of Adam and Eve's eating
from the fruit of the Tree of Life. An ancient tradition that began in
Egypt is the Communion. Originally, the communion wafer represented Ra,
the Sun God, or Horus, who was the same as Jesus. Wine represented the
Holy Blood, or the specific ray of light that created all humans. Wine
and bread were used in the Egyptian ritual in the same way they are in
Christian services. Jesus began a new covenant between man and God.
Despite all the corruption of his teaching, the covenant is still valid.
The present time of the Sixth Sun, is the time of Jesus' prophecy. All
events around the world are inseparable. All humans are one organ. What
happened in Jerusalem happened in Teotihuacan. Jesus was also
Quetzalcoatl.

All avatars speak of love and forgiveness, but Jesus proved these things
in action.

For me, the fact that he proved it is of the greatest importance. Jesus
taught us how to die as a warrior, even though he was humiliated and
hurt, he did not hate. He showed no revenge. He still felt love for
everyone. This is the part of Jesus' story that made me feel Jesus is
the greatest human who ever lived. The best teaching of Jesus is his
unfailing love. After Jesus died, his followers went in two directions.
One group saw Jesus as the messiah, like a king, and they wanted to
preserve his lineage. Jesus' wife and son were taken to the south of
France and then to England. The story of the Holy Grail is the
continuation of the House of David. Holy Grail means Holy Blood. The
Crusades were started to reestablish the kingdom for the messiah. The
secret societies of Masonry and the Rosicrucians, Knights Templar and Le
Catars, as well as King Arthur's Round Table were all connected to the
House of David. The other group, the Apostles, saw Jesus as the son of
God and they kept his teachings. They were persecuted, but they founded
seven churches. The big victory of Christianity was when one of the
Roman caesars around 200 A.D. declared that he was the pope and head of
the Christian church. He mixed the ideas of Jesus with those of another
movement in Rome at that time called the Victorious Sun. In this group,
they worshiped a man who comes from the sun and wins over evil. He also
was a son of God. After that, everybody had to be Christian and to
support the religion. They sent emissaries to find out about Jesus. The
caesar only accepted four of the versions of Jesus' life, and those were
considered the evangelists'. The other reports were the Apocrypha, never
accepted officially. All the old gods were renamed saints.

These facts will be legitimized soon by scholarship. There has always
been discord between the Catholic church and the secret groups, such as
the Templars, but soon all the information will come out and the image
of Jesus will change. The Great Imperium will break when the papacy
comes to an end. They will discover ruins in the south of France and
they will see that there were messages hidden in the art of Michelangelo
and Leonardo, as well as many other artists. The revelation has already
begun. The seals, mentioned in the Book of Revelations, will be broken.
Some are already broken. The first seal is hell. The Bible and the
Toltec's Silent Knowledge

In the first chapters of the Gospel according to John, Miguel sees "pure
esoteric knowledge from the mystery school of the Christians." Verse by
verse, the statements are kindred in language and meaning to the
Toltec's silent knowledge. As Miguel has said, there is just one silent
knowledge and it is being revealed all over the world. This is not the
first time the silent knowledge

has been revealed. What is new is that our contemporary interpretation
of the ancient wisdom is influenced by scholarship and scientific
knowledge from recent times. The following Biblical quotation is from
the Authorized King James version. 1. In the beginning was the Word, and
the Word was with God, and the Word was God. 2. The same was in the
beginning with God. 3. All things were made by him; and without him was
not any thing made that was made. 4. In him was life; and the life was
the light of men. 5. And the light shineth in darkness; and the darkness
comprehended it not.... 9. That was the true Light, which lighteth every
man that cometh into the world. 10. He was in the world, and the world
was made by him, and the world knew him not. 11. He came unto his own,
and his own received him not. 12. But as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on
his name. 13. Which were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. 14. And the Word was made
flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the
only begotten of the Father,) full

of grace and truth....

Everything comes from the word and this is exactly the same as intent
and the will. Everything comes from light. Light is energy. In the
Toltec, we

say that intent is that quality of the energy that allows all energy to
transform. Everything is an emanation of the one spirit. "Which were
born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God." This means of the will, or the intent, of God. "In him
was life; and the life was the light of men." Life and light are exactly
the same, which is the basic knowledge that the Toltecs taught. We are
only life. Without the life that is in us, our bodies would decay. The
light shines in the dark. Darkness is matter. Light works through matter
but matter resists. It does not "comprehend" the light. Matter resists
the light and this resistance makes matter grow. The Bible says, "He was
not in the world, but he came into the world and the world did not know
him." Our own body does not accept our light, our energy. When the Bible
says that "He came into his own and his own received him not," that
compares with the Toltec truth that the light of divinity comes to us
and we resist it and we stay in the world of illusion. "Whoever receives
the light becomes the children of God," compares exactly with the
meaning of Teotihuacan, the place where we become God, but this can only
happen when we surrender to the light. Miguel interprets other aspects
of the Bible, particularly the warnings of Armageddon in The Revelation
of Saint John the Divine, to elements of Toltec lore. Armageddon is
signaling the death of the dream of the planet. Destruction by nature or
by man-made causes is not inevitable. It can be diverted by the
awakening of humans. Miguel believes this awakening is moving very
rapidly. "Where chaos is the worst, awakening is moving faster," Miguel
says. "What happens in the world is exactly the same as what happens
when a

mind awakens. Before there is a sense of peace, there is an increase of
chaos."

Perhaps one human has a belief system which includes the idea that
suffering is normal and all around other humans are suffering, but at a

certain moment this person awakens and knows we don't have to suffer.
This person faces rejection by changing his belief system. If we are
different we aren't accepted. To be different is an act of rebellion.
There will be a reaction inside and outside when we move into the
unknown. Fears come out and try to stop our transformation. Chaos is the
result. Reason is weakened and loses direction. After the crisis passes
in the person and in the outside world also, then the individual is able
to be himself. First there is the war in our minds. Here, the Victim
sabotages our efforts to change. Our beliefs are our laws. I had an
apprentice who worked with me for many years. She had been widowed many
years before. Her beliefs gave her a lot of resistance but she came to a
moment of change. Then she went back where she used to live and had her
husband's remains exhumed and cremated. When she scattered his ashes she
felt free and happy, but her family were surprised and angry. They
blamed her and went to their priest. He thought she had done an evil
act. For a while, she saw herself through their eyes again, but she let
it go and left, taking her happiness and freedom with her.

Until people find God inside, they need to believe in the God who is
outside. We are all black magicians, spreading our emotional poison
until we learn to be white magicians. Then we convert from fear to love.
Once a person has transformed, he or she does not take things
personally. Jesus and Buddha came into the world and they had to make
the change to enlightenment. In doing so, they opened higher
opportunities for everyone. They were born with all their opportunities,
but they had to go into hell just like everyone else. They were fully
human.

They lived normal lives in normal circumstances for their times, with a
body, mind and soul, but they became light. We act from fear at first,
but once we become aware of what we are doing, the opportunity opens for
us to transform. Even in the most direful circumstances such as the
concentration camps of World War II, it was possible for people to
change from their desire to change. For the past twenty centuries,
Christians have taught that we are our brother's keeper. Miguel gives
this worthy ideal a different sort of interpretation from the usual one
that is vested in guilt. Being responsible, he says, is to respect each
other's way of being. We help each other most by our offer of love.
Wherever love is received it will be effective. All we really can do for
another is to love him or her. We are not responsible for the actions of
another. Feeling sorry and guilty for others is not effective. When the
government gives handouts to people so that they make more money from
not working than they can from holding a job, they are destroyed. They
are not helped. When people do not work, there is no action. There has
to be action in order to have transformation. Without action, the people
become bored and boredom leads to crime. We are here to produce. The
Toltec View of Love

Jesus taught that love is the essence of the silent knowledge. The
Toltecs also knew that the closer we get to love, the closer we get to
God. Love is the opposite of fear. Love is that fire that does not burn,
that purifies everything it touches, whereas fear is the fire that burns
and destroys everything it touches. It is so difficult to put the
meaning of love into words. It is easier to speak of the characteristics
of love. In this way, we will see that the characteristics of love and
those of fear are exact opposites. We can imagine two tracks, one of
love and one of fear. By comparing them, we

can see which track we are on. Miguel teaches that pure love is composed
of seven characteristics: 1. Love has no expectations. Fear is filled
with expectations. 2. Love has no obligations. Fear is full of
obligations. When we act from obligation, our resistance makes us
suffer. When we fail to act on our obligations, we feel guilty. 3. Love
has respect, not only for others, but also for ourself. Fear respects
nothing, including itself. When I feel sorry for myself, I do not
respect myself. When I feel sorry for you, I do not respect you. 4. Love
is patient. Fear is impatient. 5. Love does not pity. Fear is filled
with pity, especially with self-pity. 6. Love is detached. Fear is
filled with attachments and the dread of having to let go. 7. Love is
kind. Fear is too self-involved to be kind. Relationships based on love
are not broken by efforts to control the other. Unconditional love
places no burdens on one's partner. From this position,

Miguel discusses the need to reconceive the institution of marriage.
Chief among changes, he thinks, will be the new relationships that
replace the worn out institution of marriage, as we have known it. This
system is broken. The new relationship, based on respect, is just
beginning. There is complete confusion, worldwide, in human
relationships because we are resisting this change, but it will
inevitably take place. Miguel's Special Message

Many voices are calling us to awaken. Couched within their messages are
similar warnings. We hear that we are living in an illusion. We learn
that the earth is a living being and we must protect her from further
degradation. Among the voices are those who tell their listeners who it
is we should blame for the misery we see around us, our parents, white
men, the government, the United States, corporations - there is always a
guilty party. Carried to its extreme, the wake-up call gives an
impression that each of us is the victim of a corrupt system. If our
early victimization can be ascribed to a family member or caretaking
adult, we are expected to seek out this memory and bring the pain to the
surface of our consciousness ... and then, what? Miguel brings a
different message. Wake up, he tells us, to your personal
responsibility. What happens to you is dependent upon your own thoughts.
Your actions and reactions are under your control. You are not the
Victim nor are you a Judge to lay blame on others. You are a spiritual
being empowered with the potential to transform the dream of the planet.
The Toltec system to which Miguel has added the revealed wisdom he
receives in trance states is completely devoted to the refinement of the
individual. A principle of esoteric wisdom is that no one has power over
anyone else's soul and spirit. The awakened individual is one who takes
upon him/herself the total responsibility for thought, word and action.

Awakening in the Toltec way causes deep changes in a person's perception
of the world. Fear, guilt, blame and shame are surpassed. From such a
vantage point, the world appears just. Divine order operates at all
levels. The transformed master of Toltec wisdom is not a blissed-out
lotus eater whose focus is limited to personal contemplation. If fully
real ized, mastery is accompanied by practical changes. Talents, drives
and abilities rise in consciousness, fueled by the passion of joy in
action. All of us are talented at birth, but we often squelch the nudges
and desires we feel in order to earn a living. In case after case, the
Toltec masters find they can earn a living by commitment to their
talents. It is a matter of priorities. At the top of the list is
expansion of those things that give joy and hence lend positive energy
to the person and through the person to the world. Miguel conveys a
practical form of spirituality. First, one takes full charge of oneself,
cleanses emotional poison from the mind, finds the source of joy and
practices living in heaven on earth. The practice is akin to an art
form. Miguel says all Toltecs were artists; he even says they were
supreme artists. We can take that to mean you are living as an artist
when your life is a work of art, a conscious, living creation, always in
process. The mark of a Toltec master is self-possession, someone who has
risen above the personal and ego-driven, a self-monitoring person who is
aware of the power in his or her word, action and thought. Restraint,
which rests on awareness, does not restrict spontaneity. In fact,
freedom from fear releases a person's spontaneous response to life. The
Toltecs' goal is happiness.

CHAPTER TWEIUE GAYA'S STORY AND THE WISDOM OF A NAGUAL WOMAN Entering
the Realm of Magic

I had a dream, a remembrance of a dream, where I was hanging onto
something with the edge of my fingers looking back to my right into a
body of water. There was a presence with me who said, "Go on and take
your message, but you must be patient. Your message won't be for
everyone, but there are those awaiting you." I remember that dream as
being a birth dream for me. I'm not that good at dates, times and ages,
and things like that. I'm very experiential. I just remember as a child
that I knew that my message was to tell people that they were God. I
never felt free to tell people that until maybe five years ago. It was
something I had within myself that I knew was my message. Around 1987, I
was traveling on an airplane when it flew into a thunderstorm. In that
moment I realized that I might die. I thought, "I can't die before I
awaken. I don't want to die again unless I am fully awakened. I
determined for myself in that instant that I was going to go for my
liberation. Even if I had to jump out of that airplane-and at the time
that was the most frightening thing I could think of-I was willing to do
it to awaken because I wanted so badly to be free.

That incident sparked an idea inside me that I needed to work with a
shaman. I didn't even know what a shaman was. In a bookstore, I found
the magazine Shaman's Drum and I read advertisements of trips to Peru
and Brazil for working with shamans. Although I was terrified, I signed
up for one of those journeys. My husband drove me to the airport. Later
he told me that as we sat there waiting for the departure time he had
looked at me and he knew that I would never come home. I never did,
although I came home physically. Now, I know what happened. Everything
is in divine order. I did not have a clue what was going on, but I Just
knew I needed to find my freedom. So, I went to Peru and I worked with
Eduardo Calderon for two weeks. He is a wonderful man. The first time I
saw him he said, "You will have to become the master of electricity." I
had started to have imbalances in my heart at the beginning of my
spiritual awakening. My heart was beating erratically. During surgery, a
few years after that, doctors discovered I had mutated an electrical
river across the top of my heart. Otherwise, my heart is in perfect
shape. In terms of electricity, it is as if my heart is a mutant, so I
now have a pacemaker. Calderon could not have known that, but he could
see on other levels. Calderon saw me wrapped in a violet light. The
natural color of my auric field is blue, but I have another ring of
light around me that is violet-which is Miguel. In every ceremony that
we did in Peru, Calderon would come over and honor me in some way. This
was because, I found out later, I carry the imprint of the nagual woman.
He recognized my energetic imprinting. He also knew that the violet
light that wrapped me was a nagual. Calderon asked me about my husband
and he realized that the nagual was not my husband. He could see
Miguel's mark on me, which is the color violet.

This was my first experience of walking into the world of magic. When I
look back on my life I see that for the past decade I have been living
in the realm of magic beyond what my reason can understand and know.
After I worked with Calderon we made an agreement that I would come home
for three months and then I would return for more study because, with
him, I had my first experience of seeing energy directly. He became my
teacher by moving my assembly point. When I came home my heart was
bothering me and I went to Miguel's mother Santa to see if she could
help me. She told me later that when she saw me she remembered that five
years before she had seen me in her vision, knowing that I would be with
Miguel. She had seen me with red hair. At that time, I was dying my hair
red. She wanted to know if I were married and I nodded. She asked me,
"Do you have children?" and I said, "Yes." "Well, you have to meet my
son Miguel because I am aware that you will want to work with him," she
said. "I went outside and asked the woman sitting at the desk if these
people were shamans. And she said,"Oh yes, they are Toltec shamans."
That didn't make any sense to me, but I asked if Miguel took
apprentices. She said, "Yes, but he doesn't take just anybody." Miguel
was teaching in this little temple in San Diego when I met him. Miguel
told me later that from the age of thirteen, each time he went into
states of meditation or felt emotionally distressed, I would come to
him. He had expected that when he grew up I would be his wife, but that
didn't happen. He kept seeing me in stressful times and he called me his
Angel of Death. As soon as he saw me walk into the temple he was scared
and wanted to run. I did not know what was coming until I sat down and
talked with him. Miguel spoke and understood English but not as well as
he does now.

He worked with Silent Knowledge one-to-one with a client mostly through
his hands. When he did body work, he just passed the knowledge and
vibration through himself. As soon as he touched my back, I started to
have memories of Miguel with me in different situations. In that dream
state, I had a vision of a beautiful woman in the form of a green snake
with two heads. She was jewel-encrusted. All of a sudden, one of her
heads ate the other. After Miguel was finished, he asked me what my
experience had been. I told him my dream and he laughed and said he had
been having that dream since he was thirteen or fourteen. We entered
into a dynamic. Whenever I was with Miguel or thought about him, I
couldn't help scratching my body. I realize now it was my spirit
awakening, although I didn't understand it at the time. When I told
Miguel, "It feels like you're under my skin," he said, "Yes, I am." Now
I see that everything was coming to the time when we would start the
dance that we call the nagual and the nagual woman. We share an
energetic and a common vision. His dream is to bring heaven on earth and
mine is to help people know their divinity. It was like a perfect
marriage. Miguel has consciously recollected us having 13 lifetimes
together. He says that we go back thousands of years and that we are
like twin souls. I started to work with him in June. In November, I left
my twentyfive-year marriage. Before I had gone to Peru or met Miguel,
while I was riding my stationary bicycle doing my exercises, I felt a
presence come to me in the form of a golden light in my mind. In my
experience, it was the Christ. I just surrendered myself to it. I said,
"I offer myself to be a channel of your light. Please use me in this
world." Three weeks later, I knew of some available land in Fairbanks
Ranch, an exclusive area in San Diego where I had already built and sold
a

home. I was interested in doing that again and I was out with a realtor
looking at a four-acre property with a natural ravine in the middle of
it when I saw that I could create a lake there. I said, "Take me to the
office right now because I'm going to buy this property and make a
million dollars." That experience seemed directly connected to the
presence on the bike. It was a gift from spirit. In essence, this
inspiration allowed me to claim my freedom. I created a home like a
castle. I worked out all the details and hired a builder, but I never
saw the finished house. Within two months of breaking ground, it sold
just from the diagram. I walked away because my life was all about
spirit, about Miguel and about my growth. Once I started to work with
Miguel, I always felt my connection to him above my head. It wasn't the
body. My connection with him was so intense I knew I had to be with him,
although we had not really talked about that. Eventually, I made a
spiritual marriage with Miguel attended by all of our relatives. On our
two-month honeymoon in Mexico, we went to Teotihuacan. This was the
beginning of a huge body of work. What happened was that Miguel went
very deep into a process. He became completely silent. We were walking
along the Avenue of the Dead and I sensed the presence of millions of
souls all around us. I was so aware of all these energies moving with
us. When I looked down, I saw that half my body was not me. I was in
another body wearing sandals. We were silently walking. At the Pyramid
of the Moon we climbed to the top. Miguel sat there seeing the
two-headed snake. He recollected the energy that we carry as my being
Quetzalcoatl and his being Smoky Mirror. I told him about seeing many
souls there and that we were literally carrying them with us. He said,
"Yes, we are doing that. We are going to go home and start bringing
groups of people down here."

He had been so silent, so deep within himself, like a zombie the whole
three days we had been there that I teased him, "Miguel, who would want
to be with you? I haven't wanted to be with you. You've been a nightmare
to be with. You've been so moody and withdrawn." But I believed that we
would bring people down there. Redemption of the Parasite

I want to talk about the Parasite as an aspect of our consciousness
which has forgotten its divinity. It is the aspect of our consciousness
that has the ability to feel. You could call it the emotional body. It
carries all the experiences we have had. Every experience is an
individual emotion. Either we pass through it or it is stuck there with
us. When we remember our childhood, most of us cannot recollect the
wonderful parts of being a child. We remember the negative aspects of
our child hood that we have not fully experienced because we blocked
them with our defense system. That block is just like glue. We have a
judgment that holds an experience like a freeze frame photograph in our
auric field. It is imprinted in our emotional body. The emotion is
trapped by judgment. Enlightenment is the state that comes when we
reexperience our past completely, without judgment, and everything goes
back into light where everything is love, the expression of God. Here is
my experience: I went to Mexico to visit San Miguel de Allende with my
sister so that we could study Spanish. While we were still in Mexico
City I took her to visit the Basilica of the Virgin of Guadalupe, which
she had never seen. We walked up the long flight of stairs and then we
went inside. As I knelt and looked up at the statue of the Mother, this
vision came from her. I saw the Mother with two chalices. One chalice
faced the earth and the other chalice faced upward at her heart. I was
seeing the birth of the Mother down into the earth. I sensed from the
chalice facing upward

through her heart that we would be reborn. We would transcend into our
Divine Self by the Divine Mother birthing us back into heaven. What I
knew at that moment was that in order to make the birth from earth back
into heaven I would have to lead a life like that of the Divine Mother.
I would have to have the unconditional love that mothers have for their
children. I would have to love every man, woman, and every thing with
that same quality of love. The purity of that love doesn't hold any
competitiveness, jealousy, fear, or anything negative. I asked myself,
how will I ever get there? We left the Basilica and took a bus to San
Miguel. Later, Miguel met me there and we planned to join a group of
people who were going to Teotihuacan with us for a power journey. A
couple of weeks before we were to leave for Teo, we had a conversation
based on something that had happened between us earlier. Because I knew
inside myself that this dream I was living with Miguel was dead, I told
Miguel he had to let me go. We needed to move into another dream. He did
not want to do it but because I asked him, he said he would. He would
cut his emotional ties with me. That was the deepest talk we had ever
had. I felt that in my years with him, I had never given myself one
hundred percent to life. Maybe I never had. What I have learned is that
the spiritual experiences we think will be glorious and transcendent
perhaps are not. They can be the worst things you ever will walk through
emotionally. Both of us, Miguel and I, had been going through growth
experiences since we had been together. At one point, I felt I was there
with Miguel's empty body while he was experiencing a transformation. It
was so bleak for me, that afterwards I tried to escape emotionally. I
carried an emotional wound from that time, which felt like a betrayal.
(My efforts to escape had given Miguel the same feeling of betrayal.)

In this place of truth in our conversation, speaking from the wound, I
realized that in our eight years together my Parasite had been living my
life, not the real me. I said, "You know Miguel I'm going to ask you to
walk with me in relationship where I can use you to be one hundred
percent with myself. Every time I come to a place where I want to escape
or want to defend, I will stand there. Give me an opportunity to do it."
He said he would. When we were on the bus to Teo, Miguel did not tell me
what he was doing, but he performed an act of power. He removed all my
defenses. I was like a raw nerve. I went from being perfectly happy and
fine to feeling as if I were hit in my solar plexus by the worst
feelings. I did not say anything. I was just looking out of the bus,
saying to myself, "What is going on?" After about thirty minutes, Miguel
said, "Gaya, I can't stand it. I can't stand how you are feeling." I
said, "Miguel, don't help me. I can handle this myself." Those were
brave words, about three o'clock in the afternoon. That night I stayed
in a room with my son. Through that long night all I could do was to
keep breathing. I said a prayer to the Mother, "Please help me through
this." I was aware of an energy that lived in my solar plexus. It was
upside down and the color of green. It was a living being who was so
contorted and so full of shame and in such emotional pain, I felt as
though I were split in two, this energy and also me. I kept repeating,
"I love you. Love yourself," while I tried to send this being love. At a
certain point, though, I knew that this energy was going to have to
redeem itself. Nothing outside of itself could ever love it enough, but
I remember feeling it was a part of me. In my work with people
energetically, two things always present themselves: the inner child and
the angel, or a beam of light. I thought of

this place of vulnerability within myself as my inner child, in this
tiny sensitive place. I was energetically dealing with all the emotions
of this being inside me. This part of me had been with me through
everything I had ever experienced. It knew the truth on a level that I
had blocked out. I could use my defenses and not really feel my
experience, but this part of me felt everything. It was experiencing my
life directly with the eyes of the Judge judging itself and the eyes of
the Victim being victimized by its own self-judgment. I didn't know how
this part of me would ever be able to love itself enough to forgive
itself and to just be in love. I remember moving through layers of
emotions. It wasn't like pictures of the past. I was feeling the pain of
my being that I carried in this place. The last thing I walked through
was the existential betrayal. When we are born our divinity separates
from itself so that we come into the density of matter, into our
humanness, into this place of separation. To be born is a betrayal of
our divinity. I saw that carrying that seed of betrayal sets up an
electromagnetic system which draws to us everything based in fear and
negativity. That separation, that betrayal, is the seed from which our
consciousness grows and that is how we enter into fear. It is a perfect
system. Here I was with all this pain. By morning, my body was shaking.
I was quivering. My heart was racing. I was very weak and I was
physically fragmented. I went over to Miguel's room and said, "I would
rather die than live like this." He said, "Do you want me to help you?"
I said, "I can't say yes, because if I do I may never have this
opportunity again. What I have to tell you is that I am giving it one

hundred percent and I don't care if I die." Miguel said, "Gaya, you
don't have to have a heart attack. Just remember." I left and we
prepared for the day with the group. I didn't say a word to anybody as
we went to the site. Miguel walked straight to a certain rock that he
had been working with for five years. He had instructed people to sit on
it and absorb from it. Miguel told the group that I and the women were
to go down to the rock while the men were to stay above and witness. We
went down to the place in silence. I turned the rock over. When I sat on
it, I felt energetically connected with the energy of the sun. Suddenly,
this screaming started to move through my body. It was as though an
energy were spiralling out of me and I was screaming for every woman who
ever lived. I felt that the scream went to the sun. I was in such an
emotional state I almost collapsed. Then, I had a vision of the Virgin
of Guadalupe. The Mother was right there. The snake that she was
standing on started to grow in a swirl up her body and around her head,
playing and dancing. When I saw that, I knew I had passed through a
major experience. My reason did not really know what it was, but Miguel
said, "Now your Parasite is redeemed because all of your pain left. You
now have an Ally, but be aware to not feed any negativity to that
consciousness because the Parasite will grow again. You need to love
yourself and this aspect of your being. The Toltecs call this 'offering
the double ethereal to the Eagle' so at death you will not lose your
awareness of this lifetime." I know now that those words meant I had
passed the dragon; I had redeemed my Parasite; I had birthed my Angel.
At the time I had many questions. What I have discovered is that all of
life is about redemption of that aspect of your consciousness that has
literally forgotten its

divinity, the part that holds complete Divine consciousness and feels
everything. During the next eight months, a lot of new understandings
came through to me. I went to India four months after my experience in
Teo and I learned that the only place the parasite can exist and play
itself out is in resistance. It is the resistance that holds the dynamic
in place within us. The deepest level of pain that I touched into was
betrayal. I saw that without resistance none of this pain can be. Now
I've come to the very simple place of knowing that if we don't resist we
won't poison our consciousness. I used to talk about this when I first
started my work with Miguel. He would say, "Gaya, control your
emotions." That was a huge key for me. It empowered me to not be in
reaction to everything, to not be an automatic computer whose button you
could push and I would react in a certain way. Miguel had helped me
change my point of view. When you walk into a circumstance in life, if
you have an awareness of the reaction in your body, you have a choice to
either continue to react and get emotionally negative, or you can stop
it. You can say to yourself, "I am a being of pure love and light. This
reaction is not the truth of my nature." This is a very little thing,
but once I learned about it, I began to be aware of an energy all around
me. The first time this happened I felt wings flapping around me
energetically. I thought something wanted to get out, as if it were a
butterfly trying to leave its cocoon. Miguel would say, "Gaya, that's
you. It's the real you." I began to realize that the essence, the driver
of the car, is truly an angel. I practiced stopping my automatic
reaction to life and to people.

As I fed myself love and the truth of my nature, that essence became
stronger and stronger in its conscious awareness. My Angel awoke."
Gaya's Lesson

When you come to life, you dream. In the dream of the twoheaded snake,
the head of unconsciousness eats the head of consciousness. You forget
that you are Divine. You lose your divine consciousness and you forget
that you are dreaming. You forget that you are God dreaming that you are
not God. As you begin to define yourself from another point of view of
the truth of your own nature, you see that you are love. When you
recognize that you are not fear, you are Divine, you are not part of
anything based in fear, then that part of you which is aware that it is
Divine starts to grow. I became aware that this energy around me was
eating my emotions. Because I am a human being with a brain interacting
with a soul, the purpose of my existence is to dream. My dream is the
interaction between my brain and my soul, which creates my mind. The
mind is emotion being eaten by energies not in human form. Once I
noticed that this energy, which is not in material form, was eating my
emotions, I understood that what I really am is an angel essence. This
essence stands behind me, it wraps me, it is really closer to what I am
than my physical body. You will discover that everything in the world is
eating everything else, all the time. This whole realm is a feeding
cycle. One thing is feeding on the other thing. It's all God eating God.
This is the evolution of God. God enters into what in this reality we
call life. Life here is ruled by the sun in interaction with the earth.
Divine Essence comes into this reality eating itself all the way. That
energy spirals out and cycles back, with God eating God in every
experience.

You are God eating God. What are you eating? You have something to say
about what you are eating. You can feed yourself poison or love. What
you are feeding yourself will determine which is stronger than the
other, the love or the poison, and it determines where your
consciousness is-in love or in poisonous fear. As I began cleaning my
mind by cleaning my wounds, I was no longer the being living inside of
me torturing itself. I was empowering the angel essence of my being. As
you move into love, your vibration changes. Your colors change in your
auric field into finer and finer vibrations of light as you move closer
to love and out of pain. As you make this change, you are awakening your
kundalini. The other head of the snake begins to awaken from its
sleeping state and starts to move the Divine energy up the spinal
column. You start to perceive at different levels of consciousness,
which is what the chakras are. They are points of perception on
particular frequency bands. If you shift your point of view into a
higher vibration, you will start to perceive energy bodies that are less
dense than the physical. Each chakra has at least seven gates, and as
they begin to open to other realms of perception, you experience
freedom. You begin to remember that you are dreaming. At a certain
place, you are on the outside of the dream. You move into love. You
arrive at the place of the Mother where the love you have for everything
is pure. When I went to India, I was left with no illusions of having
any being outside myself who is either loving me or judging me. I was
left only with Gaya. I lost my gurus, my teachers, my guides. I lost the
illusion that God is anywhere except inside of me. What is God is me
because I am Divine. At first, when I was left with just myself it was
terrifying. I was raging at the stars. But I remembered that there is no
way from a limited consciousness, from an intellect in a human body,
that I could

ever truly understand why life, which is in Divine order, seems to be
filled with pain and injustice. All I had left was the choice to choose
life and every aspect of it, every human being, every circumstance,
exactly the way it is and exactly the way it isn't, and to embrace it
fully. If I did not do that, I would be victimized for eternity. My
perception of life changed out of my choice to choose love. I see life
in its perfec tion. I found the love of the Mother which is love without
judgment. Everything is truly Divine. Everything is evolving as it needs
to evolve. I found freedom. I also found the place where I trust myself
absolutely. I love myself absolutely because there is nobody outside of
me to judge me or to love me. Gaya is God for Gaya. It was an enormous
transformation. When I came back after that experience, I dedicated
myself to the intention that every human being will remember he or she
is God. This is the purpose of my life, and it has been so since
childhood. I came into my realization. The truth is we are all doing our
best all of the time. You awaken when you are supposed to awaken. Free
will is in how we experience the journey of life. I can choose happiness
or I can choose pain. I can choose judgment or I can choose surrender.
What becomes transparent is yourself. If I do not use a defense to
defend myself from feelings, I'm open. If I come into your presence and
I become aware of something within myself like a feeling of sorrow or
anger or righteousness, I know that is also going on with you, because
we are all mirrors for each other. We are always magnetizing to us
people and circumstances for our healing, so that we can return to
wholeness. If you want to see what part of you needs to come into
wholeness and light, that needs to come from

that place of judgment within you, look at your partner. It's amazing,
but if you look outside yourself you are going to see that your
circumstances constantly reflect your judgment of the places in yourself
that are not healed. When I go undefended, I am open to the experience
of what I have inside of me that needs to move into wholeness. I can
sense if I feel sadness, whether I am sad myself or whether I am feeling
another's sadness. I can be open to the relationship instead of
defending my point of view. The Anatomy of the Parasite

The Parasite could be called the inner child. This child is pure emotion
in the sense that animals are pure emotion. The Parasite feels and
senses everything, without intellect. It is the sensory template of the
human being. It carries all the emotional imprint- ing.Therefore, I
could say that the human being's ability to feel is the Parasite. I can
also describe the Parasite as Lucifer, or the Challenger, or the highest
angel that came into the density of matter and forgot that it is divine.
The Parasite is the child within us that screams "Leave me alone!" At
the same time, it cries, "Please, someone, come and find me. Pick me
up." The message it gives itself is, "I am not worthy of love. Please
love me. I judge everything. I am victimized by my judgment." In this
aspect of being human, there is always the duality of the Judge and the
Victim. The Parasite is the emotional body, the Fallen Angel who fell
into the senses, into fields of judgment, separation and betrayal. The
Parasite is an electromagnetic force which sets up a field of fear. It
is that coding inside each one of us that magnetizes into our lives
similar

circumstances, similar people, that always reflect what needs to be
brought into wholeness. We have played this same game through many
lifetimes. It is seemingly an unconscious process. Try to imagine a
diagram of a living being in which the spirit is a tiny wave of light
within the soul, and they are surrounded by the body. In the space
between the soul and body the interaction between body and soul creates
the mind. After the soul leaves the body, eventually, the soul will eat
the mind. As the soul devours the etheric energy from the life just
lived, an imprint of the etheric energy is made on the soul. The spirit
then devours the soul, but the spirit retains the imprinting of etheric
vibrations. We call this imprinting karma. Karma remains with the spirit
as it enters a new life. When the spirit is ready for rebirth, these
traces of vibration will respond to similar vibrational patterns in the
man and woman who will be the parents of the new child. Their vibrations
will fit like a key in a lock of the incoming spirit. The essence of
what you are is responsible for always bringing back to you the
wholeness of what you are. It pulls you into circumstances in which
there are always opportunities for healing. Karma creates holes in the
soul, or the template, that can only be healed by fully experiencing the
feelings we have blocked through judgment. If the soul is imprinted with
unresolved anger it will come into being with parents who act out what
the soul needs to heal. One parent might express anger and the other
might repress it. We are using anger as our example, but we could
substitute any emotional pattern.

The process by which the child is led into blocking his feelings will
have these steps: 1. Memory of anger is awakened in him because he is
carrying anger in his imprinting. 2. His judgment about anger is
awakened, too. 3. He reacts with fear because he carries the memory of
pain and judgment. 4. He closes himself to the experience by defending
himself. 5. He makes a decision about anger: anger hurts. I am not able
to protect myself from anger. Angry parents and angry people are
dangerous. I am dangerous when I am angry. Life is not fair. It hurts me
to feel. 6. The child makes an agreement: I will avoid anger. I will
avoid angry people. I will avoid making people angry. I will avoid
feeling angry. I will avoid feelings. Feelings are dangerous. We are
unconscious of our agreements until we actively seek them and nullify
them. This work (with the silent knowledge) is so valuable because you
can move beyond the agreements and heal them with awareness. Under our
feelings of anger, or other emotions, there is fear. If you ask, "Where
is this fear coming from?" you have the opportunity to dissolve the glue
of judgment and bring it into the light. You can recapture a part of
yourself that you have blocked off. The fear you feel is familiar. You
experienced it under similar circumstances as a child and you made an
agreement about it and we are now reacting to the fear it caused then,
in the same way we did then. We are protecting ourselves

according to the agreement we made in childhood. However, every time you
come into awareness that you are afraid, that is where the gold is. With
awareness, we have the ability to recapture our power. We can walk back
through our experiences with the eyes of love, the eyes of a loving
mother and father, and heal them. We can see that it was just fear that
started this defense in us. Then we realize that all our feelings and
our defenses are just ourselves. I am everything both inside and outside
the wall of my defense. Our experience is just a feeling. All a feeling
wants is to be felt. The solution is to feel your feelings. Once you are
able to do that, the whole dynamic of the Parasite dissolves. If it is
time for someone to be touched by this knowledge, it is like a wakeup
call. I know that in the 1960s, many people experienced a feeling of
waking up. Something enormous happened then to the sunlight. It was
supposed to occur at that time because we are always pushed by the
light. The self-preoccupation that started with the social revolutions
of the sixties could be the most wonderful thing that ever happened
because to study the self is to study God, the Divine, the Real Self,
not the ego self. The same consciousness of spirit that provoked the
spiritual quests of the sixties is still choosing. The spirit that chose
your circumstances, your parents and your life is still choosing
whatever is coming into your life right now. We think we are doing the
choosing, but we are always returning to wholeness. We get there by
experiencing life just as it is and just as it is not, without judgment.
We do not do it with our mind or the Parasite. We just enter a place of
no judgment and that is what surrender is. We accept that everything is
divinely perfect and we surrender to the experience. We call this
passing the dragon.

I have passed the dragon. I never have to pass it again. To get outside
the dream, to pass the dragon into the pure black light, I had to fight
for it. Our auric field protects us from the black light. Pure black
light is not conducive to life. Therefore, passing the dragon involves
physical risk. It is easier for women to pass the dragon in some ways
because we know how to surrender. Surrender is encoded within women
because they are required to let go of their children physically at
birth, and later, they must release them emotionally." Gaya's Dream

In my dream, I learned that there is nothing to see in spirit because
there is no form to it. All of a sudden, I saw a little piece of
something that looked like netting. It had a shape that I recognized as
a piece of film moving like a wave. As it bumped into the place in my
dream that was spirit, a little light went on inside. The image was like
a film with a light, but it was only a reflection. I knew that I was
looking at the mind, the manifesting element of the spirit, the mother,
that aspect of creation that can reproduce itself. From the marriage of
the spirit and the film with the light in it, a multiplication began
that soon built a whole new world. Buried down inside it was still that
little ray of light that is found in each human being. This is the
divine energy that is trapped within the spinal column, the sleeping
angel. The truth is that we are THAT. We are spirit, which is no thing,
it has no form. It is that which we can never know. We can only know
life in reflection, which is MIND, the moon. It is not the light itself.
The true nature of reflection is separation and duality. The mind, the
reflection, is always looking for itself. If we function and process
life from the point of view of the mind only, we can

therefore never find our true self because it is only the reflection of
the light. It is caught in the duality of separation. All that we see in
reality is mind. The truth of its nature is illusion. Angels

When I became aware of the energetic that was eating my emotions, I made
a commitment that I would only feed it love. I try to the best of my
ability to feed this energy angel nothing but love. We need to "jump the
track" to the point of view of the angel. The angel's viewpoint gives us
a lot more space to witness the personality that we are in this life. I
can see that Gaya has always done her best. She makes mistakes, but I
have great compassion for her because I am no longer jammed into her. I
am so thankful that, through her, I can experience life. She is my car,
my vehicle in which I am experiencing life. I can love her absolutely.
In my dream, when I saw the reflection of the light, I saw it as a
movie. I knew that life is like a holographic movie. I am the producer
and the director and I'm constantly making images to serve my movie. I
am casting you to fit into a role in my movie. I am always projecting my
image which then reflects myself back to me like a closed circuit TV
screen. From a spiritual point of view, you can come to every
circumstance with the eyes of the angel or the dreamer seeing the movie
being played. This is not possible from the mental point of view. The
mind can never understand itself ("It" is the object world. "Self" is
the Divine) because it is trapped in duality. With faith that all is
divinely perfect, you can choose to express your life from a place of
ultimate responsibility as your angel rather than the

Judge or the Parasite. Life is perfect all the time. You are an angel
working in this dimension, evolving the human being you call yourself.
Wake up from the dream and know you are dreaming. You are Divine. Angels
belong in heaven. Come home. Be: Feel what there is to feel. Do:
Practice the art of stalking and transformation. Remember your
commitment to love yourself. Have: Live a self-actualizing experience of
life. You recapture yourself every time you break the dynamic of the
Parasite feeding itself poison." The Rule of the Nagual

The chakras (from the Hindu tradition) are spinning points of perception
in our spiritual body that we associate with areas of our physical body.
The seven traditional chakra centers are found at the base of the spine,
the gonads, the solar plexus, the heart, the throat, the forehead and
the crown of the head. Gaya believes that each chakra represents an
angel. Lucifer, the Challenger, who guards the lower chakras at the base
of the spine and the gonads, is both the Parasite and pure love. The
Parasite is the separation of Divinity into mind. Gaya describes the
separation from the divine by the descent into matter at birth as a form
of betrayal. In our myths, Lucifer is the twin or the opposite of Ariel.
Lucifer represents the dark and Ariel the light, but both are of God and
therefore both are pure love. The third chakra is at the solar plexus
and the Tree of Death. It is guarded by Ariel, a name meaning Guardian.

Raphael guards the fourth chakra at the heart. There is a large jump in
perception at the heart chakra. Masters live and resonate at the heart
level, but they move into the higher chakras when they perform miracles.
Below the heart is the survival level of vibration. Above the heart is
mind seeking itself. The fifth chakra is at the throat, which is the
place of communication. Gabriel, the Messenger, guards the throat, The
Word. The sixth chakra is the upper mind and it is guarded by Michael
who fights the dragon of the Parasite. The seventh chakra is the Tree of
Life at the crown of the head. This is the chakra of illumination. Here,
Ariel again stands guard. The chakra system is represented in its
entirety by the snake. Gaya says, "To go back up the Tree of Life is to
return to the Divine." In the Indian tradition, the kundalini is the
energy of the snake rising up the spine into illumination. Gaya speaks
of the pure essence as the black light of the sun. "It is the purest
light we know. It is where creation comes from. Our whole purpose in
being here in life is to get back to this black light of pure essence."
Each time the soul takes a body and develops a mind, trapped inside us
is a little trapped black light. This light is wrapped in the soul, and
it goes on lifetime after lifetime until it gets back to its purest
form. At the moment of your birth, just as you emerged from your mother,
your pineal gland was penetrated by a ray of light from a waving band of
archangel energy above the earth. This ray entering your pineal gland

determined which archangel would be your guardian in this life. Your
essence is that of an archangel, also. These two angels are not
necessarily the same energy. You therefore carry two angel energies,
that of your essence and that of your guardian angel. To separate the
two angels, Gaya speaks of the guardian as the "little angel." As you
build your mind in childhood, you are also building the first filter
around your little guardian archangel. This covering fits over the angel
in the same way the soul covers the spirit. Beneath this filter, your
guardian angel is apparently asleep and forgetting that it is an angel.
"This covering of the angel is what we call the Parasite. It lives
within the mind and it is ruled by the reason," Gaya teaches. By waking
up, you are making holes in the covering of your archangel, through
which you are exposed more and more to the black light of your real
Self. At some point in the cleansing process when you reach a high
vibration of love, the guardian archangel jumps through its covering and
mates with your essence or primary archangel. It is the mating of your
guardian angel and your permanent angel essence that takes you back to
God. This is what I call the Reproduction of the Angels and the Rule of
the Nagual. You are an angel in evolution. Your angel is evolving
humanity. From this mating, the birth of the angel happens and you
return to your Divine Self. You will never be pulled back into the
earthly life again because your vibration will be the same as God's,
pure Divinity. From my experience, I am still a physical human being but
the personality called Gaya is gone. The way she expresses herself is
completely different. I always wanted to be behind the scenes. Now I
take responsibility for my expression. Now is the time. That is why I am
talking now.

Once you get out of the box, out of the dream, you cannot fit back into
the box of reasonable explanations. You expand immeasurably. I am no
longer contained. Everything is love. I carry a lot of energy because I
no longer waste my energy reacting to everything in life. My personal
importance is not eating up all my energy. I can use my energy to move
your Assemblage Point by my intent. The way I do that is by moving my
own. I live in the Oneness. This is not a matter of intellect. It cannot
be understood by the mind. This is my Angel driving my car, my
personality. How to Enter the Realm of Magic

After you have begun to understand the anatomy of the Parasite, there
are ways that you can assist your progress into the realm of magic, or
the path of transcendence. Moment by moment, rather than at a separate
time during which you are practicing stalking, you can live consciously
and remember these two concepts: 1. You can dissolve your defense
systems by noticing when you feel a resistance and by immediately
letting go of it. If you feel an uncomfortableness, embrace it. That is
the way home. Feel what you are feeling. Honor yourself there. See the
consequences of your actions and choose from the highest place of
awareness. 2. Love yourself. Lose your feeling that you are living for
others' approval. Put the love of yourself in first place and honor it
always. In those tender, vulnerable places within your being there is a
voice. It needs to express itself. It needs to be honored. Resistance
feeds the Parasite. If you are in a conversation and you feel you are
resisting someone else's words, say to yourself, "I don't need to do
this." This is a mastery in and of itself. I am talking about being

present in the moment with yourself. If you are aware, you can make the
choice not to resist by saying, "Right now, I choose not to react. I am
a loving being of pure light and anything other than that is simply a
reflection of an illusion." Just doing that changes your vibration from
the survival level to the fourth chakra. It is magic. Usually, there are
two basic dynamics which arouse resistance. One is, "Don't tell me what
to do." The other is the fear of being cheated. In the domestication
process, our parents told us to: stop being so naive; the world will eat
you alive; it's dog eat dog out there. We were prepared to be be afraid
of being cheated. When you feel afraid, you can ask yourself if you are
afraid of being told what to do, or of being cheated. These are two main
responses that destroy trust. Always having to be right is the mind's
tool of survival. If you are right, then I'm wrong. I don't exist. You
have within yourself the power, every second, to transform your
experience. That is where the magic is. The key to magic is
selfawareness. You are the magician. First you become aware. Then you
shift your point of view. We spend so much energy trying to be in
control. Think about it. We are bubbles of perception, living on the
earth, the core of which is molten lava spinning in space. Yet, we carry
the illusion that we can be in control. The only thing we can control is
our reaction to life and how we choose to experience the journey. When
we stop trying to control everything-which is an illusion anyway-we can
be a bubble floating on the river, around the rocks, in perfect harmony.
Life becomes so beautiful. A Personal Message

Words cannot touch the depth of love, respect and gratitude I hold in my
heart for Miguel. Through his teachings and the demonstration of his
ever constant impeccability, I've learned to live a life worth living .
. . a life unguarded in which I walk unafraid and open to the
experiences life presents to me. Miguel showed me that if you let the
power of love flow through you, there is nothing from which you need to
protect yourself. Through his eyes, I began to see the light in everyone
and everything, which opened me to a path of freedom, the freedom to be
true to myself, to express my truth no matter what that may look like to
anyone else. I've learned you can never really say "yes" when you don't
have the ability to say "no." In that, I've found the way to truly give,
not from a place of need but from the place of love that holds no
separation, no expectations, no attachments and is boundless in
expression. To the Nagual, I say, thank you for the gifts of the sun,
the moon and the stars ever dancing in the glow of the eternal divine
flame that lives within all of us. I love you. Miguel Interprets Gaya's
Story

When I met Gaya, I recognized what she really is. I could see all the
wisdom that comes into that body and mind. I also saw how she limits
herself. I saw how she used all her wisdom and intelligence to express
her fear of taking responsiblity for what she knows.

For years I worked with her to break the agreements she had made that
limited her. Gradually, she was changing. She would have a great idea
and give it to someone else to carry out because she did not want to do
it. She tried to justify her own divinity in someone else's divinity.
She recognized God in Sal Baba and Premananda, but not in herself. In
1994, I saw an opportunity to challenge all Gaya's beliefs. I put her in
a place of emptiness where she was face to face with God. I took away
her comfort level where she felt safe and where she had someone else to
make her feel safe. It took her a long time to digest that. We went to
Mexico and we were traveling from San Miguel de Allende to Teotihuacan
by bus. Gaya asked me, "Help me to be myself ... entirely." I asked her
if she truly meant it. I asked her three times. Each time, she said,
"Yes, please." As an act of power with my will, I took away her
defenses. She saw herself exactly. I pulled out of her energy field her
denial system. It uncovered her wounds. I did not say a word about it.
Soon, I could feel her emotional pain. Her pain was so great, I asked
her if she wanted help, or to stop. She said, "No." We arrived in
Teotihuacan and we each had our own room. She had the worst night of her
life. I felt it. It seemed too much. I felt that maybe she needed me to
have me put back her denial system. At one point, she felt it would be
better to die than to continue the way she was. The next morning, I took
her to the Place of the Air. I have prepared a rock there for my
apprentices. Gaya sat on the rock and she received the Redemption. In
five or ten very intense minutes she healed all her wounds and she
forgave herself. The Parasite redeemed itself and became an Ally.

Remember that the Parasite is the combination of the Judge and the
Victim. The Parasite had always sabotaged everything Gaya did. Now the
Parasite no longer eats fear. Now it pushes her mind to create love.

The transformation of Gaya begins there and it ended in India when she
went to see Premananda later in the year. In India, Gaya found her
voice. Now, with all her humility she accepts her divinity and she
teaches others.

IH0PTER THIRTEEI PROPHECIES uman beings have always been aware of their
own mortality and they have craved to know the future. Every age has had
its prophets and its prophecies. Prophecies worldwide and in all time
periods have agreed in one fundamental way: they are about the evolution
of the human species. In this chapter, Miguel will recapitulate the
Toltec's silent knowledge as he leads the reader toward a summation in
prophecy. His central thesis is that all humans together form one living
being, which is an organ of Planet Earth. Each human is to the earth
what a single cell is to a human body. Cells live and die continuously
in our body. In the same way, humans are born, they mature and they die.
The constant replenishment of humans keeps the human organ of the earth
alive, just as new cells keep the human body alive. We are observing, on
different time scales, the same process of physical life giving way to
physical death throughout the universe.

Humans are multidimensional in matter, multidimensional in the mind,
multidimensional in the soul and unidimensional in spirit. In matter, we
find that our bodies are made by billions and billions of little living
beings that we call cells. Every cell is an individual that we can take
out of our body, put in the laboratory and it will stay alive, yet it
will continue to be part of our body. A liver cell has no awareness that
it is part of a whole being with an awareness of itself as "I am." It
does not know that, together with all the other cells in the liver, the
brain, the heart, the bones and all the cells throughout the body, it
helps to form this single living being.

A single human being is one part of the organ that is humanity. The
totality of all humans forms one organ of the Planet Earth. Planet Earth
is alive and it has its own metabolism. There are many organs in this
beautiful living being. The atmosphere is an organ. The oceans are an
organ. The forests are an organ. All the animals are an organ. And we
are all that they are. We are the air. We are the oceans. We are all the
animals that exist on Planet Earth. And we have communication with the
other organs in the same way that the liver can communicate with the
heart and with the brain.

Extending further, we can see that the Planet Earth is both a living
being and also an organ in the solar system, with the sun at the center
and all the planets, the moons and other satellites in orbit around the
sun. The solar system is also one living being that is ruled by the sun.

The solar system that is one living being is, at the same time, just a
piece of the gigantic being that is the universe. A single atom with its
electrons in orbit around its nucleus is another solar system. The atom
and the solar system are therefore analogous. Our body is composed of
billions of atoms, each one a miniature solar system. In the universe,
there are billions upon billions of stars, each a living being, and
together they form just one living being. The Toltecs knew of these
analogies and similarities reflected in different realities throughout
the universe. The big questions -who are we? where did we come from?
where are we going? -are resolved in the Toltec point of view, which is
that we are everything there is. One small human body is a single piece
of a chain within that huge biological machine that is the universe.
This chain has communication with everything that exists in the whole
universe. Although this explanation satisfies the material point of view
of our eyes and our ears, something must be added to it because we are
not just matter. What about how we feel? What about anger, jealousy,
sadness, happiness, and love? These aspects of our human life are
evidence of an energy other than the material. We call this ethereal
energy. Energy is alive. Everything that exists is alive. Ethereal ener
gy is also a living being. Ethereal energy includes our emotions. Our
emotions are alive. Our thinking is alive. All of our feelings are
alive, and they are us. Our mind is creating billions of emotions. In
the same way that our cells create our body, our emotions create our
mind. Therefore our mind is made of ethereal energy. Remember that the
function of our mind is to dream. We dream twenty-four hours a day. We
dream when we are awake and we dream when we are sleeping. We dream with
our mind, not with our brain. Yet, the brain knows that the mind is
dreaming.

All human minds together are an organ of the Planet Earth, but this
organ exists in a different dimension from that of our bodies. Our
bodies are part of the material dimension which we can touch. Our minds
exist in the ethereal dimension of thought and feelings. In the same way
that all of our

emotions together create an individual mind, all minds together create
the mind of the Planet Earth, and that mind is dreaming, too. This
collective dream is composed of all the individual dreams each of us is
dreaming. The collective dream includes the dreams of the family, the
dreams of the community, of the city, of the state, of the country, of
the whole continent, and finally, the dream of the whole planet. At each
level of dreaming, there are distinct differences in the dream. For
example, if we visit another country, we will find that its dream is
different from that of our own country, and it is alive. The dream in
China is different from the one in Persia, but there is something in
common in the dreams. People everywhere suffer. People struggle. In
their interactions, people everywhere spread poison. This is an ethereal
poison, not a physical one, but the poison affects the physical body.
The poison we call anger, hate, sadness, jealousy, shyness, all come
from the same thing that controls the dream of the planet-and this is
fear. Fear is the big demon, the big devil in the dream of the planet.
Our interactions with each other are based on fear, human to human,
society to society, nation to nation. The way we dream is self
destructive. We are destroying ourselves as individuals and as a
society.

No matter where we go, we will find that people have a Judge and a
Victim in their minds. They all find guilt in themselves and in other
people. When we feel guilty, we have a need to be punished. When others
are guilty, we need to punish them.

The Victim is that part of the mind that says, "Poor me. I'm not good
enough. I'm not strong enough. I'm not intelligent enough. How can I
survive? Why should I try? I'm just a human." So, every step is fearful.
That is the way humans dream. With this review of Toltec silent
knowledge, we can see that the dream has to change. Prophecies are about
changing the dream. Around the world, all prophecies are coming true at
the same time, right at this time. Now! We are reminded that this living
being of Planet Earth is controlled by the sun. The earth is an organ of
the sun. All decisions for the metabolism of the planet come from the
sun. The sun controls the earth through its messengers. In the Judeo-
Christian tradition, these are called angels. Well, the messenger is
nothing but the light of the sun. Everything that exists in the whole
universe is nothing but energy, and that energy is light. Our body is
light, but it is condensed light. Our mind is light. Our soul is light
in different manifestations. Light perceives light in any of the
directions. This is why we can perceive with the eyes, but we also can
perceive with the mind, with the soul, and with thespirit. What is the
spirit? I call it Intent. Intent, spirit, God ... these are names for
the same energy. A property of this energy is that it makes possible any
change, any transformation. God is intent. God is spirit. God is God.
God is light. God is the real you. God is the real me. Energy or light
is the first manifestation of intent, or the first manifestation of God,
or of the spirit. Everything is alive because of God, because of you.
You are not your body. You are not your cells. You are not your mind.
You are not your soul. You are light. You are life.

Without you, your body will just collapse. Without you, your soul will
collapse. Your essence is light. Light is everywhere.

Light is alive and it is a living being. The light carries all the
information for any kind of life on Planet Earth. There are billions of
different vibrations of light. Mother Earth transforms whatever
information comes in the light from the Father Sun to create life. The
DNA in each of our cells is a ray from the sun trapped by the Mother
Earth and condensed into matter. All knowledge that exists is in the
light. Light is the way stars communicate from one to the other, just as
light is the way one atom communicates with another atom. Change comes
according to our perception. We see light streaming like a river from
the sun. Like a river it is always the same form, but the energy is
always different. If we shift our point of view slightly, this river of
light will look solid. It will fill the whole space between the stars
just like a nerve system. Whatever happens anywhere in the universe will
be known by the whole universe because the communication is
instantaneous. In our material point of view, the speed of light is
186,000 miles per second, which we think is probably the fastest speed
possible, but actually there is a quality in the light that is thou
sands of times faster than our measurements. It is this quality that
allows for instant communication across the universe. Everything we
perceive, in the material world, is a light that enters our eyes as a
reflection from objects. We do not actually see an object. We are
dreaming what we see. We create the entire reality in our minds. In our
dream, what we think of as matter I call the frame of the dream. The
frame is the same for everybody. We dream with the same frame. The frame
gives us the direction of time and space. It makes us feel safe. As soon
as we interpret what we are seeing, we find that each of us makes a
different interpretation because we dream a dif ferent dream. Each

of us has our own dream based on everything that we believe. To
illustrate this idea, think of a thousand new computers exactly alike,
each completely blank, without information. As soon as we put
information into these computers, each will be different. This is what
happens with human beings. Our mind is a biological machine like a
computer. There is different information in every human being according
to the person's experience. Each one has learned differently from
parents, society, school and religion. The information that we put in
our computer is what will teach us to dream. It tells us how to
interpret what we perceive. Each human computer has a name, but a name
is only an agreement we have made. I am not really a human being named
Miguel Angel. You are not a human being either. We just agree that we
are humans. Everything that we put in our computers is an agreement. It
is not necessarily good or bad, right or wrong. It is just information.
According to that information, we perceive the world and call it
reality. This information is the source of our limitations. We create
images about ourselves and about everything else. We then want to
believe in those images. The process of putting the information in the
computer is the Domestication. We are all animals that were domesticated
by other animals, other humans. We were domesticated in the same way
that we domesticate dogs, by punishment and reward. We domesticate our
children the way we were domesticated. We are afraid to be punished and
we are afraid to not get the reward. We create images of ourselves
designed to please others. We want to be good enough to please mom and
dad, the teacher, society, the church and God. Our behavior depends upon
the image we have created about ourselves, with all those limitations.
What others think about us is very important to us. We guide our lives
with reference to others' opinions. We try to please everybody else,
rather than ourselves.

The dream of the planet, held by all of us, is the same. When we rise
out of the dream of the planet and out of our own dream, we find that
what we have thought of as truth is nothing but information in our
computer and it can easily be changed. We resist change because we are
afraid. Fear controls our life. Fear controls our dream. The evolution
of humanity is the evolution of fear in the Planet Earth.

From outside the planet, we can see that evolution of the whole human
race is akin to the life of a single living being who is born, grows and
reproduces, and will transform. Everything is indestructible really. It
does not die. It transforms.

The progress of evolution has a certain logic. The living being of all
humans combined will undergo changes in the same way that a single human
changes. Imagine a young girl, eleven years of age. She will soon have
her first period and become a woman. When some of the organs in this
little woman change, that information is known by the brain and the
brain will push other organs to create certain kinds of hormones that
will complete the cycle. The process will be controlled by the brain.
The maturation process of the woman is comparable to that of the human
race as a whole. When certain transformations of body, mind and soul
occur in some humans, the sun, via light messengers, will know and the
sun will change the quality of the light it transmits, sending a
different message to the human organ of the earth. In turn, this change
will cause the whole of humanity to change. At this time humans are
finally leaving their childhood and becoming mature. They have more
clarity. Their reason is surrendering to their intuition. Their way of
dreaming is changing. Fear was necessary to promote the growth of reason
and the mind. Reason prepared the mind for intuition. Human beings are
multidimensional. In addition to the body and the mind, we are all
formed of light from the sun. The real core of a human being is a
personal ray of light in connection with the sun. Therefore, whatever
happens in the single human is known by the sun through this light. Any
change occuring in a single human affects the sun and its response
affects the rest of humanity. This is the process of human evolution.

Once we find our personal ray of light, we can shift our point of view
to the sun and see the human race all at once. I teach my apprentices to
find that ray of light connecting them to the sun. When they can do
this, the

silent knowledge enters their mind and they just know, without thought
or fear. Humans who can do this are prophets who point the way for
others. Today we are becoming mutants, because our mind is changing. We
are aware that we are dreaming and we are controlling our dream.
Automatically, we are rejecting one quality of light and accepting
another; as we do this, we are modifying our connection to the sun. We
do not need to work for it to happen. It is occurring already. The sun
controls earth life from the virus to the dinosaur to the human. All
modifications come from the sun. The sun is enormously more intelligent
than any of us. It has supreme intelligence. Humans all over the world
have recognized this. Ancient Egyptians worshipped Ra, the sun god. In
Teotihuacan, they also knew that the sun controls the earth. They were
aware that at certain intervals, life on this planet changed when the
sun changed. According to the Toltec calendar-which is also the Mayan
and Aztec calendar-there have been five suns prior to the one that
exists now. Their prophecies said that there would be a huge earthquake
in Mexico's biggest city of Tenochtitlan. In 1986, this earthquake
struck Mexico City, which is the modern Tenochtitlan. It was predicted
that after the earthquake there would be a five-year period of rest
until the new sun was born. In January of 1992, the new sun came. The
Sixth Sun has a different quality of light and it will transform the
dream of the planet. It will transform the human mind, making it more
aware of itself as a light being connected to the sun. As an individual,
you will speed your own evolution if you just open to yourself and who
you really are. All the masters on earth are trying to tell you the same
thing, and this is that you have something wonderful inside of you which
you can open to. The mind is a living being. The mind eats and digests
the emotions which come through ideas. As more and more masters speak of
the silent

knowledge, more and more humans will ingest these ideas. The ideas will
transform the information in their computers and give them a chance for
a better life.

This is the prophecy for the next humanity. Human beings will know who
they are. They will communicate with each other. They will love each
other. They will stop judging and they will control the dream. They will
be happy. When Jesus tried to explain all of these things 2,000 years
ago, he spoke of a new way to see God. They killed him. At this time, we
are ready to hear these truths. We think we are the most intelligent
species on earth, but we are only a small piece of intelligence. The
ideas that we think are our own are really already in existence when we
become aware of them and think that we "think" them. As we transform, we
will perceive ideas directly from where they are stored in nature. I
experienced this in Teotihuacan when I understood the knowledge and the
images stored there in the rocks. Once we are aware that we are directly
connected to the sun, we can suggest a behavior to another of earth's
organs. This is the way that shamans control the rain. They do not do so
with their reason, but with their intuition. Reason will not connect
because it does not believe in itself. Intuition connects you to your
personal ray of light. This is why prayer is so powerful when we expect
to have an answer. Usually, the answer to our prayer is not what the
reason expects. When we connect and witness in a shamanic way, it is not
our personality that brings about changes. The sun does. It was not the
little Jesus personality who changed water into wine, nor was it Moses
who divided the waters of the Red Sea. It was the will of the sun that
did those things. For the sun, everything is possible.

It is the same for each of us. We do not need to expect what happens. We
do not need to make something happen. We ask and we witness. The sun,
with its superior intelligence, will create the answer. How can we doubt
our personal destiny? There is no place for doubts anymore.

The prophets said that when the Sixth Sun came, God would awaken from
the dream. This means that we are God dreaming that we are not God.
Although it will take at least two hundred years for the process of
awakening to be completed, since 1992, the process has been
accelerating. This generation is the one that is beginning the awakening
and you are a part of it. What we need to do is surrender to our
destiny. Whatever happens will happen because it must. Our task is to
enjoy our life more and to express what is inside of us to bring about
the new humanity. If we have hate inside of us, we share hate. If we
have sadness, we share sadness. You can only share happiness when you
are happy. You cannot share love unless you love yourself first. The
dream of the planet will not change without resistance, just as we
cannot change our own dream without experiencing resistance. The new
dream is already here and growing, but the old dream wants to hang onto
guilt, anger, the Judge and the Victim. The human pattern of spiritual
growth is like an inner war where we face ourselves. We are the most
severe judge of ourselves. Each of us will go through a crisis of
surrender, but afterwards our capacity to love will increase. The
Parasite who lives inside our mind, constantly trying to undermine our
progress with emotional poison, will gradually give up and become our
Ally. As it happens in the individual, it will also happen in all of
humanity. All of our prophetic books describe the resistance of the
dream of the planet during the time of change. The prediction of horrors
relates to the fears released by resistance to change.

During the last fifty years, the human race has tried to destroy itself
with fear, but it has failed. Especially during the last fifteen years,
humanity has been in chaos, but the old dream is already broken and
resistance is lessening.

In the Book of Revelations, in the Bible, John speaks of the Seven
Seals. At the time of his writing, letters were sealed with wax. The
seal had to be broken in order to read the information inside. That is
symbolic. Every seal that is broken in the Book of Revelations increases
our awareness of the modifications coming into the earth via light from
the sun. There is no reason to fear. Even if our body dies in some
predicted disaster, we have no reason to fear. It will die anyway. Do
not listen to prophets of fear. Don't be guided by them. The old dream
of the planet is using many channels to create fear. Even the gods are
trying to create fear and panic, because the gods eat human emotions and
they crave them. Jesus, Buddha and Sal Baba, the contemporary holy man
in India, have lived lives without fear. They did not cause fanaticism.
Their lives were their messages more than their words. The next two
hundred years will be a time of growth, with the transformation moving
faster and faster. There will then be a period of at least three or four
thousand years of peace until a new cycle begins. A dream is biological.
It is born, it transforms and it dies. The story of evolution repeats
itself like a spiral, rising higher and higher, then it goes downward
again. Life, too, goes in cycles. When you know these cycles, you can
predict what will happen. You need only know what stage of evolution we
are in now to be able to see the future. We are now in a major period of
transition. There are three parts to the cyclic pattern of the dream of
humanity. In part one, which is the darkest time, reason controls the
dream. In the second stage, reason and instinct, or intuition, are
mixed. This leads to a fast period of growth and transformation. In the
last stage, destruction occurs in order to rebuild the dream. Today, we
are almost at the end of that part of the cycle in which reason and
intuition are mixed. Intuition is going to rule the next period.
Intuition is about trusting. It is knowing without thinking,

without doubt. This is where we are in the cycle. Reason, which controls
a false dream, has transformed now to intuition for those who are
already changed.

Far ahead of us, beyond the present cycle, there will be another period
of reason. Those we now call human will live in a different part of the
universe. Those who remain here will have a new sort of energy. I do not
think the humans of that time will be like us. I believe they will live
in the oceans. Today there are two species living in the oceans who are
starting to dream as humans. What will make the difference in the coming
transformation is not the physical form but what is created in the mind.
The importance to us of these prophecies is that we are already
transforming. We are mutants. Love is becoming the biggest
transformation in the human world. For thousands of years, humans
repressed love. They forgot what love means. When we say, "I need you,"
that is not love. That is possessiveness. If we feel jealousy and we
want to control another, that is not real love. Possessive love is like
any other need of the human body. Imagine going without food for a week.
You would feel as though you were starving. Then if someone gave you a
taste of bread, you would feel, "I need this bread. I love this bread."
Falling in love is something like that. When we were children under four
years of age, our emotional body was made to perceive love. Then,
domestication began and fear began. Fear took the place of love. Every
time we started to express our love, something in us repressed it. We
felt hurt and then we became afraid to love. We limited our love to just
a few people. With others, we would say, "I love you, IF ..." This
meant, "I will love you, if you let me control you." That kind of love
creates a strong dependency, just like a drug.

In a human relationship, one partner often has more need for love than
the other and that partner gives power to the other. This is like the
relationship between a drug addict and the supplier. The one who gives
the drug is in complete control and can manipulate the other person
through

fear. A broken heart is like a drug addict who cannot secure the drug.
It causes the same emotions. It is very common to be scared to love
because for a small pleasure there is such a large payment. During the
last fifty years, marriage has changed so much that it has almost been
destroyed. It had to happen as part of the process of cleansing that all
the emotions and fears in marriage had to be released. Marriage will be
recreated without the need to control another person. It will be based
on respect. A woman will have the right to be one hundred percent woman.
A man will have the right to be a one hundred percent man. When we
respect each other's dream, there is no conflict. When we are not afraid
to love, when we do not stipulate conditions for our love, everything
will change. Today, there is little respect. As soon as I tell you what
to do, that means I do not respect you. Feeling sorry for someone shows
a lack of respect. Feeling sorry is not compassionate. Feeling sorry for
someone else awakens our own self-pity. If I feel sorry for you, it
means that I think you are not strong enough or intelligent enough to
make it. If you feel sorry for me, you do not respect me or think that I
am intelligent or strong enough to make it. When we try to do something
for somebody else, this shows lack of respect. Having compassion is
seeing that someone has fallen, helping that person to stand up, and
then saying "yes" he or she can do it. Even though people might be in
the worst conditions, we do not need to feel sorry for them. We need to
love them. We can help them with our compassion. A person can always
choose. What has happened to the person happened because of choices he
or she made.

Humans will recover their sense of responsibility. For centuries, we
have tried to avoid responsiblity, yet whatever we do always causes a
reaction. We cannot escape cause and effect. We do not need to take
responsibility for another's mistakes. We can help and give love, but we
do not need to

take responsiblity for others because that encourages their illusion of
avoiding responsiblity. This applies even to our children, spouses and
parents or friends. If we take on their responsibilities, they become
weak. Action is what makes the difference in this reality. The power is
in the action, not in the dream. Through your actions, you have the
power to change everything. You can claim the freedom to act on behalf
of transformation. On one of my shamanic journeys, I learned that
knowledge is a limitation, a barrier to freedom. Knowledge is only a
description of the dream. Everything that we know is describing what we
dream. And, what we dream is not real. So, knowledge is not real. Yet,
knowledge seems valuable because we use it to communicate and
interchange our ideas and our emotions. The problem is that if we put
all the knowledge we have accumulated into our personal computer and
base our actions on it, knowledge will prevent us from transcending.
Knowledge tries to convince our reason that transcendence is not
possible. I tell my apprentices that knowledge is the last barrier of
the warrior. We accumulate knowledge only to change the information in
our computer. Once we change and become who we really are, we no longer
need knowledge. You need to cross the river of knowledge in order to
transcend and not come back here anymore. Our knowledge closes off our
intuition. Intuition leads us to the truth. Truth is alive. Everything
is in evolution. Everything is biological. Everything is alive. Your
only responsibility in this life is to make yourself happy. We do not
need knowledge for that, because everything we require is already here.
Other peoples' love can awaken your love, but it is your own love that
makes you happy. That love is your own truth. It is your freedom.

The best way to take advantage of the change that is ins process is to
stop resisting it. We are not here to please others. We are here to
please ourselves. You can do whatever you want. If you focus your
intent, there is no doubt that you will get what you want. This is true
for everyone. The Toltecs were the supreme artists of the Americas. They
expressed their sense of beauty with great skill in all ways. All humans
are artists and the art they are creating is their personal dream. As
you awaken to the silent knowledge, you can ask yourself, "How beautiful
is my life? How much do I love? How well do I communicate? How happy am
I?"

I encourage you to be the supreme artist of your personal dream. Make it
as beautiful as possible. Express your beauty.

IPIIOGUE THE CAVE OF THE BEST WARRIOR

here was once a very strong and very tall man who used to be a soldier.
He called himself the Best Warrior. He was in many wars and he killed a
lot of people. In his little nation, he was a hero. Everyone feared him
and respected him. Whatever he wanted to do, he did because no one would
stop him. Wherever he went, he would say, "I am the Best Warrior." One
day, the soldier was claiming he was the Best Warrior when a I little
boy said, "I don't think you are the Best Warrior." The soldier was
infuriated. He picked up the child and said, "You are lucky to be a
child because many people have died for less than that. If I am not the
best, who do you think is the Best Warrior?" The child replied, "In the
middle of the jungle, in a cave, is a man and he is really the Best
Warrior." The soldier went into the jungle immediately to look for his
rival. He wanted to kill him. Finally, he found the cave and he called
out a challenge. "Come out and fight me and we will see who is the Best
Warrior." Imagine his surprise when an old man stepped out of the cave.
The old man was so weak, he could hardly walk. The soldier laughed.
"Somebody has played a trick on me. Someone told me you are the Best
Warrior." With very kind eyes, the old man said, "Whoever told you that
spoke the truth. I am the Best Warrior." "First a little boy. Now an old
man. I don't want to have to kill you."

"If you did, that would only prove you are a murderer, not a warrior. I
don't think you have the courage to live alone, like me, in the jungle,"
said the old man.

"Hmmm," answered the soldier. "I challenge you to live one whole year in
this jungle. After a year, come to see me again and let's see who is the
Best Warrior." The soldier accepted the challenge and he lived for a
whole year in the jungle. He became a great hunter. He learned from the
eagle. He learned from the jaguar. And, he learned from the spider.
After that year, he went back to see the old man. Again, the old man
challenged him to stay another year and to use all the techniques he had
learned about hunting to hunt for knowledge. "After a year of hunting
knowledge, come to see me again and let's see who is the Best Warrior."
Using the techniques of the hunter, of the eagle, the jaguar and the
spider, the soldier learned everything about nature, about the stars,
the animals and mathematics. He accumulated a lot of knowledge and the
more he learned, the greater his ego grew. He said to himself, "There is
no doubt. I am the BEST." When he saw the old man again, the old man
challenged him to stay another year hunting himself. The soldier
accepted the challenge. He began hunting every emotion, every action,
every reaction that he had. He started to see himself and to face
himself. He struggled with his belief system. He started accepting
everything and loving himself. The transformation was so amazing that in
a very short time, only three months of hunting himself, he really felt
that the old man was his master, his teacher and truly the Best Warrior.
He felt so much love for the old man. And he felt compassion for all the
people he had hurt. He could hardly wait to see the old man again, so he
went back to the cave and called out to him.

But the old man did not come from the cave. Hesitantly, the soldier
stepped into the cave and all he found was an empty body. The old man
had died. Then, the soldier decided he would stay in that cave and

become the Best Warrior. He is right there in that cave now, waiting for
your challenge.

Thank you for reading my words and for letting me love you as you really
are, a light being connected to the sun by your personal ray of
sunlight, a being who is also God. I love you. Miguel Angel Ruiz For
information on Teotihuacan journeys with Miguel Ruiz, please write:


