Shambhala Publications, Inc. 4720 Walnut Street Boulder, Colorado 80301
www.shambhala.com ©1991 by H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso This book
was previously published under the title The Path to Bliss. All rights
reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or
by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in
writing from the publisher. Cover design by Claudine Mansour Design
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names:
Bstan-'dzin-rgya-mtsho, Dalai Lama XIV, 1935- author. \| Thupten Jinpa,
translator. \| Cox, Christine, editor. Title: The complete foundation:
the systematic approach to training the mind/the Dalai Lama; translated
by Geshe Thupten Jinpa; edited by Christine Cox. Description: Boulder:
Shambhala, 2018. \| Series: Core teachings of the Dalai Lama \| Includes
bibliographical references and index. \| Includes translation from
Tibetan. Identifiers: LCCN 2017054376 \| ISBN 9781559394765 (pbk.: alk.
paper) eISBN 9780834841499 Subjects: LCSH: Lam-rim. \|
Meditation---Tantric Buddhism. Classification: LCC BQ7935.B774 C68 2018
\| DDC 294.3/420423---dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2017054376 v5.3.2 a

CONTENTS

Preface

Part One: Introduction 1. General Introduction 2. Origin of Lamrim
Instructions

Part Two: Preparatory Practices 3. Creating a Conducive Environment 4.
Preparing the Mind 5. Visualization of the Merit Field 6. Seven-Limbed
Practice 7. The Three Aspirations 8. Invoking the Inspiring Power of the
Lineage 9. Reviewing the Stages of the Path 10. Dissolution of the Merit
Field 11. Activities of the Between-Session Periods 12. Summary

Part Three: Main Lamrim Meditations 13. Reliance on a Spiritual Teacher
14. Recognizing the Human Potential (Practices common to trainees of
initial capacity) 15. Death and Impermanence 16. Sufferings of the Lower
Realms 17. Seeking Refuge 18. Karma

(Practices common to trainees of middling capacity) 19. The Defects of
Cyclic Existence in General 20. The Specific Sufferings of the Different
Realms 21. The Path to Liberation (Practices for the trainees of great
capacity) 22. The Mind of Great Capacity 23. The Seven-Point Cause and
Effect Method 24. Equalizing and Exchanging Oneself with Others 25.
Bodhisattva Vows Rite 26. The Bodhisattva Deeds 27. Calm Abiding of Mind
28. Wisdom through Special Insight 29. Tantra in Context Appendix 1:
Commitments and Precepts of Thought Transformation Practice Appendix 2:
Bodhisattva Vows Appendix 3: Outline of The Complete Foundation Notes
Glossary Bibliography Books by the Dalai Lama Index E-mail Sign-Up

PREFACE

T

meditation known as Lamrim, stages of the path to enlightenment, was
begun by the great eleventh-century saint-scholar Atisha and has been
developed over successive generations by Tibetan meditators. It
originated with Atisha's eloquent work in verse appropriately titled
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment, in which he condensed the essence of
the entire Buddhist training of the mind in the stages of mental
development suitable to the trainees of initial, middling, and highest
capacity. The great scholar and adept Tsongkhapa based his much admired
text Lamrim Chenmo (Great Exposition on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment) on this classic work; it explores in great depth the
subject matter of Atisha's Lamp. As was the original intent of the
authors, the beauty of Lamrim lies in its systematic approach to
training the mind through meditative contemplation, taking into account
the complexity of the human mind. With Lamrim practice, one embarks upon
a fresh spiritual journey in uncovering the layers of mists that obscure
the human personality. Its approach is simple, rational and yet profound
and does not presuppose any knowledge or training on the part of the
beginner. The example of many great meditators testifies to the efficacy
of the Lamrim system. Beginning with elementary trainings, such as how
to adopt a sound and right mental outlook and motivation in one's life,
it leads the practitioner to the profound discovery of the reality,
emptiness, that underlies the entire expanse of phenomena. Such an
insight brings into question the very basis and validity of many of our
strongly held conventional beliefs which are at the root of all our
fluctuating emotions, thus showing the discrepancy between the way
things are and how we perceive them to be. This revelation, when
developed with the bodhisattva motive of universal compassion to work
for the benefit of all beings, comes into its perfection in a state
beyond duality and conceptuality. It is the state of full enlightenment,
where the individual is free of all limitations and has brought his or
her human potential to its fullest development, so as to be of limitless
service to his or her fellow beings. The Complete Foundation: The
Systematic Approach to Training the Mind HE SYSTEM OF

is a translation, based on an oral teaching of H.H. the Fourteenth Dalai
Lama, of Panchen Lobsang Choekyi Gyaltsen's Lamrim, titled Path to Bliss
Leading to Omniscience. The teaching was given at the main temple in
Dharamsala, India, in the spring of 1988 together with several other
discourses. The translation was first done simultaneously at the
teaching, and was then later corrected by comparing it to the Tibetan
tapes. As the type of commentary given on the text at the discourse was
experiential in nature, the tradition requires four repetitions of the
main sections of the practices. These repetitions have been incorporated
in this book into a single body, thus presenting the entire teaching in
an easily readable, yet complete, written form. A brief note is owed to
the reader on the editing of His Holiness's original teaching. Being a
commentary on the First Panchen Lama's Lamrim, the original format of
His Holiness' teaching followed the structure of that text in which all
the main Lamrim meditations were explained within the framework of the
preliminary, main, and concluding practices. However, in this book the
format has been altered a little to suit the needs of both readers and
practitioners. The book is divided into three parts. Part One comprises
a general introduction to the spiritual path of a Buddhist practitioner
and the origins of the Lamrim instructions. Part Two deals with the
elements of preliminary practices within the framework of the six stages
of preparation. It ends with an instruction on activities during the
between-session periods and a summary note explaining how to integrate
the preliminaries with the main Lamrim meditations. In Part Three, all
the main Lamrim meditations are explained by topic so that they can be
either studied and practiced in conjunction with the preliminary
practices found in the preceding chapters, or reflected upon
independently. Since the practice of a bodhisattva's way of life is a
crucial element in the Lamrim path, the procedure of the ceremony
through which a bodhisattva trainee commits himself/herself to follow
such an ideal is included in Part Three. Other vital materials on the
practices of a bodhisattva, such as the bodhisattva vows and precepts of
thought transformation practice, are given in appendices. For readers
who wish to cross-refer the sections of this book with the original
Tibetan version of The Complete Foundation, the translation of the
outline of the original text is provided in Appendix Three. In
conforming to the spirit of His Holiness the Dalai Lama's personal
approach to teaching, a certain style of language has been adopted in
this book. Every attempt has been made to keep the language as clear and
succinct as possible to convey the spirit of His Holiness' thoughts
without compromising the accuracy of the translation. Notes and a
glossary have been prepared to assist readers with the technical terms
used in this

book, and a brief bibliography has been provided for the texts cited in
this work. We would like to express our deep thanks to Mrs. Joyce
Murdoch, who undertook the difficult task of making the initial
transcript of the translation from the tapes. Our grateful
acknowledgment is also due to Glenn Mullin, who permitted us to quote
several verses from his translation of the Lamrim preliminary rite in
Essence of Refined Gold (Snow Lion, 1983). It is our sincere wish that
our humble service in bringing out this book may be of benefit to many
and that the noble aspirations of H.H. the Dalai Lama be fulfilled.
Thupten Jinpa Christine Cox

PART ONE

INTRODUCTION

1. GENERAL INTRODUCTION

A

LL LIVING CREATURES possess an innate notion of self based upon the

aggregates of body and mind, a self that naturally desires happiness and
wishes to avoid suffering. This natural instinct knows no boundaries,
and pervades all forms of life in this universe, regardless of the
external differences in the physical appearances of these forms. It is
this urge that makes all of us hold ourselves most dear and precious.
Because this instinct is a just one, the individual has a natural right
to work for the achievement of happiness and the overcoming of
suffering. As mentioned in Uttaratantra (Unsurpassed Continuum), all
beings further possess the potential to free themselves from the binding
chains of suffering and anxiety. The presence of this potential strongly
indicates the presence of the Buddha nature or the seed of full
enlightenment inherent within all beings. The factor that distinguishes
humans from other living species is the ability to utilize intelligence
while retaining the human qualities of love, kindness, and honesty
toward fellow beings. It is vital for people with an appreciation of a
deeper dimension of human nature not to let themselves be enslaved by
materialism. It is possible to work for one's livelihood and yet not to
stray from sincerity and honesty. Ironically, although the underlying
aim of material development is the attainment of more happiness and
peace, if one were to lead one's life totally occupied with material
development alone and were to disregard the needs of one's spiritual
life, the fulfillment of this basic aim probably would not be realized.
It is very obvious to us that the experiences of the mind are far more
acute and strong than those of the body. Therefore, if the continuity of
the mind remains even after death, then it becomes most essential for us
to ponder upon our after-death fate. It is important to probe whether or
not it is possible, on the basis of this consciousness, for an
individual to achieve a permanent state of peace and happiness. If it
is, then it becomes a matter of great personal concern for us to take
the initiative to make the necessary efforts to arrive at such a state.

When we talk of consciousness superficially, it appears as though we
were talking about a single entity. But if we analyze deeper we find
that there are various types and levels of consciousness. Certain types
of consciousness are undesirable in that when they arise they torment
the individual's mind, but there are others whose arisal ushers in
calmness and peace. So our task now is to discriminate skillfully
between these two categories of consciousness. Generally speaking,
consciousness is in the nature of clarity and knowing; it is susceptible
to change and transformation. Therefore, the essential nature of
consciousness is pure and clear, which suggests that the delusions that
pollute the mind have not penetrated into its nature. All the mental
stains, such as ignorance and the other delusions that often torment us,
are adventitious and hence not indivisible aspects of our minds. Because
these delusions, dualistic conceptions and so forth are unstable and
reside only temporarily within our consciousness, they can be alleviated
and eventually rooted out when their actual opponent forces are applied
properly. The achievement of such a feat marks the attainment of a
permanent peace and happiness. As I often remark, in this world there
are many different categories of people: those who adhere to some form
of spiritual belief, those who are totally against it, and those who are
just indifferent to religion. When people confront situations that defy
rational explanation and that are adverse, they differ in their ability
to cope with them. As long as those who do not believe in any spiritual
system encounter situations that are within the scope of human
understanding, they can cope with them. But any circumstances beyond
their own understanding come as a shock, and their attempts to deal with
them result in frustration and anxiety. A practitioner of dharma has a
better understanding of life and therefore will not lose courage and
hope, factors that are most vital for sustaining the force of life.
Therefore, the importance of spiritual development in one's life is
obvious; and in this respect, I believe that the Buddhist doctrine has
much to offer. There are many different ways of undertaking the practice
of dharma; these vary from individual to individual. Some people can
totally renounce the worldly way of life and choose the way of a hermit,
devoting their entire time and energy to meditation. Others undertake
their practice while maintaining a conventional life in the world. One
should not have the wrong notion that the practice of dharma is to be
put off for the future when one can set aside a specific time for it;
rather, it should be integrated into one's life right now. The essence
is to live one's life within the noble principles of the dharma and give
a direction and purpose to one's life. If one can adopt such an outlook,
the dharma will not only be beneficial to oneself as an individual but
will also contribute to the betterment of the community in which one
lives.

Generally speaking, altruism is the genuine source of benefit and
happiness in this world. Thus if we were born in a realm of existence
where the development of altruism was not possible, we would be in a
rather hopeless situation, which is fortunately not the case. As human
beings we have all the faculties appropriate for spiritual development,
among them the most precious of all---the human brain. It is very
important that we do not waste the great opportunity afforded by our
being human, because time is a phenomenon that is momentary and does not
wait. It is the nature of things that they go through a process of
change and disintegration. Therefore, it is a matter of utmost
importance that we make our human lives meaningful. As explained
earlier, just as one has a natural right to work for one's own
happiness, so, in equal measure, do all sentient beings. What, then, is
the difference between self and others? The only difference is that when
one talks of one's own affairs, no matter how important one might be,
one is only concerned with a single person, whereas the affairs of
others concern the welfare of numberless living beings. The difference
between the two concerns lies in the quantity. Moreover, if one were
totally unrelated to and independent of others, then one's indifference
toward their welfare would be understandable, but this is not the case.
All living beings survive in dependence upon others; even one's
experiences of happiness and suffering come about in relation to one's
interaction with others. One's dependence on others is not confined to
day-today survival alone; all one's spiritual development depends upon
others as well. It is only in relation to others that one can cultivate
such human qualities as universal compassion, love, tolerance,
generosity, etc. Even the Buddha's noble activities come about because
there are other sentient beings to work for. If one thinks in such
terms, one will find that working for one's own benefit, totally
neglecting the welfare of others, is very selfish and hence unfair. When
one compares the welfare of oneself with that of the numberless others,
one finds that the welfare of others is far more important; and
therefore giving up the benefits accruing to a single person for the
sake of numberless others is a just and a righteous act. On the
contrary, sacrificing the well-being of many for the benefit of one is
not only a most unfair act but also a foolish one. At this juncture,
when we possess the intelligence to judge between right and wrong and
also can draw inspiration from the examples of great bodhisattvas of the
past, we should make every attempt to reverse our normal self-centered
outlook. Our attitudes toward our own welfare should be such that we
open ourselves completely to the service of others---so much so, that

on our part there is not even a slight sense of possessiveness toward
our belongings or our being. We have this great opportunity now. We
should rejoice in our fortune of having the precious chance, as humans,
to practice altruism, a practice that I personally believe is the
highest fulfillment of human value. I feel extremely fortunate to be
able to speak on the importance and merits of a good heart and altruism.
Should we persist in our normal self-centered tendencies and behavior in
spite of our human birth, we would be wasting a great opportunity. Our
tenure in this world should not be that of a troublemaker in the human
community. Therefore, it is very important to realize the preciousness
of the present opportunity and that such an opportunity comes about only
through the aggregation of many favorable conditions. On our part, as
practitioners of dharma, it is very important to put the noble
principles of the Buddhist doctrine into proper practice within our
lives, and thus to experience the real fruits of the dharma. Dharma
practitioners should set good examples and demonstrate the true value of
the dharma. Otherwise, if our dharma remains only conceptual and is not
transformed into experience, its real value may not be realized. The
essence of dharma practice is to bring about a discipline within the
mind, a state of mind free of hatred, lust, and harmful intentions.
Hence the entire message of the buddhadharma could be summed up in two
succinct statements: "Help others," and "If you cannot help them, at
least do not harm others." It is a grave error to think that apart from
such a disciplining of the physical and mental faculties there is
something else called "the practice of dharma." Various, and in some
cases divergent, methods to achieve such an inner discipline have been
taught in the scriptures by the Buddha. This task of bringing about an
inner discipline may look very complex and difficult at the outset, but
if we really make the effort, we will see that it is not that
complicated. We find ourselves caught in the confusion of all kinds of
worldly conceptions and negative emotions and so forth, but if we are
able to discover the right key through the practice of dharma, we will
be able to unravel this knot of confusion. Practitioners of the dharma
should have not only the ultimate aim of attaining full enlightenment,
but also the goal of becoming righteous and kind-hearted persons within
this life too. Let us say that there is a person attending this talk who
is normally very short-tempered, but as a result of his listening to the
teachings and practicing the instructions he changes; that really is the
mark of having benefited from the dharma. The fundamental questions,
such as whether there is rebirth or not, and whether or not full

enlightenment is possible, are difficult to answer. But what is very
obvious to us is that a positive state of mind and positive action lead
to more happiness and peace, whereas their negative counterparts result
in undesirable consequences. Therefore, if as a result of our dharma
practice we are able to alleviate our sufferings and experience more
happiness, that would in itself be a sufficient fruit to encourage us
further in our spiritual pursuits. Even if we were not able to attain
high spiritual realizations in this lifetime, but were able to develop
the altruistic mind of bodhicitta---even to a very small degree---we
would at least be able to perceive all beings as our closest friends.
If, on the other hand, we were to cling to the self-cherishing attitude
and the misconception that grasps at the inherent existence of things,
there would be no possibility of a genuine and lasting mental peace and
happiness, even if all the living beings around us were trying to be
friendly toward us. We can observe the truth of this in our daily lives.
The more altruism we develop in a day, the more peaceful we find
ourselves. Similarly, the more self-centered we remain the more
frustrations and trouble we encounter. All these reflections lead us to
conclude that a good heart and an altruistic motivation are indeed true
sources of happiness and are therefore genuine wish-granting jewels. Now
we have reached the start of the twenty-first century, an era marked
with revolution in many fields of human knowledge. During the eighteenth
and nineteenth centuries, when revolutionary scientific discoveries were
being made, religion and science became more and more separated. Many
people felt that they were perhaps incompatible. But in this century,
when human intelligence has been so enriched by new knowledge derived
through important scientific discoveries, a new trend is fortunately
emerging. People in the scientific disciplines are taking a fresh
interest in spiritual and moral concepts and are prepared to reappraise
their attitudes toward the relevance of spiritual development in order
to achieve a more complete view of life and the world. In particular,
there is a growing interest among the scientific community in Buddhist
philosophical thought. I am optimistic that over the next few decades
there will be a great change in our world view both from the material
and the spiritual perspectives.

2. ORIGIN OF LAMRIM INSTRUCTIONS

T

Lamrim (stages of the path) is one of eight great commentaries on
Lamrim. This commentary explains the essential practices of Lamrim and
also their preliminaries, in conjunction with the practice of tantra;
specific parts of the meditations are associated with the tantric
visualizations of nectar flowing within the body, and so forth. Among
the eight commentaries, this text composed by Panchen Lama Choekyi
Gyaltsen, called Path to Bliss (Delam),1 and also the commentary on it
composed by Panchen Palden Yeshi and entitled The Swift Path (Nyurlam),2
are related to the practice of tantra, whereas the remaining six deal
with Lamrim practices purely from a Perfection Vehicle standpoint. For
the practice of Lamrim, there are two major lineages, both stemming from
Buddha Shakyamuni: the lineage of the Profound View transmitted through
Manjushri, and the lineage of Vast Practice coming through Maitreya.
These two lineages emerged as a result of an elucidation of the dual
aspects of the subject matter of the Wisdom Sutras taught by the Buddha
himself: the doctrine of emptiness (the explicit subject matter) and the
stages of clear realization (the hidden meaning). Manjushri expounded
the first and Maitreya the second. Atisha integrated the two lineages,
and from this integration there later arose the three lineages of the
Kadam tradition. In Tibet, Atisha composed the text called Jhangchup
Lamgyi Dronme (Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment), which served as the
basis for many of the subsequent Lamrim treatises that emerged later in
Tibet. The great Lama Tsongkhapa, having received the three Kadam
lineages, composed Lamrim Chenmo (The Great Exposition of the Stages of
the Path), as well as an intermediate length version of it that omitted
much elaboration but devoted special attention to the Two Truths in the
section on special insight. He also wrote a very short form, in verse,
called Lamrim Nyamgur (Songs of Spiritual Experience). HIS TEACHING ON

The Third Dalai Lama, Sonam Gyatso, composed a text called Lamrim
Sershunma (Essence of Refined Gold), which is in fact a commentary on
Lama Tsongkhapa's shortest version of Lamrim. The Fifth Dalai Lama
composed a Lamrim, a commentary on the Third Dalai Lama's Lamrim, called
Jampel Shalung (The Sacred Words of Manjushri), and Panchen Lama Choekyi
Gyaltsen composed this Lamrim text, Path to Bliss. Panchen Palden Yeshi
composed The Swift Path and then later Dagpo Ngawang Jamphel wrote a
Lamrim in verse form. These eight are known as the eight great
commentaries on the stages of the path. Path to Bliss encompasses all
the essential points of the sutra and tantra paths and has the advantage
of having all the visualizations arranged in a manner conducive to
systematic meditation. I know many people who have memorized this entire
text and who undertake their practice on the basis of it, thus modeling
the whole structure of the path on it. I received the transmission of
this Lamrim from the late Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche. Since the commentary
being given is an experiential commentary, the tradition requires that I
give the commentary four times,3 which means three repetitions today and
one more tomorrow. Regarding the mode of teaching and studying such a
text, it is important on the part of the teacher to have pure
motivation, to have the altruistic intention to really benefit the
disciples, and for the disciples on their part to always relate the
teachings to their own minds, to have the altruistic intention to
benefit all sentient beings, and to dedicate all the merit of the
teaching for the benefit of others. On your part, as disciples, you
should conduct the appropriate visualizations. These should also be done
with the preliminary practices. The preliminaries are explained here in
terms of six preparatory practices, Jorwai Choedrug, often abbreviated
as Jorchoe. The six preparatory practices are: (1) cleaning the
meditation environment and arranging the images, scriptures,
stupas---representations of the body, speech, and mind of the
Buddha---in their proper order; (2) beautifully setting up the offerings
(which should be free from the taints of being procured through wrong
means); (3) sitting on a comfortable meditation cushion in the
seven-featured Vairocana posture, and, with the right state of mind,
engaging in taking refuge and generating the altruistic motivation; (4)
visualizing the merit field; (5) performing the sevenlimbed practice and
mandala offering, an endeavor encompassing all the essentials of
purifying negativities and accumulating merit; and (6) beseeching the
gurus to infuse one's mind with their inspirations. One could do the
preliminaries also on the basis of the guru yoga practice

of Lama Choepa,4 or a shorter version of the guru yoga practice known as
Gaden Lhagyama (The Hundred Deities of the Joyous Land). It is not the
ritual that is important---what is important is that one does the proper
visualizations. The point is that you have to perform the visualizations
that have been discussed by the teacher during the day. As the guru
explains to you, your visualization should not be done in such a way
that you have the notion that you are looking at something out there,
but rather you should integrate the visualization with your own mind,
trying to relate it to the state of your own mind, thus directly
effecting some change and discipline within the mind. Undertaking a
practice which combines contemplative and absorptive meditations on the
basis of such a text and oral commentary constitutes receiving an
experiential commentary. So the parts that the teacher covers daily
should be visualized every day and the rest of the Lamrim practices
could then be just reviewed. One could do that quite easily on the basis
of some outlines, which is in fact much easier and also convenient. If
you can, you should do that; if not, then there is nothing one can do
about it. It is important, when you are engaged in these practices, to
focus your mind on them and not to let your mind be distracted, even by
the arisal of other virtuous thoughts. You should not let your mind be
led astray, but should rather channel it on the specific practice in
which you are engaging, be it contemplative or absorptive. Letting your
mind be distracted by thoughts that are totally unrelated to the
practice that you have set out to undertake may actually give you a bad
habit of letting your mind stray. So, right at the beginning of the
session develop a strong determination that you shall never let your
mind deviate from the practice. Furthermore, it is important to stick
with the particular meditation that you have set out to undertake. Doing
the practice properly, even for a short period of time, is better than
spending a long time with all sorts of distractions. The emphasis should
be on quality rather than quantity. You should also figure out means to
overcome mental sinking and mental excitement, which may also depend on
external factors like climate and food. The reason that we have not been
able to make any progress at all, even in spite of our being acquainted
with dharma for so long, is that we have not been able to focus our
minds properly and pay the attention that is needed in such a practice.
Therefore, I see the concentration of the mind when doing a practice as
very important; if it is done, then there is every possibility that you
will be able to undergo changes for the better. Sometimes you might feel
discouraged. Under such circumstances, it is important to compare your
mind, your way of thinking and your actions of ten, fifteen, or twenty
years ago with the state of mind you have now. This will enable you to
gain encouragement by seeing that you have made some

progress. You will be able to notice a certain change in your mind: your
interest in dharma is stronger, your faith is more firmly rooted, and
you lose your temper less often. These are signs of making progress. The
full title of this text is A Practical Guide to the Stages of the Path
to Enlightenment: A Path to Bliss Leading to Omniscience. The text is
preceded by a salutation to one's own spiritual master who is seen as
inseparable from the Buddha Vajradhara. Buddha Shakyamuni, the master of
the sutra vehicle, appears in the aspect of Buddha Vajradhara, the
master of tantric teachings. This text deals with all the essential
points of both sutra and tantra; the form of the salutation accords also
with this fact, because the success of the path, especially that of the
tantric path, depends entirely upon receiving initial inspiration from a
spiritual master. It is very important, just as Lama Tsongkhapa pointed
out in Lamrim Chenmo, to have proper reliance on a qualified spiritual
master, because so much depends upon the master. For this reason, the
practice of guru devotion is emphasized to a great degree at the
beginning of this text. All the great traditions of Tibetan Buddhism
emphasize the importance for serious meditators of having a very special
guru devotion practice. When faith and conviction are taken as the basis
for any of these practices---whether they be Mahamudra (Great Seal) or
Lamrim---one will be able to make great spiritual progress. Many people
have told me that they have experienced this for themselves. Lord Buddha
himself has outlined specific qualifications that a spiritual teacher
must possess in relation to the different types of practices, in various
scriptures on vinaya, prajnaparamita, and tantra. Lama Tsongkhapa, in
his Lamrim Chenmo, has extensively discussed the qualifications of an
ideal spiritual mentor.5 Therefore, practitioners who are seeking a
spiritual master have the information needed to judge whether or not the
person in whom they are seeking spiritual guidance possesses the
appropriate qualities. It is important to rely upon someone who will be
able to show you the right path toward enlightenment. Once you have
relied upon a master, it is important to maintain a proper reliance, in
both thought and action. Since this text explains the mode of doing the
visualization of the Lamrim in a rather condensed form, the outlines are
slightly different from those of Lamrim Chenmo. The outline of Lamrim
Chenmo has four major divisions. These four are: (1) the exceptional
qualities of the author, in order to demonstrate the authenticity of the
teachings; (2) the exceptional qualities of the teaching, in order to
inspire respect for the instructions; (3) the way in which the text
possessing the two exceptional qualities should be studied and

taught; and (4) the stages of leading disciples with the actual
instructions. In order for a dharma teaching or text to be considered
authentic, its origins should be traceable to the original teachings of
the Buddha himself. The instructions on Lamrim have their origin in the
prajnaparamita sutras taught by the Buddha. The root text of the Lamrim
is regarded as being Maitreya's Abhisamayalankara (The Ornament of Clear
Realizations), especially the section dealing with what is known as the
"serial training" in the sixth chapter of the text. This work
categorizes all the various stages of the spiritual journey to full
enlightenment by a prospective bodhisattva into four trainings. These
four are: (1) training in the complete aspects (namzog jorwa); (2) peak
training (tsemoi jorwa); (3) serial training (thargyi jorwa); and (4)
momentary training (kechigmai jorwa).6 Basically, the summary verses at
the end of the Abhisamayalankara, where the entire text is summarized
into three divisions ---the three objects of meditation, the four
trainings, and the resultant kayas of buddhahood---are taken as the
source of Lamrim meditations. There are specific verses also in the
fourth chapter of that text where conviction and faith in the spiritual
master are emphasized along with conviction in the law of causality.
That section also outlines the process of cultivating the altruistic
attitude, bodhicitta, and then engaging in the actual deeds, the
practices of the six perfections---thus the entire practice of Lamrim.
There are actually various ways and means of undertaking a practice of
dharma, suiting the diverse faculties, interests, and needs of trainees.
To study a text, we should take into account the circumstances, the
situation, the time, the society, and the community where a book was
originally written or a teaching taught. For example, you will see a
difference between the style and composition of commentaries and texts
authored by the Indian masters and those authored by the Tibetan
masters. We find that there are many variations in the styles and
techniques adopted by different masters for leading disciples or
trainees on the stages of the path. These diversities have a special
significance. The style and the process of the path as explained in the
Lamrim were first initiated by the Indian master Atisha. Although he was
Indian, since his text on the stages of the path was composed in Tibet,
he took into account the mentality and needs of the Tibetan people and
wrote a text that would lead the practitioners through the comprehensive
yet condensed practices of the three scopes. Therefore, Lama Tsongkhapa,
when commenting on the exceptional qualities of the author at the
beginning of his Lamrim Chenmo, wrote down the qualifications of Atisha,
thus implying that he was the actual author of the

text. For the Tibetans, Atisha's kindness is indeed boundless. Since the
Gelug tradition later came to be known as the new Kadam tradition,
retrospectively Atisha's tradition came to be known as the old Kadampa.
The Kadam tradition that emerged from Atisha and his chief disciple
Dromtonpa was really very impressive, very straightforward, practical,
and pure in its doctrine. Lama Tsongkhapa's various versions of Lamrim
took Atisha's Lamp as their basis and complemented the section on
special insight by adding materials from the major treatises of Indian
masters such as Nagarjuna. In these sections, he not only explains the
methods of cultivating the two factors of the path---wisdom and
method---in a systematic way, but also clarifies many points that were
left obscure before his time. Then, as stated above, the First Panchen
Lama composed this exceptional text on Lamrim. He was a great being with
high realizations, and was totally non-sectarian, a person who was
deeply admired by many great personalities of his time. As Lama
Tsongkhapa mentioned in his Lamrim Chenmo, through the practice of
Lamrim one could realize all the teachings of the Buddha as personal
advice, see all his teachings as non-contradictory, and easily
understand the ultimate intent of the Buddha. Thus, through such
practice, the grave misdeed of abandoning the doctrine would be
naturally prevented. Hence, one could say that the exceptional qualities
of this text are: (1) an encompassing of the entire subject matter of
Lamrim; (2) an easy applicability, as the text is composed in a style
designed primarily for meditation; and (3) an endowment with the
instructions of the two lineages. The text is quite condensed, yet very
profound, consisting of all the essential points of Lamrim explained in
conjunction with unique tantric visualizations. For an intensive
meditation on Lamrim practices it is essential to engage in a
preliminary stage of practice, preparing for one's meditation not only a
conducive external environment but also a receptive mind. This can best
be undertaken within the framework of what are known as the six
preparatory practices.

PART TWO

PREPARATORY PRACTICES

3. CREATING A CONDUCIVE ENVIRONMENT

F

IRST, YOU SHOULD seek a proper environment and arrange a comfortable

seat, slightly upraised at the rear so that when you do long meditation
sessions you will not feel tired. Then, the position of your body should
be maintained in the Vairocana posture: your legs crossed, if possible;
your spine straight; your head slightly bent and the eyes downcast,
looking in front of you; and the tip of the tongue touching the palate
of the mouth. You should judge for yourself the best position for your
eyes: some people find that doing the meditations with open eyes is much
more powerful, whereas others find it very distracting. For them,
slightly closing the eyes might prove more beneficial. Generally
speaking, I think that visualizations of the deities and so forth, if
conducted with the eyes open, will have a greater clarity. Sometimes it
may also be beneficial to just sit down facing a wall directly, so that
you don't have any distraction. The point is that you should figure out
a way that you find least distracting and that permits you greatest
clarity. You may find the position uncomfortable. If so, at the
beginning of your meditation---just as a symbol, a sign of
auspiciousness---try to sit crosslegged at least for a while and then
later you can adopt leg postures more comfortable for you. Place the
hands in the position of meditative equipoise, four finger-widths below
your navel, the right palm on top of the left, the two thumbs touching
each other, forming a triangle there. You should keep your elbows away
from your body, slightly outstretched so that air can pass through.
Keeping the upper tip of the tongue touching the palate of the mouth may
prevent thirst; otherwise, if you just open your mouth, then---as a
result of breathing meditations and so forth---you might feel thirsty.
The most important thing is to have an object appropriate to your
meditation. To help you have a better visualization, it is good to have
a representation of the deity on whom you are meditating, such as the
Buddha Shakyamuni, the master of the doctrine, and to look at it
frequently. If you don't have any representations, that is all right,
but if you do have them, they

should be arranged properly---statues, scriptures, and so forth. I
always make the remark that inside Tibet, since the Chinese have meted
out great destruction of religious monuments, making statues is quite
important, because they can be used to point out to the younger
generation that such is the Buddha, and such is Avalokiteshvara, the
patron deity of Tibet and the embodiment of compassion, and such is
Manjushri, the deity of wisdom, and so on. But here,
representations---for a serious practitioner---are not indispensable.
Many masters of the past, such as the great meditator Milarepa, achieved
high realizations without depending on these external factors. It is
important to be able to judge what are the most essential elements.
Furthermore, I often mention that although there have been very great
masters in Tibet who have had high realizations, at the same time there
have been many shortcomings in Tibet as well. Even in religious
practices worldly considerations have crept in, so it is very important
for all practitioners to realize that the practice of dharma means
bringing about a discipline within one's mind---in other words, training
the mind. Therefore, one should not view one's dharma practice as being
something decorative, regarding statues and images as material
possessions or as furnishings for one's house, or thinking that because
there is an empty space on a wall one might as well put up a thangka for
decoration. That kind of attitude should not be cultivated. When you
arrange the statues or thangkas, you should do so out of a deep respect
from the mind, moved by your faith and conviction. If you can arrange
these physical representations---statues and so forth---out of deep
respect and faith, that's all right. On the other hand, the attitude
that they are merely material possessions is dangerous and destructive.
I think that some people who have a cupboard or the like in which they
keep all their precious possessions may arrange an altar on it just for
the sake of decoration. This is very wrong. It is also dangerous to
arrange statues of very wrathful dharmapalas, or protectors, without
also having a statue of Buddha Shakyamuni. One's attitude in arranging
such statues, if it is influenced by worldly considerations, such as
thinking that if one propitiates such and such a protector one's wealth
will be increased and so forth, is unsafe. Sometimes I feel it is almost
like entrusting these deities on the altar on top of the cupboard to
protect the things that are inside the cupboard and perhaps increase
them if possible! Such an outlook is contradictory to the practice of
dharma. If the great Kadampa masters such as Dromtonpa were to come in
person and see such an arrangement made with such motivation, they would
never admire or be

pleased by it, but would denounce it. I can guarantee such a response.
Having such motivations is not the proper way to become a Buddhist; the
proper way to become a Buddhist is to bring about some positive change
within the mind. Any practice that can give you more courage when you
are undergoing a very difficult time and that can provide you with some
kind of solace and calmness of mind is a true practice of the dharma. I
thought that it would be more beneficial if I explained the
disadvantages of arranging the altar in such a manner and with the wrong
motivation, than if I explained the advantages of properly arranging an
altar. If we were to spend all our energy and time simply on the
arrangement of beautiful altars and so forth, totally neglecting the
development of the mind, then that would be very bad. The environment
where you are doing the meditation should be properly cleaned. While
cleaning, you should cultivate the motivation that since you are engaged
in the task of accumulating great stores of merit by inviting the hosts
of buddhas and bodhisattvas to this environment, it is important to have
a clean place. You should see that all the external dirt and dust around
you is basically a manifestation of the faults and stains within your
own mind. You should see that the most important aim is to purge these
stains and faults from within your mind. Therefore, as you cleanse the
environment, think that you are also purifying your mind. Develop the
very strong thought that by cleaning this place you are inviting the
host of buddhas and bodhisattvas who are the most supreme merit field,
and that you will subsequently engage in a path that will enable you to
purge your mind of the stains of delusions. Then, if you have a
representation of the Buddha's speech, such as a text on Lamrim, The
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Verses, or any other texts, it
would be good to arrange them properly. Offerings can also be arranged,
if you have some---but if you do not have them, they can be done
without. When you make offerings, it is important to see that the
materials of the offerings have not been wrongly procured. There is
nothing to be admired about elaborate offerings if the materials for the
offerings are obtained in a wrong way, because the negativities
accumulated in the process of procuring such materials will not be
offset by the merits gained through offering them. So, such offerings
are pointless and foolish. However, a great store of merit can be gained
on the basis of making offerings properly.

4. PREPARING THE MIND

O '

NE S MOTIVATION AT the beginning is very important, because whether or

not one's practice becomes successful and effective depends upon the
initial motive and attitude. For the development of the right attitude,
the practice of refuge and the generation of bodhicitta are vital.
Through the practice of the two one should be able to bring about some
discipline and transformation within one's mind. So, on a comfortable
meditation seat you should adopt the right physical posture and then
generate the appropriate motivation. After you are seated facing
eastward (or imagining that you are facing eastward), reflect that you
are very fortunate to have this opportunity to engage in the practice of
dharma, and that you will make this session most worthwhile. Rejoice
that you have this opportunity, and think that, at this juncture, when
you have obtained most of the important conditions for making progress
on the path, there is hope that you can embark on the right path and
make some spiritual progress. It is almost like being at a critical
crossroad and taking a new turn in your journey, embarking on a path
leading to the achievement of the omniscient state---not for your own
sake alone, but rather for the benefit of all living beings. Also
reflect that you possess within yourself, as do all living beings, the
potential or the seed of buddhahood, and also have access to the means
by which this potential can be successfully activated. Think: I shall
explore this potentiality to its fullest extent, and I shall make the
most of the present opportunity. Furthermore, you should reflect upon
the fact that you have been extremely fortunate to have received many
teachings from the master and that you are equipped with the knowledge
to undertake the practice properly. You should understand that the whole
purpose of listening to teachings, taking teachings, and studying them
is to put them into practice, just as after having learned how to
prepare a certain dish, you utilize that knowledge to

make the dish and derive full nutritional benefit from it. What you know
should be put into practice immediately; you can thus derive the benefit
of having some transformation within your mind. Even though it might be
a very minor effort, a very small practice just leaving imprints within
your mind, still you must think that it is worthwhile to do. Otherwise,
your knowledge of dharma will be quite fruitless, and like merely
playing something on a tape. At the initial stage it is important to
have short sessions, as many of them as possible in a day. Generally
speaking, the texts speak of four sessions, two in the morning and two
in the afternoon, but you could make it into six. The length and the
number of the sessions should be judged according to your own personal
disposition. Your practice should be enduring, and you should undertake
it with sustained effort. But because at the initial stage much depends
upon your physical condition---the body's influence on the mind is very
powerful---you have to take the body's condition into account. So it is
very important to be careful. Some practitioners who put the body to a
severe test in their practice of dharma may end up losing it, as such an
act is very destructive. Once you have made good progress on the
spiritual path, you will gradually gain control over your body and mind
through meditative stabilization. Particularly when you have gained
control over the subtle energies, you will be able to employ your body
for any length of time without there being any danger of imbalances
being caused by your spiritual practices. This stage is quite difficult
to attain; therefore at the initial stage it is very important to be
cautious and very skillful. I make this remark for the people who are
undertaking the practice of dharma very seriously as solitary meditators
in the mountains. For you, it is crucial right from the beginning to be
skillful and cautious so that you can maintain a sustained effort. If
you can undertake such a practice when you are young, you will be able
to make great progress, whereas if you start when you are already too
old, you may not be able to make much progress. You can do the sessions
at the initial stage for about half an hour or maybe an hour, depending
upon your own conditions, and after that you can end the session and do
other practices or take a rest. For those of you who are not able to
devote all your time to meditation, there is nevertheless the
possibility of engaging in practice in a serious way. For example, the
students at the monastic universities in South India can, with some
effort, do meditations during the prayers. When you recite the prayers,
you can mentally do the contemplation. The lifestyle and daily routine
at these monasteries have been structured by the great masters of the
past in a

way that is most conducive to individual practice as well as to the
flourishing of the dharma. If you find that your mind is in a very
fluctuating emotional state--- displaying anger, hatred, attachment, and
so forth---then you should first try to calm down that state of strong
emotion. This should be done by first transforming it into a neutral
state of mind, because there is no way that one can switch directly from
a negative state of mind to a positive one. Therefore, you should first
reduce the force of these emotions and fluctuations and try to bring
about some sort of calmness, using any means---such as taking a stroll
or concentrating on the inhalation and exhalation of the breath---that
will enable you to forget what you are immediately feeling. This will
help you to reduce the force of strong emotion, thereby giving you the
calmness necessary for the practice of dharma. Like a white piece of
cloth which could be dyed any color that you desire, such a neutral
state of mind could then be transformed into a virtuous state of mind.
You could also engage in the preliminary practices of performing 100,000
prostrations, recitations of the Vajrasattva mantra, and so forth. When
you undertake these practices, you should do them properly, not being
only concerned about the number. Many great masters of the past of all
traditions have emphasized the importance of these preliminary
practices---they will enable you to have a very firm start. If through
them you can acquire a fertile mind, then when the seed of meditation is
planted, it will readily bear the fruits of realizations. Having
successfully neutralized the emotional fluctuations within your mind and
having restored a reasonable degree of calmness, you should then engage
in the practice of taking refuge and generating the altruistic
aspiration to attain full enlightenment. Taking refuge in the Three
Jewels is the factor that distinguishes one's practice from that of an
erroneous path, and the generation of the altruistic mind makes it
superior to the paths aiming at individual liberation.

TAKING THE PRELIMINARY REFUGE First of all, visualize the objects of
refuge. This should be done by visualizing, above and in front of you in
space, your own spiritual master in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni. His
hands are in the normal position, the left arm in a meditative posture,
holding a bowl full of nectar symbolizing victory over death and all
forms of obstruction, the right in the gesture of touching the ground,
signifying his victory over the divine youth mara.1

Visualizing one's own root guru as the object of refuge allows one
swiftly to obtain inspiration; visualizing him in the aspect of Buddha
Shakyamuni makes such an inspiration more extensive and vast. Thus you
should visualize the spiritual teacher in the form of Buddha Shakyamuni,
possessing all the major and minor noble marks of the Buddha such as the
crown protrusion, in the nature of light, crystal clear, very radiant.
This clarity symbolizes the union of the illusory body and Clear Light.2
The guru is seated in the vajrasana cross-legged position. This position
of the legs symbolizes the Buddha's having realized the completely
enlightened state through the four vajrasanas (inseparable crossings):
the asanas of the legs, the channels, the energy winds, and the vital
drops. This position further symbolizes invulnerability to any form of
obstacle. Your spiritual master in the form of Buddha Shakyamuni is
seated in the center of a very vast and expansive throne, surrounded by
four small thrones, on a variegated lotus and sun and moon disks. In
front of him, on a small throne, is your own root guru who is kind to
you in all three ways, the guru to whom you feel most close. You should
visualize him in his normal appearance, excepting any physical defects
he may have. Then visualize him being surrounded by all the gurus from
whom you have taken teachings directly. I found that some commentaries
state that even though your root guru may be a lay person, when you
visualize him in the merit field you should see him in the aspect of an
ordained bhikshu. On Shakyamuni's left imagine Manjushri surrounded by
the lineage masters of the Profound View, on his right Maitreya
surrounded by the lineage masters of the Vast Practice, at the rear
Vajradhara surrounded by the lineage masters of the Experiential
Practice. These lineage masters form what is known as the "five groups
of lamas." All of them are surrounded by the meditational deities of the
four classes of tantra, bodhisattvas, arhats, heroes, heroines, and
protectors. There are different ways of visualizing the heroes and
heroines: heroes on the right and heroines on the left, or, in some
traditions, heroes and heroines in union. For us, what is of prime
importance at the beginning is to develop a deep conviction in the Three
Jewels in general, and in particular, the possibility of achieving
dharma, Buddha, and sangha within ourselves. If we do not develop this
conviction, we will not have a very firm and stable foundation. Without
such a conviction, if we complement our practice with various
visualizations of dharmapalas, heroes, heroines and so forth, instead of
benefiting us, this diversity might actually harm and confuse.

For this reason it is most important to have a very clear understanding
of the Three Jewels. This in turn requires an understanding of the
dharma, which requires an understanding of what is called the truth of
cessation, which requires a good understanding of profound emptiness.
So, first of all you should have the deep conviction that cessation of
the sufferings and the delusions is possible, and also that it is
possible within your mind. True cessation is a state where you have
destroyed the delusions at their root so that there remains no potential
for their re-emergence. Such a cessation can be realized only through
the true paths that penetrate into the nature of reality. When you
develop this conviction, you will also be able to develop faith in a
being who has really mastered cessation, who is the Buddha---a person
who has fully accomplished the realization of the dharma. If you
contemplate along such lines, you will be able to develop a very deep
faith and conviction in Buddha Shakyamuni and see him as an incomparable
master. What distinguishes Buddhist practitioners from others is the
factor of taking refuge. But merely seeking a refuge out of the fear of
suffering is not unique to Buddhists; non-Buddhists could also have such
a motivation. The unique practice of refuge that Buddhists should have
is that of taking refuge in the Buddha out of a deep conviction in his
exceptional qualities and realizations. If you think in such terms you
will be able to understand Lama Tsongkhapa's profound praise of Buddha
Shakyamuni: "Those who are far from his doctrine always reinforce the
illusion of self-existence that they have within themselves, whereas
those who follow his guidance will be able to free themselves from such
confusions." The conviction that cessation of suffering is possible will
furthermore enable you to develop deep faith and conviction in the
sangha, the spiritual community that will provide you with companionship
on your path. If you develop this proper understanding of the Three
Jewels, you will have developed a good understanding of the general
framework of the entire Buddhist path. Only then will you be able to
understand the particular significance of various visualizations, such
as those of meditational deities, heroes, heroines, protectors,
bodhisattvas, arhats and so forth, because then you will see the
importance of their differing appearances. Just as Sakya Pandita said in
his Domsum Rabye (The Divisions of the Three Vows), unless one develops
a good understanding of the Three Jewels, one will not understand the
significance of the protectors and so forth. I have a German friend who
is quite familiar with the Buddha's teachings; when she visited
monasteries in the Himalayan regions, some people pointed out to her

that protectors and meditational deities are superior to Buddha
Shakyamuni. My friend told me that she didn't find that assertion to be
very convincing. She is right, because if you do not have a proper
understanding of the Three Jewels, then when you see all these different
images, you will have the notion that they are totally different from,
and unrelated to, each other, as though they were inherently existent,
thus giving you a misunderstanding of their relationships to each other.
Therefore, I think that if you base your knowledge of Buddhism on a
proper understanding of the Three Jewels, which is a common foundation
for Buddhist practice, then your understanding of the meditational
deities will be good. Then you will also understand the importance of
the different kayas, the various bodies of the Buddha,3 and the
importance of the path that has the aspect of union of method and
wisdom. Only at that point will you be able to understand the
significance and importance of these meditational deities that are the
physical manifestation of the union of method and wisdom. Without the
proper understanding of the Three Jewels and the general framework of
the Buddhist path, if you simply visualize a very impressive and
wrathfullooking deity, your practice, instead of being beneficial, may
turn out to be quite harmful and may increase anger and emotion. If you
find such complex visualizations quite difficult at the initial stage
and disturbing to your main practice of taking refuge and generating the
mind of enlightenment (bodhicitta), then a shorter version of
visualizing the Three Jewels may be more suitable---that is, visualizing
your spiritual master alone, but seeing him as the embodiment of the
entire merit field. Visualize him in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni and
perceive him as the embodiment of the Buddha, dharma, and sangha. This
simpler practice is known as the Jewel Embodiment (Kuntu Norbu Lug). For
some people, the visualization of many different figures in a merit
field is more beneficial and effective, but for others the visualization
of just a single figure alone, such as the Buddha Shakyamuni or your own
spiritual master in the Buddha's form, may prove more effective and
powerful. Whether to undertake a very extensive visualization or to use
a short and condensed visualization is a matter that you yourself should
decide on the basis of your own mental attitude and disposition. The
point is, whatever is more beneficial and effective for you should be
adopted, since the purpose of all this visualization is to bring about
some effect and change and progress within your mind. So, if you can
achieve these with a condensed form of visualization, that's fine, and
if you think you need a more elaborate version, choose that.

If you want to do the practice of taking refuge in a more elaborate way,
then---just as you find described in the first chapter of
Abhisamayalankara--- begin by reflecting upon the ultimate nature of all
phenomena that makes it possible for them to function on the
conventional level. All these phenomena have dual aspects, the ultimate
nature which is the empty nature, and then, on the conventional level,
their individual appearances and various characteristics such as
production, disintegration, and so forth. Reflect on these dual aspects,
the Two Truths of phenomena, and then elaborate these Two Truths further
and reflect upon the Four Noble Truths. Although all phenomena lack
inherent existence, when they appear to us they appear as if they had an
inherent nature and existed in and of themselves. It is ignorance that
grasps at the belief in the true existence of phenomena and serves as
the root cause of all subsequent delusions. Once we realize that
ignorant mind states are deceptive and distorted, we will be able to see
through their illusions and be able to free ourselves of ignorance, thus
enabling us to achieve the state of cessation. Generally speaking, when
we talk of refuge we are referring to different types of refuge: outer,
the practice of refuge that is common to the lesser vehicle; inner, the
unique refuge of Mahayana; and secret, the unique refuge of tantra.4
This latter refers to the practice of going for refuge to the
meditational deities, heroes, heroines, et al., which also has its own
division into outer, inner, and secret refuges. We find that the
practice of refuge is very important as well as vast, and that it should
conform to the kind of practice we are undertaking. Having visualized
the objects of refuge, imagine in front of them the scriptures composed
by great beings, in the aspects of texts and in their nature created of
light. These scriptures should be imagined also as resounding with the
sounds of the letters as though they were being read. All the objects of
the merit field should be seen as looking pleasantly at you. Different
commentaries explain the reason for the merit fields gazing at us with
pleasure as follows: Although our own states of mind are very weak and
inferior, and therefore there are no grounds for the merit fields to be
delighted with us, since we are now embarking on a path that will lead
us to a spiritual transformation, we imagine that in order to encourage
us in our initiative the merit fields gaze at us with delight. This
explanation is according to the tradition of the late Kyabje Trijang
Rinpoche. Another tradition maintains that the significance of this
visualization is that these noble beings display such a gesture in order
to give us more courage and determination. On your part, you should
cultivate deep respect for and faith in

the members of the merit field by reflecting on their great qualities
and kindness. After having visualized the merit fields, reflect upon the
fact that you have experienced intense sufferings over infinite
lifetimes, and that if you pursue your present state of mind and action,
you will continue to torment yourself with sufferings in the cycle of
existence. Therefore, right now determine that you shall engage in the
practice that will bring about some change, and will undertake this
practice of taking refuge in the Buddha, dharma, and sangha as well as
in the guru. With such reflections, repeat the refuge formula: I go for
refuge to the Guru. I go for refuge to the Buddha. I go for refuge to
the Dharma. I go for refuge to the Sangha. While doing this recitation,
visualize yourself surrounded by all the mother sentient beings in their
human aspect. This is done because human beings possess the highest
potential for making spiritual progress. Other masters explain that all
these sentient beings, although visualized in the aspect of human
beings, should be thought of in the nature of their individual forms of
existence and actively undergoing the sufferings of their particular
realms. When you recite the refuge formula, imagine that you do so in
unison with all these sentient beings around you. Imagine that all of
you possess the basic factors of fear of the sufferings in this cycle of
existence and the conviction that the three objects of refuge have the
power and capacity to help free you from this fear. Whether or not your
practice of refuge is successful depends upon whether or not you have
the right attitude, these basic factors. So, equipped with these two
factors---fear of cyclic existence and deep conviction in the three
objects of refuge---if you repeat the refuge formula as much as
possible, your practice of refuge will be successful. On the other hand,
if you are not equipped with the two basic factors, even though you
might repeat the refuge formula many times, you won't make much
progress. You should also reflect upon the acute sufferings of all the
sentient beings around you, the general sufferings of cyclic existence,
and the specific sufferings of the individual states of existence.
Sentient beings like yourself, human beings, although not actively
undergoing the acute sufferings of hell realms and animal realms, are
nevertheless in the process of aggregating conditions for such
sufferings in the future because they are actively working

for their own downfall. Therefore, it is only a matter of time until you
actually experience such sufferings. By reflecting upon the sufferings
of cyclic existence, you should develop fear of them; this should
immediately be followed by a deep conviction that the Three Jewels have
the power and capacity to relieve you from such sufferings. Among the
Three Jewels, the actual refuge is the dharma, because it is only by
bringing about the realization of dharma within yourself that you will
be able to free yourself and relieve yourself from the sufferings of
cyclic existence. Therefore, dharma is the actual refuge, and the Buddha
is the master who shows you the path leading to realization, and the
sangha is the spiritual community that provides you with companionship
on your path. Thus, these Three Jewels have the potential and power to
relieve you from the cycle of existence, but you should not have the
attitude that those who entrust themselves to them are automatically
relieved without the need for practical initiative on their own parts.
So that your taking of refuge accords with your basic ideals as a
practitioner of the bodhisattva path, you should complement your
practice of refuge with the generation of a deep compassion toward all
beings. You should think that not only yourself but all other sentient
beings revolve in this cycle of existence fraught with misery and
suffering; although they seek happiness and wish to avoid suffering,
still they have to undergo this fate, against their wishes. So, equipped
with these three factors---the fear of cyclic existence, the conviction
that the Three Jewels have the power to relieve you, and a genuine sense
of compassion for the sufferings of all other sentient beings---then, as
a physical expression of your sense of the unbearableness of the
sufferings of cyclic existence for yourself and other sentient beings,
you should recite the refuge formula. The recitation is an expression of
what you feel inside, one that is spontaneous and natural. It is only
when you have very strong anxiety and emotion that your cry of anguish
comes out spontaneously and naturally. It is important that the meaning
of the verses should be integrated into your own mind. If you merely
recite the verses with a distracted mind, you might accumulate certain
virtues of reciting religious teachings, but you will not be able to
derive much benefit. You should do the repetition with the hands folded,
taking refuge in the guru as many times as possible. When you do the
repetition, visualize the five groups of gurus, focusing upon them
especially and thinking that all the negativities that are committed in
relation to these gurus, and particularly the Three Jewels, are being
purified. To do this, visualize nectars of five colors

descending from the bodies of these gurus; the nectars enter your body
and purify your mind of all the negativities committed in relation to
the Three Jewels and particularly your own spiritual root guru. You
receive the inspiration of body, speech, and mind of all the gurus,
particularly your own spiritual master. Then imagine that you are now
placed under the kind care of the spiritual master. These three
visualizations---purifying the negativities, receiving the inspirations
from the objects of refuge, and finally being placed under the kind care
of these refuges---are vital. The three phases of visualization should
be done when you take refuge in the Buddha, dharma, and sangha.
Generally speaking, you should not have the notion that there is a
separate guru from the Buddha. A qualified guru should be a buddha
possessing all the great qualities of the Buddha. Therefore, there isn't
any being called guru apart from the Three Jewels, particularly in the
context of Mahayana practice and especially that of the tantric path,
because in all these practices all realizations depend upon receiving
the right inspiration from the spiritual master. Particularly in the
practice of tantra, one takes vows and pledges from the guru, seeing him
as inseparable from the principal deity of a mandala. Therefore,
receiving a transmission from a living person becomes an extremely
important element in the practice of tantra. This point is demonstrated
by the simple fact that although in the Perfection Vehicle practice the
bodhicitta vow can be obtained from a representation of the refuge, such
as a statue, tantric vows can be received only from a living person.
Although you do not have the opportunity and fortune to have direct
access to Buddha Vajradhara himself, you do have access to the
inspiration that comes from him in an uninterrupted lineage. Because it
is the guru who transmits this uninterrupted lineage to you, he is the
link between you and Vajradhara. Therefore, he is regarded as the only
entrance through which you receive the inspirations of the Buddha.
Because of the extremely vital role that the guru plays in your
spiritual development, a specific refuge is taken in the guru. Light
rays emanate from the hearts of the spiritual masters of the five
groups. Visualize these light rays in the form of straws of light that
enter through the crown protrusions of yourself and all sentient beings.
Through these flow streams of nectar; thus you purify the negativities
that you have committed in relation to the Three Jewels and receive all
their inspiration of body, speech, and mind. You should imagine, as a
result, that you are placed under the kind care of the Three Jewels and
particularly of the spiritual master. This practice of taking refuge
should be followed by the generation of

bodhicitta.

PRELIMINARY GENERATION OF BODHICITTA The etymological meaning of the
Tibetan term for bodhicitta, sem kye, is "to enhance one's courage or
mental attitude." Therefore, bodhicitta is an altruistic state of mind
that aspires to attain the completely enlightened state for the benefit
of all other sentient beings. In order to generate such a powerful
altruistic mind, it is important to focus upon all the sentient beings
around you and realize the fact that, like yourself, they have the wish
to achieve happiness and avoid suffering. You should think: I can help
them fully only when I myself have achieved the completely enlightened
state, the noble state that the objects of refuge in front of me have
all realized, for the benefit of all sentient beings. The actual
generation of the altruistic mind is done by reciting the following
formula: I go for refuge until I am enlightened To the Buddha, the
Dharma, and the highest Assembly. From the virtuous merit that I collect
By practicing giving and other perfections, May I attain Buddhahood To
be able to benefit all beings. Recite this verse three times, seven
times, or as many times as possible. While reciting, do the
visualization of generating bodhicitta as powerfully as possible, so as
to lead you to the conviction that without achieving the completely
enlightened state, you will not be able to help all other sentient
beings. With such a genuine and strong attitude, you should imagine
that, due to the force of such generation of the mind, Buddha Shakyamuni
in front of you is pleased, and a replica of him emerges, comes to the
crown of your head, and dissolves into you through your crown aperture.
Your body, speech, and mind become inseparable from those of the Buddha.
Then you dissolve into emptiness; at that point meditate on emptiness
and from within it arise into Buddha Shakyamuni, sitting on a throne
upraised by lions. Imagine that you have achieved the resultant state
that you were aspiring to achieve. Alternatively, you may imagine
replicas---in the form of light rays---of the Three Jewels, particularly
your spiritual master, entering through your crown

and dissolving into you, whereby you yourself dissolve into emptiness.
From within emptiness, you arise in the aspect of the enlightened being
that you have been seeking, that is, as the Buddha endowed with all his
exceptional qualities. Imagine that you have turned yourself into such a
being, and then emanate infinite light rays around you to all sentient
beings, transforming them into Buddha Shakyamunis. Rejoice, thinking
that you have been able to fulfill your aim of working for the benefit
of all beings. This practice could also be done in conjunction with the
visualizations of tantric deity yoga as well. Visualize that due to your
intensive practice the gurus are delighted and the force of their
appreciation causes them to dissolve into you through your crown
aperture. The merging of your guru with you now causes you to gradually
dissolve from above and below into the Clear Light of emptiness. This
kind of visualization should be performed only by practitioners who have
been initiated into tantra. At this point it is effective to reflect
upon emptiness, thinking, Who is the being that has dissolved into me,
and who am I? By contemplating on the five-point analysis5 as outlined
in Tsawa Sherab (The Root Wisdom) by Nagarjuna, reflect upon the fact
that "I" is a mere imputation on the basis of the physical and mental
aggregates. There is no inherently existent guru apart from the self,
that is a mere label imputed upon his physical and mental aggregates.
Therefore, we will find that the spiritual master in whom we entrust
ourselves and in whom we take refuge, himself lacks an inherently
existent nature. Similarly, for we who take refuge in him, there is no
inherently existent self in the sense of a self that is the master of
the physical and mental aggregates and is totally distinct and separate
from them. Thus, you will be able to understand the lack of inherent
existence or, in other words, the emptiness of the self. This reflection
on emptiness will enable you to dissolve yourself---in
imagination---into emptiness, from which you arise into Buddha
Shakyamuni as described above. The practice of complementing compassion
and love with wisdom realizing emptiness is very effective, particularly
the reflection upon the ultimate nature of your own mind and on the fact
that the buddha-potential is inherent in all sentient beings---the
essential nature of your own mind is pure and never polluted by
delusions. Delusion has never penetrated into the core of the essential
nature of the mind; therefore, delusions are adventitious.

THE FOUR IMMEASURABLES Your generation of bodhicitta, the altruistic
aspiration to attain enlightenment

for the benefit of others, should then be complemented with the practice
of the four immeasurables: love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. These
are factors that will give great impetus to your realization of the
altruistic mind and will also greatly enhance it. To do this practice,
think that although you are very fortunate to be doing this
visualization of turning into a buddha, you do so only in the
imagination, and you yourself are still an ordinary being. Then you
should try to discover what prevents you from truly becoming a buddha,
and you will find that it is that your mind is under the influence of
fluctuating emotions toward friends and enemies. In order to overcome
these, you should practice love, equanimity, and so forth. With such
reflections, recite the following three or seven times: As much as I
wish that all beings be free of partiality such as emotional closeness
and distance induced by attachment and hatred, may they abide in
equanimity. I, myself, will endeavor to make this become a reality. O
Guru-deity, empower me with your inspiring strength to fulfill this
aspiration. As much as I wish that all beings be endowed with happiness
and its causes, may they achieve them. I, myself, will endeavor to make
this become a reality. O Guru-deity, empower me with your inspiring
strength to fulfill this aspiration. As much as I wish that all beings
be free of suffering and its causes, may they be relieved of them. I,
myself, will endeavor to make this become a reality. O Guru-deity,
empower me with your inspiring strength to fulfill this aspiration. As
much as I wish that all beings never be separated from the excellent joy
of favorable migrations and liberation from the cycle of existence, may
they achieve this. I, myself, will endeavor to make this become a
reality. O Guru-deity, empower me with your inspiring strength to
fulfill this aspiration.

EXCEPTIONAL BODHICITTA Next, you should generate what is called
exceptional bodhicitta, a very strong and powerful form of bodhicitta
that cannot be cultivated by practitioners of little courage. Therefore,
the practitioners of this Lamrim should have in their generation of
bodhicitta a strong sense of urgency, that of working to achieve the
completely enlightened state within a short period of time---one
lifetime.

The text uses the phrase "quickly, quickly"; the first quickly refers to
the achievement of the completely enlightened state within one lifetime,
and the second refers to its achievement within three years. However,
such a note of anxiety or urgency has its dangers, as it might actually
lead to one's disappointment and discouragement when one doesn't find
any realization as a result of practice, even after a long period of
time. Say to yourself, "To achieve the completely enlightened state
within the shortest time, I shall engage in the profound path of guru
deity yoga." You should develop the conviction that all the buddhas,
bodhisattvas, and meditational deities are various aspects and
appearances of your own guru. You should be able to see your own
spiritual master as the embodiment of all the Three Jewels: his mind as
the Buddha, his speech as the dharma, and his body as the sangha. In
short, you should undertake the practice of such a yoga on the basis of
viewing your own mind inseparably from the guru, the Three Jewels, the
meditational deity and so forth. So, here the preliminary practice of
Lamrim is taken in conjunction with the guru yoga practice of tantra.

5. VISUALIZATION OF THE MERIT FIELD

N

OW VISUALIZE IN front of you, as explained during the practice of
refuge,

your spiritual master above in space in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni.
In front of him is your master in his normal appearance, surrounded by
the gurus from whom you have received teachings directly. On his right
are the lineage masters of the Vast Practice, on his left those of the
Profound View, and in the rear those of the Experiential Lineage.1 All
of these groups are surrounded by meditational deities, buddhas,
bodhisattvas, heroes, heroines, and so forth. Visualize the crown,
throat, heart, navel, and secret regions of all the members of the merit
field marked by the syllables OM, AH, HUM, SVA, and HA respectively.
These syllables are the seeds of the five dhyani buddhas2 and represent
the body, speech, mind, actions, and virtues of all the buddhas. Light
rays emanate from the syllable HA at the heart of the Guru Buddha
Shakyamuni, inviting wisdom beings3 identical to the ones you have
visualized; a complete set of the merit field invited wisdom beings
dissolves into each and every individual figure of the merit field, so
that you can perceive each figure of the merit field as an embodiment of
the entire refuge. Doing this also enables you to see each of them as a
manifestation of your own spiritual master. It is through his kindness
and in order to tame us that he has manifested in all these various
forms; seeing things this way will help you to develop more faith in
your guru. Meditation on a merit field of such a scale has a great
significance. For some people, however, the Jewel Embodiment practice,
visualization of a single spiritual master, one's own root guru, may be
more effective. One could also do the visualization of the merit field
as explained in Lama Choepa guru yoga practice,4 which is the
visualization that one finds in the six preparatory practices. It is
meant for practitioners who have received initiation and who undertake
this practice in conjunction with highest yoga tantra. Those who have
not received any tantric initiations should not do the visualization of
the merit field as explained in Jorchoe Kelsang Dringyen,

because in that text the figures of the merit field are generated from
the wisdom of bliss and emptiness, and if you have not received any
initiation at all and have not cultivated this wisdom within you-even in
simulation---it is impossible to borrow that wisdom from the merit
field. So, do the visualization of the merit field as suits your own
mental disposition and then, focused upon it, engage in the practice of
accumulating merit. This is done on the basis of the seven-limbed
practice.

6. SEVEN-LIMBED PRACTICE

T

HE SEVEN PARTS of the practice are encompassed by two practices---the

purification of negativities and the enhancing of the store of merit.
When you engage in the practice, it is very important to understand that
each and every one of the seven limbs1 has its individual purpose and
significance, and only with such knowledge can you engage properly in
the practice. The seven limbs are: prostration, offering, confession,
rejoicing, requesting to turn the wheel of the dharma, entreating not to
enter into nirvana, and dedication of merit. When you recite the verses
of the seven-limbed practice, it is important to fold your palms to
demonstrate the physical expression of the prostration. You should not
feel embarrassed about folding the hands when reciting the prayers. A
sense of shame and embarrassment should accompany only an indulgence in
negative actions, when your conscience should be able to guard you well.
On the contrary, people often demonstrate feelings of heroism and
pleasure when indulging in such actions, which is very sad.

VERSES OF THE SEVEN-LIMBED PRAYER 1. Prostration To my lama, who
embodies all Buddhas Who in nature is Vajradhara, and Who is the root of
the Three Jewels, Ah, to my lama I bow down. To all-compassionate Buddha
Vajradhara, To perfect seers Tilopa and Naropa, The glorious Dombipa and
Atisha: To the tantric practice lineage I bow down.

To Maitreya, Asanga, Vasubandhu, Vimuktisena, Paramasena, Vinitasena,
Shrikirti, Singhabadra, Kusali the Second, and Dharmakirti of the Golden
Isles: To the lineage of bodhimind's vast action I bow down. To
Manjushri, destroyer of grasping at "is" and "is not," And to Nagarjuna,
Chandrakirti, Vidyakokila the Great, Buddhapalita and the other exalted
teachers: To the lineage of the profound teachings on emptiness I bow
down. And I bow to the glorious Atisha, Who in the presence of Buddha
was Bhadrapala, In Tibet was called Dipamkara Atisha And now, in Tushita
Heaven, as Nam-kha Tri-ma-me, Like a magic jewel works the good of the
world. And to the feet of the perfect friend and master, The Bodhisattva
who performed the work of Buddha, A precious source fulfilling the two
needs: To the feet of the spiritual friend Drom I bow. To Lama
Tsongkhapa, crown jewel of Tibetan sages, Who was an incarnation of the
three Bodhisattvas--- Avalokiteshvara, treasure of unapprehendable
compassion, Manjushri, lord of the stainless wisdom, And Vajrapani,
destroyer of Mara's armies: To Tsongkhapa, Lob-sang Drak-pa, I bow down.
To the lineage Gurus past and present Who train us in the mystic lore,
Teach us the sutras, tantras, commentaries, and oral traditions And
bestow initiations and blessings, I bow down. Homage to the Guru,
embodiment of the Three Jewels: The precious Buddha, a peerless teacher,
The precious Dharma, a peerless savior, And the precious Sangha, a
peerless guide.

To Buddha Shakyamuni, Lord of the Shakyas, Who out of wise compassion
was born a prince, Invincible one who crushed the force of evil: To he
whose body is a golden mountain I bow down. O lions amongst men, Buddhas
past, present, and future, To as many of you as exist in the ten
directions, I bow down with body, speech, and mind. On waves of strength
of this king Of praises of exalted, sublime ways, With bodies numerous
as atoms of the world, I bow down to the Buddhas pervading space. On
every atom is found a Buddha Sitting amidst countless Bodhisattvas. In
this infinite sphere of mystic beings, I gaze with eyes of faith. With
oceans of every possible sound In eulogy of the perfect Buddhas, I give
voice to their excellent qualities: Hail to those passed to bliss. 2.
Offerings Garlands of supreme flowers I offer them; And beautiful
sounds, supreme parasols, Butter lamps and sacred incense, I offer to
all Awakened Ones. Excellent food, supreme fragrance, And a mound of
powders as high as Meru I arrange in mystic formation And offer to those
who have conquered themselves. All these peerless offerings I hold up

In admiration for those gone to bliss. In accord with exalted and
sublime ways, I prostrate and make offerings to the Buddhas. For the
practice of confession, which is the third of the seven limbs, it is
very important to have the factor of regret; without this factor there
is no possibility of purifying the negativities. A proper practice of
purification requires four powers---the power of regret, the power of
the basis, the actual application of the opponent forces, and the power
of resolve. If you have the basic factor of regret, all the other powers
will ensue naturally. On the other hand, if you lack the power of regret
induced through a proper recognition of negative actions as destructive,
then the completion of the other powers is not possible. One's practice
of purification will not be effective, since it will not be heartfelt.
The great yogi Milarepa said: "When I examined whether or not confession
could purify the negativities, I found that it is regret that cleanses
them." In order to generate regret, it is important to see the
destructive nature of negative actions and also to understand the law of
causality. Causes and effects have a relation between them; in
particular, the experiences of suffering and happiness---although having
external causes as well---mainly come about due to the state of mind
that we have. Based on a disciplined mind, we experience happiness;
based on an undisciplined, untamed mind, we undergo suffering. We should
think that if we are not able to make any progress from our present
state of mind, which always indulges in negative thoughts, there is not
much hope for us. So, if we are able to think in such terms, we will be
able to really see the destructive nature of negative actions, and also
that the store of negative actions that we have is inexhaustible, like a
rich person's bank balance. Without the recognition of the destructive
nature of the negative forces, we will never be able to develop the deep
factor of regret from the depth of our hearts. If we do not engage in a
proper practice of dharma, it seems that we may expend all our store of
merit in mundane pleasures. It is very important to have this faculty of
regret in our practice of purification and confession. 3. Confession
Whatever ill deeds I have committed, Under the power of desire, anger,
and ignorance, Through my body, speech, and mind, I confess and purify
these individually.

This practice should be followed by the cultivation of admiration and
rejoicing in the accumulation of merit by oneself and others. 4.
Rejoicing In the merits of all sentient beings, Solitary realizers,
learners and those beyond learning, Buddhas in ten directions and their
heirs, I rejoice in all their virtues. 5. Requesting to turn the wheel
of dhanna O the light of all universes in ten directions, Who realized
Buddhahood through the stages to enlightenment, I appeal to all of you
protectors To turn the unsurpassed wheel. 6. Entreating not to enter
into Nirvana With folded hands I entreat Those intending to enter
nirvana To live for aeons equal to the atoms on earth, For the benefit
and happiness of all beings. 7. Dedication Whatever little merit I have
accumulated, Through prostrating, offering, confessing, Rejoicing,
requesting, and entreating, I dedicate all toward attaining full
enlightenment.

7. THE THREE ASPIRATIONS

H

AVING ENGAGED IN the preliminary practices of purifying negativities and

accumulating merits within the framework of the seven limbs, at this
point make a fervent prayer to the members of the merit field for the
fulfillment of the three aspirations which encompass the essence of that
which a practitioner seeks. The prayer is preceded by the offering of
the mandala, signifying the offering of the entire universe to the
objects of refuge.

MANDALA OFFERING \[Then perform either the long or short versions of the
mandala offering:\] OM VAJRA BHUMI AH HUM, I lay the powerful golden
base; OM VAJRA REKHE AH HUM, circling outside, the iron fence; in the

center, the King of Mountains; in the east, the continent Lu-pakpo; in
the south, Jam-bu-ling; in the west, Ba-lang-jo; in the north,
Dra-min-yan; off the east continent are the islands Lu and Lu-pak; off
the south are Nga-yab and Nga-yab-zhan; off the west are Yon-dan and
Lam-chogdro; off the north are Dra-minyan and Dra-minyan-kyi-da. (Above
this I place) the jewel mountain, the wish-yielding tree, the magical
cow, the untouched harvest, the precious wheel, the precious jewel, the
precious queen, the precious minister, the precious elephant, the
precious horse, the precious general, the vase filled with a great
treasure, and the goddesses of beauty, garlands, song, dance, flowers,
incense, light, and perfume. And I place the sun, the moon, a jeweled
umbrella, the banner symbolizing total victory, and at the center the
best things of men and gods. All this I hold up and offer to all the
holy teachers---my kind root guru and all the gurus of the lineage---and
also to Lama

Tsongkhapa, who is both Buddha Shakyamuni and Buddha Vajradhara, as well
as to the myriads of deities and retinues. For the sake of living beings
accept it with compassion and, having enjoyed it, bestow your
transforming powers. Earth blessed with flowers, incense, and scented
water And adorned with the King of Mountains, the four continents, and
the sun and moon, I offer to this field of Awakened Beings. May all
beings enjoy this pure sphere. The body, speech, and mind of both myself
and others, Our possessions, and masses of goodness of the past,
present, and future, And the precious mandala of the King of Mountains
and so forth, Together with Samantabhadra's peerless offerings, I
mentally claim and offer as a mandala to the lamas, Yidams, and the
Three Precious Jewels; Out of compassion please accept them And bestow
upon me your transforming powers. IDAM GURU RATNA MANDALAKAM NIRYATA
YAMI

Generally speaking, in a practice of offering related to a tantric
practice such as Lama Choepa, there are different types of offering:
outer offerings, associated with the vase initiation; inner offerings,
associated with the secret initiation; secret offerings, associated with
the wisdom-knowledge initiation; and suchness offerings, associated with
the word initiation. The same is true of the mandala offering---there
are outer, inner, secret, and suchness mandala offerings. The internal
mandala is the offering of your own physical body, visualizing specific
parts of the body as specific parts of the universe. Perceiving all of
them as manifestations of the union of bliss and emptiness, and also
seeing them as the mere sport and manifestation of the subtle wind
(energy) and mind is the suchness mandala offering. When you make the
outer mandala offering, you can do the visualizations of the universe as
described in the mandala formula. But that does not mean that you have
to accept that the universe exists in such a manner, with Mount Meru,
the four continents, and so forth. It is always important when studying

a text to take into account the time, the community, and the mentality
of the people when the particular text was written or taught. Ancient
Buddhist treatises describe the universe in conformity with the popular
theory of the universe current at that time. Consequently, the
descriptions differ from those found in modern cosmology. The point is
to offer the entire universe---your own possessions and also things that
do not belong to you. Doing this signifies the overcoming of even a
subtle form of possessiveness and attachment, but does not mean that we
have to accept that the universe system exists as explained in the
Abhidharma texts. After all, the basic approach of the Buddhist is to
subject concepts to rigorous logical processes, and if anything
contradicts direct observation and logic, it should not be accepted just
because it is taught in the sutras or the texts. The earth of scientific
experimentation and observation---its size and relative position in the
solar system---is the earth that we live in, and its appearance is
common to the beings living in this world. I think that the scientific
observations on this matter are beyond dispute and have to be taken as
the truth; otherwise, there is a danger of causing misunderstanding in
others who, because of not understanding the profound philosophy of
Buddhism, might despise it for certain of its views on cosmology.

PRAYER OF THE THREE ASPIRATIONS Next, make a prayer that may you, not
only in this lifetime but also always in future lifetimes, never be
separated from the kind care of a spiritual master. Also, request---with
the three great aspirations, as one finds in Lamrim Chenmo---the
spiritual masters to help free you from all the obstacles that hinder
you from achieving high realizations. The three great aspirations are:
May all deluded views, ranging from not being respectful to the gurus to
the subtle forms of duality, cease; May all the positive states of mind,
ranging from being respectful to the gurus to the final achievement of
union, be realized within; and May all external and internal obstacles
to the realization of these two aspirations be overcome. These
aspirations include and encompass all the aspirations of a spiritual
practitioner: to be free of all the obstacles and to obtain all the
factors necessary for the realizations. There is nothing more that a
practitioner could seek.

8. INVOKING THE INSPIRING POWER OF THE LINEAGE

PRAYERS TO THE LINEAGE MASTERS O precious, holy Root Guru, Sit upon a
lotus and moon on my head; Hold me within your great compassion And
bestow siddhis of body, speech, and mind. O peerless teacher,
transcended Buddha, O holy regent, invincible Maitreya, And Asanga, who
was prophesied by Buddha, To Buddha and these two bodhisattvas I pray. O
Vasubandhu, crown jewel of Indian sages, And Vimuktisena, who achieved
the Middle View, And Vimuktisenagomin, in whom I place faith: To these
three, who have opened the world's eyes, I pray. O Paramasena, wondrous
and splendid one, O Vinitasena, master of the profound path, And
Vairochana, treasury of vast deeds: To these three friends of the living
I pray. O Haribhadra, propagator of the profound wisdom-teachings, O
Kusali, holder of oral traditions, And Ratnasena, savior of the living
beings: To these three spiritual guides I pray. O Serlingpa, who found
the heart of bodhi, O Atisha, upholder of this great vehicle,

And Drom Rinpoche, elucidator of the good path: To these three pillars
of the doctrine I pray. O peerless teacher Shakyamuni, O Manjushri,
embodiment of all Buddha's knowledge, And Nagarjuna, seer of the
profoundest meaning: To these three crown ornaments of teachers I pray.
O Chandrakirti, clarifier of Nagarjuna's thought, O Vidyakokila, the
great disciple of Chandrakirti, And Vidyakokila the Second, a second
son: To these three lords of the lineage I pray. O Atisha, upholder of
this great vehicle, Who sees the profundity of dependent arising, And O
Drom Rinpoche, elucidator of this good path: To these two ornaments of
the world I bow. O Gon-pa-wa, lord of mystics, O Neu-zu-pa, whose
support is deep samadhi, And Tak-ma-pa, upholder of the teachings on
discipline: To these three lights amongst the barbarians I pray. O
Nam-seng, whose practice is spontaneous, O Nam-kha Gyal-po, he blessed
by the holy, And Sang-gye-zang, he free of worldly passions: To these
sublime sons of Buddha I pray. O Nam-kha Gyal-tsen, who is blessed And
guarded by the meditational deities And who is a supreme spiritual
friend To the beings of this dark age: to you I pray. O Po-to-wa, image
of Buddha himself, O Sha-ra-wa, whose intellect is beyond challenge, And
Che-kha-wa, teacher of the bodhimind: To these three fulfillers of hope
I pray.

O Chil-pu-pa, lord of scriptures and insight, O Lha-lung Wang-chuk, a
supreme sage, And Gon-po Rinpoche, savior of the three worlds: To these
great ones I pray. O Zang-chen-pa, who radiates with control, O
Tso-na-wa, lord of the scriptures on discipline, And Mon-dra-pa, master
of Abhidharma: To these three navigators of the world I pray. O Dhol-yob
Zang-po, glorious lama Who has found the vast and profound dharma Who
upholds the doctrine through enlightened action, And protects the
fortunate: to you I pray. O Trul-trim Bar, lord of the siddhas, O
Shon-nu Od, who relied well on many masters, And Gyer Gon-pa, whose mind
is one with the Mahayana: To these three sons of Buddha I pray. O
Sang-gye Won, treasury of marvelous qualities, O Nam-kha Gyal-po, he
blessed by the holy, And Sang-gye-zang, he free of worldly passions: To
these three gentle bodhisattvas I pray. O Nam-kha Gyal-tsen, who is
blessed And guarded by the meditational deities And who is a supreme
spiritual friend To the beings of this dark age: to you I pray. And to
Tsongkhapa, crown jewel of Tibetan sages, Who was an incarnation of the
three bodhisattvas--- Avalokiteshvara, the treasure of unapprehendable
compassion, Manjushri, lord of the stainless wisdom, And Vajrapani,
destroyer of Mara's armies: To Tsongkhapa, Lob-zang Drak-pa, I pray.

And O Jam-pal Gya-tso, lord of siddhis, O Khe-drub Ge-lek Pal, a son
amongst adepts and teachers, And Ba-so Je, a mine of ear-whispered
lineages: To these three peerless lamas I pray. O Cho-kyi Dor-je, he who
attained to great union, O Gyal-wa En-sa-pa, he who is three
Buddha-kayas, And Sang-gye Ye-she, lord of scriptures and insight: To
these three sagely adepts I pray. O eyes through whom the vast
scriptures are seen, Supreme doors for the fortunate who would cross
over to spiritual freedom, Illuminators whose wise means vibrate with
compassion: To the entire line of mystic friends I pray. While reciting
prayers to the lineage gurus of the Lamrim practice, visualize nectar
descending from the individual figures, and imagine that you receive the
inspiration of the particular masters which purifies any negativities
committed in relation to them, thus enhancing your mind's receptivity to
the realization of the path. You should then visualize a duplicate of
your spiritual master descending to your crown; request the buddhas and
bodhisattvas to shower their blessings and inspiration on you because,
induced by a genuine desire to practice Lamrim from within, you are now
embarking upon a proper spiritual path. When you recite the verses
making requests to these figures, repeat the last line of each verse.
During the first recitation, visualize nectars flowing from the
particular masters of the lineage, and during the second, visualize a
replica of the individual figures dissolving into you. Then imagine that
your mind is made receptive to the realization of the specific practices
of the Lamrim---for example, proper reliance on a spiritual master, and
the recognition of the importance of human birth. Think that you and all
other sentient beings have actually achieved the realizations. At this
point you could also perform the visualization of the protectors
expelling obstacles and providing you with favorable conditions for your
practice.

9. REVIEWING THE STAGES OF THE PATH

Following a kind master, foundation of all perfections, Is the very root
and basis of the path. Empower me to see this clearly And to make every
effort to follow him well. Precious human life gained but once Has great
potential but is easily lost. Empower me to remember this constantly And
to think day and night of taking its essence. I must remember that death
is quick to strike, For spirit quivers in flesh like a bubble in water;
And after death one's good and evil deeds Trail after one like the
shadow trails the body. Understanding that this most certainly is true,
May I discard every level of wrong And generate an infinite mass of
goodness; Empower me to be thus continually aware. Sensual gluttony is a
gate to suffering And is not worthy of a lucid mind. Empower me to
realize the shortcomings of samsara And to give birth to the great wish
for blissful freedom. And empower me that with mindfulness and alertness
Born from thoughts ultimately pure, I may live in accord with the holy
dharma, The ways leading to personal liberation.

Just as I myself have fallen into samsara's waters So have all other
sentient beings. Empower me to see this and really to practice
Bodhimind, that carries the weight of freeing them. Yet without
habituation to the three spiritual disciplines, Thought-training
accomplishes no enlightenment. Empower me to know this deeply, and
intensely to train In the various ways of the great bodhisattvas. And
empower me to pacify distorted mental wanderings And to decipher the
ultimate meaning in life, That I may give birth within my mindstream To
the path combining concentration and vision. He who trains in these
common Mahayana practices Becomes a vessel worthy of the Supreme
Vehicle, Vajrayana. Empower me that I may quickly and easily Arrive at
that portal of fortunate beings. The foundation of what then produces
the two powers Is the guarding of the pledges and commitments of tantric
initiation. Bless me so that I may have uncontrived knowledge of this
And guard my disciplines as I do my very life. Bless me so that I may
gain realization of the main practices Of the two stages of Vajrayana,
essence of the tantric path; And, by sitting relentlessly in four daily
sessions of yoga, Actualize just what the sages have taught. Empower me
that the masters who have unfolded the sublime path within me And the
spiritual friends who have inspired me may live long; And that the
myriads of inner and outer interferences Be completely and utterly
calmed forever. In all future lives may I never be parted

From the perfect lamas or the pure ways of dharma. May I gain every
experience of the paths and stages And quickly attain the stage of
Holder of Diamond Knowledge. While reciting the above verses entitled
Yonten Shigyurma (Foundation of All Perfections) mentally review all the
stages of the spiritual path. At the end, make fervent aspirations that,
should death seize you before you have achieved high realizations, you
may be reborn as a human endowed with leisure and fortune so that you
can continue the journey along the Lamrim path leading to complete
enlightenment in future lives. Thus dedicate your merit to the
fulfillment of this aim and that of being able to work for the benefit
of all beings.

10. DISSOLUTION OF THE MERIT FIELD

H

AVING BESEECHED THE merit field for fulfillment of the three
aspirations,

you should start the process of the dissolution of the merit field, as
the preparatory practices are now coming to their end. The process
begins with an exclusive request to your root spiritual guru made in
conjunction with the recitation of the following verse: O, my glorious
and precious root guru, Reside at my crown on a lotus seat, And sustain
me with great kindness, By bestowing the attainments of your body,
speech, and mind. If you have visualized the elaborate version of the
merit field, now imagine that light rays emanate from the heart of
Shakyamuni Buddha and touch all the members of the merit field
surrounding him. They melt into light and gradually dissolve into the
lineage masters of the Vast Practice and the Profound View, which in
turn dissolve respectively into Maitreya and Manjushri. Similarly, the
masters of the Experiential Lineage dissolve into Vajradhara, and the
host of gurus from whom you have received teachings in person dissolve
into your personal root guru. At this point you should reaffirm your
visualization of the five figures. After a while, visualize Maitreya and
Manjushri dissolving into the central figure while their thrones and
cushions dissolve into those of Buddha Shakyamuni. Eventually, your own
root guru melts into light and dissolves into Buddha Shakyamuni's heart.
Vajradhara, progressively diminishing in size, enters through Buddha
Shakyamuni's crown and remains within his heart as a wisdom being.
Cultivate a clear visualization at this point of Buddha Shakyamuni, who
eventually dissolves into your personal root guru seated at your crown.
Your root guru is in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni, possessing all the
qualities of a completely enlightened being. Then, focusing upon your
root guru at your crown, make a single-pointed

request from the depths of your heart. Together with all the sentient
beings around you, make request prayers to the spiritual master, seeing
him from the depths of your heart as the embodiment of all the objects
of refuge. Perceive the spiritual master as the embodiment of the
dharmakaya, all the bodies of the Buddha, meditational deities, heroes,
heroines, and so forth. Do this until you feel some effect within your
mind; at that point it is effective to examine the nature of the mind
which feels that experience. Say to the master that he alone is the
embodiment of all refuges and that you entrust yourself completely to
his care and request his inspiration. Single-Pointed Prayer I beseech
you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying the four kayas.
I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying the
unobscured dharmakaya. I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted
guru deity of blissful sambhogakaya. I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara,
The exalted guru deity of manifold nirmanakaya. I beseech you, Buddha
Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying all gurus. I beseech you,
Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying all meditational
deities. I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity
embodying all buddhas I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru
deity embodying all sublime dharma. I beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara,
The exalted guru deity embodying all sangha. I beseech you, Buddha
Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying all dakinis. I beseech you,
Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying all protectors. I
beseech you, Buddha Vajradhara, The exalted guru deity embodying all
refuges.

While reciting these verses pray fervently and imagine that, because the
guru is pleased with you, nectar descends from his body and enters
through your crown. This purifies all the negativities that you have
committed in connection with him, and the inspiration you receive
empowers you to achieve all the high realizations on the path. With
that, the practices preliminary to the practice of proper reliance on a
spiritual master are over. Just as in a sadhana of tantric meditation
there is a point where one does the meditations on subtle and coarse
generation stage practices, similarly it is at this point that one
undertakes the actual practices of Lamrim meditation.

11. ACTIVITIES OF THE BETWEEN-SESSION PERIODS

A

T THE END of the session, take a little rest. Sometimes when you are

resting, you may have inspiration all of a sudden, which helps you see
things that you have never seen before. Although in the after-session
periods you are not engaged in formal meditation, you should keep your
mind deep down still focused on the practice so that the warmth of the
session is not lost. Then, when you resume your second session you will
be able to conduct it successfully, thus enabling you to build on the
progress you have made in the first session. Otherwise, if you let
yourself stray and be idle during the between-session periods, whatever
progress you may have made in the first session will be totally lost,
and then in the second session you will have to start right from the
beginning. The state is analogous to a hearth in which you do not
extinguish the fire totally, so that when you rekindle the fire you will
be able to do so quite easily and quickly. It is also helpful to read
texts related to your practice. When you wake up in the morning, you
should bless your speech with certain mantras and develop a strong
determination that you will use the twenty-four hours of the day for a
worthy purpose and shall not waste even a single moment of the day. With
such determination and motivation at the beginning, do any practices
that you undertake, such as guru yoga, and then engage in the practice
of Lamrim. If you live your life in such a manner you will be able to
make progress, whereas if you just give up right from the beginning and
feel discouraged, then there is not much you can hope for. Therefore, it
is very important to have courage and determination. The same is true
for lay people: Although you have to be concerned about your profession,
livelihood, and so forth, nevertheless, at the beginning of the day wheh
you first wake up, it is important to develop the firm determination
that you shall live the day properly, in a righteous manner, and not
deceive others, tell lies, and so forth. Tibetans, for example, should
make the determination that during the day, if they are not able to make
any contribution to the Tibetan cause, at least they

will not degrade the Tibetan name or be a disgrace to it. Those Tibetans
who hold me dear should determine that at least they will think about
the Dalai Lama, and not be deceptive to him. Therefore, monks, lay
people, and all of you, it is possible to live a life properly within
the dharma, right from the beginning of the day adopting the right
attitude and determination, putting all that you know about dharma into
practice, with a plan that the things you are not able to practice right
now, you will practice next year or in the future. In such a manner you
will be able to make progress. At the end of the day when you go to bed,
before going to sleep you should check on the nature of the activities
in which you engaged during the day. If you find that any negative
actions have been performed, you should generate regret and resolve that
you will never indulge in them in the future. If you find that you have
engaged in some positive actions, you should rejoice. Also, when going
to bed, it is important that you do so with a virtuous thought, because
sometimes it is possible for a practitioner to have certain practices in
dreams, too; this will be particularly important for the morning, when
you are waking up, because in the morning you have a very clear, fresh
mind and therefore, when you engage in a practice at that time, it will
be more powerful and clear. Those meditators who are up in caves should
be careful not to meet just anybody, because such a meeting may hinder
their progress. Even the mere indication of a stranger coming may hinder
your practices; therefore, be cautious. This is how you should meditate
and undertake the practice of dharma. If you are able to undertake the
practice in such a manner, irrespective of whether you recite many texts
or not, you will be able to make real progress. Then there is a hope
that you will be able to achieve enlightenment in this lifetime, or, if
not, in the intermediate state, or in a future lifetime.

12. SUMMARY

A

LL THE STAGES of the preliminary practices as explained in the last two

chapters within the framework of what are called the six preparatory
practices are common to all the topics of Lamrim meditation and
therefore precede every meditative session. These stages prepare not
only the physical environment where the meditation is undertaken but
most importantly the practitioner's mind, making it receptive to the
spiritual change that he or she is likely to go through in the
meditative process. As you can notice, the preliminary practices
discussed here are based on the standard preliminary rite text Jorchoe
(Six Preparatory Practices), and the visualizations involved are
explained rather extensively. However, as you progress along the path of
meditation, and depending upon the length of time you have, you could
spend less time with the preliminary practices. Such a shorter session
could be undertaken based on just a single verse on each of the
important elements of the practice, for example, seven limbs, refuge,
generation of the altruistic motive, mandala offering, request to the
lineage masters, dedication, etc. Having prepared yourself through such
a preliminary process you should then engage in the main meditation. In
the case of every meditation topic of Lamrim---for example, the proper
reliance on a spiritual teacher---the actual meditation is done right
after the dissolution of the merit field. At that point all the members
of the merit field are already dissolved into the principal figure of
the merit field, which is your own root guru in the form of Buddha
Shakyamuni. Your root guru also goes through a progressive diminution in
size, eventually becoming the size of a thumb. He then descends to your
crown where he is visualized as being seated facing the same direction
as you are. While focusing single-pointedly on your guru at your crown,
make fervent requests to him. Meditatively imagine that, by the force of
your prayer request, nectars and light rays flow from your guru's body,
fill your entire body and cleanse the physical and mental stains that
obstruct you from attaining the realization of a proper reliance on a
spiritual teacher. Imagine that your mind is made receptive to such an
experience. You can now begin

your meditation on the actual chosen topic. In conclusion, again
visualize that light rays and nectars descend from the guru's body and
fill your body, thus infusing your entire being with his inspiring
power. Your meditative session should then be ended with a dedication of
all the positive energy that you have accumulated from this particular
session toward the happiness of all living beings. The betweensession
practices recommended in the case of guru devotion meditation are
appropriate for all the subsequent meditations as well.

PART THREE

MAIN LAMRIM MEDITATIONS

13. RELIANCE ON A SPIRITUAL TEACHER

Y

OU SHOULD THINK now that the reason that you and all other sentient
beings

revolve in the cycle of existence and undergo all these undesirable
sufferings and so forth, is that you and they lack realization of the
proper relation to a spiritual master. Therefore, request the spiritual
masters to give the inspiration to make you overcome obstacles that
hinder you from realizing this path. The actual practice of proper
reliance on a spiritual teacher is divided into two: reliance through
thought and reliance through action.

RELIANCE THROUGH THOUGHT Cultivating Faith and Conviction First, you
should visualize your spiritual master at your crown. The spiritual
master is the embodiment of all the buddhas. From his heart light rays
emanate and in front of him are all the gurus from whom you have
received teachings directly. Visualize all of them in their normal
appearance, with all their physical and personality defects, if they
have any. To visualize them with all their seeming faults and defects is
important at this point, since you are now engaged in a specific
meditation on guru devotion which involves---to a great extent---the
means to overcome your perception of faults in them. Then, reflect upon
the great benefits of proper reliance on a spiritual master ---the eight
benefits1 as outlined in the Lamrim, such as getting closer to the
achievement of buddhahood. By referring to authentic scriptural sources,
by employing all sorts of reasonings most suitable to your mind, by
considering examples from the lives of the past masters---that is, by
employing any means at your disposal---you should be able to see the
great benefits of relying on a spiritual master. It is a very profitable
venture! Therefore, develop the conviction that you should properly rely
on him or

her. Rejoice in the fact that you have such an opportunity. You should
not have the notion that "spiritual master" only refers to high lamas
who give teachings from high thrones; rather, the reference is to the
spiritual master to whom you relate daily, who leads you on the
spiritual path step by step. The kindness of such a guru is the
greatest. Your faith should be reasoned faith, not just blind faith,
based on proper intelligence so that when people question and attempt to
refute your belief and practice, you will be able to withstand their
arguments. Therefore, your faith should be properly based on a firm
foundation. If you have this faculty of intelligence, you will be
invulnerable to arguments. Otherwise, as the Kadampa masters say, "Faith
alone is like a blind person, and it can be led anywhere by anyone if it
lacks the complementary factor of wisdom." So the faith that is
supported by the factor of wisdom, and likewise the compassion that is
supported by wisdom, is indispensable in a Buddhist practice, whereas
faith and compassion alone are common features of all major religions.
Therefore, if you cultivate a faith based on a proper foundation, it
will be rational and therefore very stable. The second step is to think
about the disadvantages of not relating to a spiritual master and then,
weighing the disadvantages and advantages of relating and not relating
to a master, decide that you shall relate to a master. As Lama
Tsongkhapa advised in Lamrim Chenmo, first it is important to apply all
sorts of contemplations; as a conclusion you should develop a deep
conviction and make the determination that you must now definitely rely
on a spiritual teacher. Furthermore, seeing that through such a reliance
you stand to gain, and that without it you stand to lose, pray that you
may have an opportunity for such a reliance in all future lives as well.
Think: I wish never to lack the guidance of a qualified master in my
future lives; therefore, I decide today to rely on a spiritual master
right here and now. That is the decision you have to make. Reflect now,
as a third step, upon the disadvantages and harm of having a breach in
your guru devotion practice.2 You will have all sorts of adverse
circumstances within this lifetime, and the damage they will cause for
your future lives will be great. Therefore, after seeing the harm and
disadvantages of having such a breach, you should decide that you will
never permit it to occur. Regarding this, it might be helpful to reflect
upon stories of the great masters, such as those describing how Naropa
in India related to his master Tilopa and how Milarepa in Tibet
underwent hardships in fulfilling the wishes of his spiritual teachers
and never had any breach in his practice. Having decided that you will
rely on a spiritual master, you should determine never to

make a breach in your relationship. The actual process of relying on the
guru through thought includes, first, cultivating faith in the spiritual
master. For this, while focusing on the spiritual masters in front of
you, think that the reason that all the spiritual masters appear to you
as though they were ordinary beings is that you have an inferior state
of mind and are not able to see them in their own nature as true
buddhas. There are scriptural sources in which Buddha Vajradhara himself
says that in future times he will take the form of spiritual masters.
Think that it is because of his great kindness that Buddha Vajradhara
has assumed the forms of ordinary beings as spiritual masters, in order
to suit the practitioners like yourself who have no faculty to see the
buddhas directly in their natural aspect. A Tibetan master said: "If you
understand, not just in mere words, the way in which buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the past help the beings of the present age, you will
see it comes down to the qualified gurus." Therefore, the kindest
spiritual master is the one who gives you teachings, because he is the
one who leads you to the achievement of enlightenment. If the buddhas
are working for the benefit of us at all, it is only through the gurus.
So, if you think along such lines, you will be able to generate deep
faith in the spiritual master. Approaching the topic from a different
angle, you should reflect that although the spiritual masters are, in
fact, true buddhas, their not appearing to us as such is due to our own
ignorance. At this point, it is helpful to reflect that Asanga saw his
master Maitreya in the form of a dog, and that Maitripa saw his guru
Savaripa as an ordinary hunter, and that Legpa Karma saw the Buddha as
having all sorts of faults. Think that it is because of your ignorant
mind that you are not able to see spiritual masters as true buddhas.
Perceptions in general are deceptive. You can conclude that since your
own perception is unreliable, you will never generate even a single
thought of perceiving fault in the master. Reflect that there must be
manifestations of the Buddha who are actively working for your benefit;
if there are such beings, they are probably your spiritual masters. But
then the thought might arise that you see all sorts of faults in them.
Analyze whether this perception is illusory or not: if they are true
buddhas, how can they have faults? It is only your own perception that
is unreliable. As the Panchen Lama says here, the appearance of these
faults is not because your spiritual masters have faults, but rather
because they are using skillful means by portraying such faults in order
to show themselves as

ordinary beings so that you can relate to them more easily. How can we
ordinary beings, whose minds are always under the influence of
ignorance, determine what is true and what is false with great
certainty? Our judgments, even concerning ordinary things, are
frequently clouded by our emotions. For example, we often see the
actions of our loved ones---even if they are harmful---as wonderful,
whereas we judge even the positive actions of a person we dislike as
pretentious and false. We cannot rely upon our own perceptions; it is a
fact that we misapprehend many situations. If this is a general fact,
how can we still stubbornly maintain that our perceptions about our own
spiritual masters must be true? Sometimes it is effective to take as the
central figure of the merit field the spiritual master to whom you feel
most distant and in whom you feel you see faults. You can also visualize
this master, in whom you find it most difficult to develop faith, as the
wisdom being at the heart of Buddha Shakyamuni. Then reflect upon his
qualities---his body, personality, and so forth. This practice will
actually help you to overcome perceptions of faults in all spiritual
masters. It is very difficult to perceive all spiritual masters as true
buddhas, but it is possible to overcome perceptions of faults. If you
were to suspend your practices until you could see all the masters as
buddhas, it would be a long wait until you could commence your
practices. Overcoming the perception of faults lays a good foundation
within your mind for other practices such as refuge, renunciation, and
so forth, and the progress you make in these practices will increase
your faith in spiritual masters. So, the point that is most
indispensable at the initial stage is the overcoming of misconceptions
about faults in the spiritual master. Without your masters' proper
guidance, how can you have the knowledge of the paths, let alone embark
upon the right one? That you have the knowledge to embark upon a
spiritual path and to discriminate between right and wrong is due to the
Buddha's kindness in appearing in an ordinary form to teach you.
Therefore, you all should reflect that the little understanding that you
have about the stages of the path, and the little practice that you can
do with the hope of planting some seed in your minds, is due to the
kindness of the spiritual master. Without the guidance of the gurus you
might be able to read some texts, but integrating the teachings with
your own minds through proper instruction is possible only by following
the advice of a teacher. It is only through his kindness that you will
be able to accomplish such a feat. By thinking in such terms, you will
find that the kindness of a spiritual master is great, and greater still
is his appearing in the present form so that you can have direct access
to him. For example, if a person who has very high

rank comes with his guards displaying all the grandeur of his position
to help someone who is very sick and bereaved, it may not be very
helpful; on the other hand, if he comes as an ordinary person, without
any servants and so forth, he can be more helpful to the troubled person
and may deeply touch the patient's mind. Similarly, the appearance of
the buddhas in their sambhogakaya (enjoyment body) form may not be as
beneficial to you as their appearance in the form of spiritual masters.
The buddhas in their sambhogakaya form are accessible only to
bodhisattvas on high levels. So you should realize that through the
great kindness of the spiritual master, at this time of degeneration
still the buddhas are able to portray themselves to you in a physical
form and help you according to your own disposition. It is almost like
they are protecting those who are abandoned by all other refuges. When
you think in such terms, you will really begin to appreciate the great
kindness of the spiritual masters, which surpasses the kindness of all
others. Such forms of reflection will enable you to actually see the
perception of faults in the guru as helpful for increasing faith in his
skillful means. Thinking in such terms will increase faith and respect
in the guru. So that is how you cultivate faith and conviction in the
spiritual master. Without faith, even though you might have a very clear
visualization and image of the spiritual master, it will not be very
effective---it is almost like having a clear image of a good painting.
So, develop single-pointed faith and respect for the spiritual master.
Such a faith in the guru, firmly based on the realization of him as a
true Buddha, can come about only when you have first developed a general
understanding of the entire framework of the Buddhist path. For a person
who possesses such knowledge, the recitation of even a short guru yoga
text can become a profound guru devotion practice. It is for this reason
that I always emphasize the importance of study for Buddhist
practitioners. It is very difficult to explain the importance of guru
devotion to someone not familiar with Buddhist doctrines because if such
a person is doubtful of the possibility of buddhahood in the first
place, there is not much point in repeating that Vajradhara has said
that the spiritual masters are manifestations of the buddhas. Therefore,
first of all it is very important to have some understanding of
emptiness and the law of interdependence and how they are complementary.
This will enable you to develop deep conviction in the law of causality,
which in turn will enable you to develop conviction in things that are
beyond the perception of ordinary beings, thus helping you to have
conviction in the Three Jewels. You can reason that if the spiritual
master Buddha Shakyamuni has proved

truthful and reliable on very profound matters---like emptiness and
impermanence---then his statement that the spiritual master is the
manifestation of the Buddha can also be relied upon. Approaching the
topic in such a manner will enable you to develop a deep faith and
conviction in the Buddha's doctrine; following the stages of the path
found in Lamrim will then be very fruitful. Without such a basis, the
practice of guru devotion may not be so beneficial and appealing at the
beginning.

Cultivating Respect It is through recollecting the great kindness of the
spiritual master that one cultivates respect. Now, again focusing upon
the master that you have visualized in front of you, reflect that the
understanding you develop of the entire path is due to his kindness.
Because of the force of this contemplation, nectar descends and so
forth. The guru's kindness includes the kindness of giving you teachings
and taming your mind and so forth. You should mentally review the great
kindness of the individual spiritual masters, beginning with those who
taught you the alphabet and how to read, and including those who gave
teachings on the treatises; monastic, bodhisattva, and tantric vows;
commentaries on generation and completion stages of tantra;
transmissions and so forth; and even advice as to the way you lead your
life. So the entire way of life and outlook are taught by the spiritual
masters. When you think in such terms, you will truly be able to see the
great kindness of the spiritual master; his kindness surpasses that of
Buddha Shakyamuni. From the point of view of qualifications, all the
buddhas are equal, but from the point of view of kindness, the spiritual
master's kindness far exceeds that of the buddhas. Having perceived the
master as the Buddha, cultivate strong faith, and, reflecting upon his
kindness, develop deep respect for him. That is how to relate to a
spiritual master through thought.

RELIANCE THROUGH ACTION This practice is done by following the teachings
that the spiritual master has given, living according to his advice, and
making offerings to him and serving him. Although living according to
his advice is the real offering to a master, if

you find that any part of the master's advice contradicts the general
mode of approach of the Buddhist doctrine, you should examine it and
then explain to the spiritual master why you cannot fulfill that advice.
As Ashvagosha said in his Guru Panchashika (Fifty Verses on the Guru),
"Regarding the directions that are unfit, explain their unsuitability in
words." Also, Gunaprabha in his Vinayasutra (The Condensed Essence of
Ethics) said, "Reverse the directions if they are unwholesome." In the
same vein, a Mahayana sutra reads, "Comply well with the advice that
accords with the positive ideals, and act contrary to that which is
against the principles." There are some exceptions where the spiritual
master sees very special benefits for a certain individual; then,
although the advice may not directly accord with the general approach of
Buddhist doctrine, it is nevertheless given. I am telling you all this
from my own experience; not everything I say should be accepted by you.
If what the Dalai Lama says accords with the general mode of approach of
the Buddha's doctrine and seems sensible, then you should follow it; if
you find that anything that the Dalai Lama says contradicts the general
approach of the Buddha's doctrine, you should just leave it. This is an
important point. If you do not apply this caution, there is a danger
that a person who claims to be a spiritual master but who is ignorant of
the Buddha's doctrine may give some advice that could prove harmful.
Then, both the disciples and the master will harm themselves. Therefore,
it is very important to judge whether or not the direction given accords
with the framework of the Buddhist doctrine encompassed in the Tripitaka
(Three Scriptural Collections).3 Many people in the West mistakenly term
Tibetan Buddhism Lamaism;4 so, there is also a danger, if you are not
very careful, of really making it Lamaism in the true sense of that
word. This point has been greatly emphasized by Lama Tsongkhapa in his
Lamrim Chenmo.

CONCLUDING ACTIVITIES While meditating on the practice of reliance, make
requests to the spiritual masters in front of you. In a sadhana, when
one feels exhausted by the meditation, at the end one can do the
repetition of mantras; in the same manner here, after you do the
specific meditations on Lamrim, you should follow with the rest of the
recitation and repetition of the guru's name mantra or praise verses.
Invoke your master's inspiration, and dedicate all the merit that you
have gained through such a practice to the benefit of all beings. You
can again visualize nectar descending from the spiritual master at your
crown,

and passing down through your body, or you could do the visualization of
the guru himself descending through your crown and entering into your
heart, remaining there inseparably. This is a very powerful practice,
which will make you invulnerable to negative actions, because you will
always feel that the guru is there to witness all your actions. Although
the practice of proper reliance on a spiritual master is contemplative
in nature, at the end of the contemplation you should do absorptive
meditations as well, dwelling on the conclusion. This combined practice
of contemplation and absorption is necessary. You should end each
session of Lamrim practice before you become exhausted; otherwise, if
you try to make sessions very long, you may feel so tired that you will
not want to repeat them. Therefore, initially it is very important to
end the session when you are not yet tired, so that your practice of
dharma will be steady like a stream, not momentary like water gushing
out of a broken tank, emptying the tank in a few minutes.

14. RECOGNIZING THE HUMAN POTENTIAL

T

HE FIRST OF the practices based on a proper reliance on a spiritual
master is

the persuading of oneself to take the essence of having obtained a human
life of leisure and opportunity. First it is important to recognize the
human form as rare and precious. It is not enough just to obtain this
precious human form which has great potential; rather, you should use
that potential to its fullest extent by taking its essence. For example,
if a person's ascent to high office is not followed by good work for the
community and people, it is not very beneficial and worthwhile. If, on
the basis of full use of the potential, one is able to accomplish great
feats, that would truly be a great success. Therefore, it is important
initially to recognize all the significance and great potential of this
human existence. What is the meaning of human existence endowed with
leisure1 and fortune? Leisure refers to having time, just as the word is
ordinarily used when one asks whether or not people have the time to do
such and such. Therefore, this term refers to a human existence that has
the time to undertake the practice. Other forms of existence, such as
animals, do not have the chance to think about dharma because they are
under the strong influence of ignorance. Compared to them, we human
beings are amply endowed with the leisure and capacity to practice
dharma. So, just as the masters said, if you were to take rebirth right
now in the lower realms, then the doctrine of the buddhas and the
teachings of tantra, although they might exist in this world, would not
be of much benefit to you. Although you might take favorable forms of
existence in deva realms and so forth, since the practice of dharma has
to be undertaken on the basis of enhancing one's mind, and since in such
realms one's mind is under strong influences, you would not have the
opportunity that you have right now. But this is not the case with you.
Furthermore, you have not taken rebirth at a time when the Buddha's

doctrine has totally lived out its duration of benefit. Rather, it is
still active and very much relevant. But even though you have taken
rebirth at such a time, if you were born in a country where dharma was
totally inaccessible, then you would not benefit from your human
existence. This is not the case with you either. Even though you have
taken rebirth in a country or community where dharma is available, if
you were to lack physical and mental capabilities, you would not be able
to benefit from its availability. This is not the case, nor is it the
case that you are under the influence of wrong views, such as the total
negation of the possibility of rebirth or the authenticity of dharma.
Whether or not you have cultivated a deep conviction derived from valid
cognition, you do have a certain understanding of dharma that is
powerful enough to persuade you to take an interest in it. Therefore, at
this juncture, if you probe you will find that you are free of most of
the obvious adverse conditions for the practice of dharma and that you
are equipped with favorable conditions. You are free from lack of
leisure, and on top of that you possess what are called the ten
endowments,2 personal and circumstantial. You have been born at a time
when, although the Buddha is not still alive, his doctrine is still
alive and you can meet a living spiritual master. Also, you can emulate
certain exemplary personalities who have gained high realizations by
engaging in such a practice. So, if you think in such terms, you will be
really able to admire and rejoice in the present opportunity. After you
reflect along these lines, it is very important that you finally make a
conclusion and decide on the basis of this human existence to explore
its potential to its fullest extent by engaging in a serious practice of
dharma. So, request the spiritual master at your crown to grant you the
inspiration to overcome the obstacles to your realizations. On the basis
of this precious human form, you will be able to accomplish great
feats---not only the assurance of well-being in future lifetimes, but
also the fulfillment of the final aspiration. Chandrakirti, in his Guide
to the Middle Way, chapter two, said: If one doesn't restrain oneself
(from one's downfalls) When one is free and lives agreeably, How can one
raise oneself in the future, When one falls into an abyss and is at
others' mercy?

RARITY OF HUMAN EXISTENCE Having reflected upon the great significance
and potential of human existence, you should reflect upon its rarity.
Although something might be rare, if it does not have any potential to
bring about great benefit, it is not very precious. Present human
existence is not like that. Not only is it rare to find, it also has
great potential; on its basis one will not only be able to attain a
higher rebirth, but can also obtain the omniscient state. Since the
beginning of life on this planet, for more than five billion years, many
forms of life have existed and have gone through a process of evolution.
Of all these forms, one finds that the human form is the most
sophisticated, in terms of having not only a positive capacity but also
a destructive one. Humans possess a very sophisticated brain, which has
great power and capability, and are endowed with a faculty that enables
them to plan things and judge between right and wrong. So, among all the
forms of life, one finds no history that can compare with that of human
beings. Besides the category of phenomena that are obvious to one,
phenomena that are hidden to one at present, such as the momentary
nature of things, the emptiness of inherent existence, and so forth, can
also eventually be understood on the basis of a human body employing the
human faculties. Furthermore, on this basis one will be able to
cultivate the very strong force of the altruistic attitude as well as
receive very profound vows---tantric, bodhicitta, or monastic---with
which one will be able to accumulate great stores of merit. Therefore,
from all these points of view---those of ultimate and temporary
aims---the human body is equipped with a great capacity. You should
rejoice that you have obtained such a body and should decide never to
waste its potential. If the effort is made on your part, you will be
able to attain great achievements. Many masters of the past, Indian and
Tibetan masters of all the great traditions, achieved their high
realizations on the basis of the human form. Regarded as a basis, the
human body that you possess, and the bodies of the great beings, have no
difference between them. Think that, like the great masters who achieved
high realizations on the basis of this precious human body and achieved
the completely enlightened state, you also will work for the achievement
of the omniscient state on the basis of this present human existence.
You have obtained this great opportunity; if you do not take the
initiative right now, when will you? It is now or never. That is how you
should reflect. By emulating the examples of great personalities of the
past, by pondering upon scriptural quotations and anecdotes taught by
teachers, by employing all sorts of means, you should be able to develop
a deep conviction that this

present human body has great potential and that you shall never waste
even a single minute of its use. On the other hand, not taking any
essence of this precious human existence, but just wasting it, is almost
like taking poison while being fully aware of the consequences of doing
so. It is very wrong for people to feel deeply sad when they lose some
money, while when they waste the precious moments of their lives they do
not have the slightest feeling of regret. Such an indifference comes as
a result of not realizing the value and rarity of the precious human
existence. Therefore, you should determine that on the basis of this
precious human existence you have the capability and capacity to
undertake the practice of dharma.

DIFFICULTY OF ATTAINING HUMAN EXISTENCE In the next phase, you should
reflect upon the difficulty of obtaining a human existence in the
future. You should reflect upon the rarity of obtaining a human form
from the point of view of its causes: how only through the aggregation
of many factors can one achieve it. Compared to other forms of existence
and life, human existence and life are very rare and difficult to find.
When you reflect upon the rarity of the precious human form, you might
have the feeling that although this human existence has great potential,
since you are already quite old it might be better to hope to obtain a
better human existence in a future life and embark then upon the path
when you are much younger. But it is very difficult to say whether or
not you will succeed in obtaining a precious human existence in the
future. Such an attitude is almost like that of a person who, when
having money with him, spends it without any consideration and purpose,
just hoping that he will get more in the future and be able to do
business with it. Such a person is stupid. By comparison, a person who,
even though he might have a very small amount of money, preserves it and
builds on it and does whatever business he wants to with it is a more
intelligent person. Similarly, you should use the present potential of
the human body already at hand, rather than hope for the future. Unlike
other forms of life, such as elephants, however old we might be we are
able to recite at least a mantra and are able to ponder upon questions
of karma and its results and our future lives and so forth. There is
still potential within us to make progress. Now, how do we reflect on
the rarity of attaining a human existence? First of all, I think it is
very important to have some understanding of the Buddhist view of
dependent origination. How do we determine whether or not something
exists? This is done on the basis of whether or not a phenomenon

is established by a certifying consciousness, a valid cognizer. Within
the category of existent phenomena, there are some that exist
occasionally. The occasional nature of their existence is a sign that
they depend upon other factors, causes, and conditions for their arisal;
therefore, they are otherpowered. The other type is that of permanent
phenomena which do not depend on causes and conditions for their
existence. The first category of phenomena consists of dependent
phenomena, and within this category there are external phenomena like
matter, and others that are only in the nature of clarity and knowing,
which are known as consciousnesses. Then there are others such as time,
which are abstract phenomena---although they exist, they are not
tangible like material phenomena. So, we find that there are three
categories of dependent phenomena. Since we are concerned with the
phenomena that directly relate to our experience of pain and pleasure,
we are here concerned with the phenomena that are related to
consciousness. One can never talk about pain and pleasure as isolated
from consciousness. Here it is important to reflect on the causality of
phenomena that are related to our inner faculty, mind and consciousness.
It is very obvious to us that the body, which is the basis for our
experience of pain and pleasure, is in the nature of suffering and is
dependent upon causes and conditions. Then, we possess the faculty
called consciousness; it exists, it is the agent through which we
experience pain and pleasure, but it does not possess any form, color,
or anything. Yet this mysterious force is there. Just as the external
body has causes and conditions, the inner faculty, consciousness, also
has causes and conditions. When we reflect in such terms, we will be
able to see that within the causes there are two types: substantial
causes that eventually turn into their fruits, and cooperative causes
that contribute to the production of particular fruits. Phenomena
possess certain essential qualities---for example, the wetness of water
and the heat of fire--- which are their natural defining
characteristics. These characteristics cannot be said to be produced by
a specific cause. I do not know if the karmic forces of sentient beings
can affect these natural characteristics. We find that within phenomena
there are certain laws: natural laws, the laws of dependence, functional
laws, and the laws of logical evidence. The first one, the law of
nature, is very important as a basis; first of all, it is very important
to recognize the basic nature of a phenomenon. For example, the basic
nature of a consciousness is clarity and knowing. After having perceived
the basic nature of a consciousness on the basis of such knowledge, one
will be able to understand it better. Understanding that the basic
element

of matter is atoms will be likewise helpful. I think that there are some
parallels between the disciplines of modern science---physics,
chemistry, etc.---and some of the Buddhist concepts. Matter possesses
certain natural characteristics, and consciousness possesses certain
characteristics as well. The Kalachakra Tantra speaks of space particles
as the source of all matter, from which later evolves this entire
universe; eventually, all matter will be dissolved back into the space
particles. I do not know whether or not one can posit a beginning or an
end to these subtle particles. But in Chatu-shataka Shastra (The Four
Hundred Verses), Aryadeva does say that although lacking a beginning,
matter does possess an end. So, if we trace the matter that we see on
this earth to its source, we will find that it is originally in the form
of potential in these space particles. When we reflect in such terms, we
will be able to see a basic law of interdependence within all these
phenomena. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to speak fully about all
the subtle aspects of these laws. Buddhist philosophy speaks of the
extremely subtle aspect of karmic law, the law of causality, as an
object of knowledge only for the omniscient mind, and perceptible only
by the wisdom of a fully enlightened being. All the phenomena that are
directly related to our experience of pain and pleasure---of the body,
environment, and so forth---due to their causal conditions increase and
decrease and go through the process of change. Among these phenomena
there are certain ones that go through the process of change naturally,
and others, such as the experiences of happiness and suffering, that go
through certain changes when the being interacts with external
conditions. In order to achieve a human existence in the future with a
precious body, the causes and conditions that bring about such a result
should also be precious, because there should be a concordance between
causes and their effects. Just as the result is very rare, similarly the
causes themselves are very rare. So the appropriate cause for obtaining
a human existence in the future, as the text here discusses, is to have
a very proper foundation of a practice of morality---at minimum an
abstaining from the ten negative actions.3 In addition to this basis,
the practice of generosity, patience, and so on are also required, which
will contribute to the positive qualities of human existence such as
having a better intelligence, and so forth. These complementing factors
should themselves be complemented by aspirational prayers dedicated to
the obtaining of such a human form conducive to the practice of dharma.
So, you need these three factors: the foundation, the complementing
practices, and a strong force of aspiration to obtain such a body.

If we were to examine whether or not we possess within us these causes
that have the potential and power to bring about a human existence in
the future, we would find that achieving such an existence is very
difficult, very rare, for us. Most of us are so habituated to negative
actions and emotions that virtuous thoughts come about only accidentally
or through great effort. We are not as accustomed to them as we are to
negative actions, which flow like a stream of water running downhill.
Because of the habit of our minds, the arisal of negative emotions is
effortless for us, whereas the arisal of virtuous thoughts is very
difficult---we really have to work to generate them, as though we were
driving a donkey up hill. If we consider matters in such terms, we will
find that our own minds are always tormented by negative thoughts and
that these impulses lead us to negative actions. If this is what happens
when we are born as human beings and are equipped with the knowledge to
discriminate between right and wrong, what would it be like if we were
born in the lower realms, as animals for example, and were not equipped
with such knowledge or intelligence? If we think in such terms, we will
be able to infer that we must have accumulated great stores of
non-virtues and negativities in past lives. If we were to recollect our
own past actions even in this lifetime, we would find that we have
indulged in more negative actions than positive. If such is the case
with this present life, there is no need to say what kind of actions we
must have committed in past lives. Furthermore, the negative actions in
which we have indulged are really very complete from all points of view.
For example, when we kill a mosquito or a bug, we have the intention to
kill it, we use the most severe means to kill it, and then at the end we
rejoice that we have killed it. So, even one negative action has a very
strong motivation, an action, and also a sense of satisfaction at the
end. This is not the case with positive actions. Besides, negative
actions have the potential to increase, whereas positive actions can be
destroyed by many adverse circumstances. For example, although we may
have accumulated great stores of merit by making prostrations and so
forth, if we generate strong anger, this anger---even though it might be
momentary---will just blow away a large part of the merit that we might
have accumulated yesterday. We will then have to start all over again.
We find that it is very rare that we engage in positive actions. Even
those that are accumulated are very weak and also very vulnerable to the
effects of negative actions. In view of this, it is important to study
the texts that speak of the great advantage of reflecting upon
emptiness; even a slight understanding of emptiness, be it just a
wavering thought, can destroy great stores of

negative karma. This is very true, and reflection on it will give us
encouragement to accumulate merit. Judge whether or not you possess
these causes within you for obtaining a precious human life in the
future. If you develop a certainty that you possess these factors within
you, then there is no need to request or seek others' help, because you
possess all the necessary conditions within you. But if you lack these
basic factors, then, even though you might invoke the power and
inspiration of other forces, it is very doubtful that you will be
helped. When you do the meditation, reflect upon the rarity of the
precious human existence first by using all kinds of analogies (though
it is very difficult to find an analogy that can totally illustrate the
great potential of human existence), and then by considering it in terms
of its own nature, and finally by thinking about the rarity of its
causes. This order of reflection on the rarity of the precious human
existence of leisure and fortune is said to have great significance and
has been recommended by many great masters of the past. If you think in
such terms, you will be able to convince yourself that you should make
the effort and take the initiative right now when you have obtained a
human life. So, make whatever effort you can, now that you have a human
body. Make the decision to undertake dharma practice right now in this
very life. With that, the reflection on the great significance and
rarity of human life is over, and you should affirm this by again
visualizing nectar descending and so forth. These reflections help
persuade us from within to engage in the practice of dharma, and thus
are preliminary factors. Next follows the actual path. This is divided
into three: training the mind in the stages of the path common to the
practitioners of initial capacity, training the mind in the stages of
the path common to the middling capacity, and training the mind in the
stages of the path of the great capacity.

15. DEATH AND IMPERMANENCE

T

HE ESSENCE OF the reflection on death and impermanence can be condensed

into a verse from the Chatu-shataka Shastra: Unwholesome deeds should be
reversed first, And then in the middle, the "self." Later eliminate all
erroneous views. He who knows such a sequence is wise. You should
develop the conviction that awareness of death and impermanence is an
important element of the Buddha's teaching, and that this is why the
Buddha taught impermanence at the beginning of all his teachings when he
first taught the Four Noble Truths. The first phase of the practice is
to restrain the negative actions that could propel you to lower realms
of existence. The cause of your body is contaminated actions and
delusions, and as long as you are under their influence there is no
place for happiness. In a similar way there is no possibility of
happiness and peace while someone is under the leadership of a very
negative person. Therefore, reflect upon the fact that you are under the
rule of ignorance; ignorance is like the despotic king, and anger and
attachment are like his ministers. We live under the tyranny and
influence of ignorance, the self-grasping attitude, and also the
self-cherishing attitude--- factors that all the buddhas and
bodhisattvas treat as real enemies. The worst thing is to be under the
influence and grip of these negative factors; therefore in the second
chapter of Pramanavartika (A Thorough Explanation of Valid Cognitions),
Dharmakirti says that from the reflection on impermanence one will be
able to lead oneself on to the realization of the suffering nature. The
second phase is to engage in the method of rooting out the delusions
that are the root of these negative actions. This is done by applying
their opponent force, the wisdom realizing emptiness, which eliminates
the grasping at self-existence. Eliminating these delusions, together
with their

root, marks the achievement of liberation. The third phase is to
eliminate the dispositions or imprints left by the delusions that
obstruct you from achieving omniscience, the direct knowledge of all
phenomena. This should be done by complementing the wisdom realizing
emptiness with the factors of method---compassion, bodhicitta, patience,
generosity, and so forth. If you are able to cultivate a powerful mind
that focuses on the welfare of infinite numbers of sentient beings, you
will develop a courage that is able to endure infinite hardships for
their benefit. Because of the great power of this practice, you will be
able to accumulate great stores of merit. When you accumulate these
stores of merit by complementing the wisdom of emptiness with the
powerful factor of method, you will be able to free yourself totally
from all wrong views and misconceptions. Even in ordinary terms, you
would need to have a certain fear of impending danger in order to seek a
refuge. Similarly, in order to have a firm practice of refuge, it is
first very important to recognize the danger that you are facing. Doing
this depends upon a recognition of the unsatisfactory and painproducing
nature of life in this cyclic existence. When you have clearly
recognized the frustrating nature of life in this cycle of existence in
general, and the sufferings in the lower realms in particular, a genuine
desire to seek refuge will follow. To achieve such a recognition, some
reflection on impermanence and death is essential. Therefore, when the
Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths, he first spoke of impermanence.
This is what is explained in the first chapter of The Four Hundred
Verses; although the actual words are difficult to understand, the text
deals extensively with the general and specific sufferings of cyclic
existence. The practical commentaries list the practices that help us
overcome attraction to the affairs of this lifetime as follows:
understanding the advantages of reflecting on death and impermanence;
contemplating the disadvantages of not doing so; and the actual
meditation on death, performed by mimicking the death experience.
Gungthang Tenpai Dronme said in his Mitag Gomtsul Gyi Labjha (Advice on
How to Meditate on Impermanence): The thoughts that in this year and
month I will put right all my tasks and plans And then start a perfect
dharma practice Is in fact the devil which brings all downfalls.

The lack of death awareness prevents one from undertaking the practice
of dharma. This is very true: If one is not aware of the eventuality of
death, one will be totally concerned and preoccupied with the affairs of
this lifetime alone, and with actions that are just for the benefit of
this lifetime. Such ventures may take all one's time and energy, but no
matter how important they appear to be, since they are directly related
to this lifetime alone, their benefits are limited---once one leaves the
present body, their benefit ends. Even though one might have a best
friend, when one has to leave the body, one cannot take the friend
along. So many people have been born in this world in the past, but all
of them are now just memories. Just as the texts say, great buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the past, although great beings, also are only memories.
The same is true of great kings and so forth. Reflect upon the fact that
even the Buddha himself has passed into nirvana. The same will happen to
us. Think of how things will look after one hundred years: none of the
people assembled now inside this temple will be alive. Even this
building may not remain. To prove this, it is not necessary to quote
from scriptures nor to give any logical reasons. Even since last year's
teachings, I can see that some of my friends have passed away. The same
will happen to those who have gathered here this year---next year when
we gather for the teachings it is definite that some of us will be no
more---but none of us will even have the thought, "It will be me,"
because of our strong habituation to the apprehension of permanence.
Think that after twenty or thirty years even the Dalai Lama, who has
been talking so much, will also be no more. While I am alive, there will
be people who are, from the depths of their hearts, prepared to give
their lives for my sake, but on the day when I have to leave, I cannot
take even one among them with me. Neither will I be able to take any of
my possessions, even the body which has been with me since the time of
my birth and which I have always preserved and protected. This also will
be left behind. At that time of my death, what will benefit is only the
positive seeds that are imprinted upon my consciousness. No other
factors will help at that time. This is very true, a fact that can be
proved and observed. Therefore, if you are totally concerned and
preoccupied with the affairs of this lifetime, there is a great danger
of causing your own downfall. If by such concern you were able to
achieve the desired happiness, that is okay, but this is not the case.
We all let ourselves be caught in this web of preoccupation with the
activities and confusion of this lifetime. Having too much worldly
involvement ends in confusion. We spend our whole lives thinking that
this might be better than that, I should do this, or perhaps something
else is better

and I should do that. If you reflect upon the underlying
dissatisfaction, then you will be able to find that, well, after all,
whatever they might be, the affairs of this lifetime are not that
important, because they yield a limited benefit. This does not mean that
you should not work for your own livelihood, but it does indicate that
you should not be preoccupied with that alone. Your meditation on death
and impermanence should be inspired by great delight. You should see
this meditation as a factor that will really encourage you to engage in
dharma practice. If you have the awareness of death you stand to gain a
lot. It is important not only at the initial stage, but also during the
actual path. When you possess such awareness and mindfulness, although
you may work for your own livelihood, you will not take that as the most
important thing. If a person has prepared for death from a long time
back, when death comes it will not come as a shock because he will be
well prepared; he will feel that death is merely like changing his
clothes. Whereas if a person just avoids the question of death, trying
to forget about it, then when death comes, he might be caught totally
unprepared and be bewildered by it. When some of my friends who have
little interest in the dharma and who have become very old are told that
they might die soon---as is obvious---they are not able to actually
endure such statements, and so people deceive them by giving them a
false feeling that they are going to live long. We find that the lives
of some people who were connected to the fate of the Tibetans---such as
Mao Tse Tung and Stalin---have not in the end been quite admirable. Such
people have meted out a lot of destruction and have not been able to
accomplish even the negative actions that they set out to do. They have
had to live their whole lives under great anxiety and pressure. This is
an obvious fact. But if you are mindful of death and have this death
awareness, you will always think of the future and make preparations for
it, and when death strikes it will not come as a surprise, so you will
not be so anxious. Consequently, at that point you will be able to
maintain your calmness of mind. Just requesting prayers from others at
the time of death and not doing anything yourself is very improper and
contradicts any claim that you are a follower of dharma. Sometimes I
actually say this when people come to seek my prayers for them. I know
an old Tibetan lady who always used to ask me, "Oh, Your Holiness, do
not let me fall in the hell realms"---as though I have that in my hand!
There is nothing I can do if she has done nothing on her part. Not only
I, but even the Buddha does not have the power to save such a

being. Therefore, the Buddha taught the infallibility of karmic law. If
the great beings like the Buddha have the power to determine the fate of
the living beings, then there is no need for him to talk about the
infallibility of karmic law. If you are equipped with this death
awareness, you will always work to accumulate virtuous actions to
prepare for your future. To do the actual meditation on death, you
should reflect on the certainty of death and the unpredictability of its
time, and that at the time of death it is only dharma that can benefit
you. Meditation on the certainty of death is undertaken through
reasoning on three facts: that death definitely comes and no
circumstances can prevent it; that life ebbs away uninterruptedly and
cannot be extended; and that time is scarce for dharma practice even
while one is alive. With these contemplations, you must decide to
practice dharma. After meditating on the certainty of death, consider
the fact that the lifetime of living beings on this planet is very
unpredictable, and therefore death might strike any time. Reflecting on
its unpredictability will persuade you to undertake the practice of
dharma with a note of urgency. So, with that, you should make a decision
to practice right now. Then reflect that at the time of death, wealth,
possessions, friends, relatives, and even your own body will not be
beneficial. With this, you should decide to only practice dharma. The
oral instruction says that after meditating on the certainty of death,
it is effective to contemplate the death process, mimicking the actual
situation. How do you do that? Just imagine how a dying person feels at
the time of death. The doctors abandon you and you find yourself lost.
If you are suffering from chronic illness, the doctors will have lost
hope and the relatives or friends will seek the prayers of spiritual
beings. On your own part, you will have to face the situation. You will
be unable to move your body from the mattress and you will wear the last
clothes; and even though you might want to leave some message, it is
very difficult even to speak the words that you want to say. It is even
doubtful whether or not you will have the time to give this message. And
then the last food that you take will be, for a religious practitioner,
blessed pills and so forth, though you may not be able to swallow them.
It is difficult to know if you can gain much from pinning all your hopes
on taking some blessed pills. But still, it is human nature to keep
hoping. As you are dying, you will have all sorts of illusions when the
physical elements within your body begin to dissolve and lose their
force. Often these dissolution processes are associated with frightening
experiences and hallucinations. At that time, you will become more and
more distant from what is called the present life, for the sake of which
you have indulged in all

kinds of negative actions. You might also have indications of your
future fate, having all sorts of illusions or hallucinations of fires or
water, of being submerged underground or feeling heaviness of the body,
and so forth. Gradually, even the breath will lose its force; eventually
the breathing will grow faint. Finally, you will just exhale and not be
able to inhale, and at that point, just like a fiddle string breaking,
your link to the present body comes to an end. At that time, you will be
known as the late so and so. The very name--- Tenzin and so forth---that
might have inspired pleasure and happiness in relatives before, will now
need a prefix, "late." That marks the end of a life. It is effective to
reflect upon this process. It is very descriptively explained in the
writings of Gungthang Jamphelyang and Phabongkha Dechen Nyingpo, whose
texts are very helpful. To quote a few verses from Phabongkha's Mitag
Drenkul Nyingi Thurma (Reminder of Impermanence): Though you eagerly
prepare yourself, With constant thoughts of many morrows, The time will
come when you will be forced To leave right now and here. The time will
come when you will leave Without any control, with things unfinished:
Tasks, meals, and even half-finished drinks. The time will come when you
will pull From the clothes and hands of your friends, With hands very
weak and feeble, While lying down and unable to move, On your last
mattress, which you can use only today, As though an old tree has
fallen. The time will come when you will see Your own corpse for the
first time, When your body becomes hard as a rock, Though wrapped in and
out with your last bedding, Clothing which you can use only today. The
time will come when you will be overwhelmed

By depressions and frustrations From being unable to communicate with
others Through your last words of death-will and complaints, Spoken with
a dry mouth though with all the effort. With this, the contemplation on
death and impermanence is over.

16. SUFFERINGS OF THE LOWER REALMS

T

HE NEXT MEDITATION of the practitioners of initial capacity is the
reflection

upon the sufferings of the lower realms. Again focusing upon the
spiritual master, you should reflect that when your link to this present
life ends, there are only two possibilities for your future existence:
the favorable and unfavorable forms of existence. As we discussed
earlier, the end of birth is death, and at that point the present body
ceases. Among the many different consciousnesses, there are coarser
ones, such as the sensory consciousnesses, which are very dependent upon
the body. All these consciousnesses have a basic nature, which is the
Clear Light; there is no possibility of consciousness originating from a
cause that is not in the nature of Clear Light. So this Clear Light mind
is known as the fundamental innate consciousness, and when it interacts
with circumstances, external factors, it produces the grosser levels of
mind. Because the continuity of this subtle form of consciousness is
beginningless, it is possible sometimes---even for ordinary people---to
recall the death experiences of the past. I know some Indian children
who are able to recall very clearly and vividly their past lives, the
circumstances under which they had to die, and the experiences they went
through at the time of death. Such remembrance is a phenomenon that one
can observe now. Some people, when they subdue the active forces of the
gross levels of mind as a result of their meditations, are able to
increase the force of the subtle levels of consciousness through the
experience of Clear Light. As a result of such experiences, they are
able to recall their past lives vividly. This shows that there are
events in the past that are objects of our recollection and memory,
which indicates that there are past lives. There is no factor that can
end the continuity of this consciousness, which is in the nature of
clarity and knowing. At death time, consciousness has to separate from
the present body and undergo the intermediate state. At that point, one
experiences a subtle form of consciousness---this does not refer to the
subtle forms of consciousness developed as a result of meditation. There

are many different levels of consciousness; when the mind is withdrawn
from active attention to external objects, one is able to abandon the
grosser levels and experience a subtle level. There are three levels of
consciousness; the experiences of these different consciousnesses result
in different levels of existence. The lowest is the realm of desire,
where the level of mind is very gross and where people are more
attracted to external objects. Next comes the form realm, with its
sixteen divisions, where the mind is subtler and more withdrawn from
external objects. Then there is a realm known as the formless realm,
which is divided into four. It is a state of existence that is
temporarily free not only from suffering and dissatisfaction but also
from ordinary feelings of joy and pleasure, experiences that normally
result in desire and discontent. Although it is very difficult to
logically prove the existence of these levels, you can judge that the
states of mind that you have could result in different states of
existence in the future. The nature of these can be inferred by judging
the quality of our mind and the degree to which it is dominated by
desire, hatred, anger, and so forth. After death, the individual takes
rebirth in any of the three realms of existence, which are broadly
classified into two: the favorable and the unfavorable migrations, also
known as the higher and lower rebirths. The favorable transmigrations
include birth as a celestial being (of a formless, form, or desire
realm), an asura (demi-god), or a human being. The unfavorable
transmigrations include rebirth as an animal, a wandering spirit, or a
hell being. I do not know if the hell realms really do exist as
described so vividly in the Abhidharma literature, yet one thing that is
obvious is that the environment is very much associated with the beings
living therein. In our case, we are deeply interdependent with the
planet earth, which is our natural habitat. However, this delicate
interdependence was not understood by mankind in the past, and this
unfortunately has led human beings to take many things too much for
granted. This ignorance has resulted in an immoral exploitation of the
planet, with a devastating effect on both the environment and the lives
within it. If we examine our planet and the lives on it, we will be
amazed to find much evidence suggesting an underlying balance at the
basis of all. Consider how differing trees have appropriate features
that give them the capacity to multiply their class and thus survive.
For example, some trees have flowers with cotton-like covers which can
be blown away by the wind so the species can survive. If we were to
reflect upon the individual causes of all these distinctions, it would
be difficult to explain everything logically. The

same is true of living beings: the fact that all the living beings have
gone through the evolutionary process in this world for more than five
billion years is really very profound and difficult to believe. It is
not surprising, since that is the case, that descriptions of other forms
of life on other planets and so forth are difficult to understand, but
that does not mean that such forms do not exist. Therefore, since living
beings are infinite and have all sorts of forms, shapes, and colors, one
can infer that also their environments, their natural habitats, could be
totally different from ours. Buddhist writings speak of numberless
systems of universes. Modem scientific cosmology comes close to the
Buddhist explanation of infinite universal systems, but the particular
description that we find in Abhidharma and also some sutras, such as
Do-de Drenpa Nyershag (Sutra on Mindfulness), may not be taken as
literal. The logical explanations of the specific causes of the diverse
shapes, physical compositions, colors, and so forth of the countless
universal systems are very hidden from us, as are the subtlest aspects
of karma and their results. There are various sufferings in the lower
realms. Those realms of existence where the experience of suffering is
most intense are categorized as the hell realms; that where confusion
and ignorance are most powerful is regarded as the realm of animals,
where the powerful devour the weak; that where the sufferings of hunger
and thirst are most acute is viewed as the realm of pretas (hungry
ghosts). You should reflect on what it would be like to take rebirth in
a lower form of existence---as a dog, for example. Just imagine how you
would feel and what could be your fate! One is not born in these lower
realms without any cause, merely by accident. When the causes and
conditions for such a rebirth have been aggregated, birth into such
realms naturally follows. Reflect upon the fact that if you have
accumulated the causes such as stealing, killing, etc. ---if these
actions are very strong and forceful---then the fruition of these
actions would be rebirth in the hell realms. Actions that were a little
less forceful would throw you into rebirth as a hungry ghost, and those
somewhat milder would give you rebirth as an animal. Since it is certain
that we all have accumulated all sorts of negative actions within this
lifetime, our undergoing experience of these lower realms is only a
matter of time. The moment the process of breathing ends, our future
life begins. Reflecting in such terms, not just observing but rather
mimicking the situation, imagining that you are undergoing these
sufferings will be powerful and effective. Do this contemplation, as the
Fifth Dalai Lama's Lamrim and Lama

Tsongkhapa's Lamrim Chenmo recommend, by imagining that you are
undergoing such sufferings to the degree that you develop a kind of fear
and a feeling of unbearableness. If you find these experiences
unbearable, realize that you have the opportunity right now to prevent
yourself from falling into the lower realms. Reflect upon the factors
that cause one to take rebirth in such realms of existence, checking
within your mind whether or not you have the causes and conditions for
lower rebirth, or have committed them in the past, or are committing
them right now, or may commit them in the future. Then strive for the
means to eliminate them. Make a request prayer to the spiritual master
that you may never indulge in these negative actions. The actual means
of protecting yourself from the danger of falling into the lower realms
of existence is to bring about the realization of the dharma within your
mind. Some people might feel that if they actually meet with the
experiences of the lower realms they will face them, but since they are
not undergoing such experiences right now, it is pointless to mimic them
and imagine undergoing them. This is not a practical outlook. Generally
speaking, it is the way of a courageous person to take precautionary
measures and be prepared before an eventuality strikes. But just waiting
for something to happen and not being prepared is the way of a fool.
Having generated a genuine feeling of unbearableness for the sufferings
in the lower realms of existence by imagining the experience of being
born there, and also by realizing the presence of causes within yourself
for taking rebirth in such realms, you undertake a new initiative to
seek immunity from such a danger. The actual preventative measure is to
take, from the depths of your heart, refuge in the Three Jewels, and to
respect the karmic law of causality.

17. SEEKING REFUGE

T

is the practice of taking refuge and developing deep conviction in the
law of causality. In order to have a very firm and reinforced practice
of refuge, you can visualize the objects of refuge. This is done by
visualizing light rays emanating from the heart of the spiritual master
at your heart. Then again visualize buddhas and bodhisattvas in front of
you in the space above. Reflect upon their exceptional qualities of
body, speech, and mind, and think that you have experienced the intense
sufferings of the lower realms in the past, and if you do not control
yourself at this time you might continue to undergo such suffering in
the future as well. With such reflection, you should entrust yourself
totally to the care of these objects of refuge and seek refuge in them.
Then visualize nectar descending, which purifies the negativities. To
explain in brief, taking refuge is the factor that determines whether or
not one is a Buddhist. Therefore, it is the entrance into the Buddhist
community, marks one's becoming a Buddhist, and lays a proper foundation
for taking subsequent vows. Its practice can take various forms. There
are some forms of refuge practice that are based on a reasoned
conviction derived through valid cognition. Those who may not have such
a faculty but who have seen and admired the great qualities and
capacities of the Buddha, dharma, and sangha, can---on the basis of
their personal convictions---take them as an infallible refuge. The
Buddha said in one sutra: HE NEXT PHASE

Faith is the forerunner of all positive deeds, Hence should be
cultivated first; It safeguards all virtuous qualities, And enhances
them as well. The more progress you make in your spiritual path and the
more advanced you become, the better your practice of refuge can become.
Someone who possesses this factor of refuge entrusts himself or herself
totally to the care

and guidance of the Three Jewels and takes refuge in them. To have a
successful practice of refuge, it is first of all necessary to cultivate
the two basic causes for seeking refuge, which are the factors of fear
and conviction, as discussed earlier. Just reflect that it is your
natural tendency to wish to experience happiness and avoid suffering,
and that you can accomplish this feat by cultivating the dharma within
yourself. What is meant by dharma is the spiritual realization that you
can achieve as a result of your practice. Any factor that can enable you
to achieve total liberation from delusions and sufferings and bring
about the realization of a true cessation is the true dharma. Since
delusions do not reside in the essential nature of the mind, they are
adventitious and can be purged and cleared away from your mind when the
right opponent forces are applied. Once you are able to free yourself
totally and get rid of the delusions which are the causes of your
sufferings, then there is no possibility of experiencing sufferings. The
achievement of that liberation marks total victory, and that is true
cessation, or in other words, the dharma. Cessation of suffering and
delusions does not refer to delusions becoming exhausted through the
passage of time, but rather it refers to a state where one has achieved
a form of cessation developed through one's applying the actual opponent
forces that destroy the potential of delusion within. That "cessation"
is dharma, so when one says, "Dharma is refuge," one should have the
understanding that dharma is the path that leads one to the state of
liberation and also the state of cessation itself, and that these are
the actual refuge. The moment someone has these realizations, such a
person is regarded as a superior being or an arya. All people employing
skillful means, if they are able to free themselves from delusions and
sufferings and achieve their cessation, are spiritual beings and form
the spiritual community. Because seeing such spiritual persons can be
encouraging, spiritual communities are helpful. We beginners require the
companionship of the spiritual community. By leaning on the support of
some superior persons, we are able to make progress. Such people possess
the realizations and cessations and, due to their experience, are able
to guide us properly. Even for worldly knowledge we require teachers. We
need the guidance of a fully accomplished master who is able to lead us
on the right path to the achievement of cessation, through a gradual
process and in the proper order of the path, because cessation is a
state that can be achieved only through a gradual process---it cannot
come about instantly. Therefore, it is very important to rely upon a
spiritual master or the Buddha, the master of the doctrine, a master who
possesses the compassion that is

totally impartial and encompasses all sentient beings within its sphere.
Lama Tsongkhapa said: Those who are outside your doctrine, Though they
persevere with hardships for long, Strengthen the view grasping at self,
As though hastily asking for miseries. Masters of other religious
disciplines are admirable because their teachings benefit many people,
but since Buddhist practitioners are engaged in a path leading to the
ultimate liberation and are not confined to the perfection of this
lifetime alone, they should have a unique master conforming to their own
mode of spiritual path. Generally speaking, all the masters of the major
religious of this world should be respected and should be admired, be
they Buddhist or non-Buddhist. At the same time, when it comes to our
own refuge, it is important to go for refuge to the Buddha. It is not a
question of being partial, because it is only someone who has realized
the real meaning of emptiness who will be able to show the path leading
to liberation through experience and the doctrine which outline the path
leading to liberation through experience. The importance and
significance of the master Buddha come from the nature of the dharma. As
I remarked earlier, understanding of dharma can be developed on the
basis of understanding the Two Truths and the Four Noble Truths. Let us
take a phenomenon, a single object; although it has many levels of
characteristics and qualities, it is not necessary for one to realize
all of them at one time. Similarly, there are many different levels of
understanding of the Four Noble Truths. It is only by understanding the
subtle views of the Madhyamika Prasangika that one can understand the
Four Noble Truths on their subtlest level, but that does not mean one
cannot develop an understanding of the Four Noble Truths without these
Views. If you understand the dharma, you will be able to respect the
other Jewels, too. The word Kanchok (Jewel) will have a special meaning.
Dharma is very rare and precious; the same is true of the spiritual
community and the master of the doctrine. Through such reflections, you
will be able to develop a deep conviction that the Jewels are unfailing
and reliable when a refuge is sought in them. Having visualized the
Three Jewels, it is very effective to reflect upon the exceptional
qualities of the master of the doctrine, the Buddha. As mentioned in the
opening verse of Pramana-samucca (Compendium of Valid Cognitions) by
Dignaga, the Buddha is someone who evolved as a fully

enlightened being through the perfection of universal compassion and
wisdom, hence attaining all the realizations and cessations. Thus we see
that great compassion and wisdom are the chief qualities of the Buddha.
Even in worldly terms, the more intelligent and knowledgeable a person
is, the more the person commands respect. Similarly, the more
compassionate, kind and gentle a person, the more he or she should be
respected. This is not a matter of religion alone, for not only human
beings but even small insects have the natural instinct to be happy and
to avoid sufferings, and thus appreciate kindness. So if you are able to
develop that intelligence and altruism to their fullest extent, then you
are truly admirable and deserve to be respected. By reflecting upon the
great qualities and capacities of the objects of refuge, you will
develop a conviction that will be firmly rooted in and deeply based on
reason, and thereby able to withstand logical analysis. You should not
believe in the preciousness and sanctity of a spiritual being or Buddha
just because someone said that this being possesses these qualities;
rather you should develop faith and conviction through your own analytic
process, by comparing these beings to other masters of doctrine. A
refuge practice developed through such a process will be very firm and
stable, whereas a practice developed just by relying on a few words of a
person will not be very stable. Such a practice will be very much like
the Chinese description of Buddhist practice---blind faith. The attitude
of entrusting yourself from the round orb of your heart to a superior
being is the proper refuge. It should be deeply felt, and you should
entrust yourself totally to the care of the Three Jewels. A recitation
of the refuge formula---"I go for refuge to the Buddha"---induced by
such a force of mind marks the taking of refuge. Let us set aside for a
while the question of meditational deities, dharmapalas, heroes, and so
forth as objects of refuge; the basic necessity is the recognition of
the Three Jewels. Now, when the Buddha is spoken of in the context of
the Mahayana, you should understand that the reference is not confined
to the historical person alone. If it were, then many inconsistencies in
the Mahayana writings would emerge. It is very difficult to explain how
an ordinary person became totally enlightened within one lifetime
without ever practicing highest yoga tantra. Within the Mahayana
context, Buddha Shakyamuni should be seen as the nirmanakaya (emanation
body), the attainment of which, one assumes, is possible only when a
being has achieved the sambhogakaya (enjoyment body). Both these bodies
are dependent on the attainment of the dharmakaya (truth body). So an
understanding of these three bodies---dharmakaya, sambhogakaya, and
nirmanakaya---is very

important. Then you should reflect upon the exceptional qualities of the
Buddha's great compassion, wisdom, and capacity---in other words, the
qualities of his body, speech, mind, activities, and so forth. Then you
will be able to develop a deep conviction in the buddhas' capacities,
because they are the beings who have totally conquered all forms of
obstacles and limitations within their minds and who have the ability to
enable others to do so. The full meaning of the word buddha---fully
enlightened---could come about only on the basis of an understanding of
the indivisible union of method and wisdom. Only when you develop an
understanding of the Buddha in such a manner can the meditational deity
become really significant and mean something profound, because
realization of a meditational deity is possible only on the basis of
undertaking a practice that is a union of method and wisdom. The same is
true of protectors, heroes, heroines, dakinis, and so forth, who provide
assistance on the path. If you do not have such a firm understanding,
perhaps it is better to have just the understanding of Buddha Shakyamuni
in his bhikshu form. If your understanding of a meditational deity is
not much different from your perception of a non-Buddhist deity, then it
is not very profound. Without a proper understanding, visualization of
all these complex deities can be more harmful than beneficial. First,
make a fervent request to the spiritual master at your crown to enable
you to have the perfect realization of the practice of refuge. As a
Mahayanist, you should also wish that all sentient beings may develop
the same aspiration. As explained in the section on relying on a
spiritual master, do the visualization of the merit field according to
your own mental disposition. At this point, it is very effective to
reflect upon the exceptional qualities of the path, starting from the
sravaka1 level, first reflecting upon the realization of the sravaka on
the path of accumulation2: his force of wisdom, meditative
stabilization, morality, and so forth. You will be able to see that
these forces increase on the higher path, eventually leading to the
completely enlightened state. Then you will be able to understand the
unsurpassable quality of buddhahood, as explained in Ratnavali,
Uttaratantra, Madhyamakāvatāra, Abhisamayalankara, and similar texts.
This understanding will help you to develop a very strong conviction and
faith in the Buddha. Reflect that although all sentient beings have
these objects of refuge, if they do not realize their great significance
and capacity, then how can they take refuge in them? As a result, they
are tormented and plunged into the confusion of cyclic existence. Pray
that, from now on, just as you undertake the practice of refuge, may all
sentient beings equally have such realizations.

After having undertaken the practice of refuge, you should observe the
precepts of refuge, the abandonments and the affirmations. All these
precepts should be studied from Lamrim Chenmo by Lama Tsongkhapa. This
text is like the constitution; it is very important, and you should
study and practice it. Path to Bliss, on which you are receiving
teachings right now, should be taken as a key with which you can unlock
the treasure found in Lamrim Chenmo. As a precept of taking refuge, you
should never indulge in the business of selling statues and scriptures
for profit, and you should never talk of or judge the value of statues
on the basis of their material. Whether they are made of clay or any
precious material, they should be treated equally. Also observe the
precept of seeing the distinctive features of the Buddhist master and
the doctrine. Among all the precepts of taking refuge, the most
important is to observe the law of causality, living your life with
awareness of the laws of karma. Also reflect upon the fact that all the
Buddha's activities are motivated by his great compassion and that the
essence of his doctrine is to be compassionate and to work for others.
The gist of his message to the world is the practice of a kind heart. A
kind heart and altruism bring about a positive atmosphere around the
person who practices them. Even a gentle dog makes people around it feel
comfortable, whereas a very aggressive dog will make people cautious and
apprehensive. Such is true also of human beings: when your companions
are calm and gentle and warm-hearted, you can rely on them and trust
them. Human beings are social animals who depend for their survival on
others' cooperation and assistance. So it is better not to have a
companion at all than to have one who is very aggressive and harmful.
You can never rely on such a person but always have to be suspicious and
apprehensive about him or her. And conversely, if your own character and
personality is such that all people avoid you, that is very sad.
Therefore, a kind heart and compassion are the real sources of peace and
happiness; this compassion, when you enhance it to its fullest potential
by employing the right skillful means though meditation, marks the
realization of a universal compassion. When such a compassion is further
complemented by the factors of wisdom and intelligence, then you will
achieve a state called buddhahood in which you totally sacrifice
yourself for the benefit of others; such a compassion and kind heart are
really priceless and most precious. So, when you have developed a strong
force of taking refuge in the Three Jewels, you should, as an expression
of your mental attitude, recite the refuge formula. Repeat the
recitation, and when you find that you begin to lose the force of your
contemplation, leave the repetition for a while and again

reinforce your contemplation, reflecting upon the great kindness of the
master Buddha and the great qualities of the dharma and so forth. You
should undertake your practice in such a manner. Normally, if you have
someone in whom you have great confidence and to whom you entrust
yourself, you will be able to follow with greater willingness and
delight the advice that he gives to you. Similarly, the more you feel
confidence in the Three Jewels, particularly the Buddha, the more
forceful your refuge in them becomes. You feel closer to a being such as
the Buddha and, from the depths of your heart, will be able to have deep
conviction and confidence in such a person. As a result, naturally your
admiration for that person will increase and you will emulate his noble
example. As a result, whenever you are faced with circumstances where
you might engage in negative actions, you will naturally restrain
yourself from them, thinking, "I should not do that as it is against the
ideals of the Buddha and his doctrine, and I am a spiritual person, a
bhikshu, so I should refrain from such actions." Such a restraint would
eventually extend even to your thoughts in dreams as well. Restraint
from negative actions marks the realization of having sought refuge;
refuge has reinforced your courage to do positive actions and weakened
your boldness to indulge in negative actions. The root of the Buddha's
doctrine is compassion and the practice of nonharming. Since you claim
to be a practitioner of this doctrine, you should keep the essential
precept of taking refuge in the dharma: never to indulge in actions
harmful to others, even to small animals. For example, it is beneficial
to save animals who are in danger of being killed. If you can help them,
do it, but if not, at least never harm them. As a precept of taking
refuge in the spiritual community, you should not associate yourself
with people who are not dharma practitioners. Even someone wearing the
smallest patch of yellow robes should be respected. Since the spiritual
community is regarded as an object of refuge, its members have a great
responsibility to live exemplary lives. On their part, they should make
themselves worthy of such respect. It is very important to make the
effort. There has never been a being, no matter how great his or her
spiritual realizations---Aryadeva or Nagarjuna or even the Buddha
himself---who was totally enlightened and free of faults at birth. Just
because you have weaknesses and faults, you should not feel discouraged
and careless, saying, "I have these faults and cannot help it." Rather,
you should feel that you also have the natural notion of "self" that
serves as the basis of the instinctive wish to attain happiness and
avoid suffering. If you try to transform yourself for the better, there
is a possibility of reducing your chances of suffering in the future and
increasing your chances for happiness. On the part of the lay community,

it is important to respect the spiritual community. Of all the
practices, the most important factor is to have the altruistic attitude,
which is the essence of the doctrine. It is also the key to a happy and
successful society. You should have a kind heart and never harm others.
I say this whenever I meet people, because I have a deep conviction in
these principles and find them very effective and beneficial, and think
the same will be true for others. If someone lacks a kind heart and the
altruistic motivation and internally has a very negative mind, even
though he might be a spiritual practitioner like a bhikshu in external
appearance, it is most unbecoming. From all perspectives---religious or
political or worldly---a kind heart and altruism are like a living
jewel, the wish-granting jewel. The meditation on compassion is
therefore most important, not only for those who have great knowledge of
dharma, but also for those who lack such knowledge.

18. KARMA

T

HE NEXT MEDITATION is the contemplation on karmic law. The foundation

and root of attaining all the perfection of the future is the living of
one's life with awareness of the law of causality. As we discussed
earlier, the phenomena that are directly related to our experience of
pain and pleasure are subject to the law of interdependence and
therefore depend on their causes and conditions. If there is a cause,
the effects ensue and themselves in turn become causes and produce their
fruits. So there is a kind of chain reaction---it is like playing a
snooker game, in which one ball hits another and that hits another and
so on. This law of interdependence is very powerful. Things that we
would never expect sometimes arise, such as a small cause triggering
great change and transformation. That is the meaning of the law of
interdependence. The presentation of the law of causality is the
presentation of a natural fact. It can be explained briefly in this way:
if you do positive actions, you will face desirable consequences and if
you engage in negative actions, you will have to face undesirable
consequences. There is a connection of commensuration between cause and
effect. Any action that produces happiness is positive. The distinction
between negative and positive can be made only by judging the fruits.
Happiness and suffering can be posited only on the basis of the feeling
of a living being. If that factor of feeling is not taken into account,
what basis can there be for making such a distinction between positive
and negative or harm and benefit? Since we have to accept harm and
benefit, or in other words pain and pleasure, any causes that give rise
to suffering are negative, and any causes that give rise to happiness
are positive. Positive actions result in desirable consequences. In this
way there is a definiteness in karmic law. For example, taking the life
of another obviously harms the other person. Just as you yourself regard
your life as most precious, the same is true of the other person.
Therefore, as a result of the action that totally disregards the

preciousness of another's life, you will have to face commensurate
consequences. It is thus the worst form of negative action. Compared to
that, a slightly lesser evil is the stealing of others' belongings.
Stealing is harmful to others because it harms their possessions and
thus hurts their feelings. Although its consequences may not be as grave
as those of taking the life of others, nevertheless, stealing is a
negative act, and accordingly you will have to face commensurate
consequences. Sometimes we face certain situations where, although we
have done something good for others, we may not be able to reap the
consequences within this lifetime. When we are talking about the law of
causality, we are not limiting its operation to the confines of this
life alone, but rather are taking into account both this lifetime and
the future. Occasionally people who do not have a proper knowledge of
karmic law say that such and such a person is very kind and religious
and so forth, but he always has problems, whereas so and so is very
deceptive and negative, frequently indulging in negative actions, but
always seems very successful. Such people may think that there is no
karmic law at all. There are others who go to the other extreme and
become superstitious, thinking that when someone experiences illness, it
is all due to harmful spirits. If such a person were the disciple of a
Kadampa master, he would be beaten with a stick. It is also possible for
very negative people to experience their positive karma ripening
immaturely due to the very strong force of negative actions, and thus to
exhaust the potentials of their virtuous actions. They experience a
relative success in this life, while others who are very serious
practitioners, as a result of the force of their practices, bring upon
this lifetime the consequences of karmic actions which might have
otherwise thrown them into rebirth in lower realms of existence in the
future. As a result, they experience more problems and illnesses in this
life. Just resolving not to indulge in a negative action is not enough.
It should be accompanied by the understanding that it is for your own
benefit and sake that you must live with awareness of the law of karma:
if you have accumulated the causes, you will have to face the
consequences; if you desire a particular effect, you can work to produce
its causes; and if you do not desire a certain consequence, you can
avoid engaging in actions that will bring it about. You should reflect
upon the law of causality as follows: that there is a definite relation
between causes and effects; that actions not committed will never
produce an effect; and that once committed, actions will never lose
their potentiality simply through the passage of time. So, if you wish
to enjoy desirable fruits, you should work for the accumulation of the
appropriate causes, and if you want to avoid undesirable consequences,
you should not accumulate their causes.

Do not have the notion that karmic law is something laid down by the
Buddha. Rather, it is a natural law like any other natural law. Although
the very subtle aspects of karmic law are extremely hidden for us and
can be inferred only by relying upon scriptural sources, there are
certain general aspects of which we can develop an understanding through
reasoning. In order to gain such understanding, it is important first of
all to develop a deep conviction and faith in the master Buddha. This
cannot be produced just by saying that the Buddha possessed such and
such physical qualities and had a very impressive personality and so
forth. Rather, if after having subjected his doctrine to analysis, you
find his teachings to be authentic, very reliable, and able to withstand
any analysis, only then can you develop a deep and unshakable faith in
him. You should then be able to see that the Buddha is a being who
became enlightened through his perfection of a great compassion
developed over a long period of time. To generate the ascertainment that
the perfection of a Buddha comes from such a process, it is vital to
understand and develop the deep conviction that consciousness has the
potential to increase to a limitless level. A proper understanding of
buddhahood depends upon a proper understanding of dharma, and this in
turn depends upon an understanding of the Four Truths, the deeper
knowledge of which in turn depends upon a knowledge of the Two Truths.
If you do not understand the Four Truths, you will not be able to
understand the Buddha's doctrine properly, and if you do not have a good
understanding of the objects of refuge, then it is very difficult to
develop a deep conviction in the validity of the law of causality. If,
due to the force of your ignorance and so forth, you find yourself
committing negative actions, you should, equipped with the force of the
four powers,1 immediately purify them. There are different methods of
purification, such as reciting mantras, meditating on emptiness, doing
prostrations, engaging in deity yoga, making offerings, and particularly
on days of religious observance taking the Mahayana vows. But the most
important point is to have the factor of regret. Once you have that
factor, your practice of purification will be very successful. For
developing a deep regret for the negative actions, it is vital to see
their destructive nature. Once you have seen that, you will have genuine
regret, and this will then lead you to apply the opponent forces and to
make a very firm resolve never to indulge in these actions again. For
example, if you have a very serious and complex illness, you cannot cure
it just by taking a medicine composed of one element; rather, you have
to take all sorts of measures. Similarly, you need to apply every
measure possible to tame your mind, which is under the influence of

ignorance. Anger, hatred, and desire are also competing for domination
of your mind. There is no possibility of taming your mind by using just
one means. All the Buddha's teachings bear on the taming of the mind and
the bringing about of discipline within it. Since this work is done by
employing all sorts of skillful means, one finds many different
approaches in the Buddhist writings. Motivated as they are by all levels
of afflictive emotions and delusions (all rooted in ignorance), negative
actions committed through the three doors of body, speech, and mind are
countless. But they can be broadly classified into ten basic actions, as
the Buddha taught. Abstaining from these ten negative actions marks the
practice of the ten positive actions. Having properly recognized the ten
negative actions, you should reflect upon their destructive nature, and
impelled by the strong wish to abandon them, should refrain from doing
them. There are three negative actions of body: killing, stealing, and
sexual misconduct; four of speech: lying, divisive speech, harsh words,
and senseless gossip; and three of mind: covetousness, harmful intent,
and holding perverted views. If you have indulged in these negative
actions, you will take rebirth in the lower realms of existence as their
matured fruit. There are also many other levels of fruits, such as the
environmental effects2 and the perpetuation of negative tendencies in
the future. By reflecting upon the destructive nature of the actions and
their undesirable consequences, you should cultivate a strong resolve
never to indulge in them and should restrain yourself from engaging in
them. That, in essence, lays the proper foundation for the practice of
morality. On the basis of such morality, you should undertake the
practice. In order to achieve a true cessation, it is first of all very
important to abstain from the manifest expressions of these
delusions---the negative actions---thus gradually reversing negative
tendencies of thought. Observing the morality of refraining from the ten
negative actions is taught as a precept of taking refuge. This concludes
the practice of training in the first phase, that is, training the mind
in the stages of the path common to the practitioners of initial
capacity.

19. THE DEFECTS OF CYCLIC EXISTENCE IN GENERAL

A

S IN THE case of the earlier meditations, this meditation on the defects
of

cyclic existence should be preceded by the preliminaries. As Lama
Tsongkhapa said in his Lamrim Nyamgur: If you do not contemplate the
truth of suffering---the fallacy of samsara--- The wish to be free of
samsara will not arise. If you do not contemplate the source of
suffering---the door to samsara--- You will never discover the means of
cutting samsara's root. Base yourself on renunciation of cyclic
existence; be tired of it. Cherish knowledge of the chains that bind you
to the wheel of cyclic existence. Reflect upon the faults of true
suffering and then the faults and destructive nature of true origins of
suffering, and thus develop the wish to be free from the cycle of
existence. And, as Lama Tsongkhapa explained in Lamtso Namsum (The Three
Principal Aspects of the Path), you should overcome the attraction to
this life and then rise above preoccupation with future lives. It is
best to develop the wish to gain freedom from the cycle of existence by
understanding the method of doing so, since a wish to be free from
cyclic existence not based on a knowledge of method is not likely to be
firm and stable. Such an understanding can be developed by recognizing
sufferings as sufferings, identifying their origins, and seeking the
path which will lead to their cessation. When you see the possibility
and certainty of such cessation, by engaging in a path that leads to it,
you should develop the strong wish to achieve liberation. The training
of the mind in the stages of the path common to the middling

scope, as discussed earlier, is preceded by a loosening of the force of
grasping at self-existence of the person. Eventually, by totally
eliminating the selfgrasping attitude within your mind, you will be able
to achieve the permanent state of peace which is called liberation.
Without liberation, even though you might attain temporary relief from
the obvious sufferings of the lower realms of existence, thus enjoying
worldly perfections, this attainment is only a temporary postponement of
the sufferings of the lower realms; the moment you meet with the right
or appropriate circumstances, you will again take rebirth in the lower
realms of existence. The temporary relief from the lower realms afforded
by taking rebirth in favorable states of existence is not only unstable
but unreliable as well. Furthermore, when you probe deeply you will find
that no matter how high an existence a realm may be, even though it may
be the highest state of existence, as long as it is in this cycle of
existence the beings there are in the nature of sufferings, because they
have the sufferings of pervasive conditioning and are therefore under
the influence or command of contaminated actions and delusions. As long
as one is not able to be free from such an influence, there is no place
for permanent peace or happiness. The obvious sufferings that are known
as the sufferings of suffering are manifest sufferings that even animals
will be able to recognize as suffering and have the desire to be free
from. Generally, the experiences that you normally regard as pleasurable
and happy, such as having the physical comfort of good facilities and so
forth, if they are examined at a deeper level, will be revealed to be
changeable and therefore in the nature of suffering. They provide you
with temporary satisfaction; because of that temporary satisfaction you
regard them as experiences of happiness. But if you keep on pursuing
them, they will again lead to the experience of suffering. Most of these
pleasurable experiences are not really happiness in the true sense of
the word, but only appear as pleasure and happiness in comparison to the
obvious sufferings that you have. Thus, all experiences of suffering can
be categorized into three classes or levels of suffering: (1) manifest
suffering; (2) suffering of change; and (3) the pervasive suffering of
conditioning. Even though you have attained existence in a higher realm,
still you are not totally free of the potential suffering of the three
lower realms, and as long as you are under the influence of contaminated
actions and delusions you will never have independence or freedom. The
very fact that you are under the grip and influence of such negative
factors is a suffering enough and a state of misery. If the factors that
influence you are positive, it is okay, but the factors that command you
and determine and influence your life are negative

delusions. The very name delusion is frightening---its etymological root
is the term afflictive emotion. The very name suggests that the moment
delusions arise within your mind they afflict you and destroy your
happiness and calmness. Therefore, delusions are the genuine
enemies---you should never hesitate to deal forcefully with them.
Delusions reside within your mind in such a manner that they do not feel
any threat from you. As long as you totally entrust yourself to their
command, there is no prospect for happiness or goodness. If the enemy is
external, there is a possibility of avoiding it; there are also methods
of overcoming that enemy by seeking others' help. But if the enemy is
within, it is quite difficult to overcome. There is no way that you can
avoid it, so it is only by taking the initiative yourself and making the
effort that you will be able to combat it. You should therefore
determine that taking the initiative is important on your part, and that
there is no chance of freeing yourself from the grip of delusions if you
do not seek the means to combat and overcome them. If association with
delusions could give you happiness, you should now have the best and
most satisfactory form of happiness, because of your long association
with delusions. But this is not the case. All of us are always under the
sufferings of dissatisfaction and anxiety. The very start of our lives
is marked with suffering, our lives end with suffering, and during our
lives we go through all sorts of problems and miseries. Such is the
nature of samsara, cyclic existence. The underlying cause of all this is
that we are under the influence of contaminated body, actions, and
delusions. You should make it a point to free yourself from this yoke of
delusions. Your feeling should have such urgency that you do not have
time even to breathe before you mount your attack on them. When you only
talk about the destructive nature of delusions, your attack on them is
almost like mere backbiting, because it does not affect them directly.
First it is important to recognize the nature of the delusions and their
destructive character, to discover what are the actual opponent forces
that can counter them, and then to eliminate them. By applying the right
opponent force you should be able to hit the target in the right
way---that means employing the right opponent force to destroy the
ignorance that is at the root of all the delusions. This ignorance
refers to the misconception of reality that apprehends things as
existing truly or inherently. The root of all these sufferings is firmly
based in the mind. As long as suffering is firmly based and has deep
roots in you, any temporary relief that you may gain from the sufferings
of lower existence is unstable and

unreliable. The relief is like that of a criminal destined to be
executed, who gains a temporary postponement of his execution---there is
nothing much about which to be delighted. Thus it is very important to
reflect upon the suffering nature of life in this cycle of existence in
general: the sufferings of uncertainty, the sufferings of lack of
contentment, and the sufferings of having to discard the body again and
again. If one were to make a pile of the heads of those whom one has
killed in one's successive lives, it would far exceed the height of
mountains. If one were to collect the drops of tears that one has shed
for the loss of relatives and friends in the past, it would far exceed
the vastness of oceans. As the Buddha said in the sutras, in this cycle
of existence which is like the tip of the needle there is no place for
happiness. For instance, we Tibetans suffer on a national scale. In
particular, the people inside Tibet live with great anxiety, while those
who are scattered in other countries suffer the difficulties of
migration. Suffering is present also for people living inside
independent countries such as India: before they gained independence
they had a lot of sufferings, and then even after independence has been
attained they still have sufferings. In very powerful and developed
countries such as the United States---although they are regarded as
superpowers and are materially developed and superficially appear to be
quite successful---at the level of the individual you find a lot of
anxiety to the degree that many people have to live on sleeping pills
and tranquilizers. When you reflect in such terms, you will find that
right from birth we have many sufferings to which are added cultural
pressures such as competitiveness and lack of contentment---if you have
a thousand you need a hundred thousand, and if you have a hundred
thousand you want a million dollars and so forth. There is always this
suffering of want and lack of contentment. Suffering is limitless. Just
as the Kadampa master Potawa said, "The never-ending chain of sufferings
that we face in this cycle of existence is the true face of the cycle of
existence." In our lives there are many circumstances for suffering both
from within our bodies and from external causes. Right at the time of
birth, when our lives on this planet first begin, we create problems and
sufferings, not only for ourselves, but also for our mothers. With great
difficulty we are born; and even after birth, for months and years, we
remain extremely fragile and vulnerable, always depending upon others'
protection. We have to survive under all sorts of circumstances and
hardships. Our bodies, on their own, are composed of impure substances
and therefore are nothing to be really attached to. Each of us regards
our own body as most precious. Not only that, even others find it
attractive. On this basis, many

negative emotions arise within ourselves and others. Let us consider
whether or not this body deserves to be so well preserved and examine
its nature, its different components: skin, bones, blood, flesh, and so
forth. As an example, let us take a piece of skin from a finger: when we
take it off and keep it, after a while we find it very repulsive. The
same would be true of our bones, marrow, blood; it is because of our
misconceptions that we apprehend them as most precious and beautiful. We
feel attached to our own body and attracted to others' bodies as well.
So we live under illusions. If we probe deeper, we will never find, on
the part of the body, anything that can be regarded as attractive.
Compared to it, other living species, such as plants, flowers, and so
forth, look more clean. We find that the bodies of humans and animals
are really very impure and unclean. Now let us inquire as to the
function of this body. If we consider the body on its own, we find that
it appears almost as though its main task is to produce human waste.
Daily we take food and then release it as waste; it is almost as though
the purpose of taking food and nourishment is to produce these wastes.
If we were to heap up all the flour, rice, and so forth that we might
have consumed over the last several years, it will be really a very
large quantity. Such reflection is quite frightening. It is as though we
live in this world just to protect and preserve this composite of impure
substances. So, the body per se is not precious. Our consciousness
resides within this body through a karmic force, and as our
consciousness is karmically linked with such a body it is also under the
influence of karmic contamination. Reflections upon the six and eight
types of sufferings1 mentioned in Lamrim Chenmo as the general aspects
of cyclic existence are indeed very effective in generating a genuine
aspiration to attain freedom from this unsatisfactory state of
existence. We undergo our lives in this cycle of existence through such
a process of suffering. Right now, due to the kindness of our previous
lives we are not thrown into the abyss of the lower realms and as a
result have obtained this human form. Now, the important point is to
examine and judge whether or not there is a possibility of terminating
this vicious cycle of birth and death. It is by the force of our
attachment and attraction to objects that we spin around in the cycle of
existence. Attachment is a negative state of mind induced by the
misapprehension of the true mode of existence of phenomena. Such an
ignorance is a distorted mind that misconceives the nature of phenomena.
If we are able to see through the deception of this ignorance, we will
be able to put an end to its arisal; thus the possibility of attaining
liberation appears. This is because then only will we be able to put an
end to our accumulation of negative karma and at the same time cease
activating the imprints of past

karma. Judging by our own experiences in this life and those of others,
it is very obvious that consciousness is a phenomenon susceptible to
change and transformation. Due to the force of bad companionship and
different conditions, people change for the worse, becoming very
aggressive. Likewise we see human beings changing for the better,
becoming more gentle, kind, and so forth. This is an indication that an
impermanent phenomenon is changeable, and therefore is subject to
transformation. The effect of consciousness even upon the body is very
obvious. There is no need for a spiritual teacher to point that out to
us---even the doctors tell us to keep our minds calm and to be happy,
and that because of our anxieties we suffer. Emotional disturbances
result in physical illness. There is no possibility that meditating on
love and compassion could cause mental disturbances. Although it is
possible that a feeling of unease could arise when one is meditating on
strong compassion, this is very different from the mental disturbances
that one has as a result of delusions. In his Bodhisattvacaryavatara,
Shantideva says that generating a strong compassion can, in a way,
increase one's anxiety, for one is concerned about not only one's own
suffering but also that of others. However, I can say that there could
never be a case of losing mental balance or having a nervous breakdown
as a result of meditating on compassion. On the other hand, there is
definitely the possibility of having a nervous breakdown as a result of
being under the strong influence of hatred, anger, desire, and so forth.
Since the very purpose of one's life is to live happily, it is important
to recognize the negative states of mind and put an end to them and to
identify the positive states of mind and try to enhance them. Doing this
is a natural right that we all have; if we utilize that right, we stand
to gain. As I remarked earlier, delusion is a state of mind that is very
obvious: when it arises within the mind, it causes mental disturbances
and anxieties in the individual, and furthermore causes many problems
and difficulties in society, often on a national scale. We find that,
right from the beginning of human civilization, delusions are the real
causes of problems, trouble, and conflict within society. It is delusion
that forces one to be attracted and attached to one's own side and to
feel hatred and anger toward the opposite side. With such an outlook,
one creates the many divisions within the human community. All of these
come about through the underlying force of the attachment to one's own
self. When one totally disregards the happiness of others for the
purpose of one's own happiness, all these conflicts, wars, and so forth
come about.

The negative emotions such as hatred, anger, and desire are the real
enemies that disturb and destroy our mental happiness and cause
disturbance in society. Therefore, they are to be totally abandoned;
they do not have even the slightest potential for yielding happiness.
There are sometimes situations in which painful surgery is necessary to
remove an unhealthy or diseased part of the body. Similarly, we should
cut away the negative emotions and delusions. Suffering from these
negative states is like suffering from a chronic disease: there is no
possibility of happiness or healthiness as long as they remain. If we
are able to see the destructive nature of delusions we will naturally
develop the deep conviction that as long as we are under their influence
there is no possibility of happiness or peace. Right now, even while we
are alive, we have all sorts of sufferings and anxieties and so forth.
The contemplation on the sufferings that we have right now is
enough---there is no need to contemplate the acute and intense
sufferings of the lower realms. The question of whether or not it is
possible to put an end to such sufferings becomes very important and
relevant now. Since it is the ignorance misapprehending the true nature
of phenomena that is at the root of all the delusions, it is very
important for us first of all to identify this ignorant mind. This
should be done by first analyzing how things appear to us and how they
actually exist. If the appearance that we have of phenomena is true and
accords with their reality, then analytically seeking them should bring
us closer to that of which we have the appearance, but this is not the
case. When we analytically investigate, we find that there is a
disparity between our perception and the way things exist. When
something appears to us as good, it appears to us as one hundred percent
good, and when something appears to us as undesirable, it appears as
though it were totally undesirable in its own right. As a result of such
appearance we misapprehend the object, and then on this basis we
misconceptualize its nature. At the moment that we have very strong
anger toward an object, we experience the person toward whom we feel
extremely angry as totally negative---right from the top of his crown to
the bottom of his soles. When the force of the anger diminishes, then
the person begins to appear to be a little better. A similar sequence of
experiences is true in the case of desire. Aryadeva says in
Chatu-shataka Shastra that when one is under a very strong influence of
negative emotions, one is almost at the point of insanity. No sane
person would like to be mad. If we live insanely, we stand to lose. When
we lose our mental balance under the influence of negative emotions, we
will not be able to work for our own benefit, let alone

work for others'. Although we have incarnated so many times within
beginningless time, we have nothing substantially positive to show from
having done so. If we continue in the present style, there will never be
an end to the cycle of birth and death. There is not even a single
person that we can totally rely upon in this cycle of existence, in the
suffering of being subject to repeated fluctuations and having to
undergo birth, sickness, old age, and death again and again. When we
take birth in the cycle of existence we do so alone; when we have to die
at the end we also do so alone. If there is a possibility of putting an
end to this senseless cycle, then seeking the means of doing so is
definitely a worthy venture for us. First, by employing the appropriate
methods we should reduce the force of the delusions and then eventually
get to their root and eliminate them. As I usually remark, I used to
feel that if I ever gain a state of cessation, I shall really take a
good rest. Once we have attained such a state, we could take a good rest
and a real holiday, in the true sense of the word. Until we get to such
a state, it is foolish for us to be complacent. When we have attained
the state of cessation, we have truly reached a very secure ground. We
should reflect: "Why do I undergo this vicious cycle of life and death,
tormented by all these sufferings? It is because of my not recognizing
the delusions and eliminating them. At this point, when I have the
opportunity to engage in the right practice due to the kindness of the
spiritual master, may I generate genuine renunciation within my mind,
and impelled by such renunciation may I be able to engage in the
practices of the three trainings, thus leading myself to the attainment
of liberation."

20. THE SPECIFIC SUFFERINGS OF THE DIFFERENT REALMS

T

HE NEXT PRACTICE is the contemplation on the sufferings specific to the

various realms in this cycle of existence. Let us leave aside the
question of sufferings in the lower realms, as even when one has taken
rebirth as a human being, one undergoes eight types of suffering.
Reflection on these is very important, because as human sufferings are
something that one can recognize through experience, when one develops
renunciation on their basis it is much stronger than if it were on the
basis of a contemplation on other forms of sufferings that one cannot
see at all. So one can develop deep renunciation on the basis of just
the observable sufferings of human beings. These sufferings are very
extensively explained in Lamrim Chenmo. In the realm of demi-gods one is
tormented by jealousy. Even for human beings, when they are under a
strong influence of jealousy, such as that toward a neighbor, there is
no room for happiness. The devas have the sufferings of combat with the
demi-gods, and they also undergo acute sufferings when they are
separated from the happy life of the deva realms. Although temporarily
there are no obvious or manifest sufferings in the form and formless
realms, since the beings there are under the influence of contaminated
actions and delusions, the peaceful state enjoyed there is not
permanent. In short, your own contaminated aggregates, the body and
mind, serve as the basis for the manifest sufferings of this life, and
they also bring about the experiences of the suffering of sufferings and
the changeable sufferings, not only in this lifetime but also in the
future. Thus you should make the request to the spiritual master that
you be totally free from the contaminated aggregates. Having reflected
on and contemplated the general and specific sufferings of cyclic
existence, particularly emphasizing the sufferings of human beings which
are very observable and also reflecting upon the destructive nature of

the delusions, you will gradually see---due to the force of familiarity
and meditation---all the worldly attractions as miserable and under the
influence of contaminated actions and delusions. You will be able to see
the pointlessness and futility of all worldly attractions. Let us make
an analogy. When Tibetans visit Tibet under Chinese rule, even when they
see new buildings such as hotels, schools, and so forth, they
immediately think that these are nothing to be admired, in light of the
whole country being under a repressive occupation. Similarly, you will
have a conviction that worldly attractions will not be worth much due to
their being under the domination of delusions and actions. As a result
of such a perception, you will get to a point where the wish to achieve
liberation will come about spontaneously and naturally without any
conscious effort on your part. This marks the point of having trained
your mind in the stages of the path common to the middling scope. The
criterion of having trained the mind in the stages of the path common to
the practitioners of the small scope is being able to overcome
attraction to the affairs of this lifetime and being able to develop
concern for the affairs of one's future life. The criterion of having
trained one's mind in the stages of the path common to the middling
scope is generating an attitude spontaneously and naturally seeking to
achieve liberation, through the force of seeing all cyclic existence in
its suffering nature.

21. THE PATH TO LIBERATION

O

N THE PATH to liberation, you must reverse the cycle of existence. To do

this, you must eliminate the delusions. Although there might be
different views on the identity of ignorance due to differences in
philosophical views of emptiness, if you are able to totally eliminate
the subtle delusions--- particularly the most subtle level of
ignorance---by applying the appropriate opponent forces, then you will
be able to free yourself from all the other delusions. But if you apply
the opponent force only to the gross levels of the delusions, you will
not be able to attain a permanent liberation. The recognition of the
subtle delusions can be understood only on the basis of studying the
writings of the highest Buddhist philosophical school, Madhyamika
Prasangika. Of all the delusions, the worst is the ignorance which
misconceives the mode of being of phenomena. This incorrect apprehension
of the true nature of existence is of two types, one focusing upon the
person and one upon other phenomena. It misapprehends the object as
existing inherently, independently, in its own right. The opponent force
which dispels such ignorance is a wisdom that focuses upon that
distorted view of the object and disproves the mode of apprehension of
that distorted view. Without such an appropriate opponent force, you
will not be able to root out that ignorance and directly eliminate it.
Since it is the ignorance mistakenly apprehending inherent existence in
all phenomena that serves as the root of all other delusions, you should
generate the wisdom penetrating the real nature of phenomena, which
correctly perceives things as lacking such true or inherent existence.
The opponent force powerful enough to eliminate the delusions should be
a wisdom which combines calm abiding and special insight. In order to
cultivate an advanced meditative stabilization that is free of both
subtle mental sinking and mental excitement, first of all there should
be a basis: the practice of morality, an abstaining from negative
actions. Therefore, the path leading to liberation is composed of the
three higher trainings: the training of morality as the foundation, the
training of meditative stabilization as the

complementing factor, and the actual path which is the training of
wisdom. By enhancing the practice of wisdom and by developing it to its
fullest extent, you will be able to eliminate totally the delusions,
particularly ignorance which misapprehends the mode of being of
phenomena. If the practitioner is motivated to achieve liberation for
his own sake alone, he undertakes such a practice and gains the state
free of delusions, the state of the arhat or "foe destroyer." But here
we are engaged in the path that is common to the middling scope, with
its ultimate aim of leading to the practices of a bodhisattva.
Therefore, only one practice, the training in morality, is explained
here, while the practices of the remaining two trainings, concentration
and wisdom, are explained later. The development of renunciation first
is very important. Although the primary aim is to work for the benefit
of others, in order to develop the compassion that is strong enough to
feel the unbearableness of the sufferings of others, it is very
important to have renunciation focusing initially upon your own
sufferings, feeling them to be unbearable. Therefore, renunciation is a
cause that will later lead to the generation of compassion. Once your
realization of renunciation has become powerful, the focus should be
shifted from your own sufferings to those of others. Having identified
the sufferings in yourself, you will be able to compare yourself with
other sentient beings and think that all other sentient beings are equal
to you in having the wish to free themselves from suffering and enjoy
happiness. In order to have a pure observance of morality, it is
important to recognize the factors that do not accord with morality,
such as the ten non-virtues and to abstain from them. Since ignorance is
a door that leads to negative actions, it is very important to recognize
the discordant factors to whatever vows you may have taken---lay or
monastic. Without such knowledge, although you may feel that you have
not transgressed any vows, because of your ignorance you are likely to
break them. Therefore, ignorance must be overcome. In order to do this,
first read and study the texts concerning the vows. Being disrespectful
is another door leading to negative actions. You should cultivate
respect for the Buddha and the doctrine expounded by him, by reflecting
on his kindness and great qualities. If you have deep respect toward the
Buddha, you will be able to hold his doctrine and the vows more dear.
The lack of conscientiousness is also a door leading to negative actions
and the transgression of vows, as is having an abundance of negative
emotions. Although we must apply opponent forces to all the delusions,
some of us have stronger specific emotions, such as desire or anger,
than others. So you should give special attention to overcoming the
strongest emotion by applying its

specific antidote, such as meditation on love to counter anger, on
ugliness to counter attachments, on breathing for anxiety, etc.
Generally, you should seek conscientiousness, thinking, "I am a follower
of the Buddha and I am a spiritual being." If you have such a faculty,
you will be able to restrain and protect yourself from negative actions,
even in dreams. That is how you should observe pure morality. Any path
that enables you to purify your mind from negativities is a path leading
to liberation. You should not have the notion that liberation is a place
far away; rather, the cessation of ignorance within your mind is
liberation. It is called liberation because it is a freedom from the
bondage of the sufferings and delusions. Although such a state of
liberation is a very high condition, its attainment does not mark the
total fulfillment of one's aspirations. For although at that point one
has attained permanent peace, freed oneself from cyclic existence, and
eliminated delusions, one is not yet free from the subtle influences and
the residual imprints implanted in one's psyche by these delusions.
These latent imprints still distort the appearance of phenomena and
cause a dualistic view, thus obstructing the attainment of omniscience.
Therefore, in terms of realization, the state of the arhat---that of
personal liberation---is not final.

22. THE MIND OF GREAT CAPACITY

F

ROM ONE POINT of view, personal liberation without freeing others is
selfish

and unfair, because all sentient beings also have the natural right and
desire to be free of suffering. Therefore, it is important for
practitioners to engage in the practice of the stages of the path of the
highest scope, starting with the generation of bodhicitta. Bodhicitta,
the altruistic aspiration to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of
all sentient beings, is the factor that determines whether or not one is
a Mahayanist. Therefore, bodhicitta is the sole gateway to the Mahayana
path. The moment the faculty of bodhicitta becomes degenerated, one is
no longer a bodhisattva. Once one has cultivated bodhicitta, all the
meritorious actions that are supported by and complemented with this
altruism---even the slightest form of positive action ---become causes
for the achievement of omniscience. Omniscience is a wisdom that is able
to perceive directly all phenomena, both the ultimate and the
conventional natures, simultaneously. It is a state where all the
potentials of one's wisdom are developed fully and where there is also a
total freedom from all the obstructions to knowledge. It can be achieved
only by purifying all the faults of one's mind, and only by
complementing the practice of wisdom with the practices of method:
bodhicitta, compassion, and so forth. Without this factor of method,
bodhicitta, even though one might have great wisdom---the wisdom
realizing emptiness such as that of the sravakas and
pratyekabuddhas---one will not be able to achieve the omniscient state.
It is said that the direct realization of emptiness by the bodhisattvas
on the first level, which corresponds to the third of the five paths,
the path of seeing, is able to surpass the realization of even the
arhats. When engaging in the meditation of generating bodhicitta, if you
visualize your root guru in the aspect of and inseparable from
Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva of compassion, your practice will gain
great inspiration. Doing this will enable you to receive powerful
inspirations to overcome all manifestations of self-cherishing thoughts
within yourself. Therefore, as the

preliminary to your meditation on bodhicitta, visualize your root guru
as Avalokiteshvara and make fervent requests to him that you may be able
to root out the self-centered attitudes from your mind. In order to
cultivate a genuine bodhicitta, you have to depend upon the proper
methods and the instructions outlining these. There are two major
systems of instructions, one the seven-point cause and effect method,
the other the equalizing and exchanging oneself with others. These
methods are equally efficacious in enabling a person to generate
bodhicitta, but the latter is more profound and is also more effective.
From one point of view, the latter method is designed for beings of
higher faculty. So the different methods will suit the various mental
dispositions of the different practitioners; some might find one more
effective than the other. The tradition is that these methods are
combined and practiced together.

23. THE SEVEN-POINT CAUSE AND EFFECT METHOD

THE PRELIMINARY STEP OF CULTIVATING EQUANIMITY The foundation for
practicing the seven-point cause and effect method is cultivating a mind
of equanimity. Without this foundation you will not be able to have an
impartial altruistic view, because without equanimity you will always
have partiality toward your relatives and friends. Realize that you
should not have prejudice, hatred, or desire toward enemies, friends, or
neutral persons, and thus lay a very firm foundation of equanimity. To
do this, as this text recommends, first visualize a neutral person whom
you do not know at all. When you clearly visualize that person, you will
find that you don't feel any fluctuations of emotion, no desire or
hatred---you are indifferent. Then visualize an enemy; when you
visualize the enemy clearly you will have a natural reaction of hatred,
feeling all sorts of ill will. Next, clearly visualize a friend or
relative to whom you feel very close. With that visualization, the
natural reaction will be a feeling of affection and attachment. With the
visualization of your enemy, you will feel somewhat distant and will
have hatred and a sense of repulsion. Consider enemies such as the
Chinese, who meted out destruction on the dharma, who did not have
compassion and only harmed other fellow human beings, who rule a country
only through totalitarian methods by snatching away the basic human
qualities of trust and confidence. Reflect upon your justification in
reacting so negatively to them. Although it is true that they have meted
out much harm and destruction in this life, have they always done such
things and been like this? You will find that they have not: in the past
they must have engaged in actions beneficial to you and many others. But
right now they have no faith in the dharma and have meted out harm and
destruction to many people. They have almost no control over themselves.
Because of being under the influence of ignorance, hatred, and so forth,
they have these faults; it is not their

essential nature. Reflect that delusions are within your own mind also.
Although there might be a difference in the force of these delusions, in
terms of being delusions they are delusions equally. You should decide
that there is not much point in emotionally reacting to the people you
have categorized as enemies. Then examine how you react, on the other
hand, to your relatives and friends. You might think that they have been
very kind to you, they have benefited you in such and such a way, and so
forth. You might also have the feeling, with those who are very close,
that you would even be prepared to sacrifice your life for them.
Although it is true that they have been kind to you in this life, in the
past they might have been your enemies, and even gone to the extent of
taking your life. They might have meted out harm and destruction to many
other living beings. Therefore, there is no point in being absolutely or
permanently attached to such people, categorizing them as your friends
and relatives. Thus, there is not much difference between enemies and
friends as far as yourself is concerned. They have both had times of
benefiting you and they have both had times of harming you. Your having
partiality toward them is groundless. Therefore, develop the mind of
equanimity directed toward all sentient beings. This mind cannot be
brought about by meditating just once or twice, but rather through
repeated meditations over months or years.

1.  RECOGNIZING SENTIENT BEINGS AS HAVING BEEN ONE'S MOTHER The first
    step of the seven-point cause and effect method is to cultivate the
    recognition of all sentient beings as having been one's mother. To
    do this, it is first necessary to reflect on your beginningless
    lives in this cycle of existence and that through many of your lives
    you have had to depend on your mothers. There is not a single living
    being that you can definitely point to as not having been your
    mother in the past. Perceive all sentient beings as having been your
    own kind mothers. You might wonder how, since sentient beings are
    infinite and numberless, you can say that all of them have been your
    mother. But consider that just as sentient beings are numberless,
    your lives in this cycle of existence have been numberless as well.
    You might also reflect that although other sentient beings have been
    your mothers, they have been so in the past and not in this life.
    But what about your mother of yesterday, is she not still your
    mother? If you are able to understand the beginninglessness of your
    lives, you will be able to understand that you have taken many forms
    of life---such as egg

born and womb born---that require a mother. You will find that there is
not a single sentient being that has not been your mother in the past.
Realization of this is quite difficult. You could start with the
opposite approach---the exclusion of those that might never have been
your mother. That is, you could think that it is possible that some
sentient beings have not been your mother; but then, whom could you
point out, with complete assurance, as not once having been your mother?
Next, examine whether you stand to gain or lose by cultivating this
recognition of others as mothers. Since you are concerned with
cultivating bodhicitta, the altruistic aspiration, you should recognize
that if you do not have this basic factor of recognition of others as
having been your mothers, you will not have success in its cultivation.
So, by not developing this recognition you stand to lose. If by
disbelieving that all sentient beings have been your mothers, you stood
to gain, that would be fine, but this is not the case. Because of the
beginninglessness of your lives in this cycle of existence, all sentient
beings have been your mothers. A recognition of others as being your
dearest ones need not be confined to recognizing them as mothers alone.
As Maitreya recommends in his Abhisamayalankara, you can also view them
as having been your best friends or closest relatives. For example, you
can view all sentient beings as having been your fathers, if you relate
better to your father than to your mother, or as children to whom you
feel closest and for whom you have the deepest affection. The point is
to bring about an effect within your mind and to develop a state of mind
that will enable you to perceive all living beings as the closest
objects of affection and kindness. That is how you cultivate the
recognition of sentient beings as having been one's mother. Some
arguments have been raised in the text, such as if sentient beings have
been your mothers, surely you should be able to recall this fact. The
text replies that such a lack of remembrance does not constitute proof,
because even in this life some children do not recognize their mothers
due to the passage of time. So, just as your mother of this life is very
kind and is an object of love and affection, all sentient beings should
equally be objects of love and affection.

2.  RECOLLECTION OF ALL BEINGS' KINDNESS The next meditation is on the
    recollection of the kindness of all beings. For this, you should
    visualize the person to whom you feel closest---be it your mother or
    father---when she or he is quite old. Clearly visualize the person
    at

an age when she or he depends upon others' cooperation and assistance.
Doing this has a special significance, for it will make your meditation
more powerful and effective. Then think that your mother, for example,
has been your mother not only in this lifetime, but also in past lives.
Particularly in this life her kindness was boundless at the time of your
birth, and before that during gestation she had to undergo all sorts of
hardships, and even after birth her affection was such that she was able
to surrender her own happiness and pleasure for the sake of the
happiness and pleasure of her child. At the time of your birth she felt
as joyful as if she had found a treasure, and according to her own
capacities she has protected you, cleaning even your filth. You were
thus protected until you could stand on your own feet. This kindness is
also experienced when you take rebirth as animals, such as birds, dogs,
and kittens. You can observe them: Although these animals' affection is
not as enduring as that of humans, at the time of birth, the mothers
have very strong love and affection. From one point of view, their
affection and compassion to their small ones are much more selfless,
since the affection and compassion of human beings are slightly
influenced by the selfishness of thinking that the children will later
serve and return affection. This is not the case with animals. Birds,
for example, even feed their small ones by killing insects and so forth.
Certain types of birds, when they protect their babies, sacrifice a
great deal and they do it individually, not living in communities as do
human beings. The manner in which they bring up their small ones is
really very touching. When their young are threatened by danger such as
that from cats or vultures, they even sacrifice their lives if they
must. Basically, they do so out of attachment, but still their act is a
great kindness---so it is not only when you take rebirth as a human
being that the kindness of mothers is boundless. Their kindness is not
confined to one life alone but to many lifetimes. This kind of
contemplation will have a very strong effect within your mind. After
reflecting upon the kindness of mothers, particularly of this lifetime,
you should visualize other beings whom you find quite distant and
repulsive, even animals, and take them as your object of visualization.
Think that although these enemies are harmful to you and are your
adversaries in this life, in past lives they must have been your most
dear parents and must have even protected and saved your life countless
times. Therefore, their kindness is boundless. In such a manner you
should train your mind.

3.  REPAYING KINDNESS

The meditation on the recollection of kindness should be followed by
meditation upon repaying that kindness. The thought to repay the
kindness of mothers will come about naturally when you have been
successful in recollecting this kindness---it should come from the
depths of your heart. Not to repay their kindness would be unfair and
ungrateful of you. Therefore, you should work according to your own
capacity for the benefit of others; doing this repays their kindness.

4.  LOVING KINDNESS Having cultivated equanimity and the recognition of
    all sentient beings as having been one's mother, you will see all
    sentient beings as objects of affection and endearment. And the more
    forceful your feeling of affection toward them, the stronger will be
    your aspiration that they be free from suffering and enjoy
    happiness. So the recognition of others as having been one's mother
    is the foundation for the subsequent meditations. Having laid that
    proper foundation, recollected their kindness, and developed the
    genuine wish to repay it, you gain a state wherein you feel close to
    and affectionate toward all living beings. Now reflect that all
    these sentient beings, although they naturally desire happiness and
    wish to avoid suffering, are tormented by unimaginable sufferings.
    Reflect upon the fact that they are just like yourself in desiring
    happiness, but they lack this happiness. By such reflection
    cultivate loving kindness.

5.  GREAT COMPASSION When you do the meditation on compassion, reflect
    upon the manner in which sentient beings undergo the experience of
    suffering. First, in order to have a very strong force of
    compassion, visualize a being undergoing active sufferings. For
    example, as the text here recommends, you could vividly and dearly
    visualize an animal destined to be killed by a butcher. Imagine in
    what kind of mental state such a being would be when facing such a
    situation. Then develop the strong wish that this particular being
    be free of that suffering. You could also visualize the sufferings
    of other living beings. For example, when one travels in India by
    train, one sees many suffering creatures at the railway
    stations---dogs and other animals, and even human beings. Imagine
    these creatures and think that they are all equal to yourself in
    having the natural wish to have happiness and avoid suffering, yet
    nevertheless they undergo very obvious and manifest sufferings.
    Human beings employ animals

for all sorts of purposes, and they are put to very hard, laborious
work. One sees many oxen in the towns and villages; although Indian
society prevents the killing of these animals and therefore they do not
face immediate extinction, when they are grown up and their use to the
community is over, they are neglected. In India, one also sees
beggars---blind, deaf, dumb, paralyzed, and so on---and very poor
people. Instead of helping them with compassion, people tend to either
avoid or intimidate them, even going so far as to hit them. One can see
all these things at any railway station. You can visualize any situation
that you find unbearable. Doing so will enable you to have a strong
force of compassion and make it easier to develop a genuine universal
compassion. Then think about the sentient beings in other categories;
they may not be undergoing manifest sufferings right now, but due to
indulging in negative actions that will definitely produce undesirable
consequences in the future, they are certain to face such experiences,
too. The wish that all sentient beings who lack happiness be endowed
with happiness is the state of mind called universal love, and the wish
that sentient beings be free of suffering is called compassion. These
two meditations can be undertaken in combination, until there is some
kind of effect or change in your mind.

6.  THE UNUSUAL ATTITUDE Your cultivation of love and great compassion
    should not be left in a state of mere imagination or wish alone;
    rather, a sense of responsibility, a genuine intention to engage in
    the task of relieving sentient beings of their sufferings and
    providing them with happiness, should be developed. It is important
    for a practitioner to work for and take upon himself or herself the
    responsibility of fulfilling this intention. The stronger your
    cultivation of compassion is, the more committed you will feel to
    taking this responsibility. Because of their ignorance, sentient
    beings do not know the right methods by which they can fulfill their
    aims. It is the responsibility of those who are equipped with this
    knowledge to fulfill the intention of working for their benefit.
    Such a state of mind is called the extraordinary attitude or
    special, unusual attitude. It is called unusual or extraordinary
    because such a force of compassion, committing oneself to taking on
    such a responsibility, is not to be found in the trainees of lower
    capacity. As the oral traditions explain, with this extraordinary
    attitude there is a commitment that one will take upon oneself the
    responsibility of fulfilling this aim. It is like striking a deal in

business and signing a contract. After generating the extraordinary
attitude, ask yourself whether or not, although you have developed the
strong courage and the determination to work for the benefit of other
sentient beings, you really possess the capacity and capability to bring
them genuine happiness. It is only by your showing living beings the
right path leading toward omniscience, and by living beings on their
part eliminating the ignorance within themselves, that they will be able
to gain lasting happiness. Although you may be able to work for other
sentient beings to bring them temporary happiness, bringing about their
ultimate aims is possible only when these beings take upon themselves
the initiative to eliminate the ignorance within themselves. The same is
true of yourself: If you desire the attainment of liberation, it is your
responsibility to take the initiative to eliminate the ignorance within
yourself. As I just mentioned, you must also show the right path to
living beings--- and for that, first of all, you must possess the
knowledge yourself. There are different ways of possessing knowledge;
one is by developing an intellectual understanding, but the more
profound way is understanding through experience. The teaching that you
are going to give to others should not be obscure to yourself. You
should also have the perfect wisdom that can judge the suitability and
appropriateness of a teaching for the dispositions and mental faculties
of different beings. Because some things are profound, you cannot teach
them to just anyone; some teachings might prove more harmful than
beneficial to some types of people. To possess a knowledge of the
different faculties of all beings, you will have to overcome all subtle
forms of obstructions to knowledge. An example given by the Buddha
himself during his life demonstrates this importance: A householder
wanted to become a monk, but Buddha's disciples of high caliber such as
Sariputra did not see that the person had sufficient virtuous potential
within his mind to be eligible to take ordination. But the Buddha,
through the force of his omniscience, saw such a seed within him.
Therefore, so long as you yourself are not completely enlightened there
will always be an inner obstruction to knowledge that will make your
task of helping others incomplete. You might feel that since fulfilling
the wishes of other sentient beings and bringing about their welfare
basically depends upon them taking the initiative themselves, then what
particular need is there for you to work for the achievement of
enlightenment? After all, there are many buddhas who will be able to
help the sentient beings immediately if these beings take the
initiative.

However, the benefit from particular spiritual guides or teachers
depends upon the recipient having karmic links with these beings. Thus,
some spiritual teachers can be most effective and beneficial to only a
certain number of disciples, and not to other beings. In order to
understand this, it is helpful to read the sutras, such as The
Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines, in which the buddhas and
bodhisattvas, having seen that a certain practitioner had a stronger
karmic link with another spiritual teacher, advised him to seek his own
spiritual master. There will be sentient beings who may be able to see a
buddha directly, but who may not benefit as much from that as they would
from interaction with you, due to their having a deeper karmic link with
you. Since life is beginningless in this cycle of existence, one can
speak of beginningless karmic links; however, what I am concerned with
and referring to here is a strong karmic link between individuals formed
in recent lives. Although your achievement of the omniscient state may
not be beneficial to all living beings, it will definitely bring a lot
of practical benefit to certain living beings. Therefore, it is very
important that you work for your own achievement of the completely
enlightened state. Because there might be living beings who depend very
much upon your guidance on the spiritual path, it is important that you
take upon yourself the responsibility to work for the benefit of others.
By thinking in such terms, you will be able to develop the strong belief
that without attaining the omniscient state you will not be able to
fulfill what you set out to do and truly benefit others.

7.  BODHICITTA Based on the foundation of love and compassion, you
    should generate from the depths of your heart the aspiration to
    achieve the completely enlightened state for the benefit of all
    sentient beings. The cultivation of such a mind constitutes the
    realization of bodhicitta. After the meditation on generating
    bodhicitta you should engage in the practice of cultivating
    bodhicitta that takes the result into the path. Visualizing the
    spiritual guru at your crown, imagine that the guru expresses
    delight, saying that it is very admirable and you are very fortunate
    that you have generated bodhicitta and have engaged in the path of
    cultivating it, and that he shall take you under his care. Imagine
    that, as a result of the guru's delight, he dissolves through your
    crown and into your heart. Then you dissolve into emptiness and from
    emptiness arise in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni. See yourself
    becoming inseparable from him, and rejoice. At your heart visualize
    all your virtues accumulated through the practice of bodhicitta.
    These

emanate, in the form of light rays, toward all living beings and
actively work for their benefit, relieving them of their suffering,
placing them in the state of liberation and favorable rebirth, and
eventually leading them to the omniscient state. During the
between-session periods, you should read texts that are related to the
practice of bodhicitta. With that the method of cultivating bodhicitta
according to the seven-point cause and effect method is concluded.

24. EQUALIZING AND EXCHANGING ONESELF WITH OTHERS

N

EXT FOLLOWS THE instruction on the cultivation of bodhicitta according
to

the method of equalizing and exchanging oneself with others. This
meditation has five sections: (1) equalizing oneself with others; (2)
reflecting on the disadvantages of the self-cherishing attitude from
many perspectives; (3) reflecting on the advantages of the thought
cherishing the welfare of others from many perspectives; (4) the actual
exchange of oneself and others; and (5) taking and giving.

1.  EQUALIZING ONESELF WITH OTHERS This phrase refers to the practice of
    reflecting upon the equality of oneself and others in having the
    natural and spontaneous wish to enjoy happiness and avoid suffering.
    For the generation of this type of equanimity, the instruction by
    the late Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche on the nine-round meditation is
    very powerful and effective.

Meditation on Equanimity The nine-round meditation is composed of
training the mind in equanimity with a mental outlook based on the dual
nature of things and events: the conventional and the ultimate. Based on
different perspectives, the first in turn is divided into two sections,
one from the viewpoint of others and the second from the viewpoint of
oneself. The rounds of visualization on cultivating equanimity from the
viewpoint of others are divided into three: a. Develop the thought that
all sentient beings are equal insofar as the natural wish to avoid
suffering is concerned and that therefore there is no

point in being partial or discriminatory. b. Reflect that all sentient
beings equally desire happiness and therefore there is no ground for
discriminating between them when working for their benefit. The
situation is analogous to one where you encounter ten equally wretched
beggars who are desperately asking you to relieve their hunger. In such
circumstances it is senseless to have any feeling of preference.
c. Develop an equanimity based on the reflection that all sentient
beings are equal in lacking genuine happiness although they have the
innate desire to possess it. Likewise all sentient beings are the same
in having suffering and the wish to avoid it. If there are ten patients
equally suffering a serious illness, there is no justification for a
doctor to discriminate when treating them. Similarly, there is no moral
justification for you to be biased when helping others to relieve their
sufferings. With the above three types of practice you train your mind
in the attitude expressed as follows: "I shall never discriminate
between beings and will always work equally to help them overcome
suffering and gain happiness." The next three rounds of meditation
enforce the thought that there is no justification for discrimination
between sentient beings from the point of view of oneself or from the
viewpoint of others. This training is divided into three sections: a.
You might have the thought that although reflection upon the equality of
others is fairly persuasive regarding the futility of your being
discriminatory toward other beings, surely when viewed from your own
side the situation will look quite different. After all, some people are
friends and help you, whereas many others harm you. To counter this
thought which attempts to give false grounds for being partial toward
others, reflect that all sentient beings are equally kind to you: They
have all been at one time or other your closest friends and relatives.
Hence there is no rational basis at all for being biased toward or
against any. b. Perhaps you have the idea that although people have been
your friends in the past, they have equally been your enemies and have
caused harm as well. Such notions should be countered by reflecting that
sentient beings' kindness to you is not confined to when they are
friends and relatives alone; their kindness when they are your enemies
is boundless. The enemy provides you with the precious opportunity to
train yourself in the noble ideals of patience and tolerance, traits
vital for the perfection of your generation of universal compassion and
bodhicitta. For a

bodhisattva who emphasizes the practice of bodhicitta, the training in
patience is indispensable. Contemplating upon such lines of reasoning
will persuade you that there are no grounds for neglecting the welfare
of even a single sentient being. c. Reflect that, as Shantideva wrote in
Bodhisattvacaryavatara, there is no sense in someone who is himself
subject to suffering and impermanence being selfish and discriminatory
toward others who are also tormented by the same fate. For example, it
would be quite senseless and stupid for ten convicted criminals who are
sentenced for execution within a short time by the law to argue between
themselves, for their days are numbered. The next three rounds of
meditation deal with the cultivation of equanimity based on an insight
into the ultimate nature of things and events. (This "ultimate" should
not be taken to refer to the ultimate truth in terms of
emptiness---rather, it means that the outlook adopted in these
visualizations is deeper and hence relatively ultimate in comparison to
the earlier meditations.) a. a. Consider whether or not there are any
"true" enemies in the real sense of the word. If there are, then the
fully enlightened buddhas should perceive them as such, which is
definitely not the case. For a buddha, all sentient beings are equally
dear. Also, when you examine deeply, you will find that it is in fact
the delusions within the enemies and not the enemies themselves that
actually cause harm. Aryadeva said in his Chatu-shataka Shastra: Buddhas
see the delusion as the enemy And not the childish who possess it.
Therefore, there is no justification at all for you to hold grudges
against those who cause harm, and neglect the welfare of such beings. b.
Secondly, ask yourself whether these so-called enemies are permanent and
will always remain as enemies or whether they are changeable. Concluding
that they are not permanent will enable you to overcome your disinterest
in their welfare. c. The last meditation is a reflection upon the
relative nature of "enemy" and "friend," and touches upon the ultimate
nature of phenomena. Concepts of enemy, friend, and so forth are
relative and exist only at the conventional level. They are mutually
dependent, as are the concepts of long and short. A person may be an
enemy in relation to one person while

at the same time being a dear friend to another. It is your
misapprehension of friends, relatives and enemies as inherently existent
that gives rise to your fluctuating emotions toward them. Therefore, by
realizing that there is no such inherently existent enemy and friend,
you will be able to overcome your biased feelings toward all beings.
These techniques are all very effective for transforming the mind. In
employing such methods of visualization you should cultivate equanimity.
In short, meditate on this theme as summed up in a verse in the Lama
Choepa guru yoga: As no one desires even the slightest suffering Nor
ever has enough of happiness, There is no difference between myself and
others; Therefore, inspire me to rejoice when others are happy. The
instruction for training one's mind in the method of equalizing and
exchanging oneself with others is best found in Bodhisattvacaryavatara.
This text---particularly the sixth chapter, the chapter on patience---is
in fact like a king among all the texts dealing with the thought
transformation practices. When you are able to perceive enemies as kind
to you, you will have overcome a great stumbling block, because the
enemy is the greatest stumbling block for the cultivation of the thought
cherishing the welfare of others. From this viewpoint, the very factor
that normally serves as an obstacle and stumbling block for others in
their spiritual progress is transformed into a favorable condition and
actually becomes an impetus for practice. This mindset is indeed
effective and powerful. The instruction for the cultivation of this mind
of equality, explained in the eighth chapter of Bodhisattvacaryavatara,
the chapter on concentration, is to be practiced in particular.

2.  REFLECTION ON THE DISADVANTAGES OF THE SELF-CHERISHING ATTITUDE The
    next step is the contemplation---from many different
    perspectives---upon the disadvantages and faults of the
    self-cherishing attitude. As Geshe Chekawa said in his Lojong dhon
    dun ma (Seven Points on Thought Transformation):1 "Banish the one
    object of all blame." It is the selfcherishing attitude that is the
    source of all miseries and therefore is the only

object to be blamed for all misfortune. Normally, because of our
selfrighteousness, it is quite natural for us to blame others when
something happens that we do not like, such as problems, suffering, and
so forth. We immediately blame it upon others, but if we think in real
terms we will find that all the problems and undesirable experiences
come about because of the kind of body that we have assumed, the body
that is contaminated and a product of actions and delusions. We possess
such a body because of our attachment to our self; therefore, it is
attachment and grasping at the self that give rise to all these
undesirable sufferings. Since the self-cherishing and self-grasping
attitudes abide strongly fortified within our minds, we have never been
able to shake them in the least. We have so far not been able to disturb
them even as much as a small pebble in a shoe would disturb a person. If
we remain with our present outlook and way of thinking, we will still be
under the influence and command of these two factors. We should reflect
that these factors have always caused our downfall in the past, and that
they will do so in the future if we remain under their influence. In
deeper terms, we will find that all the sufferings and problems and
anxieties of not finding what we seek, of being separated from our loved
ones, of physical illnesses, of suffering from want, lack of
contentment, quarrels and so forth, come about because of our underlying
attachment to the self and the self-cherishing attitude that tries to
protect such a self within ourselves. The more selfish a person is, the
more sufferings and anxieties he or she will have. This self-cherishing
attitude manifests in all sorts of ways, which results in problems and
anxieties. Yet we never recognize the truth---that these are all the
doings of the self-cherishing attitude. Rather, we have the tendency to
blame others and external factors: "He did it, and if he had done
something else, it wouldn't have happened." Even on a global level, if
we search for the real cause of the two world wars and all the violence
that fills human history, we will find that they all eventually trace
back to the self-cherishing and self-grasping attitudes. The same is
true of all the problems and conflicts within our world during the
present age. Even the problems we find at the family level and national
level are due to the self-cherishing attitude and selfish thoughts. For
example, in an argument between two people, each side will truly feel
that it has more truth than the other; so if one side cannot submit and
admit fault, then a physical fight may eventually ensue. When we have
arguments, if one of the parties accepts the disputed matter as its own
fault, then the argument will deflate right there, just

like a punctured tire. We find that all these problems come about due to
selfish thought, the thought that we did what was right but the others
did not act correctly. The following verse from Lama Choepa sums this up
quite succinctly: This chronic disease of cherishing myself Is the cause
of unwanted suffering; Perceiving this, may I be inspired To blame,
begrudge, and destroy This self-cherishing demon.

3.  REFLECTION ON THE ADVANTAGES OF THE THOUGHT CHERISHING THE WELFARE
    OF OTHERS Having realized the enormous disadvantages of holding on
    to a selfish thought cherishing your welfare alone, you should now
    reflect upon the kindness of all mother sentient beings, as
    discussed earlier. The kindness of other beings toward us is
    boundless while we revolve in this cycle of existence. This is
    particularly true when we first embark upon a spiritual path and
    thus begin the process of untying the chains that bind us to this
    cyclic existence. Let us take the example of our present life and
    its survival in the human community. In this age, economic
    development is believed to be one of the most vital factors
    contributing to the happiness of a community, and it can be achieved
    only through the cooperation of others. Although two nations may
    have differences on many political issues, when they realize the
    importance of having economic links they will cooperate so as to
    achieve mutual economic benefit. Even people who are totally
    anti-religious will accept and admit that the welfare of the masses
    is more important than the welfare of an individual. If the
    community is successful, then the individual will derive benefit
    from it; on the other hand, if one or two individuals are
    successful, but the community is failing, then sooner or later the
    individuals living in the community will face the consequences of
    such a failure. Therefore, when we work for the benefit of the
    masses, the fulfillment of our personal aims comes as a byproduct.
    But if we are concerned with our own selfish aims, we will not
    achieve them. This is not merely a religious matter; it is a fact we
    can observe even in the worldly arena. We find that if a person
    lives a very selfish life and is never concerned about the welfare
    of others, he will have few friends, and people will not take

much notice of him. At the time of his death, there will not be many
people who will regret his passing. Some deceptive and negative persons
may be very powerful and wealthy, and therefore some people---for
economic reasons and so forth---might portray themselves as friends, but
they will speak against such persons behind their backs. When these
negative persons die, these very same "friends" may rejoice at their
death. On the other hand, many people mourn and regret the death of a
person who is very kind and always altruistic and who works for the
benefit of others. We find that altruism, as well as the person who
possesses it, is regarded as the friend of all, and it becomes the
object of veneration and respect by others. I often remark, partly in
jest, that if one really wants to be selfish, one should be "wisely
selfish" by working for others. By helping others, one will receive help
and assistance in return, particularly when one is in a hard
situation---the time when one needs assistance from others the most. But
if one tries to be very selfish, then when one is in difficult
circumstances, one will find fewer people who are willing to help and
one will be left to resolve the situation and difficulty on one's own.
It is the nature of human beings to depend upon the cooperation and
assistance of others, particularly when facing difficult times; during
such times and during hardship it is only true friends who will be
beneficial and helpful. By living an unselfish life, one will be able to
earn genuine friends, whereas selfish thoughts and a selfish life will
never gain one genuine and true friends. The essence of Mahayana
practice is really to teach us the methods by which we will be able to
succeed not only in this life but also in the future. Such instruction
is, in fact, very practical and relevant to all---believers and
non-believers alike. If we are able to derive practical benefits within
this lifetime by living a virtuous life, we will be able to fulfill the
wishes of future lifetimes as well. As the great bodhisattva Shantideva
said in his Bodhisattvacaryavatara, there is no need to talk at great
length about the advantages of the thought cherishing the welfare of
others and the disadvantages and faults of the selfcherishing attitude.
We need only compare ourselves, who are under the grip of the
self-cherishing attitude, and the buddhas, who have abandoned such an
attitude and who always cherish others, in order to see the
disadvantages and advantages of the two types of mind. The meaning of
the assertion that the Buddha is very precious and exceptional should
not be confined to the Buddha's having major and minor noble marks
alone; rather, the words point to the Buddha's being always

under the strong influence of compassion to its fullest extent. Since
compassion is a true source of benefit and happiness, a being who has
developed it to the fullest extent is someone whom we can truly admire
and respect. The Bodhisattvacaryavatara states: If I do not exchange my
happiness For the sufferings of others, I shall not attain the state of
Buddhahood And even in cyclic existence shall have no joy. In the same
vein, Lama Choepa reads: Cherishing myself is the gateway to all
failures, While cherishing my mothers is the basis of all success.
Inspire me to make the core of my practice The yoga of exchanging myself
for others. The original idea or motive of Karl Marx---founder of the
philosophy that is the basis of the Chinese system---was to a large
extent positive: it was to work for the benefit of the masses. Where it
went wrong was that its actual practice was moved by resentment and
confrontation based on a class struggle. The revolutionaries did not
emphasize and enhance the practice of altruism. Because their approach
was based on confrontation, with hatred between classes, they ended up
having many poor in their society, rather than fulfilling what they
originally had set out to achieve. This is a very good example of how
hatred breeds suffering. Buddhist writings emphasize the practice of
overcoming selfish attitudes and generating the wish cherishing the
welfare of others, which really is the true source of happiness and
should be practiced by socialist countries to fulfill their aims.
Reflecting upon the disadvantages of the self-cherishing thought and the
advantages of the thoughts cherishing the benefit of others is in fact
the true essence of the teachings on thought transformation. Having been
convinced of this, one should undertake the practice of exchanging
oneself with others.

4.  THE ACTUAL EXCHANGE OF ONESELF WITH OTHERS To exchange oneself with
    others is to reverse a former attitude: The thought

of endearment and cherishing of oneself with its feeling of indifference
toward others should now be reversed as follows. One should feel
indifferent to oneself, reduce the force of clinging to oneself, and
rather hold the welfare of other sentient beings as precious. That is
the meaning of exchanging oneself with others. The degree of high value
one feels toward oneself should now be turned toward others. For this
practice, one should also be knowledgeable about the commitments and
precepts2 of thought transformation practices. If one undertakes such a
practice one will be able to transform any adverse circumstances into
favorable conditions of the path. In this age of degeneration when one
meets with all sorts of problems and adverse circumstances, the practice
of thought transformation is very effective. If someone lacks the
practice of thought transformation, even though that person might be a
very serious meditator he or she will meet with many hardships and
hurdles.

5.  GIVING AND TAKING The practice of the actual exchange of oneself
    with others should be followed by the practice of giving and taking.
    The latter is begun by reflecting that although all mother sentient
    beings desire happiness, they lack it, and that although they do not
    desire suffering, they undergo it. Think that it is the ignorance of
    sentient beings that impels them to work for the fulfillment of
    their selfish aims. You should develop the unusual, extraordinary
    attitude of wishing that all their sufferings ripen upon yourself.
    This meditation on taking and giving is quite powerfully presented
    in Lama Choepa3 in the following verse: Therefore, O venerable
    compassionate gurus, Inspire me that all karmic obscurations and
    sufferings of mother sentient beings Ripen upon me right now, And
    may I give others my happiness and merits In order that all beings
    enjoy happiness. And the great master Nagarjuna said in his
    Ratnavali: May their negative fruits ripen upon me And my positive
    fruits upon them.

Induced by the strong sense of compassion for other sentient beings,
visualize taking all their sufferings upon yourself; and then, induced
by the strong wish of love, visualize giving away from the depths of
your heart all your virtuous collections, happiness, wealth,
possessions, even your body, to other sentient beings. Make the wish
that through the force of your virtuous collections all sentient beings
may experience their desirable consequences: May those who wish a
favorable rebirth attain it, and may those who wish material possessions
obtain them. Imagine that your virtues are transformed into the objects
desired by all these sentient beings and that all sentient beings obtain
them. The practice of giving can be undertaken even in regards to your
own spiritual gurus: you can give your virtuous collection to your guru
so that the guru lives a long time in order to work longer for the
benefit of other sentient beings. On the other hand, the practice of
taking can be done only in regards to sentient beings, those who have
not attained the highest form of enlightenment. From the bodhisattvas on
the highest level you should imagine taking upon yourself the
obstructions to knowledge that they have within themselves. When you
engage in the practice of taking, just as both Bodhisattvacaryavatara
and the thought transformation text explain, you should first try to
train yourself by imagining taking your own future sufferings upon
yourself right now. Then, once you gain practice, apply the process to
the sufferings of others. Chekawa writes in his Lojong dhon dun ma
(Seven Points on Thought Transformation): Practice in combination Both
giving and taking. Commence the taking from your side. Place these two
astride the breath. If you can conjoin such practices with the breathing
process---that is, imagining taking when inhaling and giving when
exhaling---you will be able to engage in a powerful practice, leading
you to the strong commitment that you will engage in the bodhisattva
deeds. If you are able to engage in such a powerful practice, then due
to the strong determination and commitment that you make as a result of
cultivating bodhicitta, you will be able to alleviate the forces of the
powerful and vast stores of negative actions committed in past

lives, and also accumulate great stores of merit. That is how you should
train your mind in the cultivation of bodhicitta through the method of
equalizing and exchanging yourself and others. When you are engaged in
such a comprehensive practice, whether or not all sentient beings have
been one's mother does not make much difference. The fact that every
sentient being has the natural tendency to desire happiness and shun
suffering is a sufficient rationale for your practice. In any case, the
kindness of beings is not confined to their having been your mothers;
their kindness to you was also powerful when they were enemies in
providing you with an opportunity to practice patience. Furthermore,
their kindness is not limited to a time when you are in the ordinary
state; it also extends to you on the spiritual path, and even in the
resultant state. It is only because of the existence of others that the
buddhas can do beneficial work and engage in their noble activities.
Since you are equal to others in having the innate desire for happiness
and in having natural rights to happiness and fortune, the only
difference is the number of beings involved. When you talk of the
welfare of yourself, that is only one; whereas when you talk of the
welfare of others, that is a matter of an infinite number of beings.
Naturally, the welfare of others is much more important than your own
welfare. Through the practice of giving and taking, you will reach a
state where you will spontaneously regard it as such. The major
instructions on generating the altruistic mind of bodhicitta---the
seven-point cause and effect method and the equalizing and exchanging of
oneself and others---could also be most effectively undertaken in
combination. For such a combined practice, performed after the
practitioner has laid within his or her mind the basis of equanimity,
the sequence will be: (1) recognizing all beings as having been one's
mother; (2) recollecting their kindness; (3) holding an uncommon
recollection of kindness; (4) having the thought to repay their
kindness; (5) developing loving kindness; (6) equalizing oneself and
others; (7) reflecting on the disadvantages of the selfcherishing
attitude; (8) reflecting on the advantages of the thought cherishing the
welfare of others; (9) performing the actual exchange; (10) taking,
concentrating on the aspirations of compassion; (11) giving,
concentrating on the aspirations of love; (12) developing the special
attitude; and the culmination; (13) achieving bodhicitta, the altruistic
intention to attain enlightenment for the benefit of all. By following
the particular instructions in the Bodhisattvacaryavatara, you will be
able to make gradual progress, eventually achieving a state where you
will feel closer to other sentient beings and feel more and more distant
from

the self-cherishing attitude and selfish thoughts that are within, thus
increasing the power and capacity of the altruism within you. This is
how you should undertake the practice of bodhicitta.

25. BODHISATTVA VOWS RITE

T

enhancing the generation of bodhicitta through ceremony is discussed
next. One of the most effective factors for protecting the altruistic
aspiration to attain enlightenment is mindfulness of the extensive
benefits of bodhicitta.1 In order to protect the mind from degeneration
in future lifetimes, you should abstain from indulging in the four
negative actions2 and always adopt the four positive actions.3 To
enhance and stabilize your generation of the bodhicitta mind, you should
engage in the ceremony that reinforces its generation. It is recommended
that Mahayana practitioners take the bodhisattva vows, as doing this
helps to generate a very strong sense of commitment to engage in the
bodhisattva deeds. In this text by Panchen Lobsang Choekyi Gyaltsen, the
ceremony is performed on the basis of the verses quoted from
Bodhisattvacharyavatara. According to this tradition, the ceremonies for
generating both the aspirational and practical bodhicitta are explained
in combination. However, because some masters like Gyaltsab-je and
Panchen Sonam Drakpa have expressed qualms about the efficacy and the
validity of such an approach, I prefer to conduct the ceremony based on
Lama Tsongkhapa's commentary on the tenth chapter of Bodhisattva Bhumi
entitled Jhangchup Shunglam (The Main Path to Enlightenment). Today the
ceremony on taking the bodhisattva vows will be conducted according to
the tradition of this text. The practice of bodhicitta, exchanging and
equalizing oneself with others, has been regarded as the core of all the
practices of the Buddha by all the buddhas and the bodhisattvas of the
past. In order to realize such an advanced state of the altruistic
attitude within your mind, it is important to train your mind in the
stages of the path explained in Lamrim texts in a properly graded course
of application. An effective method for reinforcing your training of the
mind in the generation of bodhicitta is to repeatedly enhance it by
taking the bodhicitta HE PROCEDURE FOR

rite from your spiritual master. Doing so will have an added value, in
that you are taking bodhisattva vows at the same time, thus making your
generation of bodhicitta more powerful and inspired. The fact of
participating in such a ceremony will act as a reminder in the future
that, in the presence of a certain spiritual master, you have taken the
altruistic commitment to work for the benefit of others. As is written
in sutras such as Do-de Kelsang (Sutra of Good Eon), many buddhas of the
past have repeatedly generated bodhicitta in the presence of their
spiritual masters. All the buddhas, the skillful, compassionate masters
of the past, were originally ordinary beings like yourself; they took
the initiative of generating bodhicitta in the presence of their masters
and, having taken the solemn pledge, engaged in the practice. You too
have the potential within yourself to emulate their examples. Because
your mind is changeable and has the nature of emptiness, you possess
within yourself the buddha nature, the seed that allows for full
enlightenment. Also, the essential nature of your mind is Clear Light,
and the delusions that taint it are merely superficial and have not
penetrated to its core. So, if you make the right effort, you have all
the potentials within yourself to actualize the state of omniscience.

PRELIMINARIES Today we are taking the bodhisattva vows. Some Tibetan
masters of the past speak of different traditions of generating
bodhicitta---according to the Madhyamika philosophical tenet system or
the Cittamatrin system. But Lama Tsongkhapa maintains that so far as the
ceremony for generating the altruistic aspiration of bodhicitta is
concerned, there is no difference between the philosophical systems. The
ceremony is being conducted in the presence of a representative of
Buddha Shakyamuni in the aspect of his image. Although we did not have
the fortune to see Buddha Shakyamuni himself in person, we do have the
great fortune of having access to his own precious teachings, which is
actually superior to seeing him in person. The same is the case with
great Indian masters like Nagarjuna and his immediate disciples. If we
make the necessary effort, and undertake the practice and study, we can
fully enjoy a benefit equal to that of having met them in person. In
Tibet, due to the profound kindness of the translators as well as that
of the great religious kings, Tibetans had the good fortune and
opportunity to undertake the practice and study of Buddhism without
having to undergo the

ordeals of traveling to India. On the basis of all these translations of
the original Indian texts, many indigenous works later emerged, composed
by masters of all the great traditions of Tibet. All this literature is
at our disposal now. So visualize in space, in front of you, all these
exalted masters, including Buddha Shakyamuni, Nagarjuna, Aryadeva, and
the eighty mahasiddhas; the great masters of the Nyingma tradition;
Atisha and his followers, the masters of the Kadampa tradition; the five
great masters of the Sakya tradition; the lineages of Lamdre practice;
the great masters of the Kagyu lineage, such as Marpa, Milarepa, and
their followers; and also the great masters of the Gelugpa lineage, Lama
Tsongkhapa and his followers. Around you also are the protectors who
have taken the oath in the presence of Buddha Shakyamuni to safeguard
and protect the precious doctrine of Buddha. Visualize as well the
harmful spirits---actually an embodiment of your own delusions---from
which you are being protected by the guardians. Also visualize various
emanations of the buddhas actively working for the benefit of all living
beings. Surrounding you are all sentient beings in the aspect of human
beings, though undergoing the sufferings of their individual realms of
existence. Now generate a strong force of compassion directed toward all
these sentient beings, particularly your enemies. Having created this
mental image, question yourself as to how all these objects of refuge,
the buddhas and the masters of the past, achieved such a high state of
realization and reached a state where they can provide protection to all
living beings. You will find that it is because of their having made
effort in the practice of dharma in general and, in particular, the
practice of bodhicitta. Think as follows: "I shall, from today, follow
in the footsteps of these great masters, and take the initiative of
generating bodhicitta." Strictly speaking, a practitioner who is taking
the bodhisattva vows should have as a prerequisite the aspirational
attitude of bodhicitta. Although it is very rare, some among you might
have it; but for the majority of us it is very difficult to possess such
a genuine and non-simulated bodhicitta. As we discussed earlier,
altruism or good heart is the source of all goodness and benefit.
Therefore, although we may not have realized a genuine bodhicitta within
ourselves, at least we should have a very strong single-pointed
admiration for it and simulate the experience of an altruistic mind. The
person from whom you are taking the bodhisattva vows should have the
realization of bodhicitta, and such a master should also be an expert in
the rite of giving the bodhisattva vows. Although I do not claim to have
the full qualifications myself, I can quite confidently say that I do
have a very strong

admiration for the observance of the noble ideals of a bodhisattva. I
have received the bodhisattva vows myself according to the procedure
outlined in this text from my tutor, the late Kyabje Ling Rinpoche, at
the sacred site of the Bodh Gaya stupa. Today the bodhisattva vows are
being imparted to you through the same ceremony.

Initial request to the preceptor \[The ceremony begins with a request to
the master to bestow the vows. When you make the request, you should
kneel and bow down to the master. Those who cannot kneel can sit, but
those who can should maintain a kneeling position.\] Repeat the
following request three times: O my master, pray attend to me. I, a
child of the family, seek to take the vows of bodhisattva ethics; should
there be no harm kindly listen to my plea and bestow the vows. \[The
master then, quoting heavily from the sutras and related commentaries by
great bodhisattvas, explains the great benefits of bodhicitta in order
to inspire you to rejoice in having the fortune of obtaining this
precious opportunity to take the bodhisattva vows and firmly commit
yourself to the noble ideals of the bodhisattvas. Then the guru advises
that your motive for taking the bodhisattva vows should be right and
altruistic. He does this by asking you the following questions:\] O
child of the family, listen to me. Do you aspire to liberate the beings
who are not liberated yet, free those who are not free yet, relieve
those not relieved yet, and lead to the state beyond sorrow those who
have not reached that state yet? Do you desire that the lineage of
Buddha not cease? If so, you must stabilize your generation of the
altruistic mind and reaffirm your pledge. \[Sit down.\]

Accumulation of merit

To amass vast stores of merit you should reflect upon the great
advantages and benefits of taking the bodhisattva vows. Visualize all
the buddhas, bodhisattvas, and masters above in space. In their
presence, with mindfulness upon their great exceptional qualities,
cultivate strong faith in them while maintaining your perception of your
own spiritual master, who is conducting the ceremony, as a real living
buddha. Undertake the seven-limbed practice---prostration, making
offerings, and so forth. When you recite the verses of the seven-limbed
practice, do so slowly, reflecting upon the meaning of each verse,
contemplating the exceptional qualities of the body, speech, and mind of
the buddhas. While developing faith from the depth of your mind, sing
the praises of these buddhas. Follow this with confession, admiration
for your virtues, supplication to the spiritual masters to turn the
wheel of the dharma, and dedication. As explained earlier, visualize the
buddhas and bodhisattvas in front and above you in space and yourself
surrounded by all living beings in the aspect of human beings. Think
that as a preliminary to taking the vows you shall engage in the
seven-limbed practice. With such reflections, recite the following
verses of the seven-limbed practice: O Lions amongst men, Buddhas past,
present, and future, To as many of you as exist in the ten directions, I
bow down with body, speech, and mind. On waves of strength of this king
Of praises of exalted, sublime ways, With bodies numerous as atoms of
the world, I bow down to the Buddhas pervading space. On every atom is
found a Buddha Sitting amidst countless bodhisattvas. In this infinite
sphere of mystic beings, I gaze with eyes of faith. With oceans of every
possible sound In eulogy of the perfect Buddhas, I give voice to their
excellent qualities: Hail those passed to bliss.

Garlands of supreme flowers I offer them; And beautiful sounds, supreme
parasols, Butter lamps and sacred incense, I offer to all Awakened Ones.
Excellent food, supreme fragrance, And a mound of powders as high as
Meru I arrange in mystic formation And offer to those who have conquered
themselves. All these peerless offerings I hold up In admiration for
those gone to bliss. In accord with exalted and sublime ways, I
prostrate and make offerings to the Buddhas. Whatever ill deeds I have
committed, Under the power of desire, anger, and ignorance, Through my
body, speech, and mind, I confess and purify these individually. In the
merits of all sentient beings, Solitary realizers, learners, and those
beyond learning, Buddhas in ten directions and their heirs, I rejoice in
all their virtues. O, the light of all universes in ten directions, Who
realized Buddhahood through the stages of enlightenment. I appeal to all
of you, protectors, To turn the unsurpassed wheel. I entreat with folded
hands Those intending to enter nirvana To live for eons equal to the
atoms on earth, For the benefit and happiness of all beings. Whatever
little merit that I have accumulated, Through prostrating, offering,
confessing,

Rejoicing, requesting, and entreating, I dedicate all toward attaining
full enlightenment. Let us undertake the confession of negativities, as
Gungthang Tenpai Dronme recommended in one of his writings, in
conjunction with the recitation of the Confession Sutra. While reciting,
reaffirm your visualization of the buddhas and bodhisattvas and yourself
being surrounded by suffering sentient beings. The factors that obstruct
you in accomplishing what you most seek to do---that is, work for thew
benefit of other sentient beings---are your self-cherishing attitude and
the negativities that you have committed, forced by your selfish
thoughts. When doing this recitation, let us stand up and do
prostrations in unison. While prostrating, recite the Confession Sutra.

An urgent request for the vows \[Resume the kneeling position and make
the following request three times:\] O master, kindly bestow upon me the
perfect vows of bodhisattva ethics; do bestow them quickly.

Rejoicing Having made this request, you should now solemnly sit down on
your cushions with a feeling of joy at the immediate prospect of
receiving the vows.

Determining the presence of any obstacles \[In order to examine if you
are adequately qualified to take the vows, the master asks the
following:\] O child of the family and spiritual brother/sister, called
\[...(insert name)\], are you a bodhisattva? And did you make
aspirational prayers for enlightenment? Reply by saying: "Yes, I have."
\[Then the master asks further:\] Do you wish to receive from me the
ethics of thew bodhisattva and

also all the basis of bodhisattva training? Reply: "Yes, I do."

THE MAIN RITE Now the actual ceremony of conferring the vows begins.
Reaffirm the visualization of buddhas and bodhisattvas in the space in
front of you, and of yourself being surrounded by all sentient beings.
Then reflect: "Although I too am still in the cycle of existence,
tormented by delusions and sufferings, I am much more fortunate than
many of these sentient beings, in that I have obtained a human existence
and possess the capacity to judge between what is beneficial and what is
harmful. Therefore, being always mindful of the great preciousness of
bodhicitta, I will determine that I will work for the attainment of the
completely enlightened state for the benefit of all. I will, by taking
the bodhisattva vows, dedicate my whole life and energy to the practical
application of the noble ideals of the bodhisattva." Those among you who
do not feel committed enough to engage in the bodhisattva deeds should
not take the bodhisattva vows. Develop, instead, the altruistic
attitude, "May I achieve the completely enlightened state for the
benefit of all beings." But those who do feel enough commitment should
take the bodhisattva vows and make the following pledge: Just as the
great bodhisattvas of the past first generated bodhicitta, took the vows
and dedicated themselves to the bodhisattva deeds, I too will take the
vows and observe them by engaging in the bodhisattva deeds. The
preceptor asks you the following three times; after each question, reply
positively. When you finish the third repetition, strongly imagine that
you have received the complete set of bodhisattva vows.4 O \[...(insert
name of the disciple)\], child of the family, will you take from me the
bodhisattva's morality of restraint, the morality of gathering virtue,
and the morality of working for others' welfare, in short all the
ethical codes of bodhisattvas and their practices, which were the basis
for the training of all the bodhisattvas of the past, and are for all
those present, and will ever remain so for all future bodhisattvas?

Reply: "Yes, I will."

CONCLUDING RITES Evoking the attention of the buddhas \[When the
preceptor, while reciting the following, calls for the kind attention of
all the buddhas in the ten directions, imagine yourself touching, with
your head, the feet of the buddhas and bodhisattvas visualized in front
of you.\] O, I beseech the attention of all the buddhas who, though
residing in countless realms in the ten directions and being beyond
ordinary comprehension, possess the mind from which no event or sentient
being is concealed. I call to your kind attention that Bodhisattva
\[...(insert name of the disciple)\] has taken the perfect vows of a
bodhisattva three times from me, Bodhisattva \[...(insert the name of
the preceptor)\]; and I bear witness to this event.

Words of encouragement through explaining the benefits \[The preceptor
now gives you encouragement by explaining the great benefits of having
taken the vows and generated the practical aspects of bodhicitta.\]
Bodhisattvacharyavatara says that the power of generating the practical
aspect of the mind is such that once you have generated it through
taking the vows, even when you are asleep your store of merit will
continue to increase. Lama Tsongkhapa says in his text that the moment
we have taken the bodhisattva vows, the buddhas in all the directions
will have an indication of the great event and will bear witness to our
taking the vows. They will perceive that on such and such a day---for
example, today---in this Himalayan region of Dharamsala, inside Thekchen
Choeling temple, many disciples headed by Ven. Lobsang Nyima, Jhangtse
Choje \[one of the two high masters next in the line of Tsongkhapa's
throne\] took the bodhisattva vows from the Bhikshu Tenzin Gyatso.
Because of this, the buddhas will pray for the success of these
bodhisattvas and always sustain them as their own children. The
bodhisattva vows are superior to many other forms of vows. Taking them
constitutes the accumulation of great stores of merit and also protects
the practitioner from many negative actions. Do not speak unnecessarily
of the bodhisattva vows to untrained ones and

those who have no faith in the bodhisattva practices. Doing so can be
harmful for the listener who does not appreciate the bodhisattva
principles; such persons may speak against the bodhisattva vows, and
thus indulge in grave negative actions. Therefore, when speaking about
the bodhisattva vows it is crucial to judge the suitability of the
listener.

Offering of thanks \[The ceremony concludes with the offerings of
thanks. Both the master and the disciples make offerings to all the
buddhas and bodhisattvas. This should be done by reciting the verses of
the seven-limbed practice (see this page above).

26. THE BODHISATTVA DEEDS

G

ENERATING AN ALTRUISTIC attitude alone is not enough---you should engage

in the bodhisattva deeds after having made your pledge, because without
the deeds you have only an altruistic attitude. Without engaging in the
bodhisattva deeds, you will not be able to achieve the omniscient state,
the attainment of which is so vital for the work of benefiting others to
your fullest capacity. The bodhisattva deeds or way of life must accord
with the principles you adopted when first generating the altruistic
mind of bodhicitta---the commitment to work for the welfare of all
beings. Therefore, the ultimate object of aspiration of a bodhisattva is
the attainment of the form body of a buddha, because it is only in the
aspect of the form body that buddhas are able to teach sentient beings
and work for the benefit of others. Such a form body can be achieved by
totally eliminating the obstructions to knowledge. You have to develop
the Clear Light mind within yourself to the fullest extent to make it
omniscient, since without the achievement of omniscience, you will not
be able to achieve the form bodies of the buddhas. At the resultant
state, there are two kayas or bodies---the sublime truth body
(dharmakaya) and the sublime form body (rupakaya). The bodhisattva has
to engage in a path that has the complete aspects of method and wisdom
leading to such a resultant state. This path is that of the union of
method and wisdom, or in other words, the accumulations of merit and
wisdom. The practices of method and wisdom should be undertaken not in
isolation, but rather in union. The practice of wisdom is constituted by
the accumulation of wisdom, whereas all the other practices such as
bodhicitta, generosity, morality, and so forth are practices that
accumulate stores of merit.

THE SIX PERFECTIONS The application of bodhicitta can be done through
the study and practice of

the six perfections.

1.  Generosity The first among the six perfections is generosity.
    Generosity is of three types: giving material aid, giving dharma,
    and protecting from fear. "Giving dharma" refers to the giving of
    teachings to other sentient beings out of the pure motivation to
    benefit them. The phrase does not only refer to high lamas giving
    teachings seated on high thrones. You should not have the notion
    that dharma teachings should be preceded by impressive rituals such
    as the blowing of conch shells and the like. Rather, any instruction
    given out of compassion and a kind heart by anyone is considered
    generosity of the dharma. Giving away one's own possessions without
    even the slightest touch of miserliness and without any hope for
    reward is part of the practice of generosity. It would be very
    beneficial, if you want to practice generosity, to make offerings to
    sick patients and also to the monastic universities which have
    philosophical study programs and which train many young monks for
    the practice of dharma. The practice of generosity should be
    undertaken by giving away what you can afford. You should enhance
    and develop your thought of generosity to such an extent that
    eventually you will be able to part with even your own body which
    you hold most precious, without the slightest trace of apprehension
    or possessiveness. As in any practice, it is important right from
    the beginning never to be discouraged, never to think that you will
    not be able to do it. Protecting someone from fear or danger is the
    giving of fearlessness, as is saving people from illness and so
    forth. The practice of rituals for the purpose of overcoming illness
    could also justifiably be called the giving of fearlessness. But
    genuine practitioners of dharma who emphasize the practice of Lamrim
    and thought transformation should basically not have preconceptions
    that suffering is caused by such and such a spirit. Although the
    latter is possible, basically one's own karmic actions are
    responsible for one's harm and suffering. If you have definite
    indications of being harmed by certain spirits, then---instead of
    doing all these rituals---the most effective way to overcome the
    difficulty is to practice compassion toward the forces that harm
    you. Such occasions give you new opportunities to practice your
    compassion, which is far more powerful than performing rituals.
    Although we Tibetans talk about the law of cause and effect and the

Buddha's doctrine, when a difficult situation really presses us we often
like to blame it on the harm of spirits. It is far better to have fewer
superstitions and more faith in the law of causality. However, if many
internal and external signs indicate that harm is caused by spirits,
then there are certain rituals actually recommended by the Buddha
himself to overcome the problem. If these rituals can be practiced
properly, benefit will ensue. The monks performing the rituals should do
so on the basis of divine identity with a meditational deity and a very
strong motivation of altruism.

2.  Morality Next is the practice of morality. If you have taken
    monastic vows, observe them properly and live up to the standards of
    the Buddha's bhikshus. You should never follow the example of
    corrupted monks. In the world there are people who even go to the
    extent of killing their parents. The fact that there are people who
    do this does not mean you should follow their example. Similarly,
    although within the Buddhist community there are monks who are
    unbecoming in their way of life, you should rather follow the
    example of good and perfect monks. It is better to have a lesser
    number with better quality than a greater number with inferior
    quality. Lay people should engage in the practice of morality by
    abstaining from the ten negative actions---if possible, all ten. But
    if this is not possible, then at least taking the life of others,
    telling lies, and indulging in sexual misconduct should be avoided;
    these are very detrimental, not only for the individual but also for
    the peace and calmness of a community. Divisive talk is very
    destructive; it causes a lot of conflict and misunderstanding within
    a community, and between different communities and different people.
    Therefore, it is a great obstacle to peace and happiness of mind.
    The same is true of telling lies. Senseless gossip, although not so
    destructive from one point of view, is seen from another to be very
    harmful, as it wastes so much of your precious time. You should also
    avoid harsh speech and covetousness, as well as harmful intent and
    holding perverted views. "Perverted views" refers to incorrect views
    that deny the existence of life after death and the law of
    causality. Also, as Nagarjuna recommends in his Ratnavali (Precious
    Garland), it is important to avoid taking alcoholic drinks. In
    Tibet, because of the lack of relaxation available under the
    repressive Chinese rule, some people indulge in taking alcohol,
    which is very injurious. Buddha himself has said that those

who regard him as their master should never take an alcoholic drink,
even as little as fits on the tip of a blade of grass. Gambling is also
very injurious; it involves all sorts of negative actions like telling
lies, being covetous, and using harsh speech. Because many negative
actions ensue from gambling, Nagarjuna taught that gambling is very
destructive. The same is true of smoking. Even the modern doctors speak
of the destructive effect of smoking on one's health. Smoking is an
addiction; it is not as if we could not survive if we did not smoke. Nor
is it like taking tea. Because tea is a key part of our diet, if we are
told by the doctor not to drink it, we have to find something as an
alternative. But smoking is completely different: we do not need to
smoke at all. Because of their misconceptions and the bad habit of
smoking, some people even find the smell of tobacco quite nice. Smoking
is very bad for the purse, too. Rather than smoke, it would be better to
go for a picnic and enjoy a nice lunch or dinner. This is not religious
talk---the issue is one of health. It would be better right from the
beginning not to indulge in and develop the addiction to tobacco.

3.  Patience There are different types of patience: the patience of
    being indifferent to the harm inflicted by others, the patience of
    voluntarily accepting hardship, and the patience developed through
    reasoned conviction in the dharma. Practitioners of dharma should
    have these types of patience---they should be able to endure
    hardship---but adopting such patience does not mean that they should
    not take precautions for their health. When you have a sickness,
    right from the beginning it is better to treat it by going to
    doctors and taking medicine. It is no good leaving matters to the
    last moment, which is, in part, a habit of Tibetans. Because in
    Tibet there were very few doctors, when someone became sick, people
    would advise the person to take more food and have a good rest. This
    is inadequate advice. It is more important to look into the causes
    of the illness and apply corrective measures. Taking care of your
    health is very important, particularly for meditators in the high
    mountains and for students in the monastic communities who have to
    undergo very rigorous training. At the same time, meditators and
    students should have the patience which can voluntarily accept
    hardship; without such patience they will never be successful in
    their studies. Gungthang Jampeyang said:

Should you wish to be learned in the ways of avoiding delusions and
attaining liberation, And achieve the glory of an eloquent scholar
confident amidst any assembly, Accept with patience the hardships
involved. For the leisurely lifestyle of the present, Totally attached
to the pleasures of delicacies, drinks and excessive sleep, Will get you
nowhere. Similarly, the patience of being indifferent to harm inflicted
by others is especially important for practitioners of Mahayana, because
Mahayana doctrine in particular and Buddha's doctrine in general are
rooted in compassion. Therefore, you should be able to forbear and
endure the harm inflicted by others. Buddha said that those who
retaliate against harm inflicted by others are not his followers. You
should also view all the harm that you face and that is inflicted by
others---as well as the adverse circumstances that you experience---as a
manifestation and ripening of your own negative actions. Doing this will
enable you to endure the suffering with greater patience. When facing
difficulties such as illnesses and adverse circumstances, it is very
important to reflect on the law of causality, and conclude that these
are the consequences of your own doings in the past. This conclusion
will protect you from having all sorts of superstitions or unnecessary
mental anxieties, but this does not mean that you should not work toward
the relief of the problems. Some people misunderstand the concept of
karma. They take the Buddha's doctrine of the law of causality to mean
that all is predetermined, that there is nothing that the individual can
do. This is a total misunderstanding. The very term karma or action is a
term of active force, which indicates that future events are within your
own hands. Since action is a phenomenon that is committed by a person, a
living being, it is within your own hands whether or not you engage in
actions. There are differing techniques for various types of
practitioners. For some it is effective, when facing adverse
circumstances, to reflect that these are due to the nature of suffering
and are the natural consequences of being in the cycle of existence.
Others could view adverse circumstances as the ripening of their own
negative actions and could wish that by the experience of these
sufferings all other sentient beings will never undergo such experiences
in the future.

4. Joyous Effort If one has the faculty of joyous effort, one will be
able to accomplish the task that one has originally set out to do.
Therefore, this faculty is very important for a spiritual practitioner.
Generally speaking, there are three types of joyous effort: (1)
armor-like joyous effort; (2) joyous effort in gathering virtues; and
(3) joyous effort in working for others. The main obstacles to the
development of these efforts are the different levels of
laziness---primarily the laziness of procrastination, and the lazinesses
stemming from indolence and from a sense of inferiority.1

5.  Concentration Since the practices of concentration and wisdom are
    treated in separate chapters, only a brief explanation of these is
    given here. Generally speaking, concentration refers to a faculty of
    single-pointedness of the mind that serves as a powerful basis for
    any given meditation. It is of two types, based on differing
    functions: mundane and super-mundane concentrations.

6.  Wisdom Wisdom refers to an analytic faculty of the mind that allows
    a probing into the deeper nature of things. Broadly speaking, it is
    of two kinds: the wisdom examining the ultimate nature of phenomena,
    and the wisdom examining the conventional or relative nature of
    phenomena.

THE FOUR RIPENING FACTORS The four ripening factors refer to the four
principal factors that bodhisattvas employ in attracting disciples and
enhancing their spiritual potentials. These are: (1) giving material
aid; (2) speaking eloquently; (3) always giving the right counsel; and
(4) setting an example by living the principles taught. It is through
these skillful means that the compassionate bodhisattvas work for the
welfare of all other beings.

27. CALM ABIDING OF MIND

C

ONCENTRATION IS A very important factor for the completion of the
practice

of wisdom. First of all, the practitioner should accumulate the
conditions for a perfect practice of single-pointedness. Samadhi or
concentration practice is common to both Buddhists and non-Buddhists;
without such a faculty you will not be able to make great progress in
the spiritual path---it is indispensable. Particularly for people like
us who are engaged in the practice of a union of sutra and tantra, and
particularly highest yoga tantra, it is very important to have
single-pointed concentration, a faculty that will enable us to channel
all our energy on a chosen object. The appropriate conditions for
undertaking the practice of singlepointedness of the mind, or in other
words, calm abiding, are a conducive environment, fewer excessive
activities, study of the text related to the practice of calm abiding,
no unnecessary meetings with people, adoption of the right physical
posture, and so forth. For the actual practice of calm abiding, various
objects can be taken as the focus of meditation, such as a pebble, a
piece of wood, or any other object. But for an added advantage, it is
very good to take the image of a buddha as an object of meditation. We
who are engaged in the practice of deity yoga can visualize the object
of meditation above in the space in front of us, or visualize a replica
of the spiritual master at our crowns dissolving into us, and then
ourselves transforming into the image of Buddha Shakyamuni. Seated in a
vajrasana (cross-legged) position, we can do these
visualizations---either we see the object of visualization in front of
us or, if we have taken tantric initiations, we can visualize ourselves
in the aspect of Buddha Shakyamuni. As I remarked earlier, for some
practitioners it is better to visualize with closed eyes, but for
others---although it is difficult at the beginning---it is more
effective and yields better results in the future if they can develop
the habit of doing meditation with open eyes. Otherwise, if they start
meditating with closed eyes, the moment they open their eyes their minds
are easily distracted. Another point to note is that since you are
cultivating calm abiding

and single-pointedness on the basis of the mental consciousness and not
on the sensory level, it is good to try to develop the habit of doing
meditation with open eyes, totally neglecting the visual consciousness.
In this way, you will get to a point where you will be able to prevent
the conditions that give rise to an active visual consciousness. Now,
when you actually engage in the meditation of calm abiding, channeling
your mind on a given object and maintaining single-pointedness, if your
chosen object, such as a color, changes into a different color, you
should try to reaffirm your visualization of the color that you
originally chose. You should not let your mind come under the control of
the distraction. Right from the beginning it is important that you have
a very strong determination that---even if it means having only a short
session---you shall conduct a perfect meditation, one totally free from
the influences of mental sinking and mental excitement, and never
deviating from the chosen object of meditation. Then, while in the
actual meditation session it is crucial never to lose the object of
meditation that you have chosen. When the mind is focused and directed
upon this object, it should be relaxed, but if it is too relaxed there
is a danger of mental sinking creeping in. Therefore, you should have a
certain degree of intensity while maintaining single-pointedness, as
though your mind had fused with the chosen object. This combination of
intensity and relaxed alertness is essential. When you have it, the
mental clarity of your meditation will increase, whereas if you try to
have too relaxed a state of mind right from the beginning, you will be
prevented from making progress in your meditation. If you want to engage
in a perfect meditation of calm abiding, with a single-pointed
concentration, you should apply the eight opponent forces to overcome
the five main obstacles to the attainment of a single-pointedness of
mind. One obstacle is laziness. To overcome it, there are four opponent
forces: faith in the value of meditative single-pointedness; deep
interest in and admiration for the practice of single-pointedness due to
seeing its benefits; joyous effort; and mental pliancy. Recollection of
mindfulness is the opponent force for losing your object of meditation.
Mental alertness or introspection detects the arisal of mental sinking
and mental excitement. This faculty of introspection is of vital
importance. There are many different levels of practitioners. Some whose
introspection is very powerful will be able to prevent even the arisal
of mental sinking right from the beginning, receiving a kind of
forewarning when the mental faults are about to arise. But those whose
practice of introspection is not very strong

will be able to stop the sinking only after it has already arisen. There
are different levels of mental sinking---some are gross and some are
subtle. The cause for the arisal of mental sinking is that the mind is
too relaxed; in order to overcome that you should reinforce the
intensity of your mind and alertness. This can be done by reflecting
upon things that are joyful and admirable---such as the great qualities
of the Buddha's body, speech, and mind---or by visualizing a bright
light, or by imagining your mind springing into space and becoming
infused with it. Such types of visualization are effective in overcoming
mental sinking. Another fault that obstructs the cultivation of
single-pointedness is that of mental excitement and scattering. It
arises when the mind is distracted to external objects. In order to
overcome it, it is effective to employ visualizations that will enable
you to withdraw your mind within and feel a sense of renunciation.
Reflecting upon impermanence and the faults and miserable state of
cyclic existence is effective. The unnecessary application of antidotes
or opponent forces when there is no mental sinking or excitement at all
is also an obstacle; therefore, you should cultivate equanimity, which
is non-application of opponent forces when there is no arisal of mental
sinking or excitement. All these obstacles to meditation will arise
differently, according to the variations in age, mental faculty,
experience, and mental disposition of the practitioners. Therefore, you
should judge for yourself how best to cope with them. The point is that
you have to maintain equilibrium or a balanced state of mental intensity
and single-pointedness, so that your mind is not under the influence of
either mental sinking or excitement. You should not be satisfied with
having just a stable visualization alone; there should be clarity and
intensity of the subjective experience as well. The image should be both
clear and stable. When you undertake the practice of single-pointedness
by applying the eight opponent forces,1 you will be able to realize the
nine mental stages2 and be thus led to a perfect calm abiding.
Sometimes---as Lama Tsongkhapa recommended in his shorter version of
Lamrim, or as the Panchen Lama stated in his commentary on mahamudra---
since a tantric practitioner's ultimate aim is to withdraw all the
energy winds and gross levels of mind into the subtle mind and wind,
cultivating calm abiding by taking your own mind as the object of
meditation is very powerful and will yield additional benefit in the
future.

28. WISDOM THROUGH SPECIAL INSIGHT

T

HE NEXT PRACTICE is that of wisdom, based on the cultivation of
vipassana

or special insight. When you undertake the practice of special insight
you should visualize your spiritual guru in the aspect of Manjushri and
make the request. The actual meditation on special insight is explained
here in terms of meditation on the identity-lessness or selflessness of
persons and the selflessness of phenomena. When the self-grasping
attitude arises within you, it is the self-grasping attitude focused
upon phenomena that arises first and that leads to the egoistic attitude
of grasping at the inherent existence of your own self. However, when
you do the meditation, because of the significance of the objects on
which you qualify the emptiness, meditation on the selflessness of
persons prior to meditation on the selflessness of phenomena will prove
more effective and powerful.

SELFLESSNESS OF PERSONS To do the meditation on the selflessness of
persons, think that the self or person is nothing other than a label
imputed on the composite of physical and mental aggregates. As Nagarjuna
explains in his Ratnavali: A person is not the earth, nor water, Nor
wind, nor space. Neither is it consciousness, nor all of them; Yet apart
from these what person is there? For example, right now you feel that
you are sitting on the mat, but now search for that self or person. You
will find that it is not to be found in the physical or mental
aggregates. It is none of the four elements, such as the elemental
particles that form the body. These elements cannot be posited as

persons from their own side; the collection of them is not the person;
nor are they individually the person. The person is only a label imputed
on the aggregation of all these designative bases, and therefore it
exists only nominally. There is no such person that exists inherently,
truly, and independently. The tradition explains that undertaking the
analysis on the emptiness of inherent existence with the four essential
points is very powerful and effective. These points are (1) identifying
the object of negation, (2) ascertaining the pervasion, (3) ascertaining
the absence of singularity, and (4) ascertaining the absence of
plurality. The first essential point is identifying the object of
negation. We all possess within ourselves an innate notion of self as
existing inherently and as something self-evident. Especially when very
powerful emotions arise, for example when you are accused by others,
then you feel your "self" very strongly. Under such circumstances, you
will have an intense feeling of I-ness or selfhood. At that point you
should immediately try to see, from a corner of your mind, how that self
or the person appears to you and how you relate to it. Then you will be
able to identify the mode of apprehension of the innate self-grasping
attitude and how the person, your own I, appears to that consciousness.
The natural attitude apprehends a self existing inherently, truly, and
totally independently of the body and mind. You will find that it is as
if there is a person or self that is like a master dominating the body
and mind---a totally independent entity, that seems to solidly exist. On
the basis of such a misconception, all the negative emotions such as
desire and hatred arise. If you undertake the meditation described
above, you will be able to identify the self as apprehended by this
misconception quite clearly, through your own experience. When you do
this analysis, you will get to a state where you will feel rather
impatient at being unable to locate the self or person at all and will
conclude that you are forced to posit the person as existing merely on a
nominal level. It is important to relate all this analysis to your own
way of thinking. You can reason that if things, the self or the person,
exist as they appear to you, when you analytically search for the
essence behind the label you should be able to find it. But you cannot
find it; as a result of your analysis you end with seeing through the
deception of your misconception! If you follow the instructions on the
analytic examination as explained in this text, identification of the
self as apprehended by the misconceived attitude will become clearer.
That is the essential point of identifying the object of

negation. The second essential point is the ascertainment of pervasion.
Pervasion refers to an element of the logic of necessity that one finds
underlying phenomena. In the present context, it is the premise that if
anything exists inherently and objectively in its own right, then it
should do so as either inherently one or multiple, with no third
possibility, just as everything that exists at the relative level does
so either as a single entity or a multiple. Thus, if the self exists as
apprehended by this misconception---as totally independent or inherently
existing within and amidst the body and the mind, the aggregates---then
the self or the person should exist either as one with the aggregates or
as totally separate from them. Since single and multiple form a
dichotomy and there is no third possibility, these two together observe
the law of the excluded middle. That is how you ascertain the essential
point of pervasion. The third essential point is that of ascertaining
the absence of singularity. This is done by analyzing whether or not the
self or person exists as single or totally one with the aggregates. If
the self exists as single or totally one with the aggregates, then the
contradiction arises that just as the aggregates are many, the self
should also be multiple. Also, when this present life ceases at the time
of death, the continuity of the self should also cease right then. And,
if the self or the person is totally one with the aggregates, how can
one have the natural feeling of the self being the master of these
aggregates and the aggregates being the subjects and possessions of that
self? Furthermore, how can one logically maintain that the basis of
designation and the designation itself are one and the same thing? To
ascertain the absence of plurality, consider that if the self or the
person exists independently, separate from the aggregates, then after
mentally disintegrating the aggregates one should be able to point out a
self or person existing independent of these aggregates---but one
cannot. If the self or the person is a totally different and separate
entity from the aggregates, then there should be no relation between the
self and the aggregates at all. Thus, when you analytically probe in
such a manner, you will not find the person or the self: the person or
self cannot withstand the analysis of such an ultimate scrutiny. If the
person existed independently, truly, and inherently, then it should be
able to withstand any form of ultimate analysis. When you employ such an
examination or analysis you will be able to reach a state where the self
as apprehended and perceived by your misconception does not exist. And
you will really begin to question the validity of your natural tendency
to believe in an inherently existent I or self, which you take to be

such a self-evident phenomenon. Just as Lama Tsongkhapa explains in his
Gongpa Rabsel, a commentary on Madhyamakāvatāra, you will come to the
conclusion that the self or the person is a mere label imputed upon the
basis of the aggregates. Gaining such an understanding constitutes a
realization of the selflessness of persons. When such a realization is
maintained and reinforced through constant meditation and
familiarization, you will be able to develop it into an intuitive or
direct experience. Within the selflessness of persons there are many
different levels, some that are gross. A gross level of selflessness of
persons is the person as not existing substantially, or not having a
self-sufficient identity. If any level or degree of selflessness, once
having been realized upon the person, brings you the realization of
emptiness when applied to other phenomena, then it is a genuine
understanding of the subtle selflessness of persons. An understanding of
all these different levels of selflessness is very important for leading
you to the final and ultimate nature of things, emptiness. Having
developed certainty and ascertainment in your realization of the
non-inherent existence of the person and the realization of the person
as a mere label imputed upon the designative bases, the mind-body
collection, you should maintain a meditative equipoise. When the
ascertainment becomes weaker, you should reaffirm it by applying the
analytic process as before. During meditative equipoise it is important
to keep your concentration deeply absorbed on the mere absence and total
negation of the inherent existence of the person, without having any
speculation as to any implication of another level of existence. It is
during the post-meditational period that the meditator will be led to
the realization of the conventional reality of phenomena. Although
phenomena lack inherent existence, still they have a certain level of
existence which, you can conclude, is only conventional and relative.
Thus, you will be able to perceive all phenomena as if they were
illusions. There is no need to make an extra effort to have such a
realization: If your understanding of non-inherent existence or
emptiness is perfect during meditative equipoise, then during the
post-meditational period the understanding of the illusion-like nature
of conventional reality---the fact that although phenomena appear in one
way they exist in another---will come naturally as a by-product.

SELFLESSNESS OF PHENOMENA The meditation on the selflessness of
phenomena is divided into two:

meditating upon the selflessness of compounded phenomena and meditating
upon the selflessness of uncompounded phenomena. Just as the person or
the self lacks inherent existence, all one's belongings and the
environment and phenomena lack inherent existence. The category of
compounded phenomena is divided into three: matter, consciousness, and
abstract but transitory phenomena. The first, matter, includes the body.
When you think of the body you ordinarily have the natural feeling that
the different parts---such as the head, arms, and so forth---exist
independently, or have an inherent existence, from their own side. This
feeling is not valid: when you analyze the parts of the body, you will
find that they are just mere labels imputed upon the aggregation of
their designative bases, their own parts. You should also apply the same
process of analysis to the body as a whole ---is the body totally one
with its parts or is it totally independent and separate from its
parts?---and to external phenomena like houses, towns, mountains, trees,
forests, and so forth. What is a forest? Is it the collection of all the
trees or the individual trees themselves? You will find that forest is a
mere label imputed upon the collection of all these different trees.
Similarly, the various qualities---good, bad, long, short, tall---are
relative terms imputed in relation to something else. This shows their
nature of dependence. There is no independently and inherently existing
long or short that is an absolute in itself. The same form of analysis
should also address the topic of consciousness. Consider whether or not
consciousness exists independently and inherently, and then whether
consciousness is one with the consciousness of an earlier instance or is
totally separate from it. The third category of compounded phenomena is
that of abstract but transitory phenomena. This term refers to phenomena
such as time, year, month, day, and so forth which are not tangible. If
a year existed independently, then it would not depend upon its parts,
such as the months. But without depending upon months, how can one posit
a year? So year is nothing other than a label imputed upon the
collection of a number of months. The same kind of analysis should be
extended to uncompounded phenomena, such as space, as well. Nagarjuna
said in his Mulamadhyamaka Karika (Fundamental Treatise on the Middle
Way): "If things compounded are not established, how can those that are
non-compounded be established?" In short, you should be able to get to a
realization that not only your own person but also all phenomena lack
inherent existence and are illusory in the sense that, although they
appear to be truly existent, they lack such a status.

Thus meditate upon the emptiness of all phenomena. Meditation on the
emptiness of non-compounded phenomena is very important, especially a
focus on the non-inherent existence of emptiness itself. This is because
there is a grave danger of falling into the trap of conceiving emptiness
as truly existent. Having negated the true existence of all other
phenomena, you might tend to apprehend emptiness itself as being truly
existent, because it is the ultimate nature. Just as all phenomena lack
true existence or inherent existence, so does emptiness. There is no
independent emptiness or inherently existent emptiness that is not
dependent upon the subject which it qualifies. Emptiness is always a
quality or a property, and there is no emptiness which can exist
independently, without a basis on which it is qualified. Therefore,
emptiness is a mere label imputed upon a basis, as, for example, the
emptiness of vase is nothing other than the ultimate nature of vase. The
very absence or negation of the inherent existence of the vase is
emptiness. Just as the subject vase is empty, so too is the quality
emptiness. Overcoming the misapprehension of emptiness as truly existent
is crucial. Many texts speak of this misconception as an irreparable
view. Because there is a great danger of misapprehending emptiness as
truly existent, the sutras mention many synonyms for the emptiness of
emptiness: the emptiness of ultimate nature, the emptiness of ultimate
truth, and so forth. The explanations of all these are designed to
overcome the misapprehension of emptiness as truly existent. Realization
of such an emptiness through analysis both during meditative equipoise
and the post-meditational periods, when accompanied by a physical and
mental pliancy achieved through calm abiding meditation, marks the
attainment of special insight focused on emptiness.

29. TANTRA IN CONTEXT

H

AVING TRAINED YOUR mind in the common paths of Lamrim, you should

engage in the practice of tantra, which is the gateway of the fortunate
ones. It is by engaging in such a powerful and sophisticated path that
the practitioner will be able to expedite his or her accumulation of
merit and wisdom and achieve omniscience within the shortest possible
time. With that, this brief experiential commentary on Panchen Lama
Lobsang Choekyi Gyaltsen's Lamrim is concluded. As I have remarked over
the last few days, the essence of the Buddha's doctrine is to be a kind
and good human being and to practice altruism.

APPENDIX 1 Commitments and Precepts of Thought Transformation Practice

Commitments of Thought Transformation Practice 1. Do not disregard or
contradict any pledges that you have made. 2. Do not allow your thought
transformation practice to increase arrogance. 3. Do not let yourself
fall into partiality toward others. 4. Maintain a natural external
behavior acceptable to others, while internally transforming your mind.
5. Do not speak of the faults of others. 6. Do not think of others'
failings, even when you see them. 7. Apply antidotes to the delusions
that are strongest in you with greater emphasis. 8. Give up all hope for
personal reward for your thought transformation practice. 9. Do not let
your positive actions be polluted by the poisons of the selfcherishing
attitude and by thoughts that grasp at the inherent existence of things.
10. Hold no grudge toward those who cause harm. 11. Do not respond in
kind when scolded by others. 12. Do not retaliate in return when harmed
by others. 13. Abstain from any actions harmful to others' bodies or
minds. 14. Do not blame others for your own shortcomings and failures.
15. Abandon selfish motives of appropriating the belongings of a
community for your personal gain. 16. Do not undertake the thought
transformation practice merely because of the wish to be protected from
some malevolent forces. 17. Do not be inflated and arrogant on account
of your thought transformation practice. 18. Eliminate the ulterior
motive which wishes others to suffer for the sake of your own happiness.

Precepts of Thought Transformation Practice 1. Undertake all activities
with the single thought to benefit others. 2. Oppose all interferences
and enhance your practice through the altruistic attitude of equalizing
and exchanging yourself with others. 3. Pursue all positive activities
with the bodhicitta motivation at the beginning and a dedication at the
end. 4. Transform all circumstances, both desirable and adverse, so that
they become complementary to your practice of thought transformation. 5.
Regard all pledges in general, and those of thought transformation in
particular, as dear as your life. 6. Apply the appropriate opponent
forces instantly when delusions arise and strive to sever their
continuity. 7. Aggregate the three principle causes for your practice:
a. Proper reliance on an experienced spiritual guide b. A mind receptive
to righteous actions c. Protection of the precepts of the three vows
(individual liberation, bodhisattva, and tantra) from degeneration 8.
Maintain the three undeclining attitudes: a. An undeclining devotion
toward your spiritual mentor b. An undeclining joy in the practice of
thought transformation c. An undeclining wish to observe the three vows
9. Do not isolate your body, speech, or mind from ethical conduct. 10.
Always practice thought transformation with impartiality toward all. 11.
Apply the thought transformation principles to all events. 12. Meditate
with special attention on love and compassion toward your rivals,
enemies, et al. 13. Always practice thought transformation without any
dependence on favorableness in the external circumstances. 14. Exert
yourself in the essence of the practice. 15. Abstain from six inverted
deeds: a. Inverted patience: showing great patience for the hardships of
mundane affairs rather than patience for the hardships of the
cultivation of the altruistic aspiration. b. Inverted will: having great
determination in pursuing meaningless worldly affairs, but having no
such will toward the practice of dharma. c. Inverted taste: reveling in
the enjoyment of pleasures derived through negative emotions such as
desire, hatred, etc., rather than enjoying the bliss of meditation.

d. Inverted compassion: feeling pity for a sincere dharma practitioner
who is materially poor while admiring someone who is successful at the
mundane level. e. Inverted loyalty: encouraging your close ones to
pursue worldly involvements rather than guiding them to the path of
dharma. f. Inverted rejoicing: rejoicing in the misfortunes of those
whom you dislike, while remaining indifferent toward the positive
actions of others which bring benefit to many. 16. Be steadfast and not
intermittent in your practice. 17. Exert all your ability with
single-pointedness and do not be plagued by doubts and hesitations. 18.
Strive to eliminate your delusions through the constant application of
examination and analysis. 19. Do not boast of the things done for
others. 20. Do not be provoked by slight incidents and remarks. 21. Do
not crave to receive gratitude and reputation because of your practice.
22. Do not be fickle.

APPENDIX 2 Bodhisattva Vows

The Eighteen Root Infractions 1. Praising oneself and belittling others
2. Not sharing with others one's wealth and the dharma 3. Not forgiving
even when others apologize 4. Doubting and denying the doctrine of the
Great Vehicle 5. Taking offerings intended for the Three Jewels 6.
Abandoning the doctrine (through sectarianism, etc.) 7. Causing an
ordained person to disrobe 8. Committing one of the five crimes of
immediate retribution 9. Holding perverted views 10. Destroying places
such as towns 11. Teaching emptiness to those untrained 12. Discouraging
others from seeking full enlightenment 13. Causing others to break the
vows of individual liberation 14. Belittling those who follow the path
of individual liberation 15. Proclaiming false realizations (of
emptiness, etc.) 16. Accepting gifts of articles that have been
misappropriated from the belongings of the Three Jewels 17. Laying down
harmful regulations and passing false judgment 18. Giving up the pledge
of altruistic aspiration (bodhicitta) Except in the cases of giving up
the pledge of altruistic aspiration and holding perverted views, a
complete infraction of any of the root vows requires the association
with what are called the "four factors for a thorough entanglement": (1)
not being mindful of the disadvantages, (2) not reversing the desire to
indulge in the infraction, (3) indulgence in the act with great pleasure
and delight, and (4) lack of any shame and conscience.

The Forty-Six Secondary Infractions SEVEN DOWNFALLS RELATED TO
GENEROSITY 1. Not making offerings every day to the Three Jewels 2.
Acting out thoughts of desire because of discontent 3. Not paying due
respect to those senior to one in ordination and in taking the
bodhisattva vows 4. Not answering others' questions out of negligence
though one is capable of doing so 5. Selfishly not accepting invitations
due to pride, the wish hurt others' feelings, or anger and laziness 6.
Not accepting others' gifts out of jealousy, anger, etc. or simply to
hurt the other 7. Not giving the dharma teachings to those who wish to
learn NINE DOWNFALLS IN RELATION TO THE PRACTICE OF MORALITY 1. Ignoring
and insulting someone who has committed any of the five heinous crimes
or defiled his/her vows of individual liberation, or treating him/her
with contempt 2. Not observing the precepts of moral conduct because one
wishes to ingratiate oneself with others 3. Complying with minor
precepts when the situation demands one's disregard of them for the
greater benefit of others 4. Not committing one of the seven negative
actions of body and speech when universal love and compassion deem it
necessary in a particular instance 5. Accepting things which are
acquired through one of the five wrong livelihoods (flattery, hinting,
bribery, extortion, and deceit) 6. Wasting time on frivolous actions
(such as carelessness, lack of pure morality, dancing, playing music
just for fun, gossiping) and also distracting others in meditation 7.
Misconceiving that bodhisattvas do not attempt to attain liberation and
failing to view delusions as things to be eliminated 8. Not living up to
one's precepts, thinking that doing so might decrease one's popularity,
or not correcting the undisciplined behaviors of body and speech which
result in a bad reputation that limits one's ability to carry out the
tasks of a bodhisattva 9. Not correcting others who, motivated by
delusions, commit negative actions. Doing so helps them to disclose and
purify their actions, whereas

concealing them generates suspicions of being disliked by others. FOUR
DOWNFALLS RELATED TO PATIENCE 1. Parting from the four noble
disciplines: not retaliating when scolded by others, humiliated by
others, hit by others or even when killed by others 2. Neglecting those
who are angry with you 3. Refusing to accept the apologies of others 4.
Acting out thoughts of anger; not opposing the arousal of anger within
one's mind by reflecting upon its harmful consequences, etc. THREE
DOWNFALLS RELATED TO JOYOUS EFFORT 1. Gathering circles of disciples out
of desire for respect and material gain 2. Wasting time and energy on
trivial matters; not countering laziness, addiction to excessive sleep,
and procrastination 3. Being addicted to frivolous talk THREE DOWNFALLS
RELATED TO CONCENTRATION 1. Not seeking the appropriate conditions for
attaining a single-pointed concentration, and meditating on it without
proper guidance 2. Not eliminating the obstacles to one's concentration
3. Regarding the blissful experience derived from concentration as the
main purpose of single-pointed meditation EIGHT DOWNFALLS RELATED TO
WISDOM 1. Abandoning the doctrines of the Lesser Vehicle with the
thought that the practitioners of the Great Vehicle need not study or
practice them 2. Unnecessarily expending one's energies in other
directions despite having one's own Great Vehicle methods 3. Pursuing
non-dharma studies to the neglect of the dharma ones 4. Studying
non-dharma subjects with great thoroughness, out of attachment to these
views, and favoring them 5. Abandoning the doctrines of the Great
Vehicle, claiming that they are ineffective, and rejecting texts on
grounds of their literary style 6. Praising oneself and belittling
others out of arrogance or hatred 7. Not attending dharma ceremonies,
discourses, etc. out of laziness or pride 8. Disparaging one's guru and
not relying on his words

TWELVE DOWNFALLS RELATED TO THE ETHICS OF HELPING OTHERS 1. Not helping
those who need assistance 2. Avoiding the task of caring for sick people
3. Not working to alleviate others' suffering, such as the seven types
of frustrations: being blind, deaf, lame, exhausted from fatigue,
depressed, abused and rebuked by others, and suffering from the five
hindrances to a calm and single-pointed mind 4. Not showing the dharma
way to those recklessly caught up in the affairs of this life alone 5.
Not repaying the kindness of others 6. Not consoling those who have
mental grief, such as that caused by separation from loved ones 7. Not
giving material aid to those who are in need of it 8. Not taking care of
one's circle of disciples, relatives, and friends by giving them
teaching and material aid 9. Not acting in accordance with others'
wishes 10. Not praising those who deserve praise and their good
qualities 11. Not preventing harmful acts to the extent permitted by
circumstances 12. Not employing physical prowess or any supernatural
powers, if one possesses them, at the time needed

APPENDIX 3 Outline of The Complete Foundation (Delam)

I. The Mode of Relying on a Spiritual Master, the Foundation of the Path
A. Activities during the session 1. Preliminary activities 2. Activities
during main session a) Reliance through thought b) Reliance through
action (1) Cultivating faith, the root factor (2) Cultivating respect
through recollecting kindness 3. Concluding activities B. Activities
during between-session periods II. The Stages of Training the Mind Based
on Such a Reliance A. Persuading to take the essence of fully endowed
human existence 1. Activities during the session a) Preliminaries b) The
main session (1) Reflecting on the great value of leisure and fortune
(2) Reflecting on its rarity c) The concluding activities B. The manner
in which to actually take the essence 1. Training the mind in the stages
of path common to the practitioners of initial capacity a) Activities
during the session (1) Preliminaries (2) The main session (a) Meditation
on death-awareness

(b) Reflecting on the sufferings of lower realms (c) Taking refuge in
the Three Jewels (d) Generating conviction in the karmic law (3) The
concluding activities b) Activities during between-session periods 2.
Training the mind in the stages of path common to those of middle
capacity a) Generating the aspiration to achieve liberation (1)
Activities during the session (a) Preliminaries (b) The main session i)
Reflecting on the sufferings of cyclic existence in general ii)
Reflecting on the specific sufferings of individual realms (c) The
concluding activities (2) Activities during between-session periods b)
Presentation of the nature of the paths leading to liberation (1)
Activities during the session (a) Preliminaries (b) The main session (c)
The concluding activities (2) Activities during between-session periods
3. Training the mind in the stages of path common to those of great
capacity a) The mode of cultivating bodhicitta (1) The actual generation
of the mind (a) Generating bodhicitta through the instruction of
sevenpoint cause and effect i) Meditation on equanimity Preliminaries
The main session The concluding activities ii) The seven-points
Recognition of all beings as having been one's

mother Recollection of their kindness Repaying the kindness Loving
kindness Great compassion Superior attitude Bodhicitta (b) Generating
bodhicitta through the instruction on equality and exchange of oneself
with others i) Activities during the session Preliminaries The main
session The concluding activities ii) Activities during between-session
periods (2) Reinforcing the generated altruistic mind through ceremony
(a) Activities during the session i) Preliminaries ii) The main session
The way in which the vows are received How to protect the vows from
degeneration iii) The concluding activites (b) Activities during
between-session periods b) The mode of engaging in the deeds following
the generation of the altruistic mind (1) Training in the bodhisattva
deeds in general (a) Activities during the session i) Preliminaries ii)
The main session Generosity Morality Patience Joyous effort
Concentration Wisdom

The four ripening factors iii) The concluding activities (b) Activities
during between-session periods (2) Training in the last two perfections
in particular (a) Training in calm-abiding, the essence of concentration
i) Activities during the session Preliminaries The main session The
concluding activities ii) Activities during between-session periods (b)
Training in special insight, the essence of wisdom i) Activities during
the session Preliminaries The main session meditations On the
selflessness of persons On the selflessness of phenomena On non-inherent
existence of compounded phenomena On non-inherent existence of
uncompounded phenomena The concluding activities ii) Activities during
between-session periods

NOTES

CHAPTER 2: ORIGIN OF LAMRIM INSTRUCTIONS 1. The full title of the text
is A Practical Guide on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment: A Path
of Bliss Leading to Omniscience (Jhangchup Lamgyi Rimpai Marti Thamche
Khyenpar Droepai Delam She Jhawa) by Panchen Lobsang Choekyi Gyaltsen.
2. The full title of this Lamrim text is A Practical Guide to the Stages
of the Path to Enlightenment: A Swift Path to Omniscience (Jhangchup
Lamgyi Rimpai Marti Thamche Khyenpar Droepai Nyurlam She Jhawa) by
Panchen Palden Yeshi. 3. For the convenience of the readers, these
repetitions have been incorporated into a single presentation in this
book. The purpose of these repetitions during the oral teaching is to
ensure that the listeners understand all the essential points of the
particular section of meditation covered during the teaching session, so
that the visualizations can be done without much difficulty. In order
for disciples to receive an experiential commentary or guide on a given
text, it is indispensible that they undertake the meditations explained
in the teaching at least twice before the next day---once during the
same evening and once the next morning. 4. A lucid commentary by H.H.
the Dalai Lama on this important guru yoga text is available in English
translation under the title The Union of Bliss and Emptiness (Ithaca:
Snow Lion Publications, 1988). 5. For the qualifications necessary on
the part of the teacher in the context of specific practices, such as
vinaya, Perfection Vehicle of Mahayana, and tantra, see Union of Bliss
and Emptiness, p. 123, and the translator's note on p. 181. 6. The four
trainings are discussed extensively in the fourth, fifth, sixth, and
seventh chapters respectively of the Abhisamayalankara (Ornament of
Clear Realizations). For detailed explanations, see the root text and
its related commentaries.

CHAPTER 4: PREPARING THE MIND 1. Buddhist literature speaks of all the
different degrees of obstacles that impede one's spiritual
transformation in terms of the "four maras" (negative influences). These
are the negative influences of the aggregates; of delusions; of the
divine youth; and of death. The first mara refers to the psychophysical
aggregates which are the products of our delusions and negative karmic
forces. The second refers to the negative emotions such as desire,
hatred, jealousy, and anger that dominate our minds and bring harm. The
third refers to spontaneous temptations that one normally feels
regarding sensual pleasures; whereas the fourth mara refers to ordinary
death, which is brought forth against our wishes as a consequence of our
past actions, without any choice. For a detailed explanation on the
definitions of the four maras and the spiritual levels at which they are
overcome, see the fourth chapter of Maitreya's Abhisamayalankara
(Ornament of Clear Realizations). 2. Clear Light is the subtlest level
of mind, which becomes manifest only when all the gross minds

have ceased their active functions. This state is experienced by
ordinary beings naturally at the time of death, but can also be
intentionally induced through meditative techniques. The reference here
is to the latter. 3. The three kayas: dharmakaya (truth body),
sambhogakaya (enjoyment body), and nirmanakaya (emanation body). 4. The
outer refuge refers to the taking of refuge common to the practitioners
of all the vehicles. It is the practice of simply going for refuge to
the Three Jewels, induced by a sense of fear for one's fate in the
future and a deep conviction in the power of the Three Jewels to protect
one from potential dangers. Inner refuge is an advanced form of the
practice, uniquely used by the practitioners of the Great Vehicle. There
are four features that distinguish it from the common refuge: (1) it
should be induced by a sense of universal compassion, the taking into
one's heart of the welfare of all beings; (2) the individual should be
determined to attain full enlightenment; (3) the individual must have
intellectually cognized the possibility of him- or herself actualizing
the state of the Three Jewels; and (4) it should transcend the refuge of
the lesser vehicle practice. For explanations on these four features,
see the second chapter of Mahayana Sutralamkara (Ornament of Great
Vehicle Sutras) by Maitreya. The secret refuge refers to the practice of
refuge in the context of the secret tantra path. It involves the taking
of refuge not only in the Three Jewels but also in the assembly of
mandala deities, which includes meditational deities, dakinis, heroes,
et al. 5. Refutation that (1) the "self" is identical with the
aggregates; (2) it is inherently different from the aggregates; (3) the
aggregates are the base of the self; (4) the self is imposed on the
aggregates; and (5) the self possesses the aggregates. For explanations
on these five steps of reasoning, see Meditation on Emptiness by Jeffrey
Hopkins (London: Wisdom Publications, 1983).

CHAPTER 5: VISUALIZATION OF THE MERIT FIELD 1. "Experiential Lineage"
(Nyamlen jhinlap gyue) has different references, depending upon the
context. Normally, it is identified with the lineage masters of the
meditational deity in which the individual practitioner specializes. For
a detailed explanation on the set-up of the merit field, see Union of
Bliss and Emptiness, pp. 62--91. 2. The five dhyani buddhas are
Akshobya, Vairochana, Ratnasambhava, Amitabha, and Amogasiddhi,
collectively known as the lords of the five buddha families. They are
the purified states of the five aggregates: consciousness, form,
feeling, discernment, and compositional factors. 3. The term wisdom
beings (yeshepas), refers to the deities that are evoked from their
natural abodes, such as the natural expanse of dharmakaya, and merge
into the deity you have generated earlier. For instance, in the present
context, the merit field that you have generated in a gradual sequence
as described in the manual is the "commitment being." Once the
visualization of the merit field is completed, you evoke "wisdom beings"
identical to the set of merit field figures that you have already
visualized, which are later merged into the commitment being. Such
meditations are undertaken to reinforce your faith in and respect for
the merit field created in your imagination. 4. See Union of Bliss and
Emptiness, pp. 62--91.

CHAPTER 6: SEVEN-LIMBED PRACTICE 1. For a detailed explanation on the
seven limbs, see Union of Bliss and Emptiness, pp. 92--115.

CHAPTER 13: RELIANCE ON A SPIRITUAL TEACHER 1. The eight benefits are:
(1) getting closer to the attainment of full enlightenment, (2) pleasing
all

the buddhas, (3) never being deprived of a spiritual mentor, (4) not
falling into any realms of unfavorable transmigrations, (5) becoming
impervious to misleading teachers and evil friends, (6) being able to
withstand the afflictions of delusions and the negative karmic impulses,
(7) enhancing the accumulation of merits as by always being mindful of
the bodhisattva ideals and not acting against them, and (8) realizing
all temporary and ultimate aims. For a detailed explanation, see
Phabongkha's Namdrol Lakchang, published in English as Liberation in Our
Hands (Howell, NJ: Mahayana Sutra and Tantra Press, 1990). 2. The eight
undesirable consequences are: (1) despising one's spiritual guru yields
results equal to those ensuing from showing contempt to all the buddhas;
(2) by being angry toward one's guru, one destroys the positive
potentials of the virtuous roots established over eons equal to the
moments of the anger, and hence will take birth in the unfavorable
realms of existence; (3) one will not attain any feats even by relying
on tantric practices; (4) practicing tantra, even with great
application, will be like working for one's own downfall; (5) no new
knowledge will be developed and that already developed will degenerate;
(6) in this life one will be tormented by unwanted experiences such as
illness, etc.; (7) one will wander in the lower realms of existence for
a long time; and (8) one will be deprived of a spiritual mentor in many
future lives. For explanations, see Pabhongkha's Namdrol Lakchang. 3.
Based on the difference in their presentation of the main subject
matter, the entire corpus of the Buddha's teachings is categorized into
three sets of discourses known as the Tripitaka, literally meaning the
three baskets. These are the scriptural collections on (1) ethics, (2)
discourses, and (3) knowledge, respectively dealing with the topics of
the trainings in ethics, meditation, and wisdom. For further
explanation, see Opening the Eye of New Awareness by H.H. the Dalai Lama
(London: Wisdom Publications, 1985), pp. 48--51. 4. Some early Western
writers on Tibetan Buddhism were mainly to blame for this mistaken
image. Being aware only of the devotional aspects of Tibetan Buddhism
and therefore the ritual aspect of tantra, these writers misunderstood
Tibetan Buddhism as a degenerated form of Buddhism deeply imbedded in
the native religion of Bon. Also, because in Buddhist tantra a special
emphasis is placed on laying a proper foundation of a sound guru
reliance practice, a spiritual mentor is regarded with the highest
esteem, which may have contributed to the incorrect perception of
Tibetan Buddhism as a degenerated Buddhism bordering on the practice of
a personality cult. Such misunderstandings gave rise to the term
Lamaism. Fortunately, as more and more literature on Tibetan Buddhism is
becoming available now in English and other major languages, a genuine
appreciation of the system is emerging.

CHAPTER 14: RECOGNIZING THE HUMAN POTENTIAL 1. The eight leisures or
freedoms are the four freedoms from the bondage of non-human existence
and the four from the obstacles found within human existence. They are
(1) freedom from a birth as a hell being, (2) freedom from a birth as an
animal, (3) freedom from a birth as a hungry spirit, (4) freedom from a
birth as a long-life deva, (5) freedom from being born in a land where
not even a word of the dharma is to be heard, (6) freedom from being
born with impaired physical and mental senses, (7) freedom from a
rebirth holding perverted views such as disbelief in the karmic law of
causality, and (8) freedom from being born at a time when a buddha has
not appeared in the world. 2. The five personal endowments are (1) birth
as a human being; (2) birth in a central land, a place where the dharma
is present; (3) being born with complete sense faculties; (4) not having
committed any of the five heinous crimes with immediate retribution
(killing one's mother, father, a foe-destroyer, shedding the blood of a
buddha with an intention to kill, and creating schism within a spiritual
community); and (5) having faith in the three scriptural collections and
dharma as a whole. The five circumstantial endowments are: (1) birth at
a time when a buddha has appeared on

earth, (2) being born when the buddha has taught the dharma, (3) being
born when this dharma is stable and flourishing, (4) being born when
there are practitioners following the dharma, and (5) being born when
there are kind benefactors who support the practitioners with material
necessities. 3. The ten negative actions are as follows: three actions
of body---killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct; four of
speech---lying, divisive talk, harsh speech, and senseless gossip; and
three of mind---covetousness, harmful intent, and holding perverted
views.

CHAPTER 17: SEEKING REFUGE 1. At the beginning of the spiritual path,
based upon their diverse mental faculties, trainees are divided into
three categories. Trainees whose spiritual endeavor is motivated
principally to seek their own liberation from the bondage of cyclic
existence are called sravakas (listeners); those who, although seeking
their own welfare primarily, have a strong wish to be of service to
others and have greater intelligence are called pratyekabuddhas
(solitary realizers); and those who chiefly work for the attainment of
the highest enlightenment to work for the benefit of others are the
bodhisattvas (awakening warriors). 2. All the stages of one's journey
toward enlightenment are included in five paths: (1) path of
accumulation, (2) path of preparation, (3) path of seeing, (4) path of
meditation, (5) path of no more training. For an explanation on the five
paths, see Opening the Eye of New Awareness.

CHAPTER 18: KARMA 1. The four powers are (1) the power of the basis, (2)
the power of repentance, (3) the power of actual antidote, and (4) the
power of resolve never to indulge in the acts again. For an explanation
of these, see Union of Bliss and Emptiness, p. 113. 2. Environmental
effects are secondary effects of the karma that results externally on
the natural environment in which one will incarnate in the coming life.
Such an effect comes into fruition generally on a collective basis of
many beings. For instance, our personal karma had some bearing upon the
evolution of the planet earth.

CHAPTER 19: THE DEFECTS OF CYCLIC EXISTENCE IN GENERAL 1. The six types
of suffering are those of (1) uncertainty, (2) lack of contentment, (3)
having to discard the body again and again, (4) having to undergo
conception repeatedly, (5) being subjected to repeated fluctuations, (6)
lack of true companions. The eight types of suffering are those of (1)
birth, (2) aging, (3) illness, (4) death, (5) the frustrations of
meeting the unwanted, (6) being separated from what is agreeable, (7)
not obtaining what is desirable though one has sought it hard, and (8)
in short, being bound to one's own five aggregates.

CHAPTER 24: EQUALIZING AND EXCHANGING ONESELF WITH OTHERS 1. A
commentary on this text in English is available under the title Advice
from a Spiritual Friend by Geshe Rabten and Geshe Dhargyey (London:
Wisdom Publications, 1986). 2. See Appendix I on thought transformation
precepts. 3. Union of Bliss and Emptiness, pp. 157--59

CHAPTER 25: BODHISATTVA VOWS RITE 1. See Bodhisattvacaryavatara, chapter
one, and its related commentaries. 2. The four negative actions are (1)
deceiving one's gurus, or any beings worthy of veneration, by telling
lies; (2) regretting one's positive actions and not one's negative
actions; (3) despising bodhisattvas out of anger; and (4) being false
and deceptive to any sentient being. 3. The four positive actions are
(1) not telling lies even at the cost of one's life; (2) encouraging
others in positive principles, particularly the spiritual path of the
Great Vehicle; (3) respecting all bodhisattvas as buddhas and
proclaiming their great qualities; and (4) cherishing the special
attitude of compassion toward all beings. 4. For the bodhisattva vows,
see Appendix II.

CHAPTER 26: THE BODHISATTVA DEEDS 1. For explanations on the different
types of laziness and the factors that counter them, see Meaningful to
Behold by Geshe Kelsang Gyatso (London: Tharpa Publications, 1989).

CHAPTER 27: CALM ABIDING OF MIND 1. The eight opponent forces to the
five obstacles: The Eight Opponent Forces 1) Faith 2) Aspiration 3)
Joyous effort 4) Suppleness 5) Mindfulness 6) Introspection 7)
Application 8) Non-application

The Five Obstacles 1) Laziness --- --- --- 2) Forgetfulness 3) Mental
sinking and excitement 4) Non-application of the antidotes 5) Excessive
application (equanimity)

For a detailed explanation of the eight opponent forces and the way in
which they overcome the five obstacles, see Geshe Kelsang Gyatso's
Meaningful to Behold, chapter eight. 2. The nine mental stages are (1)
placing the mind, (2) continual placement, (3) replacement, (4) close
placement, (5) controlled mind, (6) pacified mind, (7) complete
pacification, (8) singlepointedness, and (9) equipoise. For explanations
on the nine stages, see Geshe Kelsang Gyatso's Meaningful to Behold,
chapter eight.

GLOSSARY

aggregates Form, feeling, discernment, compositional factors, and
consciousness. These faculties serve as the basis for the arisal of an
innate notion of self-identity in a person. They are called aggregates
because of their being composed through the aggregation of many factors.
arhat A spiritually matured being who has succeeded in rooting out from
his or her mental stream all delusions and the ignorance underlying
them. Often this Sanskrit term is translated into English as
foe-destroyer; foe here referring to delusions. asana Sanskrit word for
the cross-legged posture of meditation; sometimes the term is used in a
metaphoric sense in a tantric context. bhikshu Sanskrit term for a fully
ordained monk; the female counterpart is bhikshuni. bodhicitta A
spontaneous and non-simulated aspiration to attain full enlightenment
for the sake of all beings. This mental state can be generated through a
process of intensive meditations based on a simulated universal love and
compassion. The realization of bodhicitta marks the individual becoming
a bodhisattva. Bodhisattva A spiritual trainee who has successfully
generated a nonsimulated aspiration to become fully enlightened for the
benefit of all. Bodhisattva can be literally translated as "the
awakening warrior." Buddha A being who has become totally free of all
limitations and is fully enlightened. calm abiding A meditative state of
mental absorption, accompanied by physical and mental suppleness, at
which level one's mind has become extremely serviceable in focusing
toward a chosen object. It is attained only through a successful
development of the faculty of concentration, which one possesses within
the mind. It is called calm abiding because it is a mental

state where distractions by external objects are calmed and where the
mind firmly abides on the chosen object of meditation. Cessation The
third of the Four Noble Truths, a state of true cessation of sufferings
and their causes. Clear Light Clear Light is the subtlest level of mind,
which becomes manifest only when all the gross minds have ceased their
active functions. This state is experienced by ordinary beings naturally
at the time of death, but can also be intentionally induced through
meditative techniques. consciousness In the Buddhist context,
consciousness is used broadly to include all cognitive events and levels
of the mind, even the very subtlest subconscious levels. Instinctive
mental events and emotions also fall into this class of phenomena; thus
animals are understood to possess consciousness. dakini Lit: Sky-goer.
Class of female deities in Buddhist tantra embodying the wisdom aspect
of the path. dharma This Sanskrit word has many different meanings. The
most common usage denotes a "way of life" or "transformative process."
In this context, it not only refers to the process itself but also to
the transformed result as well. Hence dharma refers to the true paths
and the true cessations to which the paths lead. dharmakaya Truth body
of the Buddha, the ultimate expanse into which all defilements are
purified. It is also the basis or source from which the Buddha assumes
varying physical manifestations suited to the differing mental
dispositions of beings. dharmapalas Wrathful deities who are assigned by
highly realized beings to protect the doctrine. enlightenment Used in
Buddhist context to mean an awakened state of mind attained by an
individual through a transformative process of spiritual purification.
Thus full enlightenment refers to the total awakening of a Buddha. form
& formless The four form and four formless states are meditative states
in which the attraction to external form is successively and eventually
reduced to the point where the mind is totally withdrawn. Such
meditative states lead to the practitioner's taking rebirths in form and
formless realms. four classes of tantra Action, performance, yoga, and
highest yoga tantras.

Four Noble Truths The truths of (1) suffering, (2) its origin, (3) the
cessation of suffering, and (4) the path which leads to the cessation of
suffering. Great Vehicle Mahayana, the path of great capacity, that
emphasizes others' welfare over one's own. It has two divisions:
Perfection Vehicle and Tantric Vehicle. guru yoga Tantric meditation
based on imagining one's own mind and body as inseparable from one's
guru visualized as a meditational deity. illusory body A very subtle
body possessing specific characteristics assumed by a practitioner on a
high level of completion stage in tantra. It is the main factor that
purifies the ordinary intermediate state between death and rebirth.
Kadam A tradition that originated from the teachings of Atisha in Tibet.
kaya Sanskrit word for body, especially in the context of the different
bodies of the Buddha, such as dharmakaya. lamrim Stages of the path to
enlightenment. Lesser Vehicle Hinayana, the path of beings with lesser
capacity, and a system that concentrates more on individual liberation
rather than a universal enlightenment for all. liberation In the
Buddhist context, the term refers to a liberation from the bondage of
delusion and sufferings in the cycle of existence. Mahayana See Great
Vehicle. omniscience All-knowing wisdom of a buddha which is attained
once all the obscurations to knowledge are removed from the mind.
Perfection Vehicle Sutra system of the Great Vehicle, which emphasizes
the practice of bodhisattva deeds within the scope of the six
perfections. Prasangika A philosophical school of thought founded on the
Emptiness doctrine of Nagarjuna by Buddhapalita and Chandrakirti in
India. prostration A physical gesture of homage in which one touches
one's palms, knees, and forehead to the ground in front of the object of
homage. protector See dharmapalas. puja A ritual involving the making of
ceremonial offerings to higher beings such as gurus, meditational
deities, buddhas, et al.

root guru A person whom you have taken as your most important spiritual
guide and mentor. selflessness Used as a synonym for emptiness. Refers
to the identity-lessness of things, that is, to the fact that things
have no inherently existing self nature. three scopes Initial, middling,
and great capacities for the spiritual path. two truths The dual aspect
of all phenomena: the level of their appearance called conventional
truth, and their ultimate reality known as ultimate truth. wisdom beings
Deities or buddhas evoked from their abodes in one's meditative
visualization to merge with and inhabit their forms imagined earlier in
the meditative sequence.

BIBLIOGRAPHY

Advice from a Spiritual Friend by Geshe Rabten and Geshe Ngawang
Dhargye. London: Wisdom Publications, 1986. Dode Drenpa Nyershag (The
Sutra on Mindfulness). Domsum Rabye (Divisions of the Three Vows), by
Sakya Pandita. Dulwai Do (The Condensed Essence of Discipline) Skt.
Vinayasutra, by Gunaprabha. Gaden Lhagyama (The Hundred Deities of the
Joyous Land) by Dulnag Palden Sangpo. Jhangchup Lamgyi Dronme (Lamp for
the Path to Enlightenment) Skt. Bodhipada-paradipa by Atisha. Jhangchub
Lamgyi Rimpai Marti Thamche Khyenpar Droepai Delam (A Practical Guide on
the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment: A Path of Bliss Leading to
Omniscience) by Panchen Lobsang Choekyi Gyaltsen. Jhangchup Lamgyi
Rimpai Marti Thamche Khyenpar Droepai Nyurlam (A Practical Guide on the
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment: A Swift Path to Omniscience) by
Panchen Losang Yeshe. Jhangchup Lamrim Chenmo (Great Exposition of the
Stages of Path to Enlightenment) by Tsongkhapa. Jhangchup Sempai Choepa
la Jugpa (A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life) Skt.
Bodhisattvacharyavatara by Shantideva. English translation by Stephen
Batchelor. Dharamsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1979.
Jhangchup Sempai Sa (The Bodhisattva Grounds) Skt. Bodhisattvabhumi by
Asanga. Jhangchub Shunglam (The Main Path to Enlightenment) by
Tsongkhapa. Jorchoe (The Six Preparatory Practices). Lama Ngachupa
(Fifty Verses on Guru Devotion) Skt. Guru Panchashika by Ashvagosha.
English translation by Geshe Ngawang Dhargyey et al. Dharamsala: Library
of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1975.

Lamgyi Tsowo Nampa Sum (Three Principal Aspects of the Path) by
Tsongkhapa. Lamrim Jampel Shalung (The Sacred Words of Manjushri) by
H.H. the Fifth Dalai Lama. Lamrim Namdrol Lagchang (Liberation in Our
Hands) by Phabongkha Dechen Nyingpo. English translation by Geshe
Lobsang Tharchin and Artemus B. Engle. Howell, NJ: Mahayana Sutra and
Tantra Press, 1990. Lamrim Nyamgur (Songs of Spiritual Experience) by
Tsongkhapa. Lamrim Sershunma (Essence of Refined Gold) by H.H. the Third
Dalai Lama. See commentary of the same name by H.H. the Fourteenth Dalai
Lama, edited by Glenn Mullin. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 1985.
Lojong Dhondunma (Seven-Point Thought Transformation) by Chekhawa. See
English translation and commentary in Advice from a Spiritual Friend,
listed above. Meaningful to Behold by Geshe Kelsang Gyatso. London:
Tharpa Publications, 1989. Meditation on Emptiness by Jeffrey Hopkins.
London: Wisdom Publications, 1983. Mitag Drenkul (Reminder of
Impermanence) by Phabongkha Dechen Nyingpo. Mitag Gomtsul Gyi Labjha (An
Advice on How to Meditate on Impermanence) by Gungthang Tenpa Dronme.
Naljor Choepa Shigyapa (Four Hundred Verses on the Yogic Deeds) Skt.
Chatu-shataka Shastra by Aryadeva. Ngontogyen (Ornament of Clear
Realizations) Skt. Abhisamayalankara by Maitreya. Opening the Eye of New
Awareness by H.H. the Dalai Lama. London: Wisdom Publications, 1985.
Sablam Lama Choepai Choga Detong Yerme (The Profound Path of Offering to
the Gurus: Union of Bliss and Emptiness) by Panchen Lobsang Choekyi
Gyaltsen. See commentary entitled The Union of Bliss and Emptiness
listed below. Sherchin Gyetongpa (The Perfection of Wisdom Sutra in
Eight Thousand Lines). See translation by Edward Conze, The Perfection
of Wisdom Sutra in Eight Thousand Lines and Its Verse Summary. Bolinas:
Four Seasons Foundation, 1973. Thekpa Chenpoi Gyue Lama (Unsurpassed
Continnum of the Great Vehicle)

Skt. Uttaratantra by Maitreya. Tsema Kunle Tuepa (Compendium on Valid
Cognitions) Skt. Pramanasamucca by Dignaga. Tsema Namdrel (Thorough
Exposition of Valid Cognitions) Skt. Pramanavartika by Dharmakirti. Uma
Gongpa Rabsel (Complete Elucidiation of the Intent) by Tsongkhapa. Uma
la Jugpa (Guide to the Middle Way) Skt. Madhyamakavatara by
Chandrakirti. Uma Rinchen Trengwa (Precious Garland) Skt. Ratnavali by
Nagarjuna. English translation by Jeffrey Hopkins in The Buddhism of
Tibet by the Fourteenth Dalai Lama. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications,
1987. Uma Tsawa Sherab (Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way) Skt.
Mulamadhyamaka Karika by Nagarjuna. In Emptiness: A Study in Religious
Meaning by Frederick Streng. Nashville: Abingdon Press, 1967. The Union
of Bliss and Emptiness by H.H. the Dalai Lama. Ithaca: Snow Lion
Publications, 1988. Yonten Shigyurma (Foundation of All Perfections) by
Tsongkhapa.

BOOKS BY THE DALAI LAMA

CORE TEACHINGS OF THE DALAI LAMA SERIES The Complete Foundation: The
Systematic Approach to Training the Mind An Introduction to Buddhism
Perfecting Patience: Buddhist Techniques to Overcome Anger Where
Buddhism Meets Neuroscience: Conversations with the Dalai Lama on the
Spiritual and Scientific Views of Our Minds (more forthcoming)

ALSO AVAILABLE FROM SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS Answers: Discussions with
Western Buddhists The Bodhisattva Guide: A Commentary on The Way of the
Bodhisattva The Buddhism of Tibet Dzogchen: Heart Essence of the Great
Perfection From Here to Enlightenment: An Introduction to Tsong-kha-pa's
Classic Text The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment The Gelug/Kagyu Tradition of Mahamudra The Great
Exposition of Secret Mantra, Volume 1: Tantra in Tibet The Great
Exposition of Secret Mantra, Volume 2: Deity Yoga The Great Exposition
of Secret Mantra, Volume 3: Yoga Tantra The Heart of Meditation:
Discovering Innermost Awareness Kindness, Clarity, and Insight The
Pocket Dalai Lama The Union of Bliss and Emptiness: Teachings on the
Practice of Guru Yoga

INDEX

Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been
included for use as search terms. They can be located by using the
search feature of your e-book reader. Abhidharma Abhisamayalankara (The
Ornament of Clear Realizations) action positive See also negative
actions afflictive emotions aggregates, physical and mental alcohol
altar, arrangement of altruism Buddha's doctrine and giving and taking
and happiness importance of and peace See also cherishing others;
community; compassion; selfishness altruistic attitude
developing/cultivating an equanimity and importance of altruistic
intention/motivation for enlightenment See also bodhicitta altruistic
mind bodhicitta and generating/developing an anger destructive power of
dominating the mind and enemies meditation on love to counter See also
negative emotions

animal realm ignorance and animals, kindness of arhat arya Aryadeva
aspirations. See three aspirations asura (demi-god) Atisha, vii
Jhangchup Lamgyi Dronme (Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment)
Avalokiteshvara awakening warriors. See bodhisattvas bodhicitta
aspirational buddhas and degenerated exceptional generation and
cultivation of Mahayana and meditation on practical practice of
visualizing See also altruistic intention/motivation; compassion
bodhicitta vows Bodhisattva Bhumi bodhisattva deeds. See also six
perfections; specific deeds bodhisattva ethics. See also bodhisattva
vows bodhisattva path bodhisattva vows bodhicitta and buddhas and
discussing infractions Mahayana practitioners taking motives for taking
person from whom you are taking prerequisites for taking reflecting on
the benefits of taking bodhisattva vows rite concluding rites main rite
preliminaries accumulation of merit an urgent request for the vows

determining the presence of any obstacles initial request to the
preceptor rejoicing Bodhisattvacaryavatara (Shantideva) on compassion on
taking bodhisattvas bodhicitta and Buddha and buddhas and emptiness and
examples of factors employed in attracting disciples and enhancing
spiritual potentials making offerings to noble ideals of of the past
self-cherishing attitude and stages of spiritual journey to
enlightenment by prospective ultimate object of aspiration of
visualizing See also spiritual masters; specific bodhisattvas body
attachment to negative actions of buddha ("fully enlightened"). See also
buddhas Buddha, perfection of a Buddha nature Buddha Shakyamuni
(Siddhārtha Gautama) becoming inseparable from core practice emptiness
and on faith faith in gurus visualized as lineages of Lamrim stemming
from meditating on merit field and and one's spiritual master protection
provided by statues of qualities of root guru and as source of lineages
teachings of (see also Buddha's doctrine) Tsongkhapa and Vajradhara and

visualizing wisdom being at the heart of See also gurus; enlightened
being Buddha Vajradhara. See Vajradhara Buddhadharma. See Buddhist
doctrine; dharma buddhahood all living beings possess the potential of
attaining/realizing kayas of nature of understanding buddhas becoming
enemies and evoking the attention of form bodies of kindness and making
offerings to of the past in sambhogakaya form self-cherishing attitude
and spiritual masters and in ten directions visualizing See also five
dhyani buddhas Buddha's doctrine altruism and essence of law of
causality and See also Buddhist doctrine; causality Buddhist doctrine.
See also Buddha's doctrine; dharma calm abiding of mind calmness at
death causality, law of Buddha's doctrine and deep conviction/belief in
denial of future lives and importance of understanding reflecting on
cause and effect method. See seven-point cause and effect method
ceremony. See bodhisattva vows rite cessation (of sufferings and their
causes) Chatu-shataka Shastra (The Four Hundred Verses) Chekawa, Geshe
(Chekawa Yeshe Dorje)

cherishing others reflection on advantages of See also altruism;
self-cherishing attitude Choekyi Gyaltsen, 10th Panchen Lama (Lobsang
Trinley Lhündrub Chökyi Gyaltsen) Cittamatra clarity Clear Light
commitment being community, working to benefit compassion and anxiety
Bodhisattvacaryavatara on complemented with wisdom realizing emptiness
as essence of Buddha's doctrine great meditating on traits vital for
perfection of visualization to develop vs. wisdom concentration defined
downfalls related to See also single-pointedness confession regret and
See also seven-limbed practice Confession Sutra consciousness body and
continuity of levels of nature of cross-legged posture. See vajrasana
(cross-legged) posture cyclic existence defects of fear of suffering in
See also samsara death awareness of calmness at continuity after
experiences, recalling illusions at meditation on

mimicking dedication deities meditational representations of wrathful
deity yoga delusions buddhas, bodhisattvas, and buddhas on consciousness
and destructive nature of enemies and etymology of the term gross
vs. subtle and happiness harmful spirits as an embodiment of one's
ignorance as root of liberation and freedom from and the mind nature of
and negative actions removing of wisdom and the worst demi-gods
dependent origination desire realm determinism deva realms dhanna, wheel
of dharma giving of practitioners refuge in texts and teachings
understanding See also Buddhist doctrine; Three Jewels dharmakaya
(sublime truth body) Dharmakirti dharmapalas (protectors). See also
protectors dhyani buddhas. See five dhyani buddhas Dignaga directions,
ten discipline disintegration

Do-de Kelsang (Sutra of Good Eon) Domsum Rabye (The Divisions of the
Three Vows) Dromtonpa eight leisures/freedoms eight opponent forces to
the five obstacles emotions afflictive See also negative emotions
empathy. See exchanging oneself and others; suffering emptiness Buddha
and of guru inherent existence and non-inherent existence of realization
of reflecting on and understanding of self (see also selflessness)
wisdom realizing See also cessation; Clear Light "enemies," buddhas and
value of See also under anger enlightened being Buddha as See also
spiritual masters enlightenment altruistic aspiration for emptiness,
buddha nature, and seed of full stages of the path to (see also Lamrim;
Lamrim Chenmo) See also altruistic intention/motivation; bodhisattvas;
buddhahood equalizing oneself and others equanimity cultivating the
preliminary step of meditation on practicing ethics of helping others,
downfalls related to the See also morality exchanging oneself and others
existence. See human existence; inherent existence experiential
commentary extraordinary attitude

faith benefits of blind in Buddha Buddha and Buddha's doctrine and
cultivating in guru reasoned single-pointed in spiritual master wisdom
and fearlessness, giving of five dhyani buddhas form realm formless
realm Four Hundred Verses (Aryadeva) four immeasurables four maras
(negative influences) Four Noble Truths four powers four ripening
factors free will. See predeterminism freedoms eight See also liberation
friends and friendships Gaden Lhagyama (The Hundred Deities of the
Joyous Land) gambling generosity downfalls related to See also kindness
giving and taking. See also altruism; selfishness gods. See deities
Gongpa Rabsel Gungthang Tenpai Dronme guru devotion breach of See also
reliance on spiritual teacher Guru Panchashika (Fifty Verses on the
Guru) guru yoga guru--disciple links gurus emptiness of five groups of

kindness of misperception of as refuge request to respect for tantra and
as Three Jewels visualized as Avalokiteshvara visualized as Buddha
visualized as Manjushri See also lineage gurus; spiritual masters; Three
Jewels happiness delusions and hell being hell realms helping others.
See altruism higher realms. See also lower realms human existence
difficulty of attaining humans contrasted with other living species
rarity of value of See also people; specific topics human potential,
recognizing the hungry ghosts/spirit (pretas) "I". See also self
ignorance animal realm and emptiness and happiness and liberation and
elimination of mind and and negative actions as root of delusions and
selfish aims and spiritual masters and vows wisdom and illness causes
explanations for rituals for overcoming immeasurables. See four
immeasurables impermanence inherent existence

all phenomena lack appearance/illusion of belief in grasping at the (see
also self-grasping attitude) ignorance and the of body emptiness and
inner offerings inner refuge vs. common refuge defined insanity. See
also mental disturbances interdependence law of Jampel Shalung (The
Sacred Words of Manjushri) Jewel Embodiment (Kuntu Norbu Lug) jewels
wish-granting See also Three Jewels Jhangchup Lamgyi Dronme (Lamp for
the Path to Enlightenment) Jhangchup Shunglam (The Main Path to
Enlightenment) Jorchoe Kelsang Dringyen Jorwai Choedrug (Jorchoe). See
six preparatory practices joyous effort downfalls related to Kadam
Kalachakra Tantra Kanchok (Jewel). See also Three Jewels karma
misunderstandings of karmic law. See also causality kayas Khedrup Gelek
Pelzang, 1st Panchen Lama kindness of animals gurus, buddhas, and loving
recollecting others' recollection of all beings' repaying See also
generosity knowledge. See omniscience; wisdom Kyabje Trijang Rinpoche
Lama Choepa

Lamaism Lamrim (stages of the path) eight great commentaries on origin
and history origin of Lamrim instructions two lineages of Lamrim Chenmo
(Great Exposition on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment) Atisha and
on contemplations divisions on Lamaism vs. Tibetan Buddhism Path to
Bliss and precepts from spiritual masters and sufferings mentioned in
three aspirations and Lamrim Nyamgur (Songs of Spiritual Experience)
Lamrim Sershunma (Essence of Refined Gold) Lamtso Namsum (The Three
Principal Aspects of the Path) leisure(s) defined eight liberation mark
of path to wish to achieve lineage gurus list of lineage masters,
prayers to Ling Rinpoche, Kyabje Yongdzin Lobsang Trinley Lhündrub
Chökyi Gyaltsen. See Choekyi Gyaltsen Lojong dhon dun ma (Seven Points
on Thought Transformation) love meditation on, to counter anger
universal loving kindness. See also kindness lower realms negative
actions and overview preventing oneself from falling into rebirth in
sufferings of See also hell realms Madhyamika Prasangika Mahamudra
(Great Seal)

Mahayana bodhicitta and Buddha and compassion and Mahayana practice,
essence of Mahayana practitioners Mahayana vows Maitreya
Abhisamayalankara (The Ornament of Clear Realizations) mandala offering
Manjushri Mao Tse Tung maras, four Marx, Karl materialism matter
meditation environment, creating a conducive preparing the mind for
sessions meditational deities, significance of mental disturbances. See
also delusions; specific topics mental sinking and excitement mental
stages, nine mental stains merit field Buddha and dissolution of and
fulfillment of three aspirations gurus, spiritual masters, and prayer to
members of visualization of wisdom beings and method union of wisdom and
Milarepa mind disciplined essential nature of of great capacity
preparing the See also Clear Light; specific topics Mitag Drenkul Nyingi
Thurma (Reminder of Impermanence) Mitag Gomtsul Gyi Labjha (Advice on
How to Meditate on Impermanence) monastic vows morality

downfalls in relation to the practice of mother, recognizing sentient
beings as having been one's Mulamadhyamika Karika (Fundamental Treatise
on the Middle Way) Nagarjuna on alcohol use on gambling Mulamadhyamaka
Karika (Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Way) Ratnavali Tsawa Sherab
(The Root Wisdom) Naropa natural laws nectar. See visualizing nectar
negative actions destructive nature and consequences of examples of
ignorance and purification of results of ten See also negativities
negative emotions and body negative actions and See also anger negative
influences negative mind negative state of mind negative thoughts
negativities purification of See also negative actions nirmanakaya
(emanation body) nirvana, entreating not to enter into Nyurlam offerings
omniscience achieving Buddha's force of causes of Clear Light as
omniscient path leading to removing obstacles to state wisdom and
opponent forces, eight

outer offerings outer refuge past lives. See rebirth Path to Bliss
Leading to Omniscience. See Practical Guide on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment patience downfalls related to peace people categories of
See also human existence; specific topics Perfection Vehicle. See
Mahayana perfections. See six perfections pervasion Phabongkha Dechen
Nyingpo phenomena existent selflessness of two aspects of See also
inherent existence positive actions Potawa powers, four Practical Guide
on the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment: A Path to Bliss Leading to
Omniscience, A (Choekyi Gyaltsen), viii prajnaparamita Pramana-samucca
(Compendium of Valid Cognitions) Pramanavartika (A Thorough Explanation
of Valid Cognitions) pratyekabuddhas (solitary realizers) predeterminism
preliminary practices result of preliminary refuge, taking the
preparatory practices. See six preparatory practices pretas (hungry
ghosts). See also hungry ghosts Profound View, lineage of the
prostrations protectors. See also Dharmapalas purification four powers
required for See also under negative actions; negativities Ratnavali
(Precious Garland) rebirth. See also lower realms: rebirth in refuge in
Buddha in dharma

formula guru as inner and negative actions outer practice precepts of
taking in sangha secret seeking in Three Jewels See also preliminary
refuge regret of the death of a person developing/generating importance
of vs. indifference lack of for negative actions and purification
reincarnation. See rebirth rejoicing reliance on spiritual teacher
through action cultivating faith and conviction cultivating respect
renunciation, leading to compassion ripening factors. See four ripening
factors root guru Buddha and (see also Buddha Shakyamuni) visualizing
(see also Buddha Shakyamuni: visualizing) See also gurus rupakaya
(sublime form body) Sakya Pandita samadhi. See also concentration
sambhogakaya (enjoyment body) samsara (cyclic existence) sangha refuge
in science and religion secret offerings secret refuge defined self
emptiness of

notion of (see also "I") self-cherishing attitude disadvantages of the
overcoming/reversing the See also cherishing others self-grasping
attitude overcoming problems with selfish thoughts selfishness being
"wisely selfish" ignorance and overcoming self-destructive effects of
See also altruism selflessness of phenomena See also emptiness
seven-limbed practice posture for verses of seven-point cause and effect
method preliminary step of cultivating equanimity sexual misconduct
Shantideva single-pointed faith, developing single-pointed prayer
single-pointedness cultivation of faith in the value of meditative
obstacles to the attainment of practice of See also concentration six
perfections six preparatory practices (Jorchoe) smoking society. See
community special attitude special insight, wisdom through speech,
negative actions of. See also negative actions spirits spiritual
master(s) benefits and disadvantages of buddhas and kindness of the past

See also bodhisattvas; enlightened being; gurus; lineage masters;
reliance on spiritual teacher spiritual transformation, obstacles that
impede sravakas Stalin, Joseph statues of deities suffering of demi-gods
of devas of different realms feeling others' recognition of taking
others' types of See also cessation (of sufferings and their causes);
cyclic existence taking. See giving and taking tantra in context as
gateway lower realms and path refuge of vows tantric initiation tantric
meditation. See also guru yoga tantric path. See also tantra tantric
practices tantric practitioners, ultimate aim of tantric visualizations
tantric yoga teacher, qualifications of ten directions ten negative
actions. See also negative actions thought transformation practice
commitments of precepts of thoughts. See delusions; negative thoughts;
selfish thoughts three aspirations merit field and fulfillment of the
prayer of Three Jewels cyclic existence and dharma and offerings to and
one's spiritual master

providing protection recognition of taking refuge in trust in
understanding visualization of tolerance transmigrations, favorable
vs. unfavorable Trijang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso (Kyabje Trijang
Rinpoche) Tripitaka (Three Scriptural Collections) truth body. See
dharmakaya truths, two. See Two Truths Tsawa Sherab (The Root Wisdom)
Tsongkhapa bodhisattva vows and Buddha and contemplation and on
spiritual mentors and spiritual masters writings (see also Lamrim
Chenmo) Two Truths unusual attitude Uttaratantra (Unsurpassed Continuum)
Vairocana posture Vajradhara Buddha and buddhas and kindness
single-pointed prayer and spiritual masters and Tsongkhapa and vajrasana
(cross-legged) posture symbolism of Vajrasattva mantra Vajrayana Vast
Practice, lineage of vinaya Vinayasutra (The Condensed Essence of
Ethics) visualizations complex and simple mode of doing See also
specific topics visualizing nectar descending from guru vows tantric

wheel of dhanna, requesting to turn the wisdom vs. compassion delusions
and downfalls related to faith and at the heart of Buddha omniscience
and realizing emptiness through special insight types of union of method
and wisdom beings (yeshepas) defined at the heart of Buddha merit field
and yoga deity guru tantric Yonten Shigyurma (Foundation of All
Perfections)

Sign up to receive news and special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.


