Shambhala Publications, Inc. 4720 Walnut Street Boulder, Colorado 80301
www.shambhala.com ©1999 by His Holiness the Dalai Lama, whose sole agent
for these teachings is Arizona Teachings, Inc. Quotations of
Shantideva's Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life are from Stephen
Batchelor's translation, published by the Library of Tibetan Works and
Archives, Dharamsala, India, in 1979. This book was previously published
under the title Healing Anger. All rights reserved. No part of this book
may be reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Cover design by Claudine Mansour Design © 2018 Shambhala Publications,
Inc. Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names:
Bstan-'dzin-rgya-mtsho, Dalai Lama xiv, 1935-- author. \| Thupten Jinpa,
translator. \| Śāntideva, active 7th century. Bodhicaryāvatāra. Title:
Perfecting patience: Buddhist techniques to overcome anger/The Dalai
Lama; translated by Thupten Jinpa. Other titles: Healing anger \|
Description: Boulder, Colorado Shambhala, 2018. \| Series: Core
teachings of the Dalai Lama series \| "Quotations of Shantideva's Guide
to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life are from Stephen Batchelor's
translation, published by the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives,
Dharamsala, India, in 1979. This book was previously published under the
title Healing Anger." \| Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2018012744 \| ISBN 9781559394796 (paperback) eISBN
9780834841864 Subjects: LCSH: Śāntideva, active 7th century.
Bodhicaryāvatāra. \| Patience---Religious aspects--- Buddhism. \|
Buddhism--Doctrines. \| BISAC: RELIGION/Buddhism/Tibetan. \| RELIGION /
Buddhism / Rituals & Practice. Classification: LCC BQ3147.B775 2018 \|
DDC 294.3/5---dc23 LC record available at
https://lccn.loc.gov/2018012744 v5.3.2 a

CONTENTS

Foreword by Lopön Claude d'Estrée and Ken Bacher Publisher's
Acknowledgment Translator's Introduction DAY ONE First Session Second
Session

DAY TWO First Session Second Session

DAY THREE First Session Second Session

DAY FOUR First Session Second Session

Glossary Works Cited Recommended Reading Books by the Dalai Lama Index
E-mail Sign-Up

FOREWORD

A B LL

UDDHIST TEACHINGS begin with a teacher and a student, and the 1993

teachings by His Holiness the Dalai Lama in Phoenix and Tucson, Arizona,
were no exception. As early as 1986, Howard C. Cutler, MD, requested
that His Holiness come to Arizona. His invitation was accepted in 1990,
and in September of that year he invited Lopön Claude d'Estrée to join
him in requesting specific dates. Finally, in the summer of 1992, word
came that His Holiness had agreed to teach in Arizona in the fall of
1993. His Holiness asked what he should teach, and Howard and Claude
replied that he should teach whatever he would like to teach. His
Holiness then stated that it was the responsibility of the host to
determine what would best serve the needs of the students. It didn't
take long for Howard to suggest Shantideva's teaching on patience. Why
patience? First, we wanted to request a teaching that would be universal
in scope, one that would appeal to Buddhists and nonBuddhists alike.
Second, we wanted to request a topic that would be very practical, that
one could bring into everyday life. Third, we felt that a lack of
understanding of patience, and its reflection in the overwhelming
dominance of anger, was endemic to our culture. Anger is one of the
roots that cause so much unhappiness, suffering, discord, and violence
in our world. It is expressed hundreds of times a day in the mass media,
especially television. It is found in how we settle disputes in our
highly litigious society; in how our leaders conduct themselves in the
halls of Congress; in the increase of domestic violence and child abuse;
and in the sense of selfhating and self-loathing that pervades our
culture. Politeness, kindness, patience, and compassion often seem a
part of our mythical past.

Shantideva states in the very beginning of his chapter on patience that
one moment of anger can wipe out a lifetime of merit. At first this
seems a harsh statement, but upon reflection it makes a great deal of
sense. When we get angry with someone we are often unaware of the effect
it has on that person, let alone the ripple effect it causes.
Nonetheless, it does indeed have a ripple effect: that person does not
hang on to the anger but passes it on, perhaps repeatedly. The antidote
to anger is patience, and so the dissemination of Shantideva's wisdom
regarding patience becomes a critical need in these times. In the course
of developing this series of teachings, Arizona Teachings, Inc. was
formed with Dr. Cutler, Lopön d'Estrée, and Ken Bacher as founding
directors. We decided to take a new approach to the presentation of a
teaching by His Holiness. In the past, His Holiness would stay at a nice
hotel, a large hall would be rented, and the students would stay at a
variety of hotels and motels in the area. Our vision was to have a place
where His Holiness could stay that could also accommodate both the
teaching hall and the students. In essence we wanted to create a
"campus" for five days where everyone who attended the teachings could
relax and enjoy each other's company. It was important that the setting
be beautiful and peaceful, a place where His Holiness and his entourage,
lay students, and their families would feel enriched by the natural
setting. We chose the Sheraton EI Conquistador Resort, surrounded by the
Sonora Desert with a backdrop of the Catalina Mountains in Oro Valley
just north of Tucson. The morning of His Holiness' arrival in Tucson was
marked by deep blue desert skies and a double rainbow as we approached
Oro Valley. On seeing the natural beauty of the setting for the
teachings, His Holiness exclaimed that it reminded him very much of
Lhasa. And so, with these good omens, on September 11, 1993, in the Year
of the Water Bird, at Pusch Ridge in the state of Arizona, numberless
gods and demigods, 1,600 humans and bodhisattvas, asuras, and gandharvas
assembled to hear His Holiness Tenzin Gyatso, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama
of Tibet and the living incarnation of Bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara,
present and comment on Acharya Shantideva's teaching on patience and the
bodhisattva's way of life. We pray that these teachings are of benefit
to all sentient beings.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Funding and support of Arizona Friends of Tibet, and
particularly its president, Peggy Hitchcock, made it possible for our
fledgling organization to announce the teachings and begin the myriad
arrangements required for the visit. Most of the details of the visit
were handled by nearly three dozen volunteers, coordinated by Bonnie
Cheney. Computer record-keeping systems were created by Dan Crowell, G.
Greg Bender, and Richard Laue. Volunteers transcribed the teachings
presented in this book from the sixteen hours of oral teachings
delivered by His Holiness: thanks go particularly to Julie Jones, Karen
Garland, Amy Zehra Conner, and Julie Montgomery. The transcript was then
edited by Ken Bacher and put into final form by Kate Bloodgood and Susan
Kyser of Snow Lion Publications, with crucial assistance from Geshe
Thupten Jinpa. Some small liberties have been taken with the arrangement
of the transcribed material to more effectively present it in book form;
the editors, however, have striven to preserve the voice of the Dalai
Lama as much as possible. None of this would have been possible without
the cooperation and support of Kazur Tenzin Geyche Tethong, His
Holiness' private secretary, and his staff; Rinchen Dharlo of the Office
of Tibet in New York; and Geshe Thupten Jinpa, who served as His
Holiness' interpreter during the teachings. Finally, our very special
thanks go to His Holiness, Tenzin Gyatso, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama of
Tibet, our teacher and example, for his kindness in offering these
teachings to all of us in Arizona and to the world at large. His
Holiness' personal practice of patience is an inspiration to us all. May
he live long to turn the Wheel of Dharma for his people and for all
people around the world who look to him as an example of enlightened
compassion and kindness in a world too filled with distrust, conflict,
and anger. May all sentient beings benefit. Lopön Claude d'Estrée Ken
Bacher Arizona Teachings, Inc.

PUBLISHER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Snow Lion Publications gratefully acknowledges the generous support of
the Gere Foundation and Tibet Fund in sponsoring the production of this
book.

THE CHALLENGE OF PATIENCE Translator's Introduction

A

POPULAR STORY THAT Tibetan teachers are fond of telling their students

narrates an encounter between a hermit and a herdsman: The hermit was
living alone in the mountains. One day, a herdsman happened to pass by
his cave. Intrigued, the herdsman shouted at the hermit and asked, "What
are you doing alone in the middle of nowhere?" The hermit replied, "I am
meditating." "What are you meditating on?" asked the herdsman. "On
patience," said the hermit. There was a moment of silence. After a
while, the herdsman decided to leave. Just as he turned to go, he looked
back at the hermit and shouted, "By the way, you go to hell!" "What do
you mean? You go to hell!" came flying back. The herdsman laughed and
reminded the hermit that he was supposed to be practicing patience! This
simple story wonderfully illustrates the key challenge for someone who
wishes to practice patience: in a situation which would ordinarily give
rise to an outburst of anger, how can we maintain spontaneity and yet
remain calm in our response? This challenge is not restricted to
religious practitioners alone. It is a challenge each of us faces as we
try to live our lives with a degree of human dignity and decency. At
nearly every turn we are confronted with situations that test the limits
of our patience and

tolerance. Be it within our family, in the work environment, or simply
when interacting with others, often our prejudices are revealed, our
beliefs challenged, and our self-image threatened. It is in these
moments that our inner resources are most called upon. All of this,
Shantideva would say, tests our character, revealing how far we have
developed our capacity for patience and tolerance. The story also tells
us that patience is something that cannot be cultivated in isolation
from other people. In fact, it is a quality that can arise only within
the context of our interaction with others, especially with fellow human
beings. The hermit's spontaneous response shows his inner development to
have been as unstable as a child's sandcastle. It is one thing to
immerse oneself in warm thoughts of tolerance and compassion toward
others in the unchallenged environment of solitude, but it is entirely a
different matter to live these ideals in one's day-to-day interactions
with real people. This is of course not to belittle the importance of
silent meditation. Such solitary practices internalize insights which
otherwise would remain only at the level of intellectual knowledge. And,
like most ancient Indian religious traditions, Buddhism advocates
meditation as a key element of the spiritual path. But the fact remains
that the true test of patience comes only in the context of interaction
with others. The third point that we can observe in the brief encounter
between our hermit and the herdsman is that genuine patience is
developed only when one has gained some degree of control over one's
anger. Of course, reacting with an outburst of strong emotion at
unprovoked verbal abuse is a natural human response. But a genuine
spiritual person should be capable of going beyond such predictable
human responses. This is what Shantideva teaches us in the "Patience"
chapter of his Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life. And in His
Holiness the Dalai Lama's lucid commentary, we have a clear exposition
of the ideals and practices aimed at cultivating and perfecting the
vital spiritual quality of patience. The teachings on patience presented
in this volume are essential components of what is known in Mahayana
Buddhism as the Bodhisattva ideal, namely the selfless ideals of the
spiritual aspirant who dedicates his or her entire life toward others'
welfare. Does the Bodhisattva ideal elevate meekness and submission to
high, spiritual principles? Does it advocate

tolerance toward evil? What about justified anger and hatred? Isn't what
the Bodhisattva ideal asks of us impossible because it goes against
basic human nature? These are some of the questions that immediately
come to mind for modern readers of Shantideva.

SHANTIDEVA AND HIS GUIDE TO THE BODHISATTVA'S WAY OF LIFE Before we
proceed further in our discussion of patience, a few words on
Shantideva's Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, the sixth chapter
of which forms the core of the Dalai Lama's teachings in this book, are
in order. Written in the eighth century C.E., Shantideva's work soon
became an important classic of Mahayana Buddhism. Legend has it that
Shantideva recited the entire text extemporaneously when he was asked to
give a lecture to a congregation of monks at the famous Indian monastic
university of Nalanda. It is said that the request to teach initially
arose out of a desire to humiliate Shantideva, whom his fellow monks saw
as doing nothing but "eating, sleeping, and defecating." Little did the
monks realize that while Shantideva appeared to be leading a somewhat
lazy life, he was in fact rich in inner experience and profound
learning. Tibetan accounts of the story maintain that when Shantideva
reached the difficult ninth chapter, the chapter on wisdom, he started
to ascend into the air and began to disappear although his voice could
still be heard. Whatever the merits of this legend, the importance of
the Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life in the cultural and temporal
milieu of Indian literature cannot be underestimated. Shantideva's text
became one of the most celebrated Buddhist works. For the religious
practitioner it became an important scripture outlining the essential
practices of the Mahayana Buddhist path to enlightenment. Of all the
religious writings of the Mahayana Buddhist tradition, it could be said
that Shantideva's Guide and Nagarjuna's Precious Garland together remain
the foundational texts outlining the noble, selfless career of the
Bodhisattva. For scholars and philosophers, the ninth chapter represents
an important contribution to the development of the Buddhist philosophy
of the "middle way." And for

ordinary Buddhists, the text became a profound source of inspiration in
their own personal faith. To this day, the chapter of dedication, the
tenth and last chapter, remains one of the most passionate expressions
of profound religious sentiment in Mahayana Buddhist literature. The
impact of Shantideva's Guide in Tibet was perhaps unsurpassed. Ever
since its translation into Tibetan in the eleventh century, the work
exerted a powerful influence upon the religious life of the Tibetan
people. Its pervasive influence can be found in the teachings of all
four major schools of Tibetan Buddhism: Nyingma, Sakya, Kagyu, and
Gelug. In addition to giving rise to extensive scholarship related to
the Mahayana ideals and practices that are treated extensively in the
work, the text also led to the development of a whole new genre of
literature which became collectively known as lo-jong or "the training
of mind." This is a category of religious writings which deal primarily
with two central concerns of Shantideva's work, namely the cultivation
of the altruistic mind of awakening and the generation of profound
insight into the nature of reality. As evidence of the text's great
inspirational power, those who have attended any talks by the Dalai Lama
will recall the liberty with which he quotes from Shantideva's Guide.
The following stanza is now almost immortalized because of the Dalai
Lama's repeated statements that it is his greatest source of
inspiration: For as long as space endures And for as long as living
beings remain, Until then may I too abide To dispel the misery in the
world. (Guide, X:55) It became customary in Tibet for aspiring young
novices to memorize the entire text of Shantideva's Guide so that the
stanzas could be sung in group recitations. In its Tibetan translation,
the work exists entirely in verse, each stanza containing four perfectly
metered lines. To this day, I remember with joy the nights I spent in
group recitations marvelling at the poetic beauty and the profundity of
Shantideva's verses at Ganden Monastery in South India where I received
my own monastic education.

--- Earlier we entertained some of the questions which might be posed by
the modern reader of Shantideva. I shall allow Shantideva's own verses
and the Dalai Lama's clear commentary to speak for themselves. However,
as the translator of the Dalai Lama's teachings I shall endeavor to
provide some words of explanation which may help to present a useful
background to both Shantideva and the Dalai Lama's insights. In doing
so, I also hope to help situate the teachings contained in this volume
in a wider context. The Tibetan word soe-pa, which is here translated as
"patience," has various connotations. Literally speaking, soe-pa means
"forbearance," and in its verbal form it means "to withstand" or "to
endure something," as in the case of "to endure hardships." However,
when soe-pa is used to describe a quality, as in the case of a person's
character, its meaning is best understood as "tolerance." In Tibetan, a
person who possesses a developed character of tolerance is said to be
"great in soe-pa." Yet "tolerance" alone does not capture the complete
meaning of soe-pa, for it is possible for someone to have a tolerant
temperament yet be quite impatient. In contrast, a person who is "great
in soe-pa" is said to have a patient temperament too. Of course, I am
not suggesting that the Tibetan term should be translated as
"patience/tolerance/forbearance," for doing so would go against all
established canons of writing. What I do wish to do here is draw
attention to the multifaceted meaning of the Tibetan term so that the
reader is at least aware of the complexity of the concepts involved. By
advocating the practice of patience, Shantideva is not suggesting that
we should simply submit ourselves to abuse and exploitation from others.
Nor is he recommending a policy of simple, unquestioned acceptance of
suffering and pain. What he is advocating is a resolute stand against
adversities. In his commentary, the Dalai Lama draws a distinction
between meekness and tolerance. He suggests that genuine tolerance can
only arise where one has consciously adopted a stance not to retaliate
against an actual or perceived harm. The crucial point here is the
"consciously adopted stand." Although neither Shantideva nor the Dalai
Lama gives an explicit definition of patience, we can take the following
as a working definition. "Patience" (soe-pa), according to the Buddhist
understanding of the

principle, is "a resolute response against adversity stemming from a
settled temperament unperturbed by either external or internal
disturbance." Certainly, this cannot be described as a passive
submission; rather it is an active approach toward adversity.
Shantideva's discussion of patience takes place within the framework of
what could be called the three characteristics of patience. They are:
(1) tolerance based on conscious acceptance of pain and hardships, (2)
tolerance resulting from reflecting on the nature of reality, and (3)
tolerance toward injuries from others. Shantideva discusses the first
aspect of patience in verses 12 through 21. He begins by observing that
pain and suffering are natural facts of existence and that denying this
truth can only cause additional misery. He then goes on to argue that if
we could internalize this fundamental truth of our existence, we would
derive enormous benefit in our day-to-day life. For one thing, we would
see suffering as a catalyst for spiritual growth. Shantideva implies
that a person who is capable of responding to suffering in this way can
voluntarily accept the pain and hardship involved in seeking to achieve
a higher purpose. In theory, we are all aware of this principle. To
protect ourselves against tropical diseases we often submit willingly to
the pain of inoculations. In arguing that it is possible to train
ourselves to accept greater pain than we are capable of now, Shantideva
writes the following memorable lines: There is nothing whatsoever That
is not made easier through acquaintance. So through becoming acquainted
with small harms I should learn to patiently accept greater harms.
(Guide, VI:14) He concludes the discussion of the first characteristic
of patience by drawing attention to the positive aspects of suffering,
if anything at all can be described as "positive" about pain and
suffering. Shantideva asserts that it is our experience of suffering
that awakens us from our spiritual slumbers. It is also suffering that
enables us to identify with others' pain, thus allowing us to generate
genuine compassion for them. Furthermore, it is suffering that instills
within us the fear of evil so crucial for the religious

person. Finally, it is our insight into suffering that reinforces our
longing for spiritual freedom. Of course, many of these sentiments can
be said to be religious, which a modern reader may perhaps argue as
being relevant only to a religious practitioner. But the basic insight
of Shantideva stands. That is to say that if approached with the
appropriate attitude, even pain and suffering can be perceived in terms
of their positive effects. Verses 22 through 34 discuss the second
aspect of patience: tolerance based on understanding the nature of
reality. The main focus of Shantideva's argument here is demonstrating
how actions of people and events are determined by a network of many
factors. This is to underline the critical fact that many of the
conditions which cause others to act in ways that are harmful to us are
in fact outside their control. As Shantideva puts it, we become ill
without wishing to be so. Similarly, we do not intend to be angry, but
often find ourselves gripped with anger. So one could argue that in a
sense it is illogical to isolate from the complex conditions only the
person and hold him or her alone responsible for the act of harm. To
illustrate this argument, Shantideva presents an unusual analysis of the
simple act of someone hitting us with a stick. He shows how both the
stick and the person who wields it are equally responsible for causing
the pain. On a deeper level, he argues, even the mere fact that we
possess corporeal existence is an important contributory factor in
generating the pain. A further condition, which in fact turns out to be
the key cause, is the negative emotion which motivated the person to
inflict the harm in the first place. It is obvious that the principle
underlying the second aspect of patience is nothing but the fundamental
Buddhist principle of dependent origination. In this view, nothing
arises in isolation, for everything comes into being due to the
aggregation of multiple causes and conditions. Since this principle can
be understood at many levels---in terms of causal dependence, in terms
of mutuality of concepts, or in terms of interdependence between our
perceptions and the world---the insights into reality which give rise to
greater tolerance toward events and others' actions can also vary in
their depth. For example, Shantideva demonstrates how viewing the world
as illusion-like can have immediate impact in reducing the intensity of
our strong emotional reactions like anger. Shantideva writes the
following to make this point:

Hence everything is governed by other factors (which in turn) are
governed by (others), And in this way nothing governs itself. Having
understood this, I should not become angry With phenomena that are like
apparitions. (Guide, VI:31) These lines echo similar observations
Shantideva makes in the ninth chapter of his Guide. There, after arguing
for the Buddhist philosophical world view based on an appreciation of
the nonsubstantial nature of phenomena, Shantideva poses the following
rhetorical questions: What is there to obtain or lose? Who is there to
praise or insult? Whence do joy and pain arise? What is there to be
happy or sad about? On the surface, it may seem that Shantideva is
advocating a form of apathetic equanimity. But to read his verses in
this way is to totally miss the point. Like all skillful teachers of
Buddhism, Shantideva is drawing our attention to the intimate link
between attachment and strong emotions like anger. The more we are
attached to something, the more likely it is to make us angry when we
perceive a threat to that object of attachment. Although Shantideva's
discussion of tolerance based on insight into the nature of reality is
situated within the Buddhist philosophical discourse, I think his basic
argument does not depend upon the validity of Buddhist theories about
reality. From our own experience, we can see that the deeper our
appreciation of the complexity of the circumstances giving rise to an
event, the greater our ability to respond to that event with a degree of
calmness and tolerance. We have now come to the final characteristic of
patience: tolerance toward injuries from others. Perhaps it is because
of its overwhelming importance that Shantideva treats this category last
(in verses 34 through 63). One could say that of the three dimensions of
patience the third is probably the most important, because it
exclusively pertains to our immediate interaction with others. There is
no denying that for most of us the main object of our anger or
frustration is often a fellow human. And, until we learn to interact
with others in a way that is not tainted by strong negative emotions
such as anger, no genuine development of patience can take place. This
is especially true for a practitioner of the Bodhisattva ideal whose
avowed aim is to help liberate all beings from a state of

unenlightened existence. Of course, to such a person, being angry toward
the very object for whose salvation he or she has taken a solemn
religious pledge is most inappropriate. Shantideva teaches us that it is
more appropriate to have compassion rather than anger toward those who
cause harm to us. He suggests that those who cause harm to others are in
some sense possessed. In other words, their actions stem from a state of
ignorance. This is reminiscent of the Christian Gospel's injunction that
we must forgive the perpetrators of evil, "for they know not what they
do." In fact, Shantideva asks us to go further and regard those who harm
us, our enemies, as precious, for they alone give us the rare
opportunity to practice tolerance. He writes: There are indeed many
beggars in this world, But scarce are those that inflict harm; For if I
have not injured others Few beings will cause me harm. Therefore, just
like treasure appearing in my house Without any effort on my part to
obtain it, I should be happy to have an enemy For he assists me in my
conduct of Awakening. (Guide, VI:106--107) It is verses like this which
provide the basis for the Dalai Lama's often quoted statement that our
enemy is our greatest teacher. He has certainly applied these principles
in his dealing with the Chinese authorities who have caused so much harm
and destruction to his people and homeland. Once we understand that his
thought is rooted in such spiritual training, we will have no difficulty
accepting the Dalai Lama's claim that he and his people bear no hatred
toward the Chinese. At times, Shantideva presents arguments which appear
to take rationalization to the extreme. For example, there is an
intriguing argument to illustrate the futility of anger as a response to
others' harmful actions. Shantideva suggests that we examine whether
inflicting harm on others is essential to human nature or if it is an
accidental quality. If it is the former,

Shantideva argues, it is pointless to be angry, for this would be like
begrudging fire because of its inherent capacity to burn. On the other
hand, he argues, if it is an accidental quality it is still
inappropriate to respond with anger, since this would be like begrudging
the sky for being overcast! Either way, he concludes, there are no
logical grounds for being angry. Regardless of its merits as an
argument, no one can dispute its ingenuity. The question is: how
seriously should we take this kind of argument? Certainly, there is no
denying that from a general reader's point of view these forms of
argument can at best be appreciated as "thought experiments." We know
that often we tend to reinforce our anger or outrage when we strongly
feel that we are in the right. If this is true, then even a modern
reader of Shantideva can accept the value of this kind of thought
experiment, which poignantly reveals the illogical nature of having
strong emotional reactions to an event.

ON DEALING WITH ANGER Undoubtedly, both Shantideva and the Dalai Lama
are most articulate in their discourse on how to deal with anger and
hatred. Shantideva in fact opens the chapter on patience with the strong
statement that an instance of anger can destroy positive imprints
created over "a thousand eons." He further asserts that there is no evil
like hatred and that there is no fortitude like patience. Thus, he
recommends that we all seek to develop patience. In Shantideva's view,
anger acts as the principal obstacle to the development of patience. To
use the well-known medical analogy, hatred is the poison and patience is
the medicine that removes the poisonous toxins from within the mind. As
the Dalai Lama's commentary makes clear, Shantideva identifies two key
elements in our attempts to overcome anger. First and foremost, it is
important for us to have a profound appreciation of the negativity of
anger. Of particular relevance is to reflect upon the destructive
effects of generating anger. Second, Shantideva identifies the need to
develop a deep understanding of the causal mechanism which underlies the
arisal of anger. This is of special interest to the modern reader, who
will unavoidably be approaching Shantideva's text with many of the
popular

assumptions associated with modern psychology and its views on human
emotions. In verse 7 of the chapter, Shantideva makes the crucial
observation that the "fuel" of anger is what he calls "mental
discomfort." This is an interesting notion. The Tibetan word is yi
mi-dewa which can be translated as "dejection," "unhappiness," or simply
as "dissatisfaction." It is best understood as a pervasive, underlying
sense of dissatisfaction, which need not be felt at the conscious level.
It is that nagging feeling that something is not quite right. Shantideva
seems to be suggesting that it is this underlying sense of
dissatisfaction that gives rise to frustration. When this happens, the
conditions are set for an immediate outburst of anger when things do not
go the way we wish. Once this causal nexus between dissatisfaction,
frustration, and anger is understood, we can then appreciate the virtue
of Shantideva's approach to dealing with anger. We can see that much of
his approach is aimed at rooting out this underlying sense of
dissatisfaction rather than engaging in a head-to-head confrontation
with actual full-blown anger. This is the reason for Shantideva's
emphasis on reflections which aim to create stability of mind. As to the
specific practices, the reader can follow the detailed commentary of the
Dalai Lama in the appropriate sections of the book. An important point
to note here is that Shantideva does not appear to make any distinction
between anger and hatred in his discussion. However, the Dalai Lama's
commentary explicitly underlines this critical distinction. He observes
that, in principle, it may be possible to accept what could be called a
"positive anger." Anger as an outrage toward injustice done to others
can often be an important catalyst for powerful altruistic deeds.
However, he rejects such possibility with regard to hatred. For the
Dalai Lama, hatred can have no virtue. It only eats the person from
within and poisons his or her interactions with fellow human beings. In
his words, "Hatred is the true enemy; it is the inner enemy." Perhaps we
can say that the feature that distinguishes anger and hatred is the
absence or presence of ill-will. A person can be angry without bearing
any ill-will toward his or her object of anger. The Dalai Lama instructs
us to ensure that our anger, even when it arises, never culminates in
full-blown hatred. This, I think, is an important ethical teaching.

A few words on some of the general principles which lie behind the
approaches suggested in this book for dealing with our emotions and
developing patience may perhaps help the general reader. A key principle
is a belief in what could be called the plasticity of the mind, that is,
an assumption of the mind's limitless capacity for improvement. This is
supported by a complex understanding of the psychology of the mind and
its various modalities. Both Shantideva and the Dalai Lama are operating
within a long history of Buddhist psychology and philosophy of mind
which emphasizes a detailed analysis of human emotions. Generally
speaking, in this view the mind is perceived in terms of a complex,
dynamic system where both cognitive and affective dimensions of the
psyche are seen as an integrated whole. So, when the two masters present
means of dealing with emotions such as anger, they are not suggesting
that we should suppress them. Both Buddhist and modern psychology agree
on the harmfulness of mere suppression. The Buddhist approach is to get
at the root so that the very basis for anger is undercut. In other
words, Shantideva and the Dalai Lama are suggesting ways of reorienting
our character so that we become less prone to strong reactive emotions
such as anger. It is in this light that most of the reflections
recommended in this volume should be understood. The motto is simple:
Discipline your mind. Shantideva underlines the critical importance of
this inner discipline with a wonderful analogy: Where would I possibly
find enough leather With which to cover the surface of the earth? But
(wearing) just leather on the soles of my shoes Is equivalent to
covering the earth with it. Likewise it is not possible for me To
restrain the external course of things; But should I restrain this mind
of mine What would be the need to restrain all else? (Guide, V:13--14)
This of course is reminiscent of the memorable verse from the Dhammapada
in which the Buddha says:

Intangible and subtle is the mind, That flies after fancies as it likes;
Wise are those who discipline their minds, For a mind well-disciplined
brings great joy. (Verse 35) Shantideva calls this basic Buddhist
practice "guarding the mind" and he discusses it at great length in
chapter 5 of his Guide. Another general principle I wish to draw the
reader's attention to is the basic pragmatism of Shantideva's teachings.
He does not appear to believe in the possibility of one cure or solution
to any problem. His is a strategy that involves drawing extensively from
all our inner resources. Many of his arguments appeal to what we may
call human rationality. But he also uses approaches that appeal to our
fundamental humanitarian sentiments. Often he plays upon our sense of
moral outrage too. So, the bottom line seems to be "whatever works
best." In the final analysis, many of the approaches presented in this
book are insights grounded in common sense. For example, who can argue
with the sheer practicality of the following lines, which the Dalai Lama
is so fond of quoting: Why be unhappy about something If it can be
remedied? And what is the use of being unhappy about something If it
cannot be remedied? (Guide, VI:10) Perhaps most importantly for the
modern reader, it is vital to appreciate that both Shantideva and the
Dalai Lama do not believe in "instant enlightenment." In their
teachings, there is the basic assumption that cultivating inner
discipline is a time-consuming process. In fact, the Dalai Lama rightly
points out that having expectations of immediate results is a sign of
impatience, the very factor the teachings in this volume aim to
counteract. With a sense of irony, he observes that often what the
modern reader wants is "the best, the fastest, the easiest, and, if
possible, the cheapest way." So the journey of someone who is on the
path of selfbetterment is arduous and requires long commitment.
Nevertheless, the rewards of embarking upon such a journey are
potentially enormous. Even

in immediate terms, the benefit such an endeavor brings to the
traveler's life seems remarkable. If the Dalai Lama is representative of
those who have gained the fruits of this journey, its merits are shown
to be beyond question. Geshe Thupten Jinpa Girton College University of
Cambridge

DAY ONE

FIRST SESSION Generally speaking, all the major religions of the world
emphasize the importance of the practice of love, compassion, and
tolerance. This is particularly the case in all the traditions of
Buddhism, including the Theravada, Mahayana, and Tantrayana (the
esoteric tradition of Buddhism). They all state that compassion and love
are the foundation of all the spiritual paths. In order to enhance one's
development of compassion and cultivate the potential for compassion and
love inherent within oneself, what is crucial is to counteract their
opposing forces. It is in this context that the practice of patience or
tolerance becomes very important, because only through patience is one
able to overcome the obstacles to compassion. When we talk about
patience or tolerance, we should understand that there are many degrees,
starting from a simple tolerance, such as being able to bear a certain
amount of heat and cold, progressing toward the highest level of
patience, which is the type of patience and tolerance found in the great
practitioners, the Bodhisattvas on the high levels of the Buddhist path.
Since patience or tolerance comes from a certain ability to remain firm
and steadfast, to not be overwhelmed by the adverse situations or
conditions that one faces, one should not see tolerance or patience as a
sign of weakness, but rather as a sign of strength coming from a deep
ability to remain steadfast and firm. We can generally define patience
or tolerance in these terms. We find that even in being able to tolerate
a certain degree of physical hardship, like a hot or cold climate, our
attitude makes a big difference. If we have the realization that
tolerating immediate hardship can have long-term beneficial
consequences, we are more likely to be able to

tolerate everyday hardships. Similarly, in the case of those on the
Bodhisattva levels of the path practicing high levels of tolerance and
patience, intelligence also plays a very important role as a
complementary factor. In addition to the value of the practice of
tolerance and patience from the Dharma point of view, even in our
day-to-day life experiences tolerance and patience have great benefits,
such as being able to sustain and maintain our calmness of mind, peace
of mind, and presence of mind. So if an individual possesses this
capacity of tolerance and patience, then even if the person lives in a
very tense environment, one that is frantic and stressful, the person's
calmness and presence of mind will not be disturbed. The text from which
I am teaching in this series of lectures is a Buddhist text and
specifically a text of Mahayana Buddhism. Many of the practices outlined
in this work are presented from the point of view of a practitioner who
is engaged in the Mahayana path of cultivating bodhichitta and living a
way of life according to the Bodhisattva principles. However, many of
the techniques and methods which are presented are also relevant and
applicable to individuals who do not engage in Bodhisattva practices, or
who do not subscribe to Buddhism as a personal religion. This text is
called the Bodhisattvacharyavatara in Sanskrit, which is translated as
Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life. When we speak of the activities
of a Bodhisattva, there are three levels. The first is the entry into
the Bodhisattva path, which principally involves generating bodhichitta,
the altruistic aspiration to attain full enlightenment for the benefit
of all sentient beings. That is the first level of practice. This is
followed by what is known as the actual practice, which consists of the
practice of the six perfections. Among the six perfections, which are
the main precepts of generating bodhichitta, one is patience or
tolerance. The third level of Bodhisattva deeds comprises the activities
at the state of Buddhahood, which results from this practice. In the
first chapter of the Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life, Shantideva
talks about the merits and benefits of generating bodhichitta, the
altruistic aspiration to attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all
sentient beings. He states:

I bow down to the body of him In whom the sacred precious mind is born.
I seek refuge in that source of joy Who brings to happiness even those
who harm him. (Guide, I:36) In this verse, he states that since this
altruistic aspiration develops to the infinite capacity of helping all
other sentient beings, the person who generates that kind of infinite
altruism is truly an object worthy of respect and reverence. Because
this infinite altruism is the source of joy and happiness not only for
oneself but also for countless other sentient beings, any interaction
that other individuals might have with such a person, even a negative
one, will leave a very powerful imprint on that individual's life. Even
if one commits a negative act or has a negative relationship, although
its immediate consequences may be negative, in the long run the very
fact that one had an interaction with such a person will lead to
positive consequences and benefit in the future. Such is the power of
this infinite altruism. The true foundation of this infinite altruism is
compassion, and because compassion is the root of infinite altruism,
Chandrakirti---unlike other authors who at the beginning of their text
pay homage to the Buddha or a Bodhisattva or a meditational deity---in
his text called the Guide to the Middle Way pays homage to compassion
and points out that its importance and its value remain throughout all
time. At the beginner's level, its value cannot be underestimated. While
the individual is on the path, the value of compassion and its
importance cannot be underestimated. Even at the resultant state of
Buddhahood, compassion still retains its importance and value. We find
that all major world religions, although they may have different ways of
teaching compassion and different ways of explaining why enhancement of
a compassionate attitude is important, converge on the single point that
compassion is the root. It is crucial. Compassion can be roughly defined
in terms of a state of mind that is nonviolent and nonharming, or
nonaggressive. Because of this there is a danger of confusing compassion
with attachment and intimacy.

So we find that there are two types of love or compassion. On the one
hand is compassion or love which is based on attachment or which is
tinged with attachment. That type of love or compassion and feeling of
intimacy is quite partial and biased, and it is based very much on the
consideration that the object of one's affection or attachment is
someone who is dear or close to one. On the other hand, genuine
compassion is free from such attachment. There the motivation is not so
much that this person is my friend, is dear to me or related to me.
Rather, genuine compassion is based on the rationale that just as I do,
others also have this innate desire to be happy and overcome suffering;
just as I do, they have the natural right to fulfill this fundamental
aspiration. Based on that recognition of this fundamental equality and
commonality, one develops a sense of affinity and closeness, and based
on that, one will generate love and compassion. That is genuine
compassion. It is also very clear that one's level of intelligence or
wisdom is a complementary factor that will determine the intensity and
the depth of one's compassion. In Buddhism, there are discussions of
three principal types of compassion. One is a compassion which is not
complemented by any wisdom factors. A second level of compassion is
complemented by insight into the transient nature of sentient beings,
their impermanent nature. At the third level of compassion, called
nonobjectified compassion, the complementary factor is wisdom or insight
into the ultimate nature of reality. At this level, one sees the empty
nature of sentient beings, and that insight reinforces one's
compassionate attitude toward sentient beings. Even though this type of
genuine compassion and infinite altruism is something that needs to be
consciously cultivated and developed, we all possess the basis or
potential for such enhancement and such development. One of my
fundamental beliefs is that not only do we inherently possess this
potential or basis for compassion, but also the basic or fundamental
human nature is gentleness. Not only human beings but all sentient
beings have gentleness as their fundamental nature. There are other
grounds upon which I base this belief, without having to resort to the
doctrine of Buddhanature. For example, if we look at the pattern of our
existence from an early age until our death, we see the way in which we
are so fundamentally nurtured by affection, each other's affection, and
how we feel when we are

exposed to others' affection. In addition, when we ourselves have
affectionate feelings we see how it naturally affects us from within.
Not only that, but also being affectionate and being more wholesome in
our behavior and thought seems to be much more suited to the physical
structure of our body in terms of its effect on our health and physical
wellbeing, and so on. It must also be noted how the contrary seems to be
destructive to health. For these reasons I think that we can infer that
our fundamental human nature is one of gentleness. Now if this is the
case, then it makes all the more sense to try to live a way of life
which would be more in accordance with this basic gentle nature of our
being. However, we do find a lot of conflict and tension not only within
our individual mind but also within the family, when we interact with
other people, and also at the societal level, the national level, the
global level, and so on. How do we account for that? One of the factors,
I think, that contributes to this conflict is our imaginative faculty,
or in other words, intelligence. It is also our intelligence which can
find ways and means to overcome this conflict. So in using human
intelligence to overcome this conflict which is created by human
intelligence, the important factor is human compassion. I think if we
look at the reality, it is quite clear that the best way to overcome
conflict is the spirit of reconciliation, even within oneself. That
spirit has very much to do with compassion. One aspect of compassion is
to respect others' rights and to respect others' views. That is the
basis of reconciliation. I think the rule of the human spirit of
reconciliation which is based on compassion is working deep down,
whether the person really knows it or not. Therefore, because our basic
human nature is gentleness, no matter how much we go through violence
and many bad things, ultimately the proper solution is to return to the
basic human feeling, that is, human affection. So human affection or
compassion is not only a religious matter, but in our day-to-day life it
is quite indispensable. Now with this as a background, if one looks at
the practice of tolerance, it is really worthwhile. No matter how
difficult, it is worthwhile to do this practice. The first verse of
Shantideva's "Patience" chapter reads:

(1) Whatever wholesome deeds, Such as venerating the Buddhas and
\[practicing\] generosity, That have been amassed over a thousand eons,
Will all be destroyed in one moment of anger. The implication of this
first verse is that in order for the individual practitioner to be able
to successfully cultivate patience and tolerance, what is required is a
very strong enthusiasm, a strong desire, because the stronger one's
enthusiasm the greater the ability to withstand the hardships
encountered in the process. Not only that, but one also will be prepared
to voluntarily accept hardships that are a necessary part of the path.
The first stage, then, is to generate this strong enthusiasm, and for
that what is required is to reflect upon the destructive nature of anger
and hatred, as well as the positive effects of patience and tolerance.
In this text, one reads that the generation of anger or hatred, even for
a single instant, has the capacity to destroy virtues collected over a
thousand eons. Another text, the Entry into the Middle Way by
Chandrakirti, states that a single instant of anger or hatred will
destroy virtues accumulated over a hundred eons. The difference between
these two texts is explained from the point of view of the object of
one's anger or hatred. If the object of one's anger or hatred is a
Bodhisattva on a high level of the path, and the person who is being
hateful or angry is not a Bodhisattva, then the amount of virtue which
will be destroyed is greater. On the other hand, if a Bodhisattva
generates anger toward another Bodhisattva, maybe the virtue destroyed
would be less. So it is in this regard that the differences are
explained. However, when we say that virtues accumulated over eons are
destroyed by a single instant of anger, we have to identify what sort of
virtues are destroyed. Both this text and Entry into the Middle Way
agree that it is only the meritorious virtues, not so much the wisdom
aspect but rather the method aspect of the path, which are destroyed. In
particular, these include virtues accumulated through practicing giving
or generosity as well as virtues accumulated on the basis of observing
an ethically disciplined way of life. On the other hand, virtues
accumulated through the practice of wisdom, such as generating insight
into the ultimate nature of reality, and

virtues accumulated through meditative practices, wisdom acquired
through meditation, remain beyond the scope of destruction by anger and
hatred. Here there is a mention of the word "eons." A particular
Buddhist system of measurement is used here, based on the Abhidharma
system, in which "eons" refers to a "great eon," which is composed of
twenty middle-length eons. This is also related to Buddhist cosmology,
the theory within which the whole evolutionary process of the universe
is explained. For instance, according to Abhidharma cosmology, we divide
the time of evolution into four stages---the time of empty space, the
time of evolution, the time of abiding, and the time of
destruction---and all of these are divided according to this precise
system. It may be interesting to compare that with the current
cosmological theory based on the big bang theory, in which evolution is
explained in terms of fifteen to twenty billion years. According to this
verse, the virtues which are complemented by the factor of wisdom,
particularly insight into the ultimate nature of reality (the
realization of emptiness), and also any virtues which are based on the
realization or attainment of shamatha (calm abiding or
single-pointedness of mind) remain beyond the scope of destruction by
anger and hatred. Therefore, we see the value of generating shamatha and
insight into emptiness. The second verse reads: (2) There is no evil
like hatred, And no fortitude like patience. Thus I should strive in
various ways To meditate on patience. Generally speaking, there are many
afflictive emotions such as conceit, arrogance, jealousy, desire, lust,
closed-mindedness, and so on, but of all these, hatred or anger is
singled out as the greatest evil. This is done for two reasons. One is
that hatred or anger is the greatest stumbling block for a practitioner
who is aspiring to enhance his or her bodhichitta---altruistic
aspiration and a good heart. Anger or hatred is the greatest obstacle to
that.

Second, when hatred and anger are generated they have the capacity to
destroy one's virtue and calmness of mind. It is due to these reasons
that hatred is considered to be the greatest evil. Hatred is one of the
six root afflictive emotions according to Buddhist psychology. The
Tibetan word for it is zhe dang (Tib. zhe sdang), which can be
translated as either "anger" or "hatred" in English. However, I feel
that it should be translated as "hatred," because "anger," as it is
understood in English, can be positive in very special circumstances.
These occur when anger is motivated by compassion or when it acts as an
impetus or a catalyst for a positive action. In such rare circumstances
anger can be positive whereas hatred can never be positive. It is
totally negative. Since hatred is totally negative, it should never be
used to translate the Tibetan word zhe dang when it appears in the
context of tantra. Sometimes we hear the expression "taking hatred into
the path." This is a mistranslation. In this context, hatred is not the
right word; one should use "anger": "taking anger into the path." So the
Tibetan word can be translated as either "anger" or "hatred," but
"anger" can be positive; therefore, when zhe dang refers to the
afflictive emotion it must be translated as "hatred." The last two lines
of the second verse read: Thus I should strive in various ways To
meditate on patience. Since the goal is the enhancement of one's
capacity for tolerance and the practice of patience, what is required is
to be able to counteract the forces of anger and hatred, particularly
hatred. One should use all sorts of techniques to increase one's
familiarity with patience. These include not only real life situations,
but also using one's imagination to visualize a situation and then see
how one will react and respond to it. Again and again one should try to
combat hatred and develop one's capacity for tolerance and patience. (3)
My mind will not experience peace If it fosters painful thoughts of
hatred. I shall find no joy or happiness; Unable to sleep, I shall feel
unsettled.

This verse outlines the destructive effects of hatred, which are very
visible, very obvious and immediate. For example, when a strong or
forceful thought of hatred arises, at that very instant it overwhelms
one totally and destroys one's peace and presence of mind. When that
hateful thought is harbored inside, it makes one feel tense and uptight,
and can cause loss of appetite, leading to loss of sleep, and so forth.
Generally speaking, I believe that the purpose of our existence is to
seek happiness and fulfillment. Even from the Buddhist point of view,
when we speak of the four factors of happiness, or four factors of
fulfillment, the first two are related to the attainment of joy and
happiness in worldly terms, leaving aside ultimate religious or
spiritual aspirations such as liberation and enlightenment. The first
two factors deal with joy and happiness as we understand them
conventionally, in worldly terms. In order to more fully experience that
level of joy and happiness, the key is one's state of mind. However,
there are various factors that contribute to attaining that level of joy
and happiness, which we conventionally also recognize as sources of
happiness, such as good physical health, which is considered one of the
factors necessary for a happy life. Another factor is the wealth that we
accumulate. Conventionally, we regard this as a source of joy and
happiness. The third factor is to have friends or companions. We
conventionally recognize that in order to enjoy a happy and fulfilled
life, we also need a circle of friends we trust and with whom we can
relate emotionally. Now all of these are, in reality, sources of
happiness, but in order for one to be able to fully utilize them with
the goal of enjoying a happy and fulfilled life, one's state of mind is
crucial. If one harbors hateful thoughts within, or strong or intense
anger somewhere deep down, then it ruins one's health, so it destroys
one of the factors. Even if one has wonderful possessions, when one is
in an intense moment of anger or hatred, one feels like throwing
them---breaking them or throwing them away. So there is no guarantee
that wealth alone can give one the joy or fulfillment that one seeks.
Similarly, when one is in an intense state of anger or hatred, even a
very close friend appears somehow "frosty," cold and distant, or quite
annoying.

What this indicates is that our state of mind is crucial in determining
whether or not we gain joy and happiness. So leaving aside the
perspective of Dharma practice, even in worldly terms, in terms of our
enjoying a happy day-to-day existence, the greater the level of calmness
of our mind, the greater our peace of mind, and the greater our ability
to enjoy a happy and joyful life. However, when we speak of a calm state
of mind or peace of mind, we should not confuse that with a completely
insensitive, apathetic state in which there is no feeling, like being
"spaced out" or completely empty. That is not what we mean by having a
calm state of mind or peace of mind. Genuine peace of mind is rooted in
affection and compassion. There is a very high level of sensitivity and
feeling involved. So long as we lack inner discipline, an inner calmness
of mind, then no matter what external facilities or conditions we may
have, they will never give us the feeling of joy and happiness that we
seek. On the other hand, if we possess this inner quality, that is,
calmness of mind, a degree of stability within, then even if we lack
various external facilities that are normally considered necessary for a
happy and joyful life, it is still possible to live a happy and joyful
life. If we examine how anger or hateful thoughts arise in us, we will
find that, generally speaking, they arise when we feel hurt, when we
feel that we have been unfairly treated by someone against our
expectations. If in that instant we examine carefully the way anger
arises, there is a sense that it comes as a protector, comes as a friend
that would help our battle or in taking revenge against the person who
has inflicted harm on us. So the anger or hateful thought that arises
appears to come as a shield or a protector. But in reality that is an
illusion. It is a very delusory state of mind. Chandrakirti states in
Entry into the Middle Way that there might be some justification for
responding to force with force if revenge would help one in any way, or
prevent or reduce the harm which has already been inflicted. But that is
not the case because if the harm, the physical injury or whatever, has
been inflicted, it has already taken place. So taking revenge will not
in any way reduce or prevent that harm or injury because it has already
happened.

On the contrary, if one reacts to a situation in a negative way instead
of in a tolerant way, not only is there no immediate benefit, but also a
negative attitude and feeling is created which is the seed of one's
future downfall. From the Buddhist point of view, the consequence of
taking revenge has to be faced by the individual alone in his or her
future life. So not only is there no immediate benefit, it is harmful in
the long run for the individual. However, if one has been treated very
unfairly and if the situation is left unaddressed, it may have extremely
negative consequences for the perpetrator of the crime. Such a situation
calls for a strong counteraction. Under such circumstances, it is
possible that one can, out of compassion for the perpetrator of the
crime and without generating anger or hatred, actually take a strong
stand and take strong countermeasures. In fact, one of the precepts of
the Bodhisattva vows is to take strong countermeasures when the
situation calls for it. If a Bodhisattva doesn't take strong
countermeasures when the situation requires, then that constitutes an
infraction of one of the vows. In addition, as the Entry into the Middle
Way points out, not only does the generation of hateful thoughts lead to
undesirable forms of existence in future lives, but also, at the moment
that strong feelings of anger arise, no matter how hard one tries to
adopt a dignified pose, one's face looks rather ugly. There is an
unpleasant expression, and the vibration that the person sends is very
hostile. People can sense it, and it is almost as if one can feel steam
coming out of that person's body. Indeed not only are human beings
capable of sensing it, but pets and other animals also try to avoid that
person at that instant. These are the immediate consequences of hatred.
It brings about a very ugly, unpleasant physical transformation of the
individual. In addition, when such intense anger and hatred arise, it
makes the best part of our brain, which is the ability to judge between
right and wrong and assess long-term and short-term consequences, become
totally inoperable. It can no longer function. It is almost as if the
person had become crazy. These are the negative effects of generating
anger and hatred. When we think about these negative and destructive
effects of anger and hatred, we realize that it is necessary to distance
ourselves from such emotional explosions.

Insofar as the destructive effects of anger and hateful thoughts are
concerned, one cannot get protection from wealth; even if one is a
millionaire, one is subject to these destructive effects of anger and
hatred. Nor can education guarantee that one will be protected from
these effects. Similarly, the law cannot guarantee protection. Even
nuclear weapons, no matter how sophisticated the defense system may be,
cannot give one protection or defend one from these effects. The only
factor that can give refuge or protection from the destructive effects
of anger and hatred is the practice of tolerance and patience.

Meditation Now, let us pause for five minutes of silent meditation,
reflecting on what we have discussed so far.

QUESTIONS Q: When you spoke the other night, I believe you said that our
nature was compassionate and gentle. A: Yes. Q: Then where does hatred
come from? A: That is a question which requires long hours of
discussion. From the Buddhist viewpoint, the simple answer is that it is
beginningless. As a further explanation, Buddhists believe that there
are many different levels of consciousness. The most subtle
consciousness is what we consider the basis of the previous life, this
life, and future lives. This subtle consciousness is a transient
phenomenon which comes about as a consequence of causes and conditions.
Buddhists have concluded that consciousness itself cannot be produced by
matter. Therefore, the only alternative is to accept the continuation of
consciousness. So that is the basis of the theory of rebirth.

Where there is consciousness, ignorance and hatred also arise naturally.
These negative emotions, as well as the positive emotions, occur right
from beginningless time. All these are a part of our mind. However,
these negative emotions actually are based on ignorance, which has no
valid foundation. None of the negative emotions, no matter how powerful,
have a solid foundation. On the other hand, the positive emotions, such
as compassion or wisdom, have a solid basis: there is a kind of
grounding and rootedness in reason and understanding, which is not the
case with afflictive emotions like anger and hatred. The basic nature of
the subtle consciousness itself is something neutral. So it is possible
to purify or eliminate all of these negative emotions. That basic nature
we call Buddha-nature. Hatred and negative emotions are beginningless;
they have no beginning, but there is an end. Consciousness itself has no
beginning and no end; of this we are certain. Q: How do we judge when a
strong countermeasure is required and what it will be? Please describe
what we can learn from your actions in response to the Tibetan genocide.
A: One of the reasons there is a need to adopt a strong countermeasure
against someone who harms you is that if you let it pass, there is a
danger of that person becoming habituated to extremely negative actions,
which in the long run will cause that person's own downfall and is very
destructive for the individual himself or herself. Therefore a strong
countermeasure, taken out of compassion or a sense of concern for the
other, is necessary. When you are motivated by that realization, then
there is a sense of concern as part of your motive for taking that
strong measure. In terms of the way we have been dealing with the
Chinese government, we have always tried to avoid negative emotions. We
consciously make it a point not to let our emotions overwhelm us. So
even if there is a likelihood of some feeling of anger arising, we
deliberately check ourselves and try to reduce that, and try to
deliberately develop a feeling of compassion toward the Chinese. One of
the reasons why there is some ground to feel compassionate toward a
perpetrator of crime or an aggressor is that the aggressor, because

he or she is perpetrating a crime, is at the causal stage, accumulating
the causes and conditions that later lead to undesirable consequences.
So from that point of view, there is enough ground to feel compassionate
toward the aggressor. It is through this type of reflection that we try
to deal with the Chinese. And you are right, one can say that this is an
example of how one can deal with hatred and aggression. At the same
time, we never lose sight of the importance of holding firmly to our own
principles and adopting the strong measures that are necessary. Q: Often
when I counteract hatred, even without feeling hatred myself, it seems
to increase the other person's hatred. How can I deal with this? A: I
think that is a very good question. In such cases, we have to decide on
the spot, according to the situation. This requires sensitivity to the
actual context and situation. In some cases, you are right, by taking a
strong countermeasure, even without feeling hatred, it might increase
the intensity of the other person's feeling of hatred and anger. If that
is the case, then perhaps it is possible to let it pass and not take a
strong countermeasure. However, here you have to judge the consequences
of your response to a situation. If it is going to make the other person
develop a bad habit of repeating the same pattern of action in the
future, which will be destructive in the long term, then it may call for
a strong countermeasure. But if taking a strong countermeasure will
aggravate the situation and increase the other person's anger and
hatred, then perhaps what the situation requires is a kind of letting
go, letting it pass, and not taking a strong countermeasure. So you need
a sensitivity to particular situations. This is quite analogous to one
of the Buddhist principles, which is that, so far as your own personal
requirements are concerned, the ideal is to have fewer involvements,
fewer obligations, and fewer affairs, businesses, or whatever. However,
so far as the interest of the larger community is concerned, you must
have as many involvements as possible and as many activities as
possible. Q: Why does anger destroy so much virtue, rather than one
moment of anger destroying one equivalent moment of virtue? Is it
because it requires

eons of virtue to create that moment of happiness, and anger does not
permit one to enjoy that moment? A: It is very difficult to answer this
question and say why this is the case. Perhaps these points are what
Buddhists would call "extremely hidden phenomena." Generally speaking,
when we talk about the nature of reality and the objects of our
investigation, Buddhism divides phenomena into three categories. One
category includes all the things and events which are obvious, evident
to our senses. Then there is a second level of phenomena: things or
events which may not seem very obvious or evident, but which you can,
through inference, understand or perceive. An example is insight into
the nature of emptiness: it is not obvious, but through application of
your analytic faculty, you can infer the empty nature of phenomena.
Similarly, the transient or impermanent, momentarily changing nature of
phenomena is something that you can understand through inference. The
third level or category of phenomena is technically called "extremely
hidden phenomena." So regarding questions such as generating anger or
hatred toward a Bodhisattva, a single moment of that anger or hatred has
the capacity to destroy virtues accumulated over eons. These phenomena
are something that one cannot logically understand, or understand
through inference; they are not obvious or evident. It is only by
relying on the testimony of scriptures that we can accept them. When we
talk about relying on testimony, or relying on scriptural authority, not
just any scripture will do. Authoritative scriptures must possess
certain specific criteria. At this point, it is important to understand
how Buddhists relate to scriptures and scriptural authority of all
kinds. Within the Buddhist tradition, there is one school of thought,
called the Vaibhashika school, which maintains that so far as the
scriptures are concerned, they are the valid teachings of Buddha
Shakyamuni, the historical Buddha, and that one can accept them at face
value. As a result, for the Vaibhashikas, one cannot make a distinction
between definitive scriptures which can be accepted at face value and
scriptures which cannot be accepted in this way. However, all the
Mahayana schools maintain that one must be able to distinguish between
different types of scriptures. Certain scriptures can be accepted at

their face value as literal and definitive, whereas other scriptures
cannot be accepted as literal and require further interpretation. So now
the question arises, how do we determine that a particular scripture is
definitive and literal? If that also requires referring to another
scripture, then this process will go on ad infinitum, because that also
would require another scripture, which would then require another
authority, and so on. Ultimately, the authority falls on human reason
and understanding. It is through reasoning and understanding that one
establishes the difference between a definitive scripture and a
nonliteral or interpretable scripture. Then, if that is the case, how do
we determine the validity of a scripture that talks about phenomena
which belong to the third category, the extremely hidden phenomena?
Here, as I pointed out earlier, it is only by relying on the authority
of the scripture, or the testimony of the Buddha, that one can accept
their validity. In order to do that, what is required is to establish
the reliability of that teacher, in this case, the Buddha. The way in
which we do that is, again, not by referring to a scripture, but rather
by examining Buddha's own words, his teachings which deal with the
phenomena that one can understand through reason, through inference.
These include his presentation of the path, his presentation on the
ultimate nature of reality, and so on. Once you have established the
validity of his presentations on these points, then you can develop the
conviction of the reliability of the teacher. In addition, one should
investigate the specific scripture which presents the extremely hidden
phenomena to be sure that there are no internal inconsistencies within
the scripture, no contradictions. So through the combination of these
two factors, one finds that the Buddha is a reliable teacher and that
the scripture itself has no internal contradiction or inconsistency.
Then, you can accept Buddha's testimony on the given issue. Q: How do we
teach patience to our children? How should we react to anger in our
children? A: As to the question of how to teach patience to our
children, it is very difficult to explain in words to a child the value
of patience and the

importance of it. What is crucial here is to set a good example for our
children. If you yourself are always short-tempered and lose your temper
even at the slightest provocation and then you try to teach children,
saying, "Oh, you must be patient, patience is important," it won't have
any effect at all. As to how you should react or respond to anger in
children, it is very difficult for me to say, but many of the general
principles outlined in the text that teach you how to develop patience
would be applicable, even in those circumstances. Q: What techniques can
one use to diffuse anger or hatred when it comes up? A: What is required
here is to judge the situation and figure out what factors have given
rise to that particular instance of anger or hatred. Depending on that,
you respond, and deal with it accordingly. However, it will also be
related to the kind of practices that the individual undertakes in his
or her daily life, but this topic will come later in the text. Q: If
there is no extreme form of patience that is a weakness, how can a
Bodhisattva take a strong counteraction? A: There may be a slight
misunderstanding of what is meant by a Bodhisattva. One should not have
the impression that a Bodhisattva is a very weak person. In fact,
Bodhisattvas can be seen as the most courageous beings. They are very
determined and firm in their principles. Even conventionally, if people
do not tolerate having their toes stepped on and do not tolerate being
slighted, if they always take immediate action and stand firm, we
consider them courageous and strong, to have strength of character. If
that is the case, then Bodhisattvas are beings who have made a pledge or
developed the determination that they will combat the evils that exist
in the minds of all sentient beings. In a way, that is a kind of
arrogance, but it is, of course, based on sound reason. This type of
courageous attitude is in some sense arrogant, but not in a negative
way. If we read the aspirational prayers composed by the Bodhisattvas,
such as the tenth chapter of the Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life,
the

"Dedication" chapter, we find that Bodhisattvas have many aspirations
that in reality cannot be realized. Nonetheless, they have this kind of
vision and aspiration. So I consider them heroes. I think they are very,
very courageous sentient beings. I do not consider this a weakness at
all. Bodhisattvas have that kind of outlook, and they are definitely
capable of taking strong countermeasures when necessary. Q: When we
dedicate the merit from past practices, is it destroyed by present anger
or hatred? A: If your dedication is complemented by factors of very
strong aspiration to attain liberation, or complemented by the factor of
bodhichitta, altruistic aspiration, or a realization of the empty nature
of phenomena, then, of course, the merit will remain beyond the scope of
destruction and will be protected. Dedication is a very important
element of practice in the Buddhist path. We find that in Maitreya's
Ornament of Clear Realizations, when he outlines the proper manner in
which dedication should be practiced, he points out the importance of a
strong motivation of bodhichitta. When you dedicate merit, you must have
a very strong motivation of bodhichitta, dedicating your merit for the
benefit of all sentient beings. In addition, while you do the
dedication, you should have clear realization of the empty nature of
phenomena, the illusion-like nature of phenomena. Once you have
dedicated merit, it should be "sealed" by the recognition that the agent
is inherently empty, and that both this very act and the object of your
act are also inherently empty. That is what is called "being sealed by
the three spheres." So through these practices, you can protect the
merit. In order for one's Dharma practice to be effective and powerful
it is not enough to concentrate on one aspect of the practice alone.
What is required are many complementary factors, the wisdoms, the
dedications, and so on. This is particularly true in the approach of the
Mahayana path.

SECOND SESSION

When we talk about friendship, we can generally distinguish two types.
Some friendships are not genuine, such as those based on wealth, power,
or position. In these cases, friends remain friends so long as the basis
on which their friendship is founded is sustained, such as power,
wealth, or position. However, once these grounds disappear, then the
friendship begins to erode. On the other hand, we have genuine
friendships based on true human feeling, a feeling of closeness in which
there is a sense of sharing and connectedness. This type of friendship I
would call genuine because it is not affected by the increase or
decrease of the individual's wealth, status, or power. The factor that
sustains that friendship is whether or not the two people have mutual
feelings of love and affection. If love and affection are lacking, then
one will not be able to sustain genuine friendship. This is very
obvious. (4) A master who has hatred Is in danger of being killed Even
by those who for their wealth and happiness Depend upon his kindness.
(5) By it, friends and relatives are disheartened; Though drawn by my
generosity they will not trust me. In brief, there is nobody Who lives
happily with anger. (6) Hence the enemy, anger, Creates sufferings such
as these, But whoever assiduously overcomes it Finds happiness now and
hereafter. The sixth verse presents the value and benefits of tolerance
and patience. The more one is able to reflect on the destructive effects
of anger and hatred as well as the beneficial effects of tolerance and
patience, the more one is able to develop a clear recognition of these,
the more one will become cautious and distant toward angry and hateful
thoughts. Consequently, one will develop an affinity for feelings of
tolerance and patience. That, in

itself, will have a significant impact upon one's mind. One's enthusiasm
for enhancing one's own capacity for tolerance and patience will
increase, and likewise one's actual practice of patience will increase
as well. Once one has developed that high level of enthusiasm for the
practice, then one should engage in the actual practice itself, that is,
enhancing tolerance and patience. The technique which is adopted here is
to first seek and examine the causal factors and conditions that give
rise to anger and hatred. This is very much in conformity with the
general Buddhist approach for dealing with problems and difficult
situations. For example, in Buddhism the principle of causality is
accepted as a natural law, and in dealing with reality one has to take
that law into account. For instance, in the case of everyday
experiences, if there are certain types of events which one does not
desire, the best method of ensuring that those events do not take place
is to make sure that the causal conditions which normally give rise to
them do not occur. Similarly, if one desires a particular event or
experience, then the logical thing to do is to seek and accumulate the
causes and conditions that would give rise to it. This is also the case
with mental states and experiences. If one desires a particular
experience, one should seek the causes that would give rise to it, and
if one does not desire a particular experience, like pain or suffering,
then one should ensure that the causes and conditions which would give
rise to it no longer arise. An appreciation of this causal principle is
very important. Having developed the wish that one would like to reduce
one's hatred and anger and overcome them, if one simply wishes or prays
that anger and hatred no longer arise, or simply prays that they just
disappear, this will not make it happen. In addition, if one tries to do
something when hatred or anger has already arisen it is unlikely to have
much effect since at that moment one's mind is gripped by the intensity
of anger and hatred. At that instant, to try to apply something to
prevent that arisal is a bit foolish; one is already almost out of
control. So, the best method is first of all to identify what factors
normally give rise to anger and hatred. (7) Having found its fuel of
mental unhappiness

In the prevention of what I wish for And in the doing of what I do not
want, Hatred increases and then destroys me. This verse states that the
factor that fuels anger or hatred is, in this translation, mental
unhappiness, but I think "discontent" may be a better word. A nagging
sense of discontent, a feeling of being dissatisfied, or of something
being not right, is the fuel that gives rise to anger and hatred. What
one should do is try to see how to prevent the arising of that fuel,
this feeling of discontent and dissatisfaction. Generally, this
discontent arises in us when we feel that either we ourselves, or
someone we love, or our close friends are being treated unfairly or
threatened: people are being unjust toward us or our close friends. At
that instant this feeling of discontent or unhappiness arises. Also,
when others somehow obstruct us in achieving something, we feel that we
are being trodden upon, and then we feel angry. So the approach here is
to get at the root, appreciating the causal nexus, the chain, which
would then ultimately explode in an emotional state like anger or
hatred. The idea is to stop it at an early stage, rather than wait for
that anger or hatred to arise fully. For example, if one wants to stop
the flow of a river, the best way is to go to the source and do
something about it; either divert it or do something else. (8) Therefore
I should totally eradicate The fuel of this enemy, For this enemy has no
other function Than that of causing me harm. Here the "enemy" is this
internal enemy, which is our true enemy, the ultimate enemy: hatred.
This feeling of hatred not only destroys our immediate calmness and
peace of mind, but also it throws us into a state of confusion. It
throws us into a very complicated situation in which we are constantly
confronted with confusion, problems, and difficulties. So what is stated
here is that, in fact, hatred, this inner enemy, has no function other
than causing us harm. It has no other function than simply destroying
us, both in the present and in the future.

This is very different from an ordinary enemy. Although a person whom we
regard as an enemy may engage in activities which are harmful to us, at
least he or she has other functions: that person has to eat, that person
has to sleep. So he or she has many other functions, and therefore
cannot devote twenty-four hours a day to this project of destroying us.
On the other hand, hatred has no other function, no other purpose, than
destroying us. Realizing this fact, one should resolve as a practitioner
never to allow an opportunity for this enemy, hatred, to arise. It is
possible that when combating hatred, one might get the idea, "Hatred is
an inherent part of my mind. It is part of my psyche. How can I engage
in an endeavor where I am trying to combat part of my own mind?" Here,
it is useful to know that the human mind is not only complex, but also
very skillful. It is capable of finding various ways in which it can
deal with difficult situations and different perspectives it can adopt.
For instance, in the Buddhist text called Ornament of Clear Realizations
there is a particular meditation relating to the First Noble Truth, the
truth of suffering, in which one views one's own physical body as an
enemy and then engages in a kind of dialogue. Similarly, in the context
of practicing bodhichitta, where one enhances one's altruistic attitude,
there is also a type of meditation where one engages in a dialogue
between one's own selfcentered attitude, a self which is the embodiment
of self-centeredness, and oneself as a practitioner. Similarly, although
hatred and anger are part of one's mind, one can engage in an endeavor
in which one takes anger and hatred as objects and combats them. In
addition, in our own daily experience we often find ourselves in
situations where we blame ourselves. We say, "Oh, on such and such day,
I let myself down." Then one feels angry toward oneself. In reality,
there are not two distinct selves; there is just the continuum of one
individual. Nonetheless, it makes sense to criticize oneself. There is a
kind of dialogue there as well. This is something that we all know from
our own experience. Even though in reality there is only one single,
individual continuum, there are two different perspectives adopted. When
one says, "I did wrong" and "That was not good," one is criticizing
oneself. The self which is criticizing is acting from a perspective of
oneself as a totality, an entire being, and the self which is being
criticized is a self from the perspective of a particular

experience or event. So one can see the possibility of having a
self-to-self relationship. It may be helpful here to reflect upon the
various aspects of one's own personal identity. Let us take the example
of a Tibetan Buddhist monk. That individual can have a sense of
personalized identity from the perspective of being a monk, "I, a monk."
Then he can also have a level of personal identity which is based not so
much upon his consideration of monkhood, but rather on his ethnic
origin, Tibetan. So he can say, "I, a Tibetan." Then that person, at
another level, can have another identity where monkhood and his ethnic
origin may not play any important role. He can think, "I, a human
being." So one can see different perspectives within each person's
individual identity. What this indicates is that when we conceptually
relate to something, we are capable of looking at one phenomenon from
many different angles, yet usually we are quite selective. We focus on a
particular angle, a particular aspect of that phenomenon, and adopt a
particular perspective. (9) Whatever befalls me I shall not disturb my
mental joy; For having been made unhappy, I shall not accomplish what I
wish And my virtues will decline. The ninth verse indicates that as a
practitioner of patience we make a pledge that "whatever befalls me, I
shall not allow it to disturb my mental joy." Mental joy refers to a
state of calmness or stability, which is the counterfactor of discontent
or mental unhappiness. The reason why one makes the resolve that one
will never let one's mental joy be disturbed is because by being unhappy
and discontented, one will not be able to accomplish what one wishes. So
in a way being unhappy is quite pointless. It is also destructive
because losing one's mental joy and mental stability gives rise to
situations where one's virtues also decline through the generation of
anger and hatred.

(10) Why be unhappy about something If it can be remedied? And what is
the use of being unhappy about something If it cannot be remedied? Here
Shantideva gives another reason to avoid becoming unhappy, which is that
if the situation or the nature of the problem is such that it can be
remedied, then there is no need to be annoyed with it or to be unhappy
about it. On the other hand, if the situation is such that the problem
or the difficulty has no remedy and no possibility of resolution, then
there is also no point in being annoyed with it or unhappy about it. In
the eleventh verse, Shantideva identifies the factors that normally give
rise to feelings of discontent and mental unhappiness. It reads: (11)
For myself and for my friends I want no suffering, no disrespect, No
harsh words and nothing unpleasant; But for my enemies it is the
opposite. This explains the eight worldly concerns. Generally speaking,
a worldly attitude involves feeling happy when certain pleasant things
happen, and unhappy when things go wrong. We feel happy when people
praise us, and unhappy when people insult or say bad things about us.
Likewise, we feel happy when we achieve the material things that we
aspire to obtain, and unhappy when these are not achieved. We also feel
happy when we become famous, and unhappy when we become notorious. So
just as we have these natural feelings in relation to these eight
phenomena, we have similar feelings when these events happen to close
friends, family members, or someone whom we love. However, this is not
the case when these events happen to our enemy. In the enemy's case, it
is the reverse. We feel unhappy when the enemy is having a successful
life and happy when the enemy's fortune is declining. We feel quite
miserable and unhappy when our enemy become famous, and happy when that
fame declines. This is the normal attitude that we have.

What this indicates is that we have a natural tendency to dislike
suffering, unhappiness, and problems, and we naturally seek joy,
pleasure, and happiness. Since it is in relation to this natural
tendency that our feelings of discontent and unhappiness arise,
Shantideva points out that our attitude toward suffering may need
modification. Suffering may not be as bad as we think. Consequently, it
is important to understand the basic Buddhist stance toward the whole
question of suffering. In Buddha's own public teachings, the first thing
he taught was the principle of the Four Noble Truths, the first of which
is the truth of suffering. In this teaching, he placed a lot of emphasis
on realizing the suffering nature of existence. The reason why
reflection on suffering is so important is because there is a possible
way out, an alternative, which is the possibility of freedom from
suffering. It is because of this that the realization of our suffering
nature becomes crucial. Otherwise, if there were no hope, no possibility
of freedom from suffering, mere reflection on suffering would be a form
of morbid thinking and quite negative. Here, Shantideva encourages us:
in order to free ourselves from intense future suffering, he urges us to
adopt a certain attitude so that we'll be able to withstand immediate
hardships for this higher purpose. The twelfth verse reads: (12) The
causes of happiness sometimes occur, But the causes for suffering are
very many. While we find that there are many factors and conditions that
cause pain and suffering in our lives, the conditions that would give
rise to joy and happiness are comparatively rare. Since this is the
reality of our existence, it makes more sense to adopt an attitude that
will engender a greater degree of tolerance. Suffering is part of our
reality, a natural fact of our existence. It is something that we have
to undergo, whether we like it or not. We might as well adopt an
attitude that enables us to tolerate it so that we are not so intensely
affected by it mentally. If we do not have that level of tolerance our
life will be miserable. For example, when one has a very bad night, that
night seems eternal and never seems to end. Similarly, if one does not
adopt

an attitude that will enable one to tolerate suffering, then life will
become more miserable. For example, when someone is brought up in a very
privileged environment with material abundance and without hardships,
that person becomes spoiled, often to the degree that his or her level
of tolerance toward difficulties is very low. When even the slightest
problem arises, that person cannot handle it. My late elder brother,
Lobsang Samten, who spent many years in the United States, once told me
that if the electricity goes out and does not come back on for a while,
it is possible that many people would die of starvation, because so much
is dependent upon electricity. There are freezers, refrigerators, and
electric cookers, and so on: the facilities of life are very advanced.
In many of the high-rise buildings in cities, there are elevators, and
if there is no electricity, the elevators cannot operate. Then people
living upstairs either have to prepare themselves for a long meditation
or, if it is winter, they may freeze to death. The last two lines of the
twelfth verse read: Without suffering there is no renunciation.
Therefore, mind, you should stand firm. These two lines tell us that not
only is it important to reflect upon suffering, but there is great
benefit in doing so as well. Reflecting on suffering has a tremendous
significance because only through recognizing the nature of suffering is
it possible to generate a genuine sense of renunciation, a genuine
desire to seek freedom from this bondage. For instance, in the case of a
practicing Buddhist, one has to reflect not only upon the suffering of
immediate and obvious pains, but also upon this very existence as being
of the nature of suffering and dissatisfaction. So long as one is under
the influence of karma and delusions, one is in a state of suffering and
dissatisfaction. So we can perceive the obvious sufferings like pain,
hardships, injuries, and so forth, as strong indicators of the basic
dissatisfactory nature of our existence. They are like pointers or
reminders of this fundamental nature. Sometimes when I meet practicing
Buddhist friends who complain about hardships, pain, suffering, and so
forth, I jokingly tell them that in a way

one should be grateful for this because ideally we gain experience based
on our meditations on suffering. Since that is not happening, the body
itself is telling us that we are in this dissatisfactory nature of
existence. Therefore, one should be grateful for these pains and
sufferings. (13) If some ascetics and people of Karnapa Endure the pain
of cuts and burns for no reason, Then for the sake of liberation, Why
have I no courage? If people are prepared to put up with hardships,
pains, and difficulties in order to obtain goals which are not ultimate,
then why should I, who aspire to attain full liberation from suffering,
not be able to tolerate a degree of hardship and pain? We can find this
instruction in many other Buddhist texts: it is not the way of the wise
to give up something great for the purpose of a minor goal; rather it is
the way of the wise to give up something minor for a higher purpose or
goal. There is a Tibetan expression which says that one should be able
to let go of one hundred so that one can get back one thousand. We might
think that it is true that one should be able to sacrifice something
minor for the sake of a higher purpose, yet still doubt that we have the
capacity to actually do that. We might feel disheartened or discouraged.
So in the fourteenth verse, Shantideva says that there is no need to
feel disheartened or discouraged because whatever activity it may be,
through constant familiarity, through constant training, it is always
possible to make something easier and more acceptable. It reads: (14)
There is nothing whatsoever That is not made easier through
acquaintance. So through becoming acquainted with small harms I should
learn to patiently accept greater harms. When one is relating to a
particular activity or a practice it may seem daunting at the initial
stage, but through constant familiarity and through reinforcing one's
determination, it is possible to make it easier. It is not that

the practice itself has become easier, but rather that one's attitude
and one's own mental state have become closer to it. That is why the
appearance of the phenomenon has changed. In the following three verses,
Shantideva gives examples of the types of pains and sufferings which one
can become accustomed to through familiarity or constant exposure. (15)
Who has not seen this to be so with trifling sufferings, Such as the
bites of snakes and insects, Feelings of hunger and thirst, And with
such minor things as rashes? (16) I should not be impatient With heat
and cold, wind and rain, Sickness, bondage, and beatings; For if I am,
the harm they cause me will increase. (17) Some when they see their own
blood Become especially brave and steady, But some when they see the
blood of others Faint and fall unconscious. Here Shantideva gives
examples of two kinds of people: when some see blood, even their own,
their courage is increased and they become braver; whereas other people,
when they see their own blood or even others' blood, just faint and fall
unconscious. This difference comes from conditioning and constant
familiarity. The eighteenth verse begins: (18) These (reactions) come
from the mind Being either steady or timid. The next two lines sum up
what we were discussing earlier. Therefore, I should disregard harms
caused to me

And not be affected by suffering. In sum, we have been discussing one of
the methods of counteracting the arising of feelings of discontent,
dissatisfaction, and mental unhappiness; that is, by bringing about a
transformation in our attitude toward suffering and pain. Our normal
attitude is the very natural tendency to totally dislike suffering and
pain. There is an intensity in our dislike and intolerance of pain and
suffering. By contemplating the nature of suffering, and by
contemplating the possibility of changing one's attitude through
constant familiarity, we reduce that intensity so that our feeling
toward suffering is no longer as intolerant as before. However, I think
some of these reflections have to be understood in their proper context.
Here, the particular framework of the Buddhist path is more or less
presupposed, within which the principles of the Four Noble Truths and
the Two Truths are presented. The complete framework includes the
ground, path, and resultant state toward which one is heading. Unless
one knows the complete context, there is a danger of misunderstanding
this type of approach as being rather morbid. So contextualization is
crucial. Therefore, it is very important, whenever one is reading
Buddhist texts, that one see what is being presented in its proper
context, in relation to other aspects of the Buddhist path. In this
regard, I think the Tibetan tradition is admirable because there is
always an emphasis on a combined approach of study and practice.

Meditation During this meditation session, let us focus on the suffering
nature of our existence by thinking about momentary change. Momentary
change means things are moving and never standing still. In Buddhist
practice it is very important to realize that the disintegration of
phenomena---events or things ---does not require any secondary factor:
it is built in as a mechanism. What that indicates is that all things
and events are under the power of other factors. When we consider our
own body or aggregates, we realize that they are under the influence of
the factors of ignorance and delusion. So long as

the aggregates remain under the influence of ignorance and delusion,
there is no real room for joy or happiness. Ignorance is negative, and
anything which remains under the power of a negative force cannot be
considered positive or good or desirable. Hatred, the inner enemy that
we have been discussing, and attachment or desire are the two "cronies"
of ignorance. In other words, ignorance is like the prime minister or
the president. Attachment and hatred are like the two most powerful
ministers. Together, they constitute the "three poisons" of mind.
Therefore, the very existence of our life is under the influence of the
three poisons. If we are under the power of these three poisonous
forces, then certainly our existence is essentially dissatisfactory. So
that is the meditation on suffering. That really is the deep root, not
just when someone is feeling frustrated about his pains, his body. The
main thing is to go to the depths, to get rid of the troublemaker. That
is the meditation on suffering. Begin by thinking of momentary change
and its causes, and then consider samsara and its defects. That is the
proper way to meditate.

QUESTIONS Q: Western psychotherapy encourages the expression of anger.
Is there is an appropriate expression of anger as opposed to the
antidote of patience? What do you say to the psychologists and the
counselors who say, "Let it all come out," about anger and hatred? A:
Here I think we have to understand that there are many different
situations. In some cases, people harbor strong feelings of anger and
hurt based on something done to them in the past, an abuse or whatever,
and that feeling is kept bottled up. Regarding this, there is a Tibetan
expression which says that if there is any sickness in the conch shell,
you can clear it by blowing it out. In other words, if anything is
blocking the conch shell, just blow it out, and it will be clear. So it
is possible to imagine a situation where it may be better to just let
out feelings of anger and express them.

However, generally speaking, anger and hatred are the type of emotions
which, if left unchecked or unattended, tend to compound themselves and
keep on increasing. The more one works with them, the more one adopts a
cautious attitude and tries to reduce the level of their force, the
better it is. Q: Aren't hatred and anger connected with attachment, not
only toward things, but also principles, ideologies, and especially the
identification of "I" as a permanent self? A: It is very true that both
hatred and anger are ultimately rooted in the feeling of a strong, solid
notion of self, a permanent ego. Generally speaking, when we talk about
grasping at a notion of self or ego, we should distinguish between two
types. One definition of ego is a self-centered attitude, where one
regards one's own interest as the only one worthy of consideration and
remains quite oblivious or indifferent toward others' needs or feelings.
Then there is another type of ego, a belief in an enduring, permanent,
concrete self or "I." At the beginning stage, these two types of
egocentric attitudes are complementary, and one reinforces the other.
So, in our minds they are inextricably linked. But if one emphasizes the
practice of bodhichitta, the aspiration to attain Buddhahood for the
sake of all sentient beings, and yet harms that altruistic capacity by
paying little attention to generating insight into the ultimate nature
of reality, then it is possible that in some cases it may remain beyond
one's intellectual scope. In such cases, the self-centered attitude
based upon selfish thoughts, a feeling of disregard for others'
well-being and others' feelings, may decrease, but grasping at a
permanent, abiding, or enduring self may still remain. Similarly, if one
emphasizes the practice of emptiness but does not pay attention to the
bodhichitta aspect of the path, then grasping at a permanent, abiding,
concrete self may loosen, but the selfish, self-centered attitude may
still remain. So at a higher level, one can see a distinction between
these two types of ego. This is why it is so important when engaging in
the spiritual path toward perfection to be able to adopt a path where
there is the unification of good method and wisdom, skillful means and
insight.

I think this question is also related to the basic Buddhist stance that
because hatred and attachment are ultimately rooted in ignorance, in a
misconception of the nature of reality, the specific antidotes to anger
and hatred and specific antidotes to attachment can be seen as limited
because they are specific to individual afflictive emotions. On the
other hand, the antidote to ignorance or misconception is more
comprehensive in that it serves as an antidote not only to ignorance but
also to hatred and attachment because they are rooted in ignorance.
Also, when we talk about the notion of self in Buddhism, it is important
to bear in mind that there are different degrees or types. There are
some types of sense of self which are not only to be cultivated but also
to be reinforced and enhanced. For instance, in order to have a strong
determination to seek Buddhahood for the benefit of all sentient beings,
one needs a very strong sense of confidence, which is based upon a sense
of commitment and courage. This requires a strong sense of self. Unless
one has that identity or sense of self, one will not be able to develop
the confidence and courage to strongly seek this aim. In addition, the
doctrine of Buddha-nature gives us a lot of encouragement and confidence
because we realize that there is this potential within us which will
allow us to attain the perfection that we are seeking. However, there
are different types of sense of self which are rooted in a belief in a
permanent, solid, indivisible entity called "self" or "I." There is the
belief that there is something very concrete or objective about this
entity. This is a false notion of self which must be overcome.
Similarly, within this false notion of self, we can see various levels,
various gross forms where there is a naive belief in a permanent,
abiding, unchanging self. If we go further we find that there is a
belief in something possessing a sort of intrinsic reality and a status
which is independent and unique to the thing. Again, that is a false
notion. Another strong sense of self which is false involves a tendency
to disregard others' well-being and others' feelings and rights. That
sense of self is, again, to be discarded and overcome. So we should be
very sensitive when we use the words "ego" and "self" in the Buddhist
context, not to totally adopt a black-and-white stance saying, "This is
out, and this is in."

Q: What is the role of wrathful deities? A: This is not easy to explain.
I think the basic philosophy is that human emotions, such as anger,
usually act as a force to bring about swift action. I think that is the
foundation. So the general principle behind the idea of wrathful deities
is that the one thing which is unique to emotional states such as anger
or other afflictive emotions is that they have a kind of energy, and
when one experiences that emotional state, there is a kind of energy
which would enable the individual to take swift action. It is a very
powerful motivating factor. It is in relation to this fact that the
practice of relating to wrathful deities has to be understood. Another
thing we have to understand is the basic Buddhist stance toward these
so-called afflictive emotions. From the perspective of non-Mahayana
systems, since the ultimate goal is one's own personal liberation from
samsara, and there is no talk about the importance of generating
bodhichitta, all the negative actions of body, speech, and mind are to
be abandoned. There are no exceptional circumstances where they are
permissible. So they are to be abandoned. Period. However, in the
Mahayana sutra vehicle, because the primary aim of a Bodhisattva
practitioner is to be of service to others, there are certain exceptions
allowed in regard to the negative actions of body and speech. However,
no exceptions are allowed in regard to the nonvirtues of the mind
because there is no possibility of mental nonvirtues being beneficial.
In the case of the Bodhisattva practitioner, if the situation is such
that it is beneficial to the larger community or many sentient beings,
then there is permission for the Bodhisattva to use attachment, not so
much on the path but as a complementary factor to the path, as an aid
toward the goal of helping others. However, there is no permission given
to the Bodhisattva for generating hatred or anger in Sutrayana. Tantric
Buddhism contains unique techniques of meditation on emptiness which are
based upon deity yoga, the meditative procedure whereby one dissolves
ordinary perception and ordinary apprehension and deliberately adopts an
identity which is perfected and divine. On that basis, exceptions are
also allowed in regard to the use of anger on the path, and it is in
this context that the wrathful deities are used in tantric meditation.

Naturally, when one utilizes the energy of anger for the benefit of
others, at that time it is much easier to visualize wrathful deities
rather than peaceful deities. Q: If there is no soul, what is the nature
of the mindstream that reincarnates from lifetime to lifetime? How can
such a consciousness become a separate entity? A: Once again, it depends
very much on how one understands the term "soul." If one understands the
term "soul" as a continuum of individuality from moment to moment, from
lifetime to lifetime, then one can say that Buddhism also accepts a
concept of soul; there is a kind of continuum of consciousness. From
that point of view, the debate on whether or not there is a soul becomes
strictly semantic. However, in the Buddhist doctrine of selflessness, or
"no soul" theory, the understanding is that there is no eternal,
unchanging, abiding, permanent self called "soul." That is what is being
denied in Buddhism. Buddhism does not deny the continuum of
consciousness. Because of this, we find some Tibetan scholars, such as
the Sakya master Rendawa, who accept that there is such a thing as self
or soul, the "kangsak ki dak" (Tib. gang zag gi bdag). However, the same
word, the "kangsak ki dak," the self, or person, or personal self, or
identity, is at the same time denied by many other scholars. We find
diverse opinions, even among Buddhist scholars, as to what exactly the
nature of self is, what exactly that thing or entity is that continues
from one moment to the next moment, from one lifetime to the next
lifetime. Some try to locate it within the aggregates, the composite of
body and mind. Some explain it in terms of a designation based on the
body and mind composite, and so on. We also find a particular school
within the Mahayana tradition called the Chittamatra or Yogachara
school, the "Mind-Only" school. One of the divisions of that school
maintains that there is a special continuum of consciousness called
alayavijnana, which is the fundamental consciousness. The reason for
positing this is that they feel that if there is such a thing as a self,
a stream of consciousness continuing from one lifetime to another, then

when we search for the true referent behind the term "self," or "I," or
whatever one calls it, it must be findable because if we can't find it
then we will be tending towards nihilism. However if we posit a self, or
an agent independent of body and mind, then we will be tending toward
the extreme of absolutism. Further, if we were to identify the self or
the person from within the stream of consciousness itself, this would be
problematic because Buddhism accepts certain states of existence where
there is an absence of consciousness, and at that instant there would
not be any thought or consciousness present in the mind of the person.
So because of these problems, this particular school posits a separate
continuum of consciousness called alayavijnana, which is like a
fundamental basis. In addition, one of the reasons the Chittamatrins
felt the need to posit this particular type of stream of consciousness
is because if we try to explain selfhood or personhood only within the
context of six types of consciousness and five sensory faculties, then,
as I pointed out earlier, there are problems. For instance, at the stage
of thoughtlessness, there is no consciousness; therefore there would not
be any person. Similarly, in Buddhism, there is the acceptance of a
state of intuitive direct realization of emptiness, when the
consciousness has become totally unalloyed, pure, and untainted. At that
very instant, even though the person is not fully enlightened, there is
no tainted or polluted consciousness. However, one has to accept some
form of defilement that would obstruct the person's full enlightenment,
and that has to be understood in terms of imprints or dispositions, and
so on. Again, because of this, the Chittamatrins found the need to posit
this fundamental basis, defined in terms of a neutral consciousness that
serves only as a kind of depository of all the various imprints that are
implanted in one's psyche. Q: The societal result of anger and hatred is
cold-blooded murder by younger and younger people. What is society's
role in responding to the results of anger and hatred? A: As I pointed
out at the press conference yesterday, I feel that there has been
negligence over a certain period of time, several decades, during which
we did not pay enough attention to the importance of some of the
fundamental human values, and that, combined with other factors, has led

to the kind of society that we find ourselves in now. Therefore, it is
very difficult to come up with simple solutions, just like that. What is
required here is a concerted effort from many different angles to try to
tackle this problem. Education, no doubt, is one major factor. The way
we educate children is very important. I also believe that a teacher's
behavior is a very important factor. A teacher's duty is not only to
give information or knowledge, but also to set a good example of the
principles that we are trying to teach. So the manner in which children
are educated becomes very important, particularly by adults setting a
good example. In that way, these principles or values become something
very dear to the heart of the children. Of course, the media are also
very much involved. Q: What can we do to reduce the influence of greed?
A: In some sense, without greed there would not be any rebirth. In order
to have reincarnation, we need greed. As is the case with anger, I think
there are different types of greed, some of which can be positive, some
negative. Greed is a form of desire. However, it is an exaggerated form
of desire, based on overexpectation. The true antidote of greed is
contentment. For a practicing Buddhist, for a Dharma practitioner, many
practices can act as a kind of counterforce to greed: the realization of
the value of seeking liberation or freedom from suffering, recognizing
the underlying unsatisfactory nature of one's existence, and so on.
These views also help an individual to counteract greed. But in terms of
an immediate response to greed, one way is to reflect upon the excesses
of greed, what it does to one as an individual, where it leads. Greed
leads one to a feeling of frustration, disappointment, a lot of
confusion, and a lot of problems. When it comes to dealing with greed,
one thing which is quite characteristic is that although it arises from
the desire to obtain something, it is not satisfied by obtaining it.
Therefore, it becomes limitless or boundless, and that leads to trouble.
The interesting thing about greed is that although the underlying motive
is to seek satisfaction, as I pointed out, even after obtaining the
object of one's desire, one is still not satisfied. On the other hand,
if one has a strong sense of contentment, it doesn't matter whether one
obtains the object or not; either way, one is still content.

Q: What is the relationship between mindfulness and patience and between
humility and patience? A: Generally speaking, when one engages in any
form of practice, the habit of mindfulness is necessary because it is
defined as a faculty that allows one to maintain attention on an object
of observation. Be it patience or other forms of practice, one has to
direct one's attention toward that particular practice, so mindfulness
is necessary. There is also a very close connection between humility and
patience, because what I meant by generating humility is that although
one has the capacity to retaliate, one has decided not to do so. One has
the capacity, if one wishes, to take a more confrontational or
aggressive stance, and although one has this capacity, one deliberately
decides not to do so. That is what I would call a genuine humility. When
there is a feeling of helplessness or incapacitation toward the human
situation, I wouldn't call that genuine humility, because there is no
alternative but to give in. Similarly, in the case of tolerance or
patience, there could be different types. One is genuine and involves
the decision to be more tolerant through self-discipline. On the other
hand, when one is forced to adopt a response, that would be in some
sense meekness rather than tolerance. So again, there are differences.
Generally, tolerance requires self-discipline, the realization that one
could have acted otherwise, could have adopted an aggressive approach
but has decided not to do so, not that someone forced one to adopt a
tolerant attitude. Our practice of tolerance toward the Chinese is
genuine, not questionable.

DAY TWO

FIRST SESSION In the Pratimoksha-sutra, the scripture on ethics and
monastic discipline, Buddha states that one should not indulge in any
actions which are unwholesome, but rather should always perform deeds
which are wholesome. That way of life should be based on a disciplined
state of mind. One should therefore tame or discipline one's mind, and
that disciplining, bringing about inner transformation, is indeed the
essence of Buddha's doctrine or teaching. So what this indicates is
that, ultimately, whether one's action is wholesome or unwholesome
depends upon whether that action is arising from a disciplined state of
mind or an undisciplined state of mind. Similarly, we also find in other
scriptures statements indicating that if one's mind is disciplined and
tamed, or at peace, then it will lead to joy and happiness, whereas if
one's mind is undisciplined and not at peace, then it will lead to
unhappiness and suffering. Ultimately it is one's state of mind which is
the determining factor. In general, it is possible to indicate one's
particular spiritual way of life through external means, such as wearing
certain clothes, having a shrine or altar in one's house, doing
recitations and chanting, and so on. However, these practices or
activities are secondary to one's religious or spiritual way of life
because all of these activities can be performed by a person who harbors
a very negative state of mind. On the other hand, all the virtues of
mind, the mental qualities, are genuine Dharma or genuine spiritual
qualities because all of these internal mental qualities cannot exist in
a single moment simultaneously with ill feelings or negative states of
mind. So engaging in training or a method of bringing about inner
discipline within one's mind is the essence of a religious life. Whether
or not one

leads a spiritual life depends on whether or not one has been successful
in bringing about that disciplined, tamed state of mind. As far as the
actual techniques for bringing about that internal transformation are
concerned, the basic approach that is employed in the Buddhist path is a
unification of skillful means, or method, and wisdom. For example, let
us take the case of the particular text that we are dealing with, the
Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life by Shantideva. In this text, the
ninth chapter deals with the wisdom aspect of the path, that is,
generating insight, whereas the remaining chapters all deal with the
method aspect, the skillful means of the path. So when we speak about
skillful means or the method aspect of the Mahayana path, the principal
practice is the development of love and compassion. In order to
successfully enhance these qualities of love and compassion, one must be
able to counteract the factors which obstruct one's cultivation of these
qualities. In this regard the practice of tolerance and patience becomes
crucial for Bodhisattva practitioners. Just as in the general path of
Mahayana Buddhism, where the method and the wisdom aspects of the path
complement and reinforce each other, here the practice of tolerance and
patience is necessary for generating and enhancing one's capacity for
love and compassion. As one progresses on the path, love and compassion
on the one hand, and patience and tolerance on the other, become
complementary and reinforce each other. The next two verses read: (19)
Even when the wise are suffering Their minds remain very lucid and
undefiled; For when war is being waged against the disturbing
conceptions Much harm is caused at the time of battle. (20) The
victorious warriors are those Who, having disregarded all suffering,
Vanquish the foes of hatred and so forth; (Common warriors) slay only
corpses.

When we are engaged in the practice of patience and tolerance, in
reality what is happening is that we are engaged in combat with hatred
and anger. Since it is a situation of combat, one seeks victory, but one
also has to be prepared for the possibility of losing the battle. So
while one is engaged in combat, one should not lose sight of the fact
that in the process one will encounter many problems and hardships. One
should have the ability to withstand these hardships and have the
fortitude to bear these problems. Someone who gains victory over hatred
and anger through such an arduous process is a true hero. On the other
hand, those people who fight with other human beings out of anger,
hatred, and strong emotion, even if they gain victory over their enemies
in battle, are not in reality true heroes. What they are doing is
slaying corpses, because human beings, being transient, will die.
Whether or not these enemies die in the battle is another question, but
they will die at some point. So what is happening, in reality, is that
they are slaying corpses. The true hero is the one who gains victory
over hatred and anger. One might feel that while it is true that one
should engage in combat with hatred and anger and other delusions, what
guarantee do we have, what assurance do we have, that we can gain
victory over them? I think this point is very important. One must have
some assurance that one can, if one energetically pursues it, gain
victory over the delusions. If we pay enough attention, it is quite
simple to recognize these afflictive emotions and thoughts, called nyon
mongs in Tibetan, which literally means "that which afflicts the mind
from within." The term is often translated simply as "delusions." The
etymology of the Tibetan word gives one a sense that they are emotional
and cognitive events. They automatically afflict one's mind; they
destroy one's peace of mind and bring about a disturbance within one's
psyche. It is quite obvious that if we pay enough attention, we will be
able to realize their afflictive nature when they arise, because they
have a tendency to destroy our calmness and presence of mind. But what
is difficult is to discover whether, through applying the corresponding
antidotes, we can overcome and eliminate them or not. That is a question
that directly relates to the whole idea of whether or not it is possible
to attain nirvana or liberation from samsara. That is a very serious and
difficult question.

So far as the Buddhist concept of nirvana, that is, liberation or
freedom, is concerned, we find its earliest discussion in the scriptures
belonging to the first public discourse that the Buddha gave, which
principally deals with the Four Noble Truths. But full and comprehensive
understanding of nirvana and liberation can be developed only on the
basis of understanding the teachings presented in the second and third
public discourses. So what premises or grounds do we have for accepting
that these mental afflictions can be ultimately rooted out and
eliminated from our mind? In Buddhist thought, we have three principal
reasons for believing that this can happen. One is that all deluded
states of mind, all afflictive emotions and thoughts, are essentially
distorted in their mode of apprehension, whereas all the antidotal
factors such as love, compassion, insight, and so on not only are
undistorted, but they also have grounding in our varied experience and
in reality. Second, all these antidotal forces also have the quality of
being strengthened through practice and training. Through constant
familiarity, one can enhance their capacity and increase their potential
limitlessly. So the second premise is that as one enhances the capacity
of these antidotal forces and increases their strength, one is able to
correspondingly reduce the influences and effects of delusory states of
mind. The third premise is that the essential nature of mind is pure; in
other words, there is the idea that the essential nature of mind is
clear light or Buddha-nature. So it is on these three premises that
Buddhism accepts that delusions, all afflictive emotions and thoughts,
can be ultimately eliminated through practice and meditation. Some of
these points are quite obvious, so that if one just pays enough
attention they will become quite clear, while some may remain quite
obscure or hidden. However, through analysis and investigation, one will
be able to develop inferences, so all of these can be understood through
investigation and analysis. They do not require accepting the testimony
of a scriptural authority. One of the reasons that Buddha's words can be
accepted as valid in relation to very obscure phenomena is that in
regard to less hidden things his teachings have proven to be reliable
and valid. The principal concern of

a seeker is to find out whether or not it is possible to attain
liberation or freedom from suffering. And so far as that subject is
concerned, Buddha's teachings have been proven to be valid and reliable.
(21) Furthermore, suffering has good qualities: Through being
disheartened with it, arrogance is dispelled, Compassion arises for
those in cyclic existence, Evil is shunned, and joy is found in virtue.
In this verse, Shantideva elaborates on the benefits of thinking about
suffering. First, he states that when one reflects upon suffering, when
one appreciates the underlying unsatisfactory nature of our existence,
then it will automatically reduce one's arrogance and feeling of
conceit. Additionally, when one is aware of this suffering nature and of
one's own pains and suffering, it also helps one to develop a capacity
for empathy, the capacity which allows one to connect with other
people's feeling and suffering, thereby enhancing one's capacity for
compassion toward others. In addition, by realizing the nature of
suffering one will develop greater resolve to put an end to the
unwholesome deeds which lead to suffering, and one's enthusiasm for
engaging in wholesome actions and deeds which lead to happiness and joy
will increase. So these are the benefits or merits of thinking about
suffering. However, it is important to be very skillful in one's
application of the various techniques, and not to be extreme in one's
approach. For instance, if we have too much self-importance, if we are
puffed up by arrogance based on our supposed or actual achievements or
qualities, then the antidote is to think more about suffering and one's
own problems and the unsatisfactory nature of existence. This will
assist in bringing down the level of one's high opinion of oneself; it
will bring one more down to earth, as it were. On the other hand, if one
finds that by reflecting on the unsatisfactory nature of existence,
suffering, pain, and so forth, one feels quite overwhelmed, then there
is again a danger of going to the other extreme, where one might become
totally discouraged, helpless, and depressed. This can lead to thinking,
"Oh, I can't do anything, I'm not worth anything." That extreme is
another danger. So under such circumstances, it is

important to be able to uplift one's mind by reflecting on one's
achievements, the progress that one has made so far, one's other
positive qualities, and so on, so that one can get out of that
discouraged or demoralized state of mind. What is required here is a
balanced and skillful approach. This is analogous to planting a sapling
or a seedling. At its very early stage, one has to be very skillful and
gentle: too much moisture will destroy it, too much sunlight will
destroy it. What one needs is a balanced environment where the sapling
can have healthy growth. Similarly, what one is seeking here is healthy
emotional and psychological growth. So here again one needs that gentle
and skillful approach, otherwise there is a danger of going to extremes.
It also can happen that someone just picks out a passage from a Buddhist
text and says, "This is the Buddhist approach." The tendency to look at
Buddhist techniques in black-and-white terms, as if one particular
technique is applicable everywhere, universally, without any
qualification, must be avoided. In other words, the real practice of
Dharma is in some ways like a voltage stabilizer. When there is a power
surge, the function of the stabilizer is to provide stable and constant
power. (22) As I do not become angry With great sources of suffering
such as jaundice, Then why be angry with animate creatures? They too are
provoked by conditions. (23) Although they are not wished for, These
sicknesses arise; And likewise although they are not wished for, These
disturbing conceptions forcibly arise. (24) Without thinking, "I shall
be angry," People become angry with no resistance, And without thinking,
"I shall produce myself,"

Likewise anger itself is produced. In the twenty-second verse,
Shantideva presents a technique of developing patience or tolerance
based on an appreciation of the complex reality of a given situation.
Here, one can feel that since the aggressor has inflicted this pain and
injury on me, I am totally justified in being intolerant. I am totally
justified in being hateful or angry toward that person. Shantideva
responds by stating that if we examine this carefully, we will find that
among the factors that give rise to our pain and suffering, our feelings
of hurt and harm, there are both animate and inanimate factors. Why is
it that we particularly hold the animate factors, like people,
responsible and accountable, but not the inanimate factors, such as the
conditions that give rise to it? For instance, we don't hold grudges
against our illnesses, although illness gives us pain. One could argue
that this is quite different, because in the case of inanimate factors
such as illnesses, they have no desire to injure us---it's not
deliberate. Further, the illnesses and these factors arise without their
own deliberation, without their own choice. Shantideva responds to this
by saying that if this is the case, then even when a person inflicts
harm on us, the harm that is inflicted is in some sense out of that
person's control because he or she is compelled by other forces such as
negative emotions, delusions, ill feelings, and so on. If we go even
further, we find that even a very negative feeling such as ill will or
hatred also comes about as a result of many factors and is the
aggregation of many conditions which do not arise out of choice or
deliberately. In the twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth verses, he sums up
the reflections that he has outlined earlier, stating that: (25) All
mistakes that are And all the various kinds of evil Arise through the
force of conditions: They do not govern themselves. (26) These
conditions that assemble together Have no intention to produce anything,

And neither does their product Have the intention to be produced. Again,
there is a kind of chain, a causal nexus, one factor leading to another.
Nothing has any independent status, nothing has control over itself.
(27) That which is asserted as Primal Substance And that which is
imputed as a Self, (Since they are unproduced) do not arise after having
purposefully thought, "I shall arise (in order to cause harm)." In verse
27, we find a refutation of certain views held by non-Buddhist schools
of Shantideva's time, particularly the views of two principal schools,
the Samkhya school and the Naiyayika school. The idea that is being
presented here is that no things and events arise out of their own
choice; none enjoys an independent status. So in order to fully argue
for that, one has to anticipate other rival theories having a view or a
position that there are certain types of events and things which can
enjoy this independent status. Of the two examples which I have given
here, the first is the Samkhya theory of prakriti, which is a belief in
some kind of primary substance. Prakriti is described as the underlying
substratum from which arises the whole phenomenal world, as if this
primal substance were the essence that creates the entire phenomenal
world. The substance itself is independent, eternal, and absolute. The
Naiyayika school maintains that "self" similarly enjoys this
independent, absolute, eternal sort of status. (28) If they are
unproduced and non-existent Then whatever wish they have to produce
(harm will also not exist). Since (this Self) would permanently
apprehend its objects, It follows that it would never cease to do so.
(29) Furthermore if the Self were permanent It would clearly be devoid
of action, like space.

So even if it met with other conditions How could its unchanging
(nature) be affected? (30) Even if when acted upon (by other conditions)
it remains as before, Then what could actions do to it? Thus if I say
that this (condition) acts upon (a permanent Self) How could the two
ever be (causally) related? In verses 27, 28, 29, and 30, Shantideva
refutes these views by drawing extensively on the Buddhist doctrine of
universal causation, which asks: If the primal substance or self is
permanent and eternal, how can one account for its interaction with the
phenomenal world? What is the nature of their relationship? How can one
explain conditionality on the basis of the relationship between the
phenomenal world and this eternal substance or self? Because if the self
or the primal substance is permanent, unchanging, eternal, how can it
produce anything? In order for something to have the capacity to produce
something, it must itself be a product; it itself must also depend upon
other conditions and factors. If it is not produced, it cannot produce
any other thing. So it is on the grounds of Buddhist universal causation
that these two views are refuted. In verse 31, Shantideva provides a
summary: (31) Hence, everything is governed by other factors (which in
turn) are governed by (others), And in this way nothing governs itself.
Having understood this, I should not become angry With phenomena that
are like apparitions. The reason the analogy of apparitions is used here
is that an apparition is an illusion created by a magician; it has no
objective status of its own and is entirely dependent upon the whim of
the magician. So there is no objective or independent life of its own;
it is created by another factor. Similarly, all phenomena, because they
are governed by other factors and come into existence as a result of
other causes and conditions, do not enjoy any

independent status of their own. From that point of view, they are like
apparitions. Therefore, it is inappropriate to respond with such
extremes to conditions that do not arise of their own accord because
they are, in some sense, quite helpless. It is important to understand
the Buddhist doctrine of universal causality or causation, and when we
talk about the principle of causation we have to understand the basic
characteristics of this doctrine. It is very clearly presented in
Asanga's text called Compendium of Knowledge, in which he states that
the Buddhist doctrine of causality has three principal characteristics:
first, there is no acceptance of an autonomous creator. There is no idea
of a design, because Buddha himself states that because the causes were
there, the effects, or fruits, followed. So it has to be understood
purely in terms of conditionality, because there is no acceptance of an
independent autonomous agent or a creator. In sutra, it states, "Because
this was produced, it led to this effect." This is the second
characteristic--- anything that is a cause must itself be of a transient
nature; it must be impermanent. If it is permanent, if it is eternal and
unchanging, then it cannot have the capacity to produce anything. The
third characteristic is that there must be a correspondence, a unique
relationship between the cause and the effect. These are the three
characteristics of the Buddhist theory of universal causality or the
principle of causality. When the principle of causality is examined
further, Buddhism explains two principal types of causes. One is called
the "substantial cause," the material that turns into the effect. Then
there are contributing causes, which are not primary because they are
the factors that assist in turning that material substance into that
effect. For example, in the case of a sprout, the water, the
temperature, and the fertilizers, and so on are contributing causes. One
thing we must bear in mind is that the perspectives adopted here are
from the point of view of Mahayana Buddhism and particularly that of the
Prasangika Madhyamika. So far as his philosophical position on emptiness
is concerned, Shantideva shares the view of Chandrakirti. Both agree in
their interpretation of Nagarjuna's philosophy of emptiness; they
subscribe to the philosophical tenets of Prasangika Madhyamika. So when
we talk of all things and events as being apparitions or illusion-like,
we have to understand it from that perspective.

A question is raised here that if all things and events are like
apparitions, then why should we take them seriously? Why should they
affect us so much? Shantideva responds by saying that although all
things and events are like apparitions, the agent or the subject who is
undergoing this experience is also like an apparition. However, our own
experience of pain and suffering, no matter how apparition-like, is very
real. Our own experience affirms their reality---let's not deny that. We
face the problem, we undergo suffering, and so far as the reality or the
concreteness of their existence is concerned, our experience speaks out.
There is no point in denying this. Therefore, just as in a dream, an
apparition-like agent can go through suffering and pain, which is also
like an apparition. However, one cannot ignore the effects of that
reality because our experience affirms its existence. So it is true that
by appreciating the apparition-like nature of things and events we can
better deal with the problem. The next verses read: (32) ---(If
everything is unreal like an apparition) then who is there to restrain
what (anger)? Surely (in this case) restraint would be inappropriate. It
would not be inappropriate, because (conventionally) I must maintain
That in dependence on restraining (anger) the stream of suffering is
severed. (33) So when seeing a human enemy or even a friend Committing
an improper action, By thinking that such things arise from conditions I
shall remain in a happy frame of mind. As far as the philosophy of
emptiness is concerned, it is extensively presented in the ninth chapter
of Shantideva's text.

Meditation

Let us do a meditation with a little bit of visualization. Imagine a
scenario where someone that you know very well, someone who is close or
dear to you loses his or her temper, either in a very acrimonious
relationship, or in a situation where something else is happening. This
person shows all signs of being in an intense state of anger or hatred,
loses all mental composure, creates very negative "vibes," even goes to
the extent of harming himself or herself and breaking things. Then
reflect upon the immediate effects of intense anger or hatred. The
reason why I think we should visualize this happening to others is
because it is easier to see the faults of others than to see our own
faults. So visualize this, and even see a physical transformation
happening to that person. This person whom you feel close to, whom you
like, the very sight of whom gave you pleasure in the past, now turns
into this ugly, ugly person, even physically speaking. This is a kind of
analytic meditation, so do this meditation and visualization for a few
minutes, in an analytical way, using your imaginative faculty. At the
end of it, relate that to your own experience. Then resolve, "I shall
never let myself fall under the sway of such intense anger and hatred.
Because if I do that, I will also be in the same position and suffer all
these consequences---lose my peace of mind, lose my composure, assume
this ugly physical appearance, and so on." Make that decision, and then
remain in an absorptive meditation on this conclusion. So the first part
is an analytic meditation, and the second stage is an absorptive
meditation. If one can use one's imaginative faculty and do this
visualization practice, it can be a very powerful and very effective
tool. For instance, in our day-to-day life we are exposed to many events
and scenarios, like television, films, and so on, in which there are
scenes of violence and sex, but it is possible to view them with an
underlying mindfulness of the effects of extremes, and, instead of being
totally overwhelmed by the sight, you can take these scenes as a kind of
indicator from which you can learn lessons. One of the Tibetan Kadampa
masters, Potowa, said that for a meditator who has a certain degree of
inner stability and realization, every experience comes as a teaching;
every event, every experience one is exposed to comes as a kind of
learning experience. I think this is very true.

QUESTIONS Q: Your Holiness, how can we balance our concern for the
interests of others with the need to cultivate our own inner qualities?
A: In terms of sequence, one has to take care of one's own inner
development first. This is also the principle behind the Lam Rim
approach of the three scopes, or three capacities. In this approach,
practice is graded into three stages, according to the motivation of the
individual. Each corresponds to a particular stage in the individual's
spiritual development. Even Buddha himself, when he gave public
teachings or sermons, did not begin with the teachings on bodhichitta.
Rather he began with the teachings on the Four Noble Truths. When he
gave the second public discourse, or turning of the wheel of the Dharma,
it was then that he spoke extensively about bodhichitta. However, so far
as the second and the third public discourses are concerned, it seems
there is no historical record of a chronological event; these teachings
might have been given to an audience of a select few. Q: Are all vices
only mental habits, and by applying the antidotes for each, are they
eliminated, or is this only the method aspect, and must it be used in
conjunction with discovering the inherent emptiness of existence? A: As
to your first question, if we examine the nature of our mental
afflictions in their present state, all of these cognitive and emotional
states are the results or products of their previous instance. There is
a kind of continuum. One can therefore say that they are products of
conditioning. From the Buddhist point of view, that conditioning factor
has to be understood not only within a single lifetime, but it also has
to be traced to previous lifetimes; that is, the rebirth theory has to
be taken into account. However, external or circumstantial conditioning
would also make a difference as to the intensity and degree of the
particular afflictive emotion. For instance we find that even within one
family, different children of the same parents each have their own
natural tendencies, which are products of their previous karma. As they
grow up, due to external conditioning and circumstances, certain types
of emotions will become stronger and others

weaker, and so on. So although the emotional afflictions are the results
of conditioning from previous lives and previous instances, there is
also an aspect of immediate or circumstantial conditioning as well. As
to the question of how our mental afflictions originate, from the
Buddhist point of view one has to accept the Buddha's explanation in
terms of the beginninglessness of consciousness. When talking about the
beginninglessness of consciousness, I don't personally think that there
is a possibility of coming up with an affirmative argument or reason.
Although one can explain it on the basis of tracing the substantial
continuum of consciousness, I don't think one can come up with a one
hundred percent affirmative proof in the sense of a logical deduction.
However, the strongest argument is that if we adopt a contrary position,
which is that there is a beginning, then we have to accept that either
there is an external creator, an agent, which also leads to problems, or
we have to accept some type of uncaused event, one which has no cause
and conditions. Again, that is logically incoherent and inconsistent. So
given the choice, the position that the continuum of consciousness is
beginningless seems to have fewer logical inconsistencies and
contradictions. It is on that basis that we will also have to accept the
origin of our negative tendencies. We cannot posit a beginning to these
habits or tendencies. However, it is also possible for some individuals
to have a high spiritual faculty or heightened consciousness enabling
them to look into their past lives, not necessarily to beginningless
time, but several lifetimes. That is possible. As far as the second part
of your question is concerned, there seems to be a consensus among all
Buddhist traditions that so far as the actual elimination of the
afflictive emotions and cognitive events is concerned, the application
of wisdom is necessary; it is indispensable. For example, even from the
perspective of a tradition which does not subscribe to the philosophy of
emptiness, or identitylessness of phenomena, meditating on love and
compassion can act as a direct antidote to anger and hatred. However, it
would not eliminate or eradicate them completely. In order for that to
be done, one needs to employ the faculty of wisdom, a realization of the
identitylessness of a person, or selflessness. The consensus among all

Buddhist traditions seems to be that there is a need to apply the wisdom
factor in order to root out these negative tendencies. In the Mahayana
traditions, this is very clear. In both the Yogachara (Mind-Only) school
and the Madhyamika (Middle Way) school, the eradication of both
obstructions, i.e., afflictions of the mind and obstructions to
knowledge, can be achieved only through generating insight into the
nature of emptiness, or selflessness. So insight into selflessness is
seen as the direct antidote to delusions, or afflictive emotions and
cognitive events, and insight into the ultimate nature of reality or the
ultimate emptiness of phenomena is seen as the direct antidote that
would root out the imprints and the residual potencies that are
implanted in one's psyche by the delusions. However, according to the
Prasangika Madhyamika school, the identitylessness of persons and the
identitylessness of phenomena are understood only in relation to the
subject or object which they qualify; there is no difference in terms of
their negation. Again, it is only by generating insight into the nature
of emptiness that one can cut the root of afflictive emotions and
thoughts. Q: In what ways do the images in dreams give significance and
illumination to our waking consciousness? A: As far as ordinary dreams
are concerned, generally speaking they are seen as an example of
something unreal. So, I don't think there is any need to take them too
seriously. Of course, there have been thinkers such as Jung and Freud
who have taken dreams very seriously. However, one cannot totally
dismiss one's dreams. It is possible that in some cases, due to the
aggregation of many factors, there could be significant indications in
dreams; some dreams can have great significance. Therefore, one cannot
dismiss all dreams. As for the details or specific techniques of
enabling one to have significant dreams, these can be found in the
practices of tantra, particularly in Highest Yoga Tantra. However, the
reason there is this emphasis on dream yoga practice, the practice
associated with dreams in Highest Yoga Tantra, is because the
application of certain techniques in dream states can have significant
impact on one's practices during the waking state. That's

the main reason. Another reason is that when you are in the dream state,
it allows you the opportunity, if you can use the techniques properly,
to be able to separate your subtle body from the gross levels of
corporal existence. Q: Since anger and other negative emotions arise
from causes and conditions and are not generated under our direct
control, how is it that we can directly generate intentions to practice
loving-kindness and other positive states? A: An analogy to this point
is that ignorance is quite natural. As we grow up, we are quite
ignorant. Then with education and learning we acquire knowledge and
dispel ignorance. On the other hand if we leave ourselves in an ignorant
state without consciously developing our learning, we won't be able to
dispel ignorance. In this case, when we talk about ignorance we are not
talking about it in the technical Buddhist sense, but rather as a state
of lack of knowledge. So if we continue in a natural state without
making an effort to dispel it, then its opposing factors or forces do
not come naturally. Similarly, in the case of anger and hatred, although
they arise naturally, in order to dispel or overcome them we have to
make a conscious decision and deliberately cultivate their antidotes
such as love and compassion. Because we gain from this endeavor we
should engage in it. In Buddhist terminology, nirvana, i.e., liberation
or freedom, is often described as "the other side" or "the beyond" and
our unenlightened state of samsara as "here and now." There is also a
sense that unenlightened individuals can only see their immediate
surroundings; they can only see what is obvious. Similarly, what is
implied is that many of the negative tendencies, delusory states of
mind, emotional afflictions, thoughts, and so on, which are the causes
of our own suffering, exist in samsara and they in some sense belong to
"this side," so they come quite naturally. On the other hand, most of
the positive qualities that need to be generated belong to "the other
side," "the beyond," the side of liberation and freedom and nirvana. So
unless we consciously develop them, these qualities will not arise
naturally.

If we are successful in "going beyond," we can adopt a perspective from
which many of the negative tendencies, the delusory states of mind, and
so forth, become the "other side." Q: If hatred comes in part from a
sense of having been wronged or being hurt, is it not less evil, less
negative, than doing harm coldly? Or is there always hatred beneath the
harm, as with the harm that has been done to the Tibetan people? A: That
is quite a complicated question. The first part is a very complicated
question, and I think one has to distinguish between many different
situations. Some harms can be inflicted without any sense of particular
hatred, but out of ignorance. For instance, we eat a lot of fish. And
when we fish, there is no feeling of a fish being a sentient or living
being. But there is no hatred. The killing is done out of ignorance.
Then there is another kind of killing, such as hunting for pleasure.
Again, there is no hatred. I think this is also mainly due to ignorance,
and perhaps it also involves greed. In addition, there are cases in
which killing or hunting are mainly a question of survival. So there are
a lot of differences. Then, I think the Nazis' extermination of the Jews
and other people in the concentration camps is yet another case. It is
possible that even in such extreme cases there may be a few individuals
involved who do not have a personal feeling of hatred. Because of this
complexity, and the complex nature of human actions, in the Buddhist
doctrine of karma we make distinctions between four principal categories
of action: actions which, though committed, are in some sense
motiveless; actions which have been committed only in motivation, but
are not fully executed; actions which have both full completion of the
motivation and execution; and those which are neither motivated nor
executed. There is also such a thing as "mercy killing." So between
ignorance-motivated killing and hatred-motivated killing, I would think
that killing motivated by hatred is graver and more negative. Even for a
given action, an act of killing, for instance, there may be different
degrees of negative karma accumulated by the person depending

on various factors that are complete or incomplete. For instance, you
can have an individual act of killing where a person has a very strong
desire to kill, a very strong negative emotion, and even the method of
killing is very cruel. If the killing is motivated out of hatred, then,
of course, the methods would be very cruel. Then at the conclusion of
the act, the killer could have some sense of satisfaction of having
accomplished it. In such a case, the negative karma that is accumulated
is considered to be the gravest. However, there are cases where there is
less strong emotion at the time of the motivation and the methods which
are used for killing are less cruel, and the person may feel regret at
the time that the killing is done. Under such circumstances, the
negative karma accumulated is considered to be comparatively less. In
addition, within the type of killing which is committed through hatred,
there can be various degrees of hatred. Hatred can be very subtle.
Further, if the murder is planned for many years, when it takes place,
there is no anger. But you can't say that in such cases there is no
hatred. There is hatred deep down. Yet at the very instant when the
action is committed, there is no strong emotion. There is a Tibetan
saying that the more sophisticated a person is, the more skillful the
person may be in hiding his or her feeling of hatred. So the angrier a
person is, or the more hateful a person is, the gentler the person will
appear. I don't know whether that is to be valued or not. Q: Would you
speak more on the purpose of life, please. It sounds frivolous for the
purpose of life to be joy and happiness. So much needs to be done, and
it all seems far from easy and happy. It seems selfish to be happy when
so many sad things are going on. A: I believe the purpose of life is
happiness. So what is happiness? There are many levels. The highest
happiness is Buddhahood; the state of Buddhahood is the most profoundly
happy state. The next happiest state is nirvana, being an Arhat in
nirvana. Of course, that state does not give one total satisfaction as
there are still some defects in the mind, but there is no longer any
suffering due to ignorance, so it is also one happy state of mind. Then
thinking about the next life and a good birth is also defined as
happiness. But in lower realms, there is more suffering and because of
that,

a rebirth into a lower realm is not desirable. We are trying to get to
the higher birth. Why? There is more happiness. But then, within this
life, I think the very existence of day-to-day life is very much alive
with hope, although there is no guarantee of one's future. There is no
guarantee that tomorrow at this time we will all be here. Still, we are
working for that purely on the basis of hope. Therefore, for these
reasons, I believe life is happiness; this is my belief. This is not
necessarily a selfish feeling. It is for serving others, and certainly
not for creating misery for them. Serving means not only to enjoy
happiness oneself, but also to help other people, other sentient beings,
have more happiness. I think that is the whole philosophy, the whole
basis. So happiness is not a simple thing. Q: Please elaborate on how
intelligence is a complementary factor for patience. A: When we go
through many of the techniques that are outlined in the text, we have to
use a lot of reasoning or analysis. This is what is meant by
intelligence being a complementary factor. So at a high level the
insight of wisdom can be of many different types. At a higher spiritual
level the complementary factor of wisdom could be that of insight into
the dynamic, momentarily changing nature of phenomena, or insight into
the ultimate nature of reality, and so on. These could serve as
complementary factors to one's practice of patience. Q: What is the
Buddhist position on abortion? A: Regarding birth control in general
Buddhists believe that human life is something precious, even though
there are a lot of people who are troublemakers! So, as far as
controlling this precious life is concerned, it is not advisable.
However, today there are too many precious lives---more than five
billion. This is the reality. There is also another dimension to the
question. The global economic gap between the "northerners" and the
"southerners" is not only morally wrong, but practically wrong as well.
If it continues it can be a source of problems. Because of the economic
gap, many refugees are coming to industrialized nations. That also
creates a lot

of problems, particularly in Europe. In America there may be fewer
problems because it is a vast land, although there is a lot of crime.
Therefore, we have to make every effort to reduce this gap. Then,
according to specialists, the natural resources simply do not exist to
provide the southerners with the standard of living that the northerners
are already enjoying, even with this population of five billion. So the
entire human population is now facing a problem. Logically, we have to
think very seriously about birth control. Generally speaking, abortion
is negative, for it is an act of killing. The other day I read about the
human rights of fetuses. That's very, very true from the Buddhist
viewpoint, because the unborn fetus is also considered to be sentient, a
living being. For instance, one of the root precepts or root vows of a
fully ordained monk or nun is not to kill another human being. If a
fully ordained monk or nun kills an unborn fetus, that constitutes
breaking the root vow. But then again, the basic Buddhist way of viewing
these things is that the most important thing is to judge according to
the circumstances. You may have a generalization, but always there will
be exceptional cases, which even include mercy killing. Of course,
generally speaking, abortion must be avoided. But under certain unique
circumstances abortion may be an understandable option. For example, if
the mother's and child's lives are at serious risk. Or if there would be
some negative serious consequences to the family. Similarly, on the
question of euthanasia, from the Buddhist viewpoint if keeping a patient
alive longer is very expensive, and if it would cause difficulty for the
remaining family, and if there is no hope so that the patient will
remain in a coma with no mental functioning, then it may be acceptable.
Of course if the family has enough money, and if they want to keep the
patient alive, it's their right. But if the circumstances are such that
it creates a lot of problems, then euthanasia, in such exceptional
cases, may be possible. Similarly abortion under particular
circumstances may be possible. But we have to judge on the spot,
case-by-case. That's the general Buddhist approach.

SECOND SESSION (34) If things were brought into being by choice, Then
since no one wishes to suffer, Suffering would not occur To any embodied
creature. (35) Through not being careful People even harm themselves
with thorns and other things, And for the sake of obtaining women and
the like They become obsessed and deprive themselves of food. In verses
34 and 35, Shantideva explains another way to deal with harm or injury
by developing a sense of indifference toward the actual perpetrator of
the crime or the aggressor. He suggests that in many cases, if one
examines the situation carefully one will find that many of these
actions are committed either out of ignorance or carelesssness or that
there is not much choice on the part of the other person. If this were
not the case, why would people also sometimes injure or hurt themselves?
So if one examines this situation carefully, one will see that many
harmful acts are caused not out of malicious intention, but out of
carelessness or a lack of sensitivity. (36) And there are some who
injure themselves Through the unmeritorious deeds Of hanging themselves,
leaping from cliffs, Eating poison and unhealthy food. (37) If, when
under the influence of disturbing conceptions, People will even kill
their treasured selves, How can they be expected not to cause harm To
the bodies of other living beings? In verse 37, Shantideva states that
if it is possible for individuals to injure themselves or cause harm to
themselves out of ignorance or carelessness, then it is also possible
that they would inflict harm on others in the same

manner. If they are prepared to inflict harm on themselves, it is very
possible that they would inflict harm on others as well. (38) Even if I
cannot develop compassion for all such people Who through the arisal of
disturbing conceptions Set out to try and kill me and so forth, The last
thing I should do is to become angry with them. So in verse 38, he
suggests that regarding those people who commit such acts of harm or
injury upon themselves and others, instead of feeling hateful or angry
toward them, the appropriate attitude that one should develop is
compassion. (39) Even if it were the nature of the childish To cause
harm to other beings, It would still be incorrect to be angry with them,
For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.
(40) And even if the fault were temporary In those who are by nature
reliable, It would still be incorrect to be angry, For this would be
like begrudging space for allowing smoke to rise in it. In the next
verses, Shantideva presents ways in which we can prevent the causes that
would normally give rise to anger within us. He states that if
inflicting harm upon others is in some sense an inalienable part of the
nature of a person, then there is no point in holding it against him or
her. After all, that person cannot help it. Harming others is that
person's essential nature. On the other hand, if it is not his or her
essential nature, but rather some sort of circumstantial phenomenon,
then when the person is in a fit of anger he or she is under the
influence of a circumstantial condition, for which there is no point in
holding him or her accountable.

In the former case, it is analogous to begrudging fire because it burns;
the ability to burn is part of the essential nature of fire. So to
begrudge fire for possessing that nature is quite pointless. In the
latter case, if one holds a grudge against sentient beings who are under
the influence of a circumstantial condition, then it is quite similar to
someone who begrudges clouds that overcast the sky. It is not the
essential nature of the sky to be overcast, but through circumstantial
conditions, sometimes the sky is obscured by clouds. (41) If I become
angry with the wielder Although I am actually harmed by his stick, Then,
since he too is secondary, being in turn incited by hatred, I should be
angry with his hatred instead. In verse 41, Shantideva points out
another method through which one can attempt to prevent the arisal of
anger or defuse the force of anger: by examining both the immediate and
long-term factors which gave rise to the particular act or injury. On
the one hand, we could say that it is the factor that directly causes
the pain that one should feel angry toward. If, for instance, someone
hits one with a stick, then it is in fact the stick toward which one
should direct one's anger. On the other hand, we could say that it is
the root or underlying cause that gives rise to the act with which one
should feel angry. In this case, since it is hatred which is the
motivating factor of the act, one should direct one's anger toward that
hatred. So why is it that we particularly select the intermediary
between the direct cause of our injury, which is the stick, and the
indirect, underlying cause, the hatred? We leave these two aside and
particularly select the intermediary, the person, and direct all our
anger against the person. Shantideva questions the whole rationale
behind this. (42) Previously I must have caused similar harm To other
sentient beings. Therefore it is right for this harm to be returned To
me who is the cause of injury to others.

Then in verse 42, he discusses the possibility of another consideration
or reflection on the same act, which is the act of injury caused by
someone hitting us with a stick. He points out that since all our
painful experiences are consequences of our own negative deeds committed
in the past, if one were to hold responsible all of the factors that
gave rise to that injury, then one should also include oneself because
after all it is due to one's own karmic deeds that one is suffering that
particular injury or harm. (43) Both the weapon and my body Are the
causes of my suffering. Since he gave rise to the weapon and I to the
body, With whom should I be angry? In verse 43, Shantideva observes that
it is through a combination of various factors and conditions that we
experience pain. For instance, in the case of someone hitting us with a
weapon, the contributing factors are the weapon which is wielded by the
other person and also our own body, because the very nature of the body
is that it has a capacity for feeling the pain of injury. Without the
body as a basis, an experience of pain or injury could not arise in the
first place. So, since both the other's weapon and my own body in
combination give rise to this injury and harm, why do I particularly
single out that other factor as the object of my anger? For example, if
you know that someone is speaking badly of you behind your back, and if
you react to that negativity with a feeling of hurt or anger, then you
yourself destroy your own peace of mind. One's pain is one's own
creation. There is a Tibetan expression that one should treat such
things as if they were wind behind one's ear. In other words, just brush
it aside. If one were to do that, one would protect oneself from that
feeling of hurt and agony. This shows that to a large extent whether or
not one suffers pain depends on how one responds to a given situation.
What makes a difference is whether or not one is too sensitive and takes
things too seriously. So from the Buddhist viewpoint, in our daily life
we are sometimes too sensitive toward minor things. At the same time,
toward other major problems that can create long-term consequences, we
are not so sensitive. Because of this, we find in the scriptures that
ordinary people like ourselves

are described as childlike or childish. In fact, the term jhipa (Tib.
byis pa), or childish, is used in different ways: sometimes it is used
in terms of age, which is the conventional usage; sometimes it is used
for ordinary sentient beings, as opposed to the Arya beings, the
superior beings. Then sometimes it is used to describe people who are
concerned only with affairs of this life and have no interest or regard
for the affairs of their future life, or life after death. So, the
tendency of our childish nature is to take small things too seriously
and get easily offended, whereas when we are confronted with situations
which have long-term consequences, we tend to take things less
seriously. (44) If in blind attachment I cling To this suffering abscess
of a human form Which cannot bear to be touched, With whom should I be
angry when it is hurt? In verse 44, Shantideva notes that so long as we
possess this aggregate, the mind-body composite, which is a product of
our karma and delusions, we are always prone to pain, suffering, and
dissatisfaction. (45) It is the fault of the childish that they are
hurt, For although they do not wish to suffer They are greatly attached
to its causes. So why should they be angry with others? (46) Just like
the guardians of the hell worlds And the forest of razor-sharp leaves,
So is this (suffering) produced by my actions; With whom therefore
should I be angry? In verse 45, Shantideva states that much of our pain
and suffering is caused by this childish nature, which makes us take
small things too seriously and remain indifferent to concerns that have
long-term implications and consequences. Therefore, since our pain and
suffering are,

in fact, of our own doing, why should we hold others responsible and
accountable for our experience of pain and suffering? For example, after
the Gulf War, many people blamed the conflict on Saddam Hussein. Based
on this same concept, on various occasions I said, "That's not fair."
Under such circumstances, I really feel sympathy toward Saddam Hussein.
Of course, he is a dictator, and of course, there are many other bad
things there, but without military equipment an army cannot cause harm.
All this equipment was not produced by them. So, when we look at it like
that, many nations were involved. But our normal tendency is to try to
blame it on another, an external factor. This tendency is to focus on
one single cause, and then try to exonerate oneself from responsibility.
So I think this mental practice is to look at it in a holistic way, to
see that there are many events involved. We cannot pinpoint
responsibility for what happened entirely on one person. As another
example, consider our problem with the Chinese. I think many
contributions were made from the Tibetan side that led to this tragic
situation. Perhaps our generation made some contributions, but
definitely the previous generations did, for at least a few generations'
time. So it is not fair to blame everything on China. So if we examine
any given situation in an unbiased and honest way, and also from a wide
perspective, then we realize that, to a large extent, we are also
responsible for the unfolding of events. (47) Having been instigated by
my own actions, Those who cause me harm come into being. If by these
(actions) they should fall into hell Surely isn't it I who am destroying
them? In verse 47, Shantideva points out that it is our negative karma
and deeds committed in the past that have caused the other person to
inflict that injury or harm on us. In addition, because of that negative
act, the person creates negative karma. So in a sense, we are causing
the downfall of the other person because we are, through our karma,
forcing the other person, the perpetrator of the crime or the aggressor,
to create negative karma. (48) In dependence upon them I purify many
evils

By patiently accepting the harms that they cause. But in dependence upon
me they will fall Into hellish pain for a very long time. (49) So since
I am causing harm to them And they are benefitting me, Why, unruly mind,
do you become angry In such a mistaken manner? In verses 48 and 49,
Shantideva observes that from one point of view, as pointed out earlier,
when the other person inflicts harm or injury upon one, that person is
accumulating negative karma. However, if one examines this carefully,
one will see that because of that very act, one is given the opportunity
to practice patience and tolerance. So from our point of view it is an
opportune moment, and we should therefore feel grateful toward the
person who is giving us this opportunity. Seen in this way, what has
happened is that this event has given another an opportunity to
accumulate negative karma, but has also given us an opportunity to
create positive karma by practicing patience. So why should we respond
to this in a totally perverted way, by being angry when someone inflicts
harm on us, instead of feeling grateful for the opportunity? (50) If my
mind has the noble quality (of patience) I shall not go to hell, But
although I am protecting myself (in this way) How will it be so for
them? At this point, two questions are raised. First, since it is the
case that when the other person inflicts harm on me I am giving that
person an opportunity to create negative karma, does that mean I will
also accumulate negative karma because I am causing the downfall of the
other person? Shantideva responds by saying no, because if one takes
that opportunity to respond in a positive way, to practice patience and
tolerance instead of accumulating negative karma, one will be
accumulating virtues or positive karma.

Second, if by inflicting injury upon me the other person has given me
this opportunity to practice patience and tolerance, and thereby allows
me to accumulate virtuous karma, does that mean that the person who has
inflicted the harm also accumulates virtuous karma? Shantideva responds
by suggesting that this is not the case because the result, the virtuous
karma of practicing patience and tolerance, will be established only in
the mind of the person who is practicing patience and tolerance. (51)
Nevertheless, should I return the harm It will not protect them either.
By doing so my conduct will deteriorate And hence this fortitude will be
destroyed. Shantideva states that if we respond to harm or injury
inflicted upon us by retaliating against the other person, then not only
will that act be of no use to the other person---in fact it will be
harmful to him or her---it will also be destructive so far as our own
interests are concerned. This is because if one is a practitioner of
bodhichitta, it will deteriorate one's bodhichitta practice.
Additionally, it will weaken the fortitude that one has built through
the practice of tolerance and patience. So it is destructive both for
the other and for oneself. When someone inflicts harm or injury upon us,
if instead of responding positively by developing patience and tolerance
we retaliate and take revenge upon him or her, then it will establish a
kind of vicious circle. If one retaliates, the other is not going to
accept that and he or she is going to retaliate, and then one will do
the same, and it will go on. When this happens at the community level,
it can go on from generation to generation in a vicious circle. So the
result is that both sides suffer. The whole purpose of life is spoiled.
For example, in the refugee camps, from childhood hate grows, and some
people consider that strong hatred good for the national interest. I
think this is very negative, very short-sighted. In our discussion
earlier, we talked about how to respond appropriately to physical injury
and harm inflicted by others, and how one should develop tolerance
toward them. However, it is important not to misunderstand and

think that Shantideva is saying that we should give in, or that we
should just meekly accept whatever is done against us. This is relevant
to one of the aspects of Buddhist practice that deals with generosity
and giving. We know that according to the Bodhisattva ideal, one's
generosity should be so developed that eventually, even if the situation
requires the Bodhisattva to sacrifice his or her own body, that
Bodhisattva will be able to do so. However, in this regard, a
sensitivity to the time factor is crucial. One should not do such
practices prematurely, before one has developed the appropriate
strength, realization, and so forth, at which one can practice in these
ways. So, sensitivity to the appropriateness of time is very important.
This is related to what I pointed out earlier: that for a minor purpose,
one should not give away or sacrifice something which has higher
potential. If this is the case, then of course Shantideva cannot
recommend to practitioners of bodhichitta that any harm others inflict,
physical injury and so forth, should be meekly accepted. Rather, if
necessary, the best and wisest course might be to simply run away, run
miles away! The reason I state that it is important to be sensitive to
the appropriateness of time, depending on the level of one's
realization, is because we find in the scriptures stories of great
meditators who have made such sacrifices. For example, in one of the
lives of the Buddha in the Jataka tales, he willingly accepts all of the
physical injury that is done to him by subjecting his body to be
severed, cut, mutilated, and so on. He did not avoid such situations
but, rather, faced them. This type of practice can be undertaken by
individuals who have reached higher levels of realization and know that
by doing so they might achieve a great purpose. What all these examples
point out is that it is essential, when one engages in practice, to be
able to weigh the circumstances, the long-term and shortterm
consequences, and the pros and cons of the situation. Generally
speaking, Vinaya, which is the category of scripture that deals with
ethics and monastic discipline, tends to be less flexible on ethical
questions than the Mahayana stance. Even there, Buddha taught about
various acts which would be universally proscribed or prohibited, and
then pointed out exceptional cases, under new circumstances, in which
the same act could be permitted. Similarly, he taught various universal
affirmative

precepts that his disciples must follow. Then, under certain
circumstances, he would give exceptions for certain individuals or for
specific times when there was no need to adhere to the precept. So, even
from the Vinaya standpoint, where there is less flexibility on these
issues, we again find a sensitivity to context and situation. We have
been discussing injury and harm mainly in terms of physical injury and
physical harm inflicted by others upon oneself, how to deal with them,
and how to respond appropriately toward such an act. In the next verses,
Shantideva talks about how to deal with types of injury which are not
physical, such as feelings of hurt caused by someone insulting or
belittling us. (52) Since my mind is not physical In no way can anyone
destroy it, But through its being greatly attached to my body It is
caused harm by (physical) suffering. (53) Since disrespect, harsh speech
And unpleasant words Do not cause any harm to my body, Why mind, do you
become so angry? In verses 52 and 53, Shantideva reminds us that mind is
not physical and talks about the relationship between the body and the
mind. And he asks, in the case of someone being disrespectful or using
harsh speech and insulting us and so on, since that person does not
cause any direct physical injury, why should the mind be angry toward
him or her? (54) ---Because others will dislike me--- But since it will
not devour me Either in this life or in another life Why do I not want
this (dislike)? Here Shantideva anticipates the defense that although it
is correct that insults and disrespect and so on do not cause any direct
physical injury or

harm, these will lead others to dislike me; therefore, I must feel angry
toward them. Shantideva argues that this is not an adequate ground on
which to feel angry toward such acts, because even if others dislike me
it is not going to cause any serious downfall to me in this lifetime or
in a future lifetime. On the contrary, if one responds to these acts by
others in a negative way, by losing one's temper and being angry, then
the end result is that one will lose oneself, because this response will
destroy one's peace and calmness of mind. It is we who stand to lose. So
here again Shantideva is not suggesting that we should act in a way that
totally disregards the opinions of others, or that we shouldn't care
about what other people think. One should not misunderstand Shantideva
as recommending that we act in that way. On the contrary, we find in the
Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life itself one verse in which
Shantideva states that whenever one moves into a new area or town, one
should learn the ways of the particular community, learn to live in a
way which will not offend the other people. This is because if one can
make others happy, then one will be in a better position to be of
service to them. That is one principle of a Bodhisattva. So one should
not misunderstand here, thinking that Shantideva is suggesting that we
should be totally negligent of others. What is being said is
contextualized; that is, in order to prevent the arising of anger toward
another's insult or disrespect, and so forth, one should think in this
manner. But this is a very specific context. (55) ---Because it will
hinder my worldly gain--- Even if I do not want this I shall have to
leave my worldly gains behind And my evil alone will remain unmoved. In
this verse, Shantideva anticipates another defense, the argument that we
might feel justified in retaliating against someone insulting us,
speaking badly of us, or belittling us, because these activities will
hinder our worldly gains, successes, and achievements: if we don't
retaliate against such acts, then they will obstruct our worldly
achievements. Shantideva says that this is not an adequate ground upon
which to retaliate against others' insults or belittling acts. After
all, even if such acts of others do hinder our worldly

gain, worldly gains are ultimately to be left behind. They are of
benefit and use only in this lifetime, but when one dies one has to
leave them behind, so they are not of that much importance. By
responding negatively to others' insults or belittling acts, for
instance if one loses one's temper and acts in a negative way, then the
negative karma which has been created by these acts is something that
one has to carry along with one, even into future lives. (56) Thus it is
better that I die today Than live a long but wicked life; For even if
people like me should live a long time, There will always be the
suffering of death. (57) Suppose someone should awaken from a dream In
which he experienced one hundred years of happiness, And suppose another
should awaken from a dream In which he experienced just one moment of
happiness; (58) For both of these people who have awoken That happiness
will never return. Similarly, whether my life has been long or short, At
the time of death it will be finished like this. (59) Although I may
live happily for a long time Through obtaining a great deal of material
wealth, I shall go forth empty-handed and destitute Just like having
been robbed by a thief. In these verses, Shantideva points out that
compared to someone living a long life based on material successes which
are acquired through wrong means of livelihood, it is better to die
today, because sooner or later one will die and the things that one has
acquired will be left behind. However, the negative fruits of the wicked
actions that one has committed will be carried over long into the
future. In any case, the temporary pleasure or happiness that one might
gain from living a materially successful life

through wicked means or wrong livelihood, at the time of death, no
matter how long one has lived that way, it becomes only an insignificant
object of memory, something like a past dream. There is no qualitative
difference between that and someone living a happy sort of life in a
single instant: once they are past, they are just like dreams. (60)
---Surely material wealth will enable me to live, And then I shall be
able to consume evil and do good--- But if I am angry on account of it
Will not my merit be consumed and evil increase? (61) And what use will
be the life Of one who only commits evil, If for the sake of material
gain He causes (the merits needed for) life to degenerate? Here
Shantideva anticipates another response by stating that someone might
feel, "Surely through acquiring material wealth I will not only live
more comfortably but will also gain the opportunity to do a lot of
wholesome deeds and earn merit from it. Because of this fact, surely I
am justified in retaliating against any act committed by another that
comes in the way of acquiring this wealth." Shantideva says that this
again is not an adequate ground for behaving in this way because when
one compares the opportunity for accumulating merit by engaging in
wholesome actions that is obtained through acquiring material wealth to
the negative karma one creates by retaliating against another person who
insults one and so forth, there is simply no comparison: the negative
actions far outweigh the few wholesome deeds one might engage in.
Therefore, it cannot justify retaliation against someone who insults or
belittles one. (62) ---Surely I should be angry with those Who say
unpleasant things that weaken other beings' (confidence in me)--- But in
the same way why am I not angry With people who say unpleasant things
about others?

(63) If I can patiently accept this lack of confidence Because it is
related to someone else, Then why am I not patient with unpleasant words
(about myself) Since they are related to the arisal of disturbing
conceptions? Here, Shantideva anticipates another defense by stating
that someone could say, "Surely when someone insults me, or is being
disrespectful, or speaks badly of me, I am justified in feeling angry
toward that person because this will cause others to lose confidence in
me." Shantideva argues that if this is truly justified, if this is the
case, then why should one not be angry toward other people speaking
badly of a third person? Then, one might respond to this by saying,
"Come on here, when someone is insulting a third person, it has nothing
to do with me."

Meditation For this session, let us do a meditation visualizing someone
whom you dislike, someone who annoys you, causes a lot of problems for
you, gets on your nerves. Imagine a scenario where the person irritates
you, does something that offends or annoys you. And, in your
imagination, when you visualize this, let your natural response follow,
flow. And then see whether that causes the rate of your heartbeat to go
up. See your mental feelings and whether there is an immediately
uncomfortable feeling, or if you develop even more peace. Judge and
investigate for three or four minutes. Then, for the last minute,
understand that it is of no use if we let the irritation develop:
immediately we lose our peace of mind. So say to yourself, "In the
future, I will never do this." Develop the determination and then relax
in absorptive meditation.

QUESTIONS

Q: Besides contemplating one's suffering, are there any other techniques
or antidotes to cultivate in order to work with pride? A: One antidote
is to reflect upon the diversity of disciplines. According to Buddhism,
one of the antidotes of pride is to reflect upon the multiple categories
one finds in the sutras, the various ways in which one can perceive
reality, and so on. Another example is the modern educational system, in
which there are multiple disciplines. Thinking about the many fields of
knowledge in which one is ignorant can help overcome pride. Q: What role
does forgiveness have in enhancing tolerance and patience? A:
Forgiveness is something like an end result, or a product, of patience
or tolerance. When one is truly patient and tolerant, then forgiveness
comes naturally. So they are very intimately connected. Q: What is the
position of women in Buddhism? We have all heard of the excesses,
prejudices, and outright misconduct with which women are treated in
Buddhism as well as in other religions. But Buddhist texts seem to speak
to a male point of view. Women seem to have a different set of social
and physical issues. Are there different practices, texts, etc., for
laywomen and nuns to assist us through the denser aspects of the path?
How does a nun's life differ from a monk's? A: It is very true that
because many of the Indian pundits whom we cite as authorities, as
sources for Buddhist literature and thought in Tibet, were male
practitioners, so often their writings reflect principally a male point
of view. The second point you raised is a little bit more complicated.
First, according to Vinaya rules, Buddha gave equal opportunities to
males and females. In the Vinaya Sutra, there is provision for full
ordination of both men and women. However, I think because of cultural
aspects the bhikshu is considered higher and the bhikshuni next. So from
that angle, there is an element of discrimination. Similarly in all
practices of the Bodhisattva and tantric vows, both male and female
practitioners are equal. There are, however, certain texts where

we find statements to the effect that a Bodhisattva who is in the final
stage of attending full enlightenment is necessarily in a male form.
According to the perspective of Highest Yoga Tantra, not only are there
equal opportunities on the path, but also any practitioner can attain
full enlightenment, in either the male or the female form. So there is
no distinction or discrimination there. However, it seems very clear
that in the Highest Yoga Tantra, special attention is paid to the rights
of women, because when listing the tantric vows in Highest Yoga Tantra,
not abusing or insulting women is counted as one of the root vows. The
reason for listing those, I think, is because at the societal level
there is some prejudice against women. So, particular attention is paid
to respecting a woman's dignity and rights. In fact, an ideal
practitioner of Highest Yoga Tantra is supposed to relate to women in a
special way. For a practitioner of the Mother Tantras, there is a
special emphasis: if there is no particular objection, then whenever one
meets a woman, it is suggested that one prostrate and pay homage. If one
cannot physically do that, one is supposed to pay homage mentally. On
the other hand, not abusing a male practitioner or insulting a man is
not counted as one of the root vows. What this indicates is that special
attention is paid according to the respect that is due. So I think
basically equal opportunity is there. However, because of the social
system, there is the danger of abuse or looking down on a female. So a
special emphasis is placed that I think clearly elucidates complete
equality. If one looks at it from the whole Bodhisattva approach, I
think it is quite equal. The Goddess Tara, I think, is one of the most
influential feminists. The legend of Tara shows that when she first
generated the altruistic intention to become fully enlightened for the
benefit of others, she made a resolution. Seeing that there were so many
Bodhisattvas who were male, and so many Bodhisattvas on the path were
male, and so many who had attained Buddhahood in the male form, she was
determined not only to generate bodhichitta in her present form as a
female, but also to retain the same female form while on the path, and
also to retain it when she became fully enlightened.

Q: Can you discuss the problem of self-hatred, and the Buddhist means to
alleviate it? A: In fact, when I first heard the word "self-hatred" and
was first exposed to the concept of self-hatred, I was quite surprised
and taken aback. The reason why I found it quite unbelievable is that as
practicing Buddhists, we are working very hard to overcome our
self-centered attitude, and selfish thoughts and motives. So to think of
the possibility of someone hating themselves, not cherishing oneself,
was quite unbelievable. From the Buddhist point of view, self-hatred is
very dangerous because even to be in a discouraged state of mind or
depressed is seen as a kind of extreme. Because self-hatred is far more
extreme than being in a depressed state, it is very, very dangerous. So
the antidote is seen in our natural Buddha-nature---the acceptance or
belief that every sentient being, particularly a human being, has
Buddhanature. There is a potential to become a Buddha. In fact,
Shantideva emphasizes this point a great deal in the Guide to the
Bodhisattva's Way of Life, where he states that even such weak sentient
beings as flies, bees, and insects possess Buddha-nature, and if they
take the initiative and engage in the path, they have the capacity to
become fully enlightened. If that is the case, then why not I, who am a
human being and possess human intelligence and all the faculties, if I
make the initiative, why can't I also become fully enlightened? So this
point is emphasized. In his text called Sublime Continuum, Maitreya
presents the Buddhist view on the doctrine of Buddha-nature. It states
that no matter how poor or weak or deprived one's present situation may
be, a sentient being never loses his or her Buddhanature. The seed, the
potential for perfection and full enlightenment, always remains. For
people who have the problem of self-hatred or self-loathing, for the
time being it is advisable that they not think seriously about the
suffering nature of existence or the underlying unsatisfactory nature of
existence. Rather they should concentrate more on the positive aspects
of existence, such as appreciating the potentials that lie within
oneself as a human being, the opportunities that one's existence as a
human being affords. In the traditional teaching, one speaks about all
the qualities of a fully endowed

human existence. By reflecting upon these opportunities and potentials,
one will be able to increase one's sense of worth and confidence. So
what is important here is, again, a very skillful approach, an approach
that is most suited and appropriate to one's own mental faculties,
disposition, and interests. As an analogy, suppose one needs to get
another person from one town to another quite far away, and suppose that
person is not very courageous. If one tells him or her about the
difficulties, then the person may feel totally discouraged and
disheartened or lose hope and think, "Oh, I'll never get there."
However, one can achieve the purpose through more skillful means,
leading that person step by step, first by saying, "Oh, let us go to
this town," and then once there, saying, "Oh, let's go to the other
town." This is also analogous to our educational system. Although our
aim may be to go to the university and get a higher education, we cannot
start right from there. We have to begin at the primary level, where we
start with the alphabet and so on. As one progresses, then one will go
to the next stage, and the next, and so on. In this way, one will be
able to reach the ultimate aim. Similarly, in the case of Dharma
practice, it is very important to adopt the methods most suited to one's
current condition. For instance, different people have different
temperaments: some people may be more arrogant and conceited, and they
should adopt a path or a method which is more suited to that type of
temperament. Some people may have stronger desire or anger, or whatever
it may be; then that type of person may have to look for a technique or
method which is more suited to that tendency. And some people may have
less courage and confidence in themselves, and such a person needs to
engage in an approach which is more suited to that type of temperament.
So we find that in Āryadeva's text called Four Hundred Verses, he talks
quite extensively about how best to lead a student along the path,
according to each mental disposition. In fact, there is a historical
precedent here. In Buddha's time there was a king who committed the
heinous crime of murdering his father. But he was totally overwhelmed by
his crime, and depressed. When Buddha visited him he made a statement
and said that parents are to be killed, but he didn't mean it literally.
Buddha was using parents as a kind of metaphor for desire and attachment
that lead to rebirth. Because karma and desire combine to create
rebirth, in some sense they are like parents. So in making that

statement that parents are to be killed, he meant that karma and desire
are to be eliminated. It is from the point of view of the importance of
being sensitive to the needs of individual practitioners that one should
understand Buddha's pronouncements in some of the sutras in which he
seems to accept even the theory of a self, or soul. Q: Recognizing the
nature of samsara will lead one to develop genuine renunciation. How
does one recognize the nature of samsara? Is it the amount of suffering
that causes one to develop renunciation, or is it recognizing the nature
of suffering that causes one to develop renunciation? A: Recognition of
suffering alone does not guarantee that you will generate genuine
renunciation. What is required, in addition, is the recognition of the
origin of suffering, and how it leads to suffering. Through the
combination of these two, realizing suffering and recognizing the origin
of suffering, one will be led to renunciation. It is stated that among
the three types of sufferings---obvious suffering, the suffering of
change, and the suffering of pervasive conditioning---the wish to get
rid of obvious suffering is something that even animals have
instinctively. That cannot be said to be renunciation. One can say that
it tends toward renunciation in that it seeks freedom from suffering,
but one cannot say it is genuine renunciation. Seeing the suffering of
change as the nature of suffering and developing the wish to be free
from it is something which even non-Buddhist meditators, whose primary
concern is to seek an absorbed meditative state of mind, can develop.
However, this is not the meaning of true renunciation as understood in
the Buddhist context. True renunciation has to be developed in relation
to the third level of suffering, in which one realizes the underlying,
unsatisfactory nature of existence, known as the suffering of pervasive
conditioning. When one develops that recognition, one is in fact getting
at the root because this recognition is based on the appreciation that
one's existence is a product of karma and delusions. So, as I pointed
out earlier, true renunciation must arise as a result of appreciating
the dynamic, transient nature of our existence. The

momentarily changing nature of phenomena indicates to us our lack of
ability to endure, the lack of self-empowerment, the lack of independent
status. These things are under the influence of other factors. In the
case of our aggregates, the factors that govern them are our karma and
delusions, and it is the realization of the negativeness of these causes
giving rise to our aggregates that reveals their true unsatisfactory and
suffering nature. This will lead to a genuine desire to seek freedom
from this particular type of existence. That is true renunciation. Even
here, I think that what is necessary in order to develop genuine
renunciation is for the individual to have some appreciation of the
possibility of freedom, in other words the possibility of attaining
nirvana or liberation. Otherwise, if one could develop true renunciation
by reflection on the nature of suffering alone, there would have been no
need for Buddha to talk about the Four Noble Truths. He could have
simply done away with talking about them. However, when we speak of
recognizing the nature of suffering, we have to bear in mind that one
can understand its nature in two ways. One is from the ultimate
perspective, where we are talking about emptiness, which is the ultimate
nature of the reality of suffering. But this is not the understanding we
speak of when we discuss the nature of suffering in the context of
generating renunciation. Here, we are using more conventional terms. Q:
If the goal is to get rid of emotions, or be free of emotions, how can
we feel compassion? Isn't compassion an emotion? A: You might be
interested in hearing about a discussion I had with some scientists. We
were talking about how one would define emotion. In the end we all
agreed that even at the stage of Buddhahood, we can say that there are
emotions. So from that point of view, one could definitely say that
compassion is also an emotion. Emotion is not necessarily something
negative. Within emotion, there is both destructive emotion and
constructive emotion. So what we should do is eliminate the destructive
emotion. Q: Is it possible for a professed Christian to also take a
Buddhist vow? I am a very committed Christian, indeed an ordained
person, and yet there seems

a compatibility and congruence in my understanding of the teaching of
Jesus and that of the Buddhist path of spirituality which would allow
assent to both, and practice of both Buddhism and Christianity, as they
are pointed toward light, the path of truth, love, and freedom. One of
the teachers in my life has been Thomas Merton, a Catholic priest and
monk, and a practitioner of Buddhism. A: Of course, there are many
common elements among all major world religious traditions. Therefore, I
believe, at the initial stage one person can practice both Buddhism and
Christianity simultaneously, and perhaps some other religions as well. I
think this is very good. But the question is when one reaches further.
Then it is like in the field of education: when one becomes a
specialist, then one has to choose one particular field. In the further
practice of Buddhism, when one reaches a certain stage, the realization
of emptiness is one of the key aspects of the path. The concept of
emptiness and the concept of an absolute Creator, I think, are difficult
to put together. On the other hand, for the Christian practitioner, the
Creator and the acceptance of the Creator as almighty, is a very
important factor within that tradition in order to develop
selfdiscipline, compassion, or forgiveness and to increase them in one's
intimate relationship with God. That's something very essential. In
addition, when God is seen as absolute and almighty, the concept that
everything is relative becomes a little bit difficult. However, if one's
understanding of God is in terms of an ultimate nature of reality or
ultimate truth, then it is possible to have a kind of unified approach.
Then if we try to make a new interpretation, the concept of Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, I think might be compared to the sambhogakaya,
nirmanakaya, and dharmakaya, the three kayas. However, once one begins
to interpret the Trinity in terms such as the three-kaya doctrine, then
whether that practice truly remains Christian becomes quite
questionable. As to one's personal religion, I think this must be based
on one's own mental disposition. That is very important. So I tell
people that as a Buddhist monk I find Buddhism is most suitable to me.
This does not mean Buddhism is best for everyone. That is clear. For
other people, the Christian, Muslim, or Jewish tradition, a tradition
which is based on Creator

theory, is more effective, that's certain. So it is very, very important
to follow religion according to one's own mental disposition. Then
another thing I am always trying to make clear is that changing religion
is not a simple task. For example, here in the West, for most of you,
your family background and your traditional background are Christian. So
I want to warn you that changing religion is very complicated and
difficult. Of course, for those individuals who are truly atheists, it
doesn't matter if you have more attraction toward Buddhism. Then, good,
you should take Buddhism as your religion; that is better than remaining
an atheist. Usually I call these people "extreme atheists" because from
a certain viewpoint Buddhism is also a kind of atheism. I think it's
better than remaining an extreme atheist. So that is clear. But then,
for those people who have some religious feeling according to your own
tradition, then you must be very careful when considering changing.
Generally speaking, I think it is better to practice according to your
own traditional background, and certainly you can use some of the
Buddhist techniques. Without accepting rebirth theory or the complicated
philosophy, simply use certain techniques to increase your power of
patience and compassion, forgiveness, things like that. Also, I think
one important thing is single-pointedness meditation, in which there is
interest among our Christian brothers and sisters. I have found that in
the Greek Orthodox Church it is called "mysticism." So there are, of
course, things you can adopt. But otherwise, if you hurriedly change
your religion, then after some time you may find some difficulties and
some confusion. Therefore, be very careful. An important thing to
remember is that once you change your personal religion, there is a
natural tendency, in order to justify your newly adopted religion, to
take a critical view toward your previous religion. This is very
dangerous. Although your previous religion may be unsuitable or
ineffective for you, at the same time, millions of people may still get
benefit from that tradition. So we must respect each other's individual
rights. If it is their belief, and millions of people get their
inspiration from it, we must respect that. And there are many reasons to
do so.

DAY THREE

FIRST SESSION Next, Shantideva explains how we should deal with anger
and hatred that might arise in us in relation to someone who is
destroying something that belongs to us. Up to this point, he has dealt
with harm and injury inflicted on oneself; from this point onward, he
discusses how to deal with harm inflicted on something that is "mine."
(64) Should others talk badly of or even destroy Holy images,
reliquaries and the sacred Dharma, It is improper for me to resent it
For the Buddhas can never be injured. In verse 64, Shantideva talks
about how a Buddhist might try to justify being angry and hateful toward
someone who is destroying images of the Buddha or performing
sacrilegious deeds such as destroying reliquaries or sacred images, and
so forth. For a Buddhist, these are very dear to the heart, very
precious. One might try to justify developing hatred toward someone who
desecrates these objects by saying that it is for the sake of the
Dharma. Shantideva says that this is not the appropriate response,
because in reality what is happening is that one is responding because
one cannot bear it. But so far as the sacred objects themselves are
concerned, they cannot be harmed. (65) I should prevent anger arising
toward those Who injure my spiritual masters, relatives, and friends,
Instead I should see, as in the manner shown before,

That such things arise from conditions. Then in verse 65, Shantideva
says that developing hatred toward someone who hurts one's spiritual
masters, relatives, or friends also is not appropriate. This is because,
even in these cases, the harm inflicted on these people happens partly
because of the karmic deeds they have performed in the past. On top of
that, in some cases there are also circumstantial conditions involved.
If someone is harming one's friend, it may have something to do with the
behavior of that friend---some act of his or hers may have led to the
other person causing him or her harm. So one should take these factors
into account and not feel hatred. (66) Since embodied creatures are
injured By both animate beings and inanimate objects, Why only bear
malice to the animate? It follows that I should patiently accept all
harm. In verse 66, Shantideva reflects that since, so far as the factors
that are involved in causing harm and injury are concerned, as pointed
out earlier, there are both animate and inanimate objects. However, why
is it that we specifically single out animate objects and hold them
accountable or bear malice toward them? (67) Should one person
ignorantly do wrong And another ignorantly become angry (with him) Who
would be at fault? And who would be without fault? Here, he shows a
symmetry of the two sides. If someone does harm to one or to one's
friends, then that person is doing so principally out of ignorance of
the consequences of his or her act. Then if one were to lose one's
temper and be angry toward that person, again one would be developing
anger out of ignorance. So there is a kind of symmetry between the two
acts, and if that is the case, who would be at fault? Who is in the

right and who is in the wrong? Both the person who is causing the harm
and the person who is being angry are in the same category. (68) Why did
I previously commit those actions Because of which others now cause me
harm? Since everything is related to my actions Why should I bear malice
toward these (enemies)? In this verse, Shantideva responds to a defense
one might use which is quite understandable, that someone might try to
justify being angry toward another person and saying that these are two
different situations: "In the first place, I was just minding my own
business. I didn't provoke the other person, and that other person,
without any provocation, did this harm to me. So we are not in the same
situation. Therefore, my responding with anger is justified." Shantideva
says in this circumstance one hasn't really thought it through enough.
If one examines it carefully, one will see that ultimately one is
responsible because it is one's own karma that has given rise to this
situation. So one cannot say, "I am completely innocent in this
situation." (69) When I have seen this to be so, I should strive for
what is meritorious (In order to) certainly bring about Loving thoughts
between all. In verse 69, Shantideva concludes that by thinking along
the lines he has developed earlier, one should resolve, "From now onward
I will do my best to ensure that I live in harmony and peace and have
loving thoughts when interacting with others. I will do my best not only
to ensure that I remain that way, but to ensure that others also do so."
(70) For example, when a fire in one house Has moved into another house,
It is right to get rid of straw and such things That will cause the fire
to spread.

(71) Likewise when the fire of hatred spreads To whatever my mind is
attached to, I should immediately get rid of it For fear of my merit
being burned. In these two verses, Shantideva emphasizes the importance
of dealing with attachment, which is the root, essentially, of hatred
and anger. He gives the example that if one finds one's house is on
fire, then one should try immediately to throwaway all burning straw in
order to ensure that this fire does not spread to other houses.
Similarly, when the fire of hatred spreads then it will spread because
of this fuel of attachment, so what one should be trying to do is
getting rid of attachment. Generally speaking, in Mahayana literature
such as Shantideva's Compendium of Deeds, which presents the Bodhisattva
ideals or way of life, we find an emphasis on the importance of dealing
with hatred, how to defend oneself against it and how to eliminate it.
However, he mentions that there are exceptional situations in which
attachment could be of assistance to the Bodhisattva who is working for
the benefit of others. Even though this is the case, in general it is
attachment or desire which is at the root of hatred. The difference
between hatred and attachment is that hatred, when it arises, is very
destructive, very rough; it immediately has an extremely disturbing
quality. This is not so much the case with attachment, which has more
gentleness. However, attachment also is at the root of hatred, so in
order to totally eliminate hatred one must also deal with attachment. It
is important to be clear on this position that although attachment can
be of aid or assistance to the Bodhisattva when working for the benefit
of others, this is not due to the nature of attachment, but rather due
to the sophistication of the skillful means which the Bodhisattva can
apply in utilizing attachment for the benefit of others. However, one
must be clear about the fundamental stand that attachment is at the root
of our unenlightened existence. It is also very clear that many of the
conflicts and arguments that one finds, even within the family, are very
much based on strong attachment. So we find that there are different
types of attachment in relation to different objects: attachment toward
form, appearance, sound, smell, tactile

sensations, and so on. All of these individually are powerful enough to
cause a lot of problems and difficulties. However, the strongest form of
attachment seems to be sexual attachment. Where the scripture describes
this particular type of attachment, we find attachment toward all the
five senses involved. Therefore, it is all the more powerful and has
this potential for problems and destruction. I wonder, however, where
the attachment to money belongs, because one cannot say one is attached
to the appearance of the form of the money, nor that one is attached to
the beautiful sound of it. With money one can acquire a lot of the
objects of desire, so maybe it is through that aspect that attachment to
money becomes so powerful. Here it is relevant to discuss intergender
relationships. I see two principal types of relationships based on
sexual attraction. One form is pure sexual desire in which the motive or
impetus is temporary satisfaction, a sort of immediate gratification.
Then, based on that, individuals form a relationship, but I think it is
not very reliable or stable because the individuals are relating to each
other not as people, but rather as objects. However, there is a second
type of relationship based on sexual attraction in which the attraction
is not predominantly physical. Rather there is an underlying respect and
appreciation of the value of the other person, based on one's feeling
that the other person is kind, nice, and gentle. One can therefore
accord respect and dignity to that other individual. Any relationship
which is based on that will be much more long-lasting and also more
appropriate. In order to establish that form of relationship, it is
crucial for the individuals to have enough time to get to know one
another as people. So when each person has enough time to get to know
the other at the personal level, to know each other's basic
characteristics, then any relationship based on that will be much more
reliable and long-lasting. So one could say that in the second type
there is some genuine compassion involved in the formation of that
relationship. There is a sense of responsibility, because there is a
sense of commitment toward each other, whereas in the former case these
factors are lacking. There is just temporary satisfaction. As I
mentioned earlier, within oneself, within each single person, one finds
many inconsistencies and contradictions. Sometimes the disparity

between one's thoughts early and late in the day is so great that one
spends all one's energy trying to figure out how it can be resolved.
This can lead to headaches. So naturally, between two persons, between
parents and children, between brothers and sisters, there are
differences. Conflict and disagreements are bound to happen. Given that
there are bound to be disagreements, conflicts, contradictions, how do
we deal with them, how do we face them? If we have confidence in our
capacity for reconciliation then we will be able to deal with these
situations. (72) Why is a man condemned to death not fortunate If he is
released after having his hand cut off? Why am I who am experiencing
human misery not fortunate If by that I am spared from (the agonies of)
hell? (73) If I am unable to endure Even the mere sufferings of the
present, Then why do I not restrain myself from being angry, Which will
be the source of hellish misery? In these two verses, Shantideva
explains that by not being angry and developing hatred in response to
harm caused by others, what one is gaining is protection from potential
undesirable consequences that might otherwise come about. Because if one
responds to such situations with anger and hatred, not only does it not
protect one from the injury that has already been done, but on top of
that one creates an additional cause for one's own suffering in the
future. However, if one responds without anger and hatred and develops
patience and tolerance, then although one may face temporary discomfort
or injury, that temporary suffering will protect one from potentially
dangerous consequences in the future. If this is the case, then by
sacrificing small things, by putting up with small problems or
hardships, one will be able to forgo experiences of much greater
suffering in the future. An example Shantideva uses here is that if a
convicted prisoner can save his life by sacrificing his arm as a
punishment, wouldn't that person feel grateful for that opportunity? By
accepting the pain and suffering of having his arm cut off, that person
will be saving himself from death, which

is a greater suffering. Shantideva adds that there is another advantage:
not only will one be protected from potentially dangerous consequences
in the future, but also by experiencing the pain and suffering which has
been caused temporarily by others, one is exhausting the karmic
potentials of negative karma which one has accumulated in the past. So
it serves two purposes. Patiently accepting small hardships also gives
one the opportunity to apply other practices. One could make
aspirational prayers and the dedication, "By my experience of this
suffering, may I be able to purify my negativities committed in the
past." One can also use the opportunity for the practice of tong-len,
which is the Mahayana practice of "giving and taking." For that, when
one undergoes the experience of pain and suffering one thinks, "May my
suffering substitute for all similar types of suffering that sentient
beings may have to undergo. May I, by experiencing this, be able to save
all other sentient beings from having to undergo the same suffering." So
in this way one takes others' suffering upon oneself and uses the
experience of hardship as an opportunity for this type of practice as
well. This advice is especially useful when dealing with illnesses. Of
course it is important, first of all, to take all the preventative
measures so one does not suffer from illnesses, such as adopting the
right diet, or whatever it may be. Then when one becomes ill, it is
important not to overlook the necessity for taking the appropriate
medications and other measures necessary for healing. However, there
would be an important difference in how one responded to illness if
instead of moaning about the situation, instead of feeling sorry for
oneself, instead of being overwhelmed by anxiety and worry, one saved
oneself from these unnecessary additional mental pains and suffering by
adopting the right attitude. Although it may not succeed in alleviating
the real physical pain and suffering, one can think, "May I, by
experiencing this pain and suffering, be able to help other people and
save others who may have to go through the same experience." One can in
this way use that opportunity for a spiritual practice, in other words,
practicing tong-len meditation, or "giving and taking." This type of
practice, although it might not necessarily lead to a real cure in
physical terms, can definitely protect one from unnecessary additional
mental suffering and pain. And on top of that, it is also possible that
instead of being saddened by the

experience one can see it as a kind of privilege. One can see it as an
opportunity and in fact be joyful because of this particular experience
which has made one's life richer. Sometimes due to misunderstanding the
doctrine of karma one has a tendency to blame everything on karma and
try to exonerate oneself from responsibility or from the need to take
personal initiative. One could quite easily say, "This is due to my
negative past karma. What can I do? I am helpless." This is a totally
wrong understanding of karma, because although one's experiences are a
consequence of one's past deeds, that does not mean that one has no
choice, nor that there is no room for initiative to bring about change.
This is the same in all areas of life. One should not become passive and
try to excuse oneself from having to take personal initiative on the
grounds that everything is a result of karma. If we understand the
concept of karma properly, we will understand that karma means "action,"
and it is a very active process. When we talk of karma or action, it
entails action committed by an agent, in this case, oneself, in the
past. So what type of future will come about, to a large extent, lies
within one's own hands and can be determined by the kind of initiatives
that one takes now. Not only that, but karma should not be understood in
terms of a passive, static kind of force, but rather in terms of an
active process. This indicates that there is an important role for the
individual agent to play in determining the course of the karmic
process. Consider, for instance, a simple act like fulfilling our need
for food. In order to achieve that simple goal one must take action on
one's own behalf: one needs to look for food, to prepare it, to eat it.
This shows that even a simple act, even a simple goal is achieved
through action. (74) For the sake of satisfying my desires I have
suffered numerous burnings in hell, But by those actions I fulfilled the
purpose Of neither myself nor others. (75) But now since great meaning
will accrue From harm which is not even (a fraction) of that, I should
indeed be solely joyful

Toward such suffering that dispels the harms of all. In these verses,
Shantideva explains that the hardships, pain, and suffering that one has
to undergo in the process of working for the benefit of others, and also
in the process of developing patience and tolerance, are almost
insignificant when compared to the suffering in lower realms. The forms
of suffering which are involved in working for others, through learning
or through training, one can definitely put up with.

Meditation Let us meditate on compassion by visualizing a sentient being
who is suffering from acute pain or is in a very unfortunate situation.
Then try to relate that being to yourself and think that he or she has
the same capacity as you do for experiencing pain, joy, happiness, and
suffering. Then simply focus on the unfortunate state of that being's
existence, on the intense suffering, and try to develop a natural
feeling of compassion toward that sentient being. Let the natural
compassion arise in you toward that sentient being. As before, let us
use the first three minutes of the meditation session in a more analytic
fashion, thinking about the suffering, its unfortunate state, and so on.
Then try to arrive at a conclusion, thinking, "How strongly I wish that
sentient being to be free from that suffering," and, "I will help
relieve that sentient being from that suffering." Then place your mind
single-pointedly on that kind of resolution. Generally speaking, when we
talk about meditation there are two principal types. In one type, you
take something as your object of meditation. For example in the case of
meditation on impermanence, or meditation on emptiness, you are not
generating your mind in the nature of that but rather taking
impermanence and emptiness as an object and focusing your mind on that.
The other principal type of meditation is one in which you generate your
mind into a particular state. For instance, in a meditation on love and
compassion you don't take compassion and love as

an object of meditation, but rather you try to generate your mind in a
loving state or in a compassionate state. I think it is important to
understand that when you develop compassion, by definition you are
trying to share the suffering of other sentient beings. From that point
of view, you are taking upon yourself additional pain or suffering.
There is that element. Because of that, the immediate feeling or
sensation within that experience may involve a certain degree of
discomfort. However, underlying that, one must have a very high degree
of alertness because you are voluntarily and deliberately, for a higher
purpose, accepting and taking upon yourself another's suffering. This is
very different from the situation in which you think about your own
suffering and feel totally overwhelmed by it, where you are burdened by
it to the point that your faculties have become numb and dull. The
feeling of discomfort that one experiences when taking on others'
suffering in generating compassion has an underlying alertness, a sense
of deliberation. Therefore, the more suffering you take upon yourself
from others, the greater the power of your alertness and determination.
So this is a point one has to bear in mind. One should not misunderstand
stories such as that of the great Tibetan Kadampa master Langri Tangpa,
who was a great meditator on compassion and love. He was said to be
always weeping and in fact was nicknamed "the Weeping Lama." However,
this should not be misunderstood, because the very purpose for which
that great master found himself weeping all the time was for a state of
happiness, total joy, both for others and himself. This state is called
sugata, which literally means "going to the realm," "going beyond," and
is a state of joy and total peace. So Langri Tangpa was not weeping
because he wanted to go to a state of suffering, but rather because he
wanted to go to, and lead others to, a state of happiness and joy.

QUESTIONS Q: Please explain the relationships between fear and hatred,
and fear and patience.

A: There are many different types of fear. Some fear is genuine, based
on valid reasons, and some fear is simply our own mental creation. I
think that the second type of fear results from long-term negative
consequences and is a state of suffering. Fear of one's own negative
emotions, I think, is a valid kind of fear. Fear of others due to one's
own negative state of mind can appear to those others as hostility. Due
to that, sometimes there is a kind of fear which can be very related to
hatred. Fear and patience, I don't know. Q: Instead of learning to deal
with other people's anger, why not simply avoid being with angry people?
A: This is very true. In fact the practitioner, at the initial stage,
chooses an isolated place. However this is not a long-term solution;
it's a temporary method. While one remains isolated, one must develop
inner strength so that when one returns to society, one is already
equipped. Someone who totally isolates himself or herself from society
and avoids interacting with other people, then spends a whole lifetime
in meditation in a solitary retreat, may become an Arhat, which is
described as the one who is like a rhinoceros. Q: What evidence do we
have that Buddha-nature exists? How do we know that everyone has this?
And that we have it ourselves? A: First, in Buddhist thought, one of the
reasons is that the ultimate nature of mind is its nonsubstantiality,
which the Buddhists call emptiness. The apprehension of the intrinsic
reality of our mind is thus an illusion, a distorted state of mind which
has no grounding in reality, and therefore it can be eliminated and
removed. This is a fact which can be understood by inference without
relying on scriptural authority. However, this requires not just an
intellectual or inferential understanding alone, but must be combined
with meditative experience. So through the combination of inferential,
intellectual understanding and meditative experience, we can arrive at
the knowledge that the ultimate nature of mind is empty, and the
delusory states which are rooted in the apprehension of an intrinsic
existence of mind can be eliminated.

It is also possible to come quite close to an understanding that the
essential nature of mind is pure by focusing one's attention on the fact
that when we talk of consciousness, what is characteristic of it is that
consciousness is in the nature of mere experience. It is not physical,
it is not material, but it is in the nature of mere experience, or
luminosity. That fact is something that one can also understand, not
necessarily fully but to a large extent, through inference as well.
However, the full understanding of the essential nature of mind being
pure and being mere luminosity may require one to rely on scriptural
authority because it requires being able to distinguish between various
levels of mind. These are explained in terms of four different stages of
subtle mind culminating in the very subtle consciousness, which is known
as the "clear light" nature of mind. It is quite difficult to say that
these can be understood fully through reason without relying on
scripture. What is important here is the level of one's own experience
in arriving at a certain degree of understanding. One does find in the
Vajrayana literature metaphorical reasoning which attempts to establish
the existence of what are known as "the eighty conceptions which are
indicative of the subtle states of mind," and how they relate to the
four stages of the subtle mind. However, I personally feel that it is
quite difficult to fully arrive at the conclusion through mere logic and
reasoning. We also find in Maitreya's Sublime Continuum the argument
that the reason we all possess this innate desire to seek happiness and
avoid suffering is because it is possible to overcome suffering and
attain happiness. There he tries to point toward existence of
Buddha-nature. Q: What do you think about Dharma teachers who speak and
write about Dharma beautifully, but do not live it? A: Because Buddha
knew of this potential consequence, he was very strict in prescribing
the qualities that are necessary for a person to be qualified as a
teacher. Nowadays, it seems, this is a serious issue. First, on the
teacher's side: the person who gives some teaching or gives talks on
Dharma must have really trained, learned, and studied. Then, since the
subject is not history or literature, but rather a spiritual one, the
teacher must gain some experience. Then when that person talks about a
religious subject with some

experience, it carries some weight. Otherwise, it is not so effective.
Therefore, the person who begins to talk to others about the Dharma must
realize the responsibility, must be prepared. That is very important.
Because of this importance, Lama Tsongkhapa, when he describes the
qualifications that are necessary for an individual to become a teacher,
quotes from Maitreya's Ornament of Scriptures, in which Maitreya lists
most of the key qualifications that are necessary on the part of the
teacher, such as that the teacher must be disciplined, at peace with
himself, compassionate, and so on. At the conclusion, Lama Tsongkhapa
sums up by stating that those who wish to seek a spiritual teacher must
first of all be aware of what the qualifications are that one should
look for in a teacher. Then, with that knowledge, seek a teacher.
Similarly, those who wish to seek students and become teachers must not
only be aware of these conditions, but also judge themselves to see
whether they possess these qualities, and if not, work toward possessing
them. Therefore, from the teachers' side, they also must realize the
great responsibility involved. If some individual, deep down, is really
seeking money, then I think it is much better to seek money through
other means. So if the deep intention is a different purpose, I think
this is very unfortunate. Such an act is actually giving proof to the
Communist accusation that religion is an instrument for exploitation.
This is very sad. Buddha himself was aware of this potential for abuse.
He therefore categorically stated that one should not live a way of life
which is acquired through five wrong means of livelihood. One of them is
being deceptive and flattering toward one's benefactor in order to get
maximal benefit. Now, on the students' side, they also have
responsibility. First, you should not accept the teacher blindly. This
is very important. You see, you can learn Dharma from someone you accept
not necessarily as a guru, but rather as a spiritual friend. Consider
that person until you know him or her very well, until you gain full
confidence and can say, "Now, he or she can be my guru." Until that
confidence develops, treat that person as a spiritual friend. Then study
and learn from him or her. You also can learn through books, and as time
goes by, there are more books available. So I think this is better. Here
I would like to mention a point which I raised as early as thirty years
ago about a particular aspect of the guru-disciple relationship. As we

have seen with Shantideva's text Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life,
we find that in a particular context certain lines of thought are very
much emphasized, and unless you see the argument in its proper context
there is a great potential for misunderstanding. Similarly, in the
guru-disciple relationship, because your guru plays such an important
role in serving as the source of inspiration, blessing, transmission,
and so on, tremendous emphasis is placed on maintaining proper reliance
upon and a proper relationship with one's guru. In the texts describing
these practices we find a particular expression, which is, "May I be
able to develop respect for the guru, devotion to the guru, which would
allow me to see his or her every action as pure." I stated as early as
thirty years ago that this is a dangerous concept. There is a tremendous
potential for abuse in this idea of trying to see all the behaviors of
the guru as pure, of seeing everything the guru does as enlightened. I
have stated that this is like a poison. To some Tibetans, that sentence
may seem a little bit extreme. However, it seems now, as time goes by,
that my warning has become something quite relevant. Anyway, that is my
own conviction and attitude, but I base the observation that this is a
potentially poisonous idea on Buddha's own words. For instance in the
Vinaya teachings, which are the scriptures that outline Buddha's ethics
and monastic discipline, where a relationship toward one's guru is very
important, Buddha states that although you will have to accord respect
to your guru, if the guru happens to give you instructions which
contradict the Dharma, then you must reject them. There are also very
explicit statements in the sutras, in which Buddha states that any
instructions given by the guru that accord with the general Dharma path
should be followed, and any instructions given by the guru that do not
accord with the general approach of the Dharma should be discarded. It
is in the practice of Highest Yoga Tantra of Vajrayana Buddhism where
the guru-disciple relationship assumes great importance. For instance,
in Highest Yoga Tantra we have practices like guru yoga, a whole yoga
dedicated toward one's relation to the guru. However, even in Highest
Yoga Tantra we find statements which tell us that any instructions given
by the guru which do not accord with Dharma cannot be followed. You
should

explain to the guru the reasons why you can't comply with them, but you
should not follow the instructions just because the guru said so. What
we find here is that we are not instructed to say, "Okay, whatever you
say, I will do it," but rather we are instructed to use our intelligence
and judgment and reject instructions which are not in accord with the
Dharma. However, we do find, if we read the history of Buddhism, that
there were examples of single-pointed guru devotion by masters such as
Tilopa, Naropa, Marpa, and Milarepa which may seem a little extreme. But
we find that while these masters, on the surface, may look like outcasts
or beggars, or they may have strange behaviors which sometimes lead
other people to lose faith, nevertheless when the necessity came for
them to reinforce other people's faith in the Dharma and in themselves
as spiritual teachers, these masters had a counterbalancing factor---a
very high level of spiritual realization. This was so much so that they
could display supernatural powers to outweigh whatever excesses people
may have found in them, conventionally speaking. However, in the case of
some of the modern-day teachers, they have all the excesses in their
unethical behaviors but are lacking in this counterbalancing factor,
which is the capacity to display supernatural powers. Because of this,
it can lead to a lot of problems. Therefore, as students, you should
first watch and investigate thoroughly. Do not consider someone as a
teacher or guru until you have certain confidence in the person's
integrity. This is very important. Then, second, even after that, if
some unhealthy things happen, you have the liberty to reject them.
Students should make sure that they don't spoil the guru. This is very
important. Q: With greatest respect, I sit here thinking it is arrogant
to state that there is no Creator. Yet I know Buddhism teaches humility.
Why do you think that logic can understand the greater whole? Is that
simply another form of belief? Finally, what position do intuition and
feeling have concerning the statement that there is, or is not, a
Creator? A: So far as the position that there is no Creator is
concerned, it seems that there are very explicit references to that in
Buddha's own scriptures. For instance, let us take the scripture on
dependent origination called The Rice Sapling Sutra in which Buddha
states that because the cause was produced

or generated, the effects followed. We also find references in the works
of subsequent Buddhist thinkers such as Shantideva and Chandrakirti.
Shantideva is very explicit and very clear about his position on the
whole issue of the Creator in the ninth chapter of the Guide to the
Bodhisattva's Way of Life. Similarly, Chandrakirti is very clear on this
position. We also find Dharmakirti, in the second chapter of Exposition
of Valid Means to Cognition, adopting a very firm and explicit stand on
this issue. Dharmakirti discusses a particular verse in which it is
stated that the fully enlightened one is the one who has become
perfected. So this very word, "becoming," is used there to indicate that
there is no belief in an eternal or absolute perfected being. Buddha
Shakyamuni became fully enlightened through causes, conditions,
training, and a process. Hence, the choice of the word "becoming." That
is the Buddhist stand. Then, as I always say, there are five billion
human beings and a variety of different dispositions. So in a certain
way I think we need five billion religions, because there are such a
variety of dispositions. Therefore it should be very clear that for
certain people the concept of a Creator is much more beneficial and much
more comfortable. So it is much better that those people should follow
that tradition. The gist of all of this is that it is important for each
individual to embark upon a spiritual path that is most suited to his or
her mental disposition, temperament, and belief. As to the second part
of your question, where does this intuition or feeling for the Creator
come from? It may have some sociological explanations; the cultural
background may also play an important part. The reason I say this is
that for many Tibetans, intuition of life after death or rebirth is
natural; it's innate and instinctive. So there are no grounds for
dispute here. The most important thing is, if you utilize a religion or
different philosophy for argument, I think that's wrong. Just live it.
Buddhism is the business of Buddhists; Christianity is the business of
Christians. So that is clear. Even in one restaurant, at one table, we
eat different dishes and nobody argues. It is the individual's right. Q:
If all of our actions are dependently arising, how can one choose to
move toward enlightenment? Does one choose, or is it just the next

inevitable step? A: There is no possibility of progressing to full
enlightenment or liberation simply as a result of timely evolution. So
if one doesn't take the initiative, and doesn't make the effort on one's
part to consciously embark upon a spiritual path to perfection, then it
is not possible for an individual to naturally evolve into a more
enlightened being. When talking about emptiness, we find in the
scriptures a listing of sixteen different types of emptiness. The
emptiness of samsara is called the "emptiness of beginningless and
endless." The reason is that if on the part of individuals no initiative
is taken and no conscious effort is made, then our existence in the
unenlightened state will go on infinitely. However, if a conscious
effort is made and initiative is taken, then there is an end to this
unenlightenment. Here I find a great deal of inspiration from a
particular concept in the second chapter of Maitreya's Ornament of Clear
Realizations in which he talks about five characteristics of the
Bodhisattva practitioner. He says that so far as the immediate natural
inclination is concerned, there may be something definite about
it---some people are more inclined toward the individual path to
liberation, and some people are more inclined toward the Bodhisattva
ideal leading to the Mahayana goal of full Buddhahood. However, from the
ultimate point of view, all sentient beings are equal because
Buddha-nature pervades all of them. So here we differentiate between the
potential possessed by all beings and their ability to realize that
potential.

SECOND SESSION (76) Should someone else find joyous happiness Upon
praising (my enemy) as an excellent person, Why, mind, do you not praise
him too And likewise make yourself happy?

Having dealt with how to respond without anger to harm or injury
directed both toward oneself and one's relatives and friends, Shantideva
now turns to how to deal with the anger that we feel when we hear our
socalled enemies being praised by others, or when others speak highly of
someone we dislike. Normally we tend to dislike that sort of news, and
then we feel angry about it. So Shantideva points out that one
shouldn't; that is not the kind of attitude one must adopt. To be angry
at hearing other people speaking highly of one's enemies is totally
inappropriate, because if one looks at it carefully, one will find that
when someone speaks highly of someone one does not like, at least in the
mind of the person who is praising this enemy, there is some sense of
fulfillment, some satisfaction. That person is doing so because he or
she feels joyous and happy about that enemy, and one should rejoice in
that because one's enemy has caused that other person to be joyful,
happy, and satisfied. So one should rejoice in that, and if possible
should also join in the praise rather than trying to obstruct it. That
manner of relating to the situation is truly a source of joy. It also
will help other people change their attitude toward one as well, because
someone who is capable of dealing with that kind of situation in that
manner has less of a problem with jealousy, and a person who has less of
a problem with jealousy will truly be happier and more pleasant to
associate with. (77) That joyous happiness of yours Would be a source of
joy, not something prohibited, A precept given by the Excellent Ones And
a supreme (means) for assembling others. (78) It is said that others are
made happy through (being praised) in this way. But if, in this way, you
do not want (them to have) this happiness, Then, (since it makes them
happy), you should cease giving wages and the like (to your servants).
But you would be adversely affected both in this and future lives.

Here, Shantideva anticipates another defense by observing that someone
might feel, naturally, "I should feel jealous toward an enemy when he or
she is being praised by others because that praise will make my enemy
happy. Therefore, of course I will be jealous, and of course I will
dislike that praise." Shantideva responds by saying that if that is
one's ground for being jealous of, and being angry about that act, then
that means that what one dislikes is the existence of joy or happiness
in another person. And if that is the case, then why should one work so
hard to please other people, doing all sorts of things for others in
order to make them feel happy? If one can't bear one's enemy's
happiness, then why should one do all sorts of things to make anyone
else happy? (79) When people describe my own good qualities I want
others to be happy too, But when they describe the good qualities of
others I do not wish to be happy myself. (80) Having generated the
Awakening Mind Through wishing all beings to be happy, Why should I
become angry If they find some happiness themselves? Shantideva explains
in the next verse another inconsistency regarding this issue. He notes
that when praise is directed toward oneself, when people speak highly of
oneself, one not only feels happy but also expects others to be happy
when they hear this praise. However, this is totally inconsistent with
one's attitude toward others. When people praise others, then not only
does one disapprove of others' happiness but one's own peace of mind and
happiness are destroyed as well. So there seems to be an inconsistency
when it comes to relating to praise directed toward oneself and praise
directed toward others. Then, especially for a Bodhisattva practitioner
who has dedicated his or her life to bringing about joy and happiness in
others and leading them to the ultimate state of happiness, to be
jealous of others' happiness and joy is

totally inappropriate. In fact, one should feel that if other sentient
beings of their own accord, from their own efforts, gain any little
experience of happiness and joy here and there, we should be all the
more grateful, because without our helping them, they have been able to
achieve these joyful experiences and happiness. (81) If I wish for all
sentient beings to become Buddhas worshipped throughout the three
realms, They why am I tormented When I see them receiving mere mundane
respect? (82) If a relative for whom I am caring And to whom I must give
many things Should be able to find his own livelihood, Wouldn't I be
happy, rather than angry? Shantideva goes on to point out that a
Bodhisattva practitioner has pledged to place all sentient beings at the
highest state of existence, which is the state of Buddhahood, a state
worthy of reverence from sentient beings in all three realms. If that is
the case, how can such a practitioner allow himself or herself to be
tormented by the perception of other people's success, joy, and
happiness? Then he gives an example: if, for instance, there are people
toward whom one is financially and materially responsible, who depend on
one financially and materially, and if these people, of their own
accord, can make their own livelihoods and succeed by themselves, then
what happens is that this lightens one's burden toward them. Therefore
in such situations one should feel grateful and happy that they can
stand on their own feet and work for their own livelihood. Similarly, as
a practitioner of bodhichitta who on a daily basis thinks about the
well-being of all sentient beings and constantly prays for it, we have
to bear in mind that when we say "all sentient beings," everyone without
exception is included within that thought, even individuals whom one
might dislike or find irritating, such as enemies, and so on. (83) If I
do not wish for beings to have even this,

How can I wish for them to awaken? And where is there an Awakening Mind
In him who becomes angry when others receive things? In this verse,
Shantideva asks, "If I cannot tolerate or bear other people having
material successes or material acquisitions and joy, then how can I
claim that I wish them to become fully enlightened?" It is hypocritical.
There is no way that bodhichitta can develop in such a person's mind.
(84) What does it matter if (my enemy) is given something or not?
Whether he obtains it Or whether it remains in the benefactor's house,
In either case I shall get nothing. Here, Shantideva notes that when
one's enemy acquires certain material benefit, let us say from a
benefactor, there is no point in being jealous, nor is there any point
in feeling dislike because of that. Even if our enemy does not receive
that material thing from his or her benefactor, it is not going to make
any difference so far as we ourselves are concerned: if our enemy does
not receive that material thing, it is not going to be given to us. So
as far as we are concerned, whether that material thing is given to our
enemy or remains in the home of the benefactor, the friend of the enemy,
makes no difference. (85) So why, by becoming angry, do I throw away my
merits, The faith (others have in me) and my good qualities? Tell me,
why am I not angry (with myself) For not having the causes for gain?
(86) Let alone not having any remorse About the evils that you
committed, (O mind,) Why do you wish to compete with others Who have
committed meritorious deeds?

In fact, what one truly desires is material wealth or success; feeling
jealous of others' success and others' material wealth is totally
inappropriate. Because of that jealousy, one in fact destroys one's own
virtuous roots or imprints, which in the future would lead to material
success, acquisition of material wealth, and so on. So if one is serious
in the aspiration to attain material possessions, then one should feel
all the more angry toward oneself, the person who feels jealous of
others' material success. Further, Shantideva says that when we see our
enemy being successful, acquiring material possessions, and when others
speak highly of him or her, instead of feeling jealous and feeling
bitter or angry about it, if we, in fact, rejoice in their success, if
we feel joyful and happy, there's a possibility that we will be able to
share in the success. Maybe there is that possibility. However, he says,
by being jealous and angry about these successes, one is not only
failing in one's ability to develop a deep sense of regret for the
negative actions committed in the past, one is in some sense
aggressively competing with the consequences of virtuous deeds committed
by others. (87) Even if your enemy is made unhappy What is there for you
to be joyful about? Your merely wishing (for him to be hurt) Did not
cause him to be injured. (88) And even if he does suffer as you had
wished, What is there for you to be joyful about? If you say, "For I
shall be satisfied," How could there be anything more wretched than
that? (89) This hook cast by the fishermen of disturbing conceptions Is
unbearably sharp: Having been caught on it, It is certain that I shall
be cooked In cauldrons by the guardians of hell. In the first of these
three verses, Shantideva asks the question, if our enemy is made
unhappy, even through our action, what is there for us to be

joyful about? Simply wishing to hurt someone, simply wishing something
bad for our enemy is not, in any case, causing any harm or injury to
that enemy. Even if by our wishful thinking all the negative things, all
the failures or problems that we wished for our enemy did take place,
what would there be to rejoice about? If we say, "Well, in that case, I
would feel very satisfied," then Shantideva says, "How can there be
anything more wretched than that?" He concludes by stating that this
anger or hatred is like a fisherman's hook, so it is very important for
us to be cautious and ensure that we are not caught by this hook of
hatred. (90) The honor of praise and fame Will not turn into merit or
life; It will give me neither strength nor freedom from sickness, And
will not provide any physical happiness. (91) If I were aware of what
held meaning for me, What value would I find in these things? If all I
want is (a little) mental happiness, I should devote myself to gambling,
drinking, and so forth. Then, in verses 90 and 91, Shantideva points out
that we should not be too concerned with our fame or what people say
about us, either bad or good, because in reality fame would not make any
serious difference to one's life. Therefore, we should have our
priorities right, and seek what is truly of value, what is truly of
meaning to our life, not just mere fame, which is, after all, empty
sounds. One might respond to this by saying, "This is not true, because
when I enjoy fame and people speak highly of me, it gives me a lot of
satisfaction." There is a kind of immediate gratification. But if that
is one's sole purpose, then, as Shantideva indicates, on that ground one
can also justify drinking all the time, or using substances such as
drugs, because they too provide instant gratification. (92) If for the
sake of fame I give away my wealth or get myself killed,

What can the mere words (of fame) do then? Once I have died, to whom
will they give pleasure? Here, Shantideva explains that sometimes we do
find cases in which individuals would, in fact, sacrifice many of their
material possessions, wealth, and so forth, just for the sake of fame.
And we also find cases in which individuals go to such an extent to
acquire fame that they would even sacrifice their own lives for it. If
we examine these cases, we find that in reality the individual does not
benefit from the fame. After all, fame is nothing but empty words, empty
sounds, and once the individual has died, who is there to benefit from
it? The very purpose of seeking fame was to gain a sense of
satisfaction. Yet if life itself is sacrificed for it, then there is no
one to benefit. So this type of obsession with seeking fame is very
childish and is quite foolish. People can get completely drunk with the
idea of fame. (93) When their sandcastles collapse, Children howl in
despair; Likewise when my praise and reputation decline My mind becomes
like a little child. In this verse, Shantideva presents an analogy: when
children playing on the beach build sandcastles, they take it so
seriously that when the sandcastle collapses they howl and cry. People
who are drunk with fame are acting in a similar manner. (94) Since
short-lived sounds are inanimate They cannot possibly think of praising
me. ---But as it makes (the bestower of praise) happy, (My) reputation
is a source of pleasure (for me)--- (95) But whether this praise is
directed at myself or someone else How shall I be benefitted by the joy
(of him who bestows it)? Since that joy and happiness are his alone

I shall not obtain even a part of it. (96) But if I do find happiness in
his happiness Then surely I should feel the same way towards all? And if
this were so then why am I unhappy When others find pleasure in that
which brings them joy? (97) Therefore the happiness that arises From
thinking, "I am being praised," is invalid. It is only the behavior of a
child. In these four verses, Shantideva explains that if one closely
examines what it is that makes us happy when people speak highly of us,
it is not fame itself. It is not the sound, because sounds are quite
momentary and, in some sense, motiveless. The sounds by themselves do
not have the intention to please us, nor do they have affection toward
us. Now, we may think that when someone praises us or speaks highly of
us, at that instant, at least in the mind or in the heart of that person
who is praising us, there is a sense of joy, a sense of satisfaction, a
sense of fulfillment. That's why I feel happy when people speak highly
of me. But if that is the case, so far as the happiness that exists in
the mind of the person who is praising is concerned, it remains in the
heart of that person, it is not part of our mental continuum. So how can
we, in reality, take part in that joy, in that happiness? And if we
respond that this is not the whole point, the point is that by the
simple act of someone praising me, it gives the opportunity for one
person to be happy and joyful, i.e., the person who praises me, then why
should we not also feel the same way when someone praises our enemy? At
least in the mind or heart of the person who is praising our enemy,
there is a sense of joy and happiness. So in verse 97, he concludes that
the happiness or joy that arises from thinking, "I am being praised," is
itself invalid. It is only the behavior of a child. (98) Praise and so
forth distract me And also undermine my disillusion (with cyclic
existence); I start to envy those who have good qualities

And all the very best is destroyed. (99) Therefore, are not those who
are closely involved In destroying my praise and the like Also involved
in protecting me From falling into the unfortunate realms? Here,
Shantideva points out that in fact there are many destructive
consequences or disadvantages of being praised by others. The first is
that when one becomes very famous, when people begin to praise and speak
highly of one, it will cause a lot of distraction in one's practice,
because when one becomes very famous, one becomes very busy and has no
time. Not only that, but it also may undermine one's dissatisfaction
with unenlightened existence, because as one becomes famous everything
seems to look quite all right. Then, when one thinks of samsaric
existence, one may think, "Oh, it's not bad. It's quite joyful." There
is a danger that when one reads about the faults and defects of samsaric
existence, one may think, "Oh, maybe this was written by impoverished
meditators living in far isolated places. They knew nothing about the
reality of the world." So there is that danger of undermining one's
appreciation of the unsatisfactory nature of cyclic existence. Then,
third, as one becomes famous and people praise one, it may go to one's
head and one may feel very proud. As one's pride increases, one becomes
quite arrogant because one is successful in the eyes of the world.
Although one might see jealousy among beggars, jealousy seems to be
stronger when one becomes successful; somehow the intensity of jealousy
increases with increasing success. So these are the potential dangers of
being praised by others. One should reflect upon these, because through
these factors, ultimately, one's own spiritual progress can be hampered.
(100) I who am striving for freedom Do not need to be bound by material
gain and honor. So why should I be angry With those who free me from
this bondage?

(101) Those who wish to cause me suffering Are like Buddhas bestowing
waves of blessing. As they open the door for my not going to an
unfortunate realm, Why should I be angry with them? Generally speaking,
we find in Buddhist literature a description of the ideal form of human
existence, which is endowed with what are known as the eight qualities
that make one's existence full and complete. These include possessing
material wealth and being successful in the world, and so on. These are
seen as favorable conditions; if one can use them constructively, then
they can be very useful. They can assist the individual not only on his
or her spiritual path, but also will make him or her all the more
effective when working for the benefit of other sentient beings.
However, while one possesses the facilities of wealth, position,
education, and so on, it is crucial that there be some internal
restraining factor that constantly keeps one in check so one is not
spoiled by these facilities and never loses the fundamental insight into
the underlying unsatisfactory nature of cyclic existence. In that case,
one's attitude toward all these facilities will be in its proper
perspective, i.e., to be utilized as an aid in the path and for working
for the benefit of other sentient beings. There is always the need to
maintain balance, not to go to any extremes, and at the same time to
have full knowledge of how to proceed along the path in the best and
most effective way. If one is aware of these facts, then it is possible
to view the individuals who get in the way of one's acquiring material
successes, material wealth, fame, position, and so on, not as enemies
but rather as protectors who keep one from the potential dangers of
being spoiled and obstructed from the path toward enlightenment. So, in
verses 100 and 101, Shantideva reminds us that we should never lose
sight of our ultimate goal. Our ultimate aspiration is to attain freedom
from suffering---liberation, or nirvana. So we should not let ourselves
become bound by material gain and honor. Therefore, why should we be
angry toward those such as our enemies who obstruct our material
acquisitions and so on, and are, in fact, helping to free us from this

bondage? Shantideva states that what these people are doing is like the
blessings of Buddha, because through their acts they are protecting us
from entering into the house that leads to the room of unfortunate
existence. They are, in a sense, putting a lock on the door which would
otherwise lead us to suffering. Therefore, one should not feel angry
toward these people. (102) ---But what if someone should obstruct my
gaining merit?--- With him too it is incorrect to be angry; For since
there is no fortitude similar to patience Surely I should put it into
practice. In verse 102, Shantideva responds to the feeling that if one's
enemy, through his or her action, causes one's own merit or virtue to be
destroyed, then one is justified in being angry. This too is not
adequate justification for being angry toward one's enemy, he answers,
because the best practice for accumulating merit or creating virtuous
imprints is the practice of love and compassion. That is the true Dharma
practice. In order to become fully successful in practicing love and
compassion, a practice of patience and tolerance is indispensable.
Therefore, there is no fortitude similar to patience; there is no
practice greater than patience. One must not be angry toward the enemy's
acts, but one should use the opportunity to enhance one's practice of
patience and tolerance. (103) If due to my own failings I am not patient
with this (enemy), Then it is only I who am preventing myself From
practicing this cause for gaining merit. Here, it is stated that even if
I am given this opportunity, if due to my own failings I am not
successful in being patient or tolerant toward my enemy and lose my
temper, then it is only I myself who prevents me from using this
opportunity to gain merit through the practice of patience. Therefore,
in this sense, we ourselves destroy the cause of patience.

(104) If without it something does not occur And if with it, it does
come to be, Then since this (enemy) would be the cause of (patience) How
can I say that he prevents it? In this verse, Shantideva briefly defines
what is meant by cause. He states that if without it something cannot
occur, and if with it, it does come into being, then that is the cause
of the event or action. In the case of patience, without an enemy's
action there is no possibility for patience or tolerance to arise.
Therefore, the enemy's action is an indispensable factor for our having
the opportunity to practice patience. So how can we say the contrary,
that the enemy prevents us from practicing patience? In fact, the enemy
is the necessary condition for practicing patience. (105) A beggar is
not an obstacle to generosity When I am giving something away, And I
cannot say that those who give ordination Are an obstacle to becoming
ordained. Then Shantideva uses the example of a beggar who truly
deserves to be given something. One cannot say such a beggar is an
obstacle to practicing generosity. Similarly, how can one say the
preceptor who gives ordination and vows is the obstacle for taking
ordination? (106) There are indeed many beggars in this world, But
scarce are those who inflict harm; For if I have not injured others Few
beings will cause me harm. (107) Therefore, just like treasure appearing
in my house Without any effort on my part to obtain it, I should be
happy to have an enemy For he assists me in my conduct of Awakening.

In these two verses, Shantideva states that indeed there are many
beggars in the world so that you can practice your generosity. However,
in comparison, there are fewer opportunities for practicing patience.
This is because in order for an enemy to inflict harm upon us, unless we
provoke it, there is, generally speaking, no harm inflicted; it needs an
interaction. So, when one comes across such an opportunity, one should
treat it with gratitude. Like having found a treasure in one's own
house, one should be happy and grateful toward one's enemy for providing
that precious opportunity. (108) And because I am able to practice
(patience) with him, He is worthy of being given The very first fruits
of my patience, For in this way he is the cause of it. In this verse,
Shantideva points out that if we ever are successful in our practice of
patience and tolerance, it is due to the combination of our own efforts
and the opportunity provided by our enemy. Therefore, we should
acknowledge that and dedicate the fruits of our practice of patience
first for the benefit of our enemy. (109) ---But why should my enemy be
venerated? He has no intention for me to practice patience.--- Then why
venerate the sacred Dharma? (It too has no intention) but is a fit cause
for practice. Here, Shantideva acknowledges that one might think, "Why
should I venerate my enemy, or acknowledge his or her contribution?
There was no intention to give me this opportunity for practicing
patience; there was no intention of helping me." If that were the case,
then we should also not venerate the Dharma, one of the three jewels,
because true Dharma refers to the cessation and the path. And so far as
the cessation and the path are concerned, on their part, there is no
intention to help us. Yet we consider them objects worthy of veneration
and respect. So what is important here is the effect, not so much the
intention on the part of the other factor.

(110) ---But surely my enemy is not to be venerated For he intends to
cause me harm--- But how could patience be practiced If, like doctors,
people always strove to do me good? (111) Thus since patient acceptance
is produced In dependence upon (one with) a very hateful mind, That
person should be worthy of veneration just like the sacred Dharma,
Because he is a cause of patience. In these two verses, Shantideva
explains that one might think, "Yes, you are right regarding the Dharma
cessations and the path, that there is no intention to help us, but we
venerate them. But at least in the case of the enemy, on their part,
they not only have no wish or intention to help us, but, in fact, have
malicious intention to harm us. They want to harm us. Therefore they are
definitely not worthy of veneration or respect." Shantideva says that,
in fact, the presence of this hateful mind in the enemy and the
intention to hurt us is exactly what make the enemy's action unique.
Otherwise, if it is just the actual act of hurting us that is crucial,
then even doctors, without the intention of harming us, often adopt
methods which are quite painful. Some of the doctors' treatment also may
involve surgery. Nonetheless, we do not consider these acts harmful or
the acts of an enemy because the intention on the part of the doctor was
to help us. Therefore, it is exactly this intention to harm us willfully
that makes the enemy unique and that gives us this precious opportunity
to practice patience. Therefore, in verse 111, he concludes that just as
one venerates the sacred Dharma, one should also treat enemies as
objects worthy of veneration because they are the cause of the practice
of patience.

Meditation

Let us now use this silent session to meditate on the practice of
tong-len, "giving and taking." First, visualize, on the one side,
sentient beings who are in desperate need of help, who are in an
unfortunate state of suffering. Then, on the other side, visualize
yourself as the embodiment of a selfcentered person who is quite
indifferent to the well-being and needs of other sentient beings. Then,
as a neutral observer, see how your natural feeling inclines toward the
two; whether your natural feeling of empathy reaches out to the weaker
sentient beings who are in need, or inclines more toward this embodiment
of selfishness. Then, after that, focus your attention on the needy and
desperate sentient beings, and direct toward them all your positive
energy, mentally giving them your successes, virtuous collections,
positive energies, and so on. Then take upon yourself their suffering,
their problems, and their negativities. For example, we can visualize an
innocent, starving child from Somalia and see how we would respond
naturally toward that sight. Here, when we generate deep empathy toward
the suffering of that individual, it is not based on considerations such
as, "He's my relative. She's my friend." You don't even know the person,
but because of the fact that the other person is a human being, and you
yourself are a human being, your natural capacity for empathy allows you
to reach out. So you can visualize this way, and think that this child
has no ability of his or her own to gain relief from the present state
of difficulty. Then, mentally take upon yourself all the sufferings of
starvation, poverty, and feelings of difficulty. Then, mentally give
your own facilities, your successes, your wealth, and so on, to this
child. So, engage in this give-and-take relationship. In this way, you
train your mind. When you do the visualization of taking upon yourself,
it is useful to visualize the sufferings, problems, and difficulties in
the form of either poisonous substances or dangerous weapons---things
that normally the very sight of makes you shudder. You could also
visualize animals which you just can't stand the sight of. So visualize
them in these forms and then absorb them directly into your heart. When
you do that visualization effectively, it will make you feel a slight
discomfort. That is an indication that it is hitting its target, that
is, the self-centered, egocentric attitude that we normally have.
However, for those individuals who may have problems with their own
self-image, like having hatred or anger toward oneself and

low self-esteem, it is important to judge for yourselves whether this
particular practice is appropriate or not. It may not be.

QUESTIONS Q: Shantideva writes as if the decision to develop bodhichitta
or take the Bodhisattva path is one of pure intellect. Wherein do we
listen to the heart? A: We find in Buddhism discussion of three types of
wisdom, or three stages in one's understanding. First is the stage of
hearing or learning, the initial stage when you read or hear about
something. Then as a result you immediately develop some sense of
understanding. The second stage is when, after learning, or after having
heard or read, you think about the issue or the topic constantly, and
through constant familiarity and thinking, your understanding becomes
clearer. Then at that time you begin to have certain feelings or
experiences. The third stage is called the "meditatively acquired
wisdom." This is when you not only intellectually understand the subject
matter but also, through meditative experience, are able to feel it. So
there is an assimilation of your knowledge with your experience. At the
initial stage, you can see a kind of difference, or gap, between the
intellect and the object of knowledge, but at the meditatively acquired
wisdom level, there is no gap; it is experiential knowledge. There may
be a few exceptional cases in which some individuals do not have to go
through this procedure, but generally speaking, for many of the Dharma
practices, which do not come to us naturally, we need conscious effort
on our part and need to go through these stages. In addition, these
processes of understanding will make the subject matter much more
experiential and close to the heart, as well as much more spontaneous.
This is analogous to the case of our delusory states, our afflictive
emotions. Although in general afflictive emotions come about naturally,
when directed to a particular object, for instance, when we have anger
or hatred toward a person, if we leave them unattended, then there is
less likelihood of their developing to an intense degree. Whereas if we
think about the projected injustices done to us, the ways in which we
have been

unfairly treated, and we keep on thinking about them, that feeds on the
hatred and makes it very powerful and intense. Similarly, when you have
an attachment toward a particular person, then you can feed on that by
thinking about how beautiful he or she is and then thinking about the
projected qualities that you see in the person, and as you keep at this,
the attachment becomes more and more intense. This also shows how
through constant familiarity and thinking, afflictive emotions become
more intense and powerful. As I pointed out earlier, at the initial
stage there is intelligence or understanding acquired through learning
or hearing. This also includes reading. Then, as you ponder the subject,
through thinking and analysis, you will get to a point where
understanding begins to dawn. The Tibetan word is nyamogtuchupa (nyams
'ogtu chudpa), which means you feel as if you have grasped the subject.
There is a sense of familiarity, a sense of affinity with the topic, so
that it no longer appears alien to you. And then, again, as you pursue
this process of familiarization you will get to a point where you
develop a kind of experiential knowledge. That, in the technical
language, is described as "the experience dependent upon effort." That
type of experience requires conscious effort and exertion on your part.
However as you pursue the topic still further, you will gradually get to
a point where your experience becomes spontaneous, almost like second
nature. Then you no longer need to go through the whole process of
thinking and putting conscious effort into it. In the case of
compassion, for example, where previously you might have had to go
through the whole process of thinking, meditating, and so on, at this
point the very sight of a suffering sentient being will give rise to a
spontaneous, genuine compassionate state. That is the state known as
"the spontaneous experience which is free of exertion." So it seems
there is this kind of progression from one stage to another. One should
not have the notion that the spontaneity of one's experience goes
totally in one direction and intellectual understanding goes in a
totally different direction, as if they were completely separate and
unrelated. That is a misconception. In fact, any understanding or
experience that is developed through this process, through intellectual
understanding and training, once you acquire it, is very stable and
lasting. Compared to that, there may be some instances where you can
have a spontaneous experience

that seems very gripping and very powerful in the moment. But if it
lacks intellectual grounding it will not be stable. After a few days,
when the experience goes away, you will return to your ordinary, normal
self without the experience having had much impact on you. So it is not
reliable. I think there may be different levels of experience. But
according to my own experience, for example with bodhichitta, there were
times these words appeared to be just words. Of course, I understood the
meaning of the words at the linguistic level, but there was not much
feeling. With regard to emptiness, shunyata, it was much the same. Of
course I could explain something about the meaning of emptiness, but
there was not much feeling associated with it. Then I thought about it
year by year, for decades and decades. Then eventually these words, when
I thought about them, became not just words, there was something more.
Q: As a mother of small children and mainstay of our household, my daily
life has few free moments. My social environment is quite secular and
not supportive of Dharma practice, though not hostile to it either. I am
somewhat overwhelmed with the implications of adopting Dharma practice
given my current circumstances, yet I want to make positive changes and
apply effort toward developing mental discipline, bodhichitta, and
wisdom. What would be your advice to a beginning practitioner for
setting priorities for practice under these conditions? A: Even in my
case, if I wish to complain, I can always complain about lack of time. I
am very busy. However if you make the effort, you can always find some
time---say the early morning. Then, I think there are some times such as
the weekend. You can sacrifice some of your fun. So if you make the
effort and try hard enough, perhaps you may be able to find, let us say,
thirty minutes in the morning, and thirty minutes in the evening. Maybe
it is possible to figure out a way of getting some time. However, I feel
it is very important first of all to develop a fairly general
understanding, a kind of overview, of the basic Buddhist path. If we
think seriously and if we understand Dharma practice in the true sense
of its meaning, then we should understand Dharma in terms of our mental
state, i.e., our psychological and emotional state. One should not
confine one's understanding of Dharma only to some physical or verbal

activities, like doing recitations or chanting. If your understanding of
Dharma practice is limited only to these activities, then of course you
will need a specific time, a separate allotted time to do your practice,
because you can't go around doing your daily chores like cooking and so
on while reciting mantras. This could be quite annoying to people around
you. However, if you understand Dharma practice in its true sense, then
you will know that it has to do with psychological and emotional
well-being. Therefore, you can use all twenty-four hours of your day for
your practice. For example, if you find yourself in a situation in which
you might insult someone, then you immediately take precautions and
restrain yourself from doing that. Similarly, if you encounter a
situation in which you may lose your temper, immediately be mindful and
say, "No, this is not the appropriate way." That is actually a practice
of Dharma. Seen in that light, you will always have time. Similarly, if
you are meditating on the transient, momentarily changing nature of
phenomena, then there are plenty of examples around you which will
remind you of that fact. However what is important is first to study,
because without knowledge it is difficult to practice. Q: What should
you say to a loved one who is talking about a third person with hatred
or anger? On the one hand, you want to show compassion for the feelings
being experienced by the loved one. On the other hand, you don't want to
reinforce or lend approval to that hatred. What might one say? A: Here I
would like to tell a story. Once there was a Kadampa master called
Gampowa who had many responsibilities. One day he complained to the
Kadampa master Dromtonpa that he had hardly any time for his meditation
or for his Dharma practice. So Dromtonpa responded by agreeing with him,
"Yes, that's right. I don't have any time either." Then once an
immediate affinity was established, Dromtonpa skillfully said, "But, you
know what I am doing is for the service of the Dharma. Therefore, I feel
satisfied." Similarly, if you find one of your beloved ones speaking
against someone out of anger or hatred, maybe your initial reaction
should be one of agreement and sympathy. Then once you have gained the
person's confidence, you can say, "But...."

Q: On this historic day with the signing of a peace agreement between
the Israelis and the Palestinians, would you please comment on this
momentous event, and perhaps offer a blessing for continuing peace in
the Middle East as the difficult work begins? A: Just as we had a
discussion this morning, during which I commented that this event is
something to be commended, you may be interested to know that I wrote a
letter to both Prime Minister Rabin and PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat. Q:
Please explain skillful means more completely. A: That's difficult.
There are many different levels of methods. Gaining some understanding
of what is meant by the wisdom factor is comparatively easy. The
understanding of skillful means is much more difficult because it is so
varied and so complex. Generally speaking, one can define skillful
means, or the method aspect of the path, as those practices,
meditations, or aspects of the path that are principally associated with
the conventional side of reality. We have conventional reality and
ultimate reality, in other words, appearance and emptiness. And the
techniques, meditations, and practices which are primarily associated
with the ultimate nature of reality, that is, emptiness, can be
described as the wisdom aspect of the path. Those which deal primarily
with the appearance level, with the conventional aspect of reality, can
be roughly defined as skillful means or the method aspect. We also find
that, generally speaking, many of the aspects of skillful means, or the
method aspects of the path, such as love, compassion, and so on, are not
cognitive. These are not cognitive in the sense that there is a greater
involvement with the affective or emotional side of the psyche. The
wisdom aspect has a more cognitive component that has more to do with
one's apprehension or understanding. However, it is very difficult to
come up with a detailed explanation of what exactly skillful means are.
Q: One Bodhisattva vow says to forgive someone who apologizes. What
about forgiving someone who does not apologize? Is it desirable to ask
for

an apology from someone who has wronged you? What is the connection
between forgiveness and patience? A: The reason that Bodhisattvas are
recommended to accept an apology when expressed by another is because if
you don't accept another's apology, that will hurt the other person. The
other person will think, "Oh, he or she still hasn't forgiven me." So
this is done in order to protect the other person, to help the other
person from feeling hurt. If the other person who has wronged you hasn't
given any apology, there is no point in asking for it. Otherwise, you
will be begging for that person to apologize. In fact, this will make
the other person more uncomfortable. Q: I have problems believing in
reincarnation. What is the best approach which will lead me to believe
in it? A: This is very understandable, even for us Tibetans, who feel we
have a very strong faith or belief in reincarnation or rebirth. But if
we examine the content of our belief very carefully and honestly, then
sometimes it becomes problematic because, unlike a belief in the
solidity of material objects around us, where there is very concrete
evidence for their existence and we can feel them, with matters like
rebirth it is very difficult to have a concrete belief. However, even
among those people who are extremely skeptical of rebirth or who
consciously deny its existence, if you ask them for the grounds upon
which they reject it, or on what grounds they are extremely skeptical of
it, then ultimately they will say, "I just don't feel like believing in
it." Generally speaking, we have two principal categories of
philosophical systems: on the one hand, you have the whole camp which
subscribes to belief in rebirth or reincarnation, and on the other, you
have the camp which does not subscribe to belief in reincarnation or
rebirth, or, in fact, denies its existence. But, in reality, if you
examine it, it is not that the second group has found evidence which is
counter to the existence of rebirth; rather, they haven't found any
evidence confirming existence or belief. So, it is important to be able
to distinguish between not having found evidence for

something and having found evidence which disproves it. These are two
different things. Here there is the need to understand how we use proof
or evidence, either in proving something or disproving it. We also have
to understand the scope of a particular type of reasoning or argument.
For instance, there are certain types of reasoning which state that if
the phenomenon is such that if it were to exist, then we should be able
to find it through a certain method of analysis. If the phenomenon
belongs to that category, then subject it to analysis. If you don't find
it, then you can use that as evidence that the phenomenon does not
exist, because if it were to exist, you should be able to find it
through these means. Then, there are other types of phenomena which may
not fall into the scope of that form of reasoning. Now as to the
question of rebirth, it is something that has to be understood on the
basis of a continuum of consciousness. You cannot account for it on the
basis of the continuity of your bodily existence, let alone what happens
to the consciousness after death. Even when you are alive, it is
extremely difficult to identify what exactly the nature of consciousness
is, and what its relationship with the body is, and whether or not there
is a separate thing called "consciousness" which is not material. Or is
consciousness a mere illusion? And so on. It is a very problematic area
for which there are no clear, precise answers according to modern
scientific discipline. However, on the other hand, we also find
exceptional individuals, even to this day, who are capable of
recollecting experiences from their past lives. We also find that
through meditation, some individuals have certain types of experiences
which are very mysterious.

DAY FOUR

FIRST SESSION Nagarjuna pays homage to Buddha Shakyamuni by praising him
as the teacher who propounds the philosophy of emptiness---that all
things and events are without intrinsic existence or intrinsic identity,
and that although they lack identity and existence they still function
in their ability to produce effects and so on. One can realize this
through understanding the dependent or interdependent nature of reality.
Nagarjuna pays homage to Buddha Shakyamuni, who propounded this doctrine
of the emptiness of intrinsic reality by teaching the dependently
arising nature of phenomena. Generally speaking, we find in the
Madhyamika literature various forms of reasoning which are aimed at
establishing the absence of intrinsic existence and intrinsic identity
of phenomena. These include trying to analyze how things arise nominally
and conceptually; by analyzing that nature, we arrive at the conclusion
that things lack intrinsic reality. Further, we find such forms of
argument known as "examining the identity and difference of phenomena."
We also find other types of arguments or reasoning which examine
phenomena from the causal perspective, that is, from the perspective of
their ability to produce effects and so on. However, among all of these
forms of reasoning, the most powerful is the reasoning of dependent
origination, which is employed by Nagarjuna. When a particular thing or
event is established by means of its dependently originating nature as
being without intrinsic reality and intrinsic existence and identity, we
find that we are not denying the existence of phenomena; we are trying
to understand their existence and identity in terms of their
relationships to other phenomena. In some sense, existence and identity
can be said to emerge in relation to other phenomena.

What is so unique about this form of reasoning, which heavily relies
upon the interdependent nature of reality, is that it has the capacity
to arrive at the "middle way." This is a position free from the extreme
of absolutism, because one is not holding on to some sort of intrinsic
reality; yet at the same time, it is also free from the extreme of
nihilism, because one is not denying the existence and identity of
phenomena. One is accepting a formal existence which is dependent, which
is emergent, and which is understood in terms of its interaction and
interrelationship. Therefore, in the Entry into the Middle Way, we find
Chandrakirti stating that once one's understanding of the existence and
identity of phenomena is developed on the basis of understanding the
interdependent nature of reality and how identity and existence are in
some sense derived through this interrelationship, then this allows one
to understand the fundamental Buddhist concept of causality, in which
our understanding of the nature of reality is derived from the
appreciation of mere conditionality. In this way, one will be able to
refute the idea of unproduced or uncaused phenomena, because things come
into being through interaction with other factors, due to causes and
conditions. And through this insight into the interdependent nature of
reality, one will also be able to refute the idea of creation by some
sort of absolute, independent being, because again, one's understanding
of causality is in terms of mere conditionality. Similarly, one will be
able to refute the idea that a thing may come into being by being
dependent on causes which are identical to itself or are totally
independent from itself. One will be able to free oneself from all these
extremes and be able to accept the fundamental idea of causality in its
true sense. However, when we try to understand what is meant by mere
conditionality, or how things and events come into being entirely in
dependence on other causes and conditions, there are many problematic
areas that we have to bear in mind. Let us take for example our own
aggregates, our own skandhas. If we look at the continuum of the most
subtle aggregate, that is, consciousness, and also at the sense of "I"
or "self," the personal identity is based on the continuum of the subtle
aggregate, the general sense of "I" which is unqualified, either as a
human being, or as a person of particular ethnic origin, or
whatever---there is no qualification. The mere sense of "I" or

mere identity, that "I" or sense of self which is derived from the
continuum of the subtle aggregate, is beginningless, so far as its
continuum is concerned. Therefore, that "self" or that "I" which is
associated with our identity as a human being cannot be said to be
specific to a single lifetime. We cannot say it is a human being; we
cannot say it is an animal. But we can say this is a being. In terms of
its continuum, we can say that self together with the basis of that
sense of self, which is the subtle aggregate, arises from its earlier
moment, which arises from its earlier instance, and so forth, because
there is a continuous process. However, we cannot say that it is a
product of karma, because karma, in terms of its continuing process, has
no role in making the process go on. It is simply a natural fact that
this continuum carries on. However, if one looks at a slightly grosser
level, let us say at the level of human existence, then we have the
human body and the human identity that leads one to say, "I am a human
being." That sense of self, and the aggregates on which that identity is
based, can be said to be a product of karma. This is because when we say
"human body" and "human existence," we are talking about the consequence
or fruit of positive karma, the virtuous actions which one has
accumulated in the past. So it is there that karma plays a role. Let us
take the case of a human body. Although in general we can say it is a
product of good karma, if we trace the material origin, the substantial
cause which is the material origin of our body, we can trace it by means
of the causal principle to its earlier instance of the parental
regenerative fluids, then go further and further. Then we can trace the
material origin until, let us take the example of this particular
universal system, to a point where it is totally empty space. According
to Buddhist cosmology, prior to the evolution of a particular universal
system, all the material substances are believed to be inherent in what
are known as "space particles." So again, as far as the process of the
material continuum is concerned, it is a natural fact, a natural law,
that the causal principle propels material substances to carry on their
continuum. Again, there is no role for karma there. Now the question is,
at what point or at what stage does karma come into the picture? At the
stage of empty space, the space particles will carry on

their material continuum, which will give rise to various composite
particle structures, leading to, according to scientific theory,
molecular structure. Becoming more and more complex, there will come a
point where the composition of the material particles will make a
difference to individuals who inhabit the world. In other words, the
material will become directly relevant to individuals' experience of
pain and pleasure. It is at that stage, in my view, that karma begins to
play a role. These are problematic areas which I want you to think
about. Because of this complexity, we find in the Buddhist literature
various avenues of reasoning and four key principles which are believed
to be embedded in the natural world. The first three are the principle
of natural law, the principle of dependence, and the principle of
functions. Then, based on these three principles, one can apply logic or
reasoning, and that is the principle of logical proof. Unless one has
certain bases which one can use, one cannot acquire reasoning or logic.
So one could say that the reason we can appreciate the laws of chemistry
is because there are certain principles known as "the principle of
dependence" and "the principle of functions." When certain material
substances interact, they give rise to emergent properties. Then that
will allow us to appreciate the functions they can perform collectively,
through interaction, and thus we can appreciate the laws of chemistry.
Here we may ask the question, "Why is there in the natural world, as if
they are given, the material realm and the mental realm---the spiritual
realm or the realm of consciousness?" There is no rational answer. It is
simply a given fact. In light of these philosophical considerations, we
arrive at the conclusion that things and events ultimately lack
intrinsic existence or intrinsic identity. They derive their existence
and identity only in relation to other factors, causes, and conditions,
and therefore, the apprehension which grasps at things and events as
existing intrinsically, possessing intrinsic identity and status, is a
state of ignorance. In fact, it is a state of misconception. Therefore,
by generating insight into the empty nature of phenomena, we will be
able to directly see through the illusion of this misconception, because
this insight directly opposes the mode of apprehension of this
misknowledge. As a result, that distorted state of mind can be removed
or

eliminated. On these grounds it is believed that not only ignorance, but
also the derivative delusory states which are rooted in that fundamental
ignorant state can ultimately be removed. Carrying this discussion
further, Maitreya, in his text the Sublime Continuum, gives three
reasons on the basis of which one can conclude that the essence of
Buddhahood permeates the minds of all sentient beings. First, he says
that the Buddha's activities radiate in the heart of all sentient
beings. Now this can be understood in two different ways: one is that we
can understand that in every sentient being there is a seed of virtue,
and one could see the seed of virtue as an act of the completely
enlightened, compassionate Buddha. But one could also see it in deeper
terms, that is, that all sentient beings possess the potential for
perfection. Therefore, there is a kind of perfected being inherent
within all sentient beings, radiating. So one can understand it in these
ways. Second, so far as the ultimate nature of reality is concerned,
there is total equality between the samsaric state and nirvana. Third,
we all possess a mind which lacks intrinsic reality and independent
existence, which allows us to then remove the negativities and delusory
states that obscure it. For these three reasons, Maitreya concludes that
all sentient beings possess the essence of Buddhahood. However, in order
to activate that seed which is inherent within our heart or mind, we
must develop compassion. Through cultivating universal compassion, one
will be able to activate that seed, and this makes the individual more
inclined toward the Mahayana path. For that, the practice of patience
and tolerance is crucial. So let us return to the subject of patience.
(112) Therefore the Mighty One has said That the field of sentient
beings is (similar to) a Buddhafield, For many who have pleased them
Have thereby reached perfection. Because of sentient beings, such as
one's enemy, and people who cause injury and hurt, one has precious
opportunities to practice patience and tolerance and accumulate great
stores of merit. Therefore, Buddha spoke of the field of the Buddhas and
the field of sentient beings as fields for

accumulating merit. These are "fields" in the sense that they serve as
sources or foundations from which we can accumulate merit. (113) A
Buddha's qualities are gained From sentient beings and the Conquerors
alike, So why do I not respect them In the same way as I respect the
Conquerors? In verse 112, Shantideva states that those who have
appreciated this fact and then please sentient beings will thereby reach
perfection. Since this is the case, we find that both Buddhas, the fully
enlightened ones, and sentient beings are equal in terms of being
factors or conditions leading us to perfection. Why is it then that we
discriminate between the two and revere the Buddhas, the fully
enlightened ones, and not the sentient beings? Why do we not revere and
respect the sentient beings and acknowledge their contribution? In fact,
if we examine this carefully, we will find that there are more
opportunities for accumulating great stores of merit through our
interactions with sentient beings than through our interactions with the
Buddha. With respect to the Buddha, we can accumulate merit by
generating faith and confidence, making offerings, and so on. However,
many of the practices that lead to enhancing our stores of merit can
happen only in relation to other sentient beings. This is true even in
terms of attaining a favorable rebirth in the future, for which we need
to practice and have a way of life that is ethically disciplined, in
which we restrain our body, speech, and mind from indulging in negative
or nonvirtuous actions, such as killing, sexual misconduct, stealing,
telling lies, and so on. These actions all depend on other beings; we
cannot practice them in a vacuum. In addition, when we obtain a
favorable form of existence, such as a human body, even many qualities
of the human body that we would consider desirable, such as a pleasant
appearance, having material wealth, and so on, are also the consequences
of virtuous deeds. For example, a pleasant appearance is the consequence
of patience and tolerance, and material wealth is the consequence of the
practice of generosity. Even these

practices become possible only when there are other sentient beings.
They cannot occur in a vacuum. This is the case with the limited purpose
of obtaining a favorable rebirth; it is even truer in terms of the path
for obtaining full liberation from samsara, in which we need to practice
many other things. For instance, in order to attain full enlightenment
we need to practice love, compassion, and many other aspects of the
path. In all of these, we find that unless there is an interaction with
other sentient beings, there is no possibility of even beginning. So we
find that if we compare Buddhas and sentient beings in terms of their
contribution to our acquiring stores of merit, sentient beings in fact
seem to have a greater contribution than the Buddhas. Now, let us take
the example of generating insight into the nature of emptiness. That
wisdom is very powerful, and is something that we practitioners must
aspire to realize. However, if that insight is not complemented with the
factor of method, that is, bodhichitta, then no matter how powerful that
realization of emptiness may be, it can never reach a stage at which it
can directly serve as an antidote for eliminating obstructions to
knowledge. Even in terms of enjoying a conventionally understood joyful
and happy life, as I said earlier, we need certain factors, such as good
health. Here again, in order to enjoy good health, other sentient beings
have a great role because one needs to acquire the merit necessary to
obtain that. Then, if we closely examine the material facilities that we
use for our enjoyment of life, we find that there are hardly any
material objects which have no sources in other people. All these
facilities, if one thinks carefully, come into being as a result of the
efforts of many people; either directly or indirectly, many people are
involved in making them possible. Similarly, in order to enjoy a happy
life we need good companions, a circle of friends. When we talk about
friends and companions, we speak of interaction with other human beings.
While the relationships might involve hardships, like a lot of quarrels
and cursing, in spite of all of this we have to try to maintain
friendships and lead a way of life in which there is enough interaction
with others in order to be happy. So here we see that even these

three factors---good health, material possessions, and friendship---are
all inextricably linked with other people's efforts and cooperation. So
if we think along these lines, we will find that not only in our
ordinary state, but also when we are on the path as well as when we are
at the resultant state of Buddhahood, even though Buddhas are fully
enlightened beings and may be very sacred, very precious, and very
highly realized beings, in terms of kindness and their contribution
toward our well-being, it seems as if sentient beings have a greater
role. So we should be more grateful toward sentient beings than toward
Buddhas. From another point of view, we can see that the Buddhas, the
fully enlightened beings, have completely perfected their own
self-realization. Therefore, to put it bluntly, they have nothing to do
other than serve sentient beings. In a way, it's their duty. In some
sense it's nothing to be admired or be surprised about: Buddhas work for
the benefit of sentient beings. However, when we consider sentient
beings, with all their weaknesses, faults, and intact delusory states of
mind, afflictive emotions, and so on, even with these limitations their
contribution toward our well-being cannot be underestimated. Therefore,
we should feel all the more grateful to them. One can think along these
lines and ask, "Who is kinder to us---the Buddhas or sentient beings?"
In response, the statements made here in the Guide to the Bodhisattva's
Way of Life, when one thinks carefully about them, are not really
exaggerations. So what is meant by equality of the Buddhas and sentient
beings? Here Shantideva says that the equality is not in terms of their
realization, but rather in terms of being indispensable to our endeavors
in accumulating merit and in attaining enlightenment. In this regard,
both Buddhas and sentient beings are equal. (114) (Of course) they are
not similar in the quality of their intentions But only in the fruits
(that they produce); So it is in this respect that they have excellent
qualities And are therefore (said to be) equal.

(115) Whatever (merit comes from) venerating one with a loving mind Is
due to the eminence of sentient beings. And in the same way the merit of
having faith in Buddha Is due to the eminence of Buddha. (116) Therefore
they are asserted to be equal In the share they have in establishing
Buddha-qualities. But none of them are equal (in good qualities) With
the Buddhas who are boundless oceans of excellence. (117) Even if the
three realms were offered, It would be insufficient in paying veneration
To those few beings in whom a mere share of the good qualities Of the
Unique Assemblage of Excellence appears. (118) Thus since sentient
beings have a share In giving rise to the supreme Buddha-qualities,
Surely it is correct to venerate them As they are similar in merely this
respect? In these verses, Shantideva points out that if we consider
bodhichitta and a good heart as objects worthy of veneration, then we
should also consider sentient beings worthy of veneration, because the
greatness of bodhichitta and a good heart comes from the greatness of
sentient beings. If we consider merits such as those acquired through
having faith toward the Buddha as virtuous, then that is due to the
greatness of the Buddha. Therefore, Buddhas and sentient beings are
asserted to be equal. In fact, sentient beings' contribution cannot be
reimbursed or reciprocated even if we were to offer material goods
filling all three realms to the Buddhas. He concludes that therefore, at
least from the point of view of their kindness toward us, there is an
adequate ground on which we should venerate sentient beings and respect
them.

(119) Furthermore, what way is there to repay (the Buddhas) Who grant
immeasurable benefit And who befriend the world without pretension,
Other than by pleasing sentient beings? (120) Therefore since
benefitting these beings will repay Those who give their bodies and
enter the deepest hell for their sake, I shall behave impeccably in all
(that I do) Even if they cause me a great deal of harm. (121) When for
their sake, those who are my Lords Have no regard even for their own
bodies, Then why am I the fool so full of self-importance? Why do I not
act like a servant towards them? (122) Because of their happiness the
Conquerors are delighted. But if they are harmed they are displeased.
Hence by pleasing them I shall delight the Conquerors And by harming
them I shall hurt the Conquerors. In these four verses, Shantideva
argues that if we are serious in our desire to repay the kindness of the
Buddhas and venerate them, there is no better way than pleasing sentient
beings. In fact, the well-being and interests of sentient beings are
very dear to the hearts of the fully enlightened ones. So much so that
if one serves sentient beings, the Buddhas will be pleased; and if one
hurts them, the Buddhas will be displeased. Therefore, if one is serious
about pleasing the Buddhas through one's meritorious actions, the best
way to achieve that is by paying respect to and acknowledging the
kindness of other sentient beings. He sums that up by stating, (123)
Just as desirable sense-objects would give my mind no pleasure If my
body was ablaze with fire,

Likewise, when living creatures are in pain, There is no way for the
Compassionate Ones to be pleased. The next three verses read: (124)
Therefore, as I have caused harm to living beings, Today I openly
declare all my unwholesome deeds That have brought displeasure to the
Compassionate Ones, Please bear with me, O Lords, for this displeasure I
have caused you. (125) From now on, in order to delight the Tathagatas,
I shall serve the universe and definitely cease (to cause harm).
Although many beings may kick and stamp upon my head, Even at the risk
of dying, may I delight the Protectors of the World by not retaliating.
(126) There is no doubt that those with the nature of compassion Regard
all these beings (as being the same) as themselves. Furthermore, those
who see (this Buddha-nature) as the nature of sentient beings see the
Buddhas themselves; Why then do I not respect (sentient beings)? Then he
concludes: (127) (Pleasing living beings) delights the Tathagatas And
perfectly accomplishes my own purpose as well. In addition, it dispels
the pain and misery of the universe. Therefore, I should always practice
it. These practices and reflections could also be applied by those who
believe in the concept of creation and Creator, by substituting God for
Buddhas or fully enlightened beings. This is because if one is truly
serious about living a way of life that would be in accordance with
God's wishes,

and that would please God and uphold the principle of loving God, then
the true indication of that would be manifested in the way one deals
with other sentient beings, at least one's fellow human beings.
Therefore, one's ideal of a truly loving God must translate in one's
behavior toward one's fellow human beings. In the Christian
understanding, one's relationship to God takes place within the
framework of a single lifetime. There is no idea of previous lives, but
rather the belief that one's individual life is created by God. As a
result, there is less distance, and a kind of intimacy in the
relationship; there is a closeness about it. When one applies these
practices within that framework, surely there would be a certain effect,
something quite powerful in governing one's behavior and way of life. I
will read the remaining verses. (128) For example, should some of the
king's men Cause harm to many people, Farsighted ones would not return
the harm Even if they were able (to do so). (129) For they see that
(these men) are not alone But are supported by the might of the king.
Likewise, I should not underestimate Weak beings who cause me a little
harm. (130) For they are supported by the guardians of hell And by all
the Compassionate Ones. So (behaving) like the subjects of that fiery
king, I should please all sentient beings. (131) Even if such a king
were to become angry, Could he cause the pain of hell, Which is the
fruit I would have to experience By displeasing sentient beings?

(132) And even if such a king were to be kind, He could not possibly
grant me Buddhahood, Which is the fruit I would obtain By pleasing
sentient beings. (133) Why do I not see That my future attainment of
Buddhahood, As well as glory, renown, and happiness in this very life
All come from pleasing sentient beings? And the final verse reads: (134)
While in cyclic existence, patience causes Beauty, health, and renown.
Because of these, I shall live for a very long time And win the
extensive pleasure of the universal Chakra Kings. This concludes
"Patience," the sixth chapter of Shantideva's Guide to the Bodhisattva's
Way of Life.

Meditation Let us meditate on thoughtlessness---but not a mere state of
dullness, or a "blanked-out" state of mind. Rather, you should first of
all generate the determination required to maintain a state of
thoughtlessness. Generally speaking, our mind is predominantly directed
toward external objects. Our attention and our focus follow after our
sense experiences, and remain at a sensorial and conceptual level. So
withdraw your mind inward, not letting it chase after sensory objects.
At the same time, not being so totally withdrawn that there is a kind of
dullness, you should maintain a very full state of alertness and
mindfulness. Then try to see this natural state of your consciousness in
which it is not afflicted by thoughts of the past, things that have
happened, memories, and so on; nor is it afflicted by thoughts of your

future, such as future plans, anticipations, fears, and hopes. Rather,
try to remain in the natural state. This is a bit like a river which is
flowing quite strongly, in which you cannot see the bed of the river
clearly. If there was some way you could put an immediate stop to the
flow from the direction the water is coming from and the direction the
water is flowing to, then you could keep the water still, and that would
allow you to see the bed quite clearly. Similarly, when you are able to
stop your mind from chasing after sensory objects and when you can free
your mind from being totally "blanked out," then you will begin to see
under this turbulence of the thought processes a kind of underlying
stillness, an underlying clarity of mind. You should try to do this,
even though it is very difficult at the initial stage. Especially at the
outset, since there is no specific object to focus on, there is a danger
of falling asleep. At the initial stage, when you begin to experience
the natural state of consciousness, it will be in the form of some sort
of vacuity, absence, or emptiness. This is because we are so habituated
to understanding our mind in terms of external objects that we tend to
look at the world through our concepts, images, and so on. So when you
withdraw your mind from external objects, it's almost as if you can't
recognize your mind. There's a kind of absence, a kind of vacuity.
However, as you slowly progress and get used to it, you will begin to
see an underlying clarity, a sort of luminosity. That's when you begin
to appreciate and realize the natural state of the mind. However, that
state should not be confused with the realization of emptiness, or
meditation on emptiness. Nor should you have the illusion this is a very
profound meditative experience. This is something that is common to
non-Buddhists and Buddhists alike, especially in the meditations of high
levels of concentration, which are technically called "the formless
states of mind," space-like, limitless, infinite consciousness. These
are various levels of consciousness in which there is a kind of
singlepointedness and stability, and where the stability and stillness
are even more powerful. But again, these are not very profound
meditative states. It is true, however, that many of the profound
meditative experiences come from a basis of this kind of stillness of
mind.

Begin the meditation with a simple breathing exercise. Focusing on the
right and left nostrils, do three rounds of breathing, and focus your
attention simply on the breath. Just be aware of inhaling, exhaling, and
then inhaling, exhaling, three times. Then, start the meditation.

QUESTIONS Q: Your Holiness and other teachers admonish us to be
sincerely joyful about others' worldly achievements, happiness, and
acquisitions as discussed in chapter six of Shantideva and in The Path
to Bliss. If, however, we know with certainty that a person has acquired
or achieved something through unskillful or nonvirtuous means, such as
lying, stealing, cheating, harming, in what manner should that happiness
for them be experienced and expressed? A: You are right that one's
attitude toward superficial successes that are achieved through wrong
means of livelihood such as lying, stealing, cheating, and so on, should
not be the same as for achievements and happiness which are genuine.
However, here you must bear in mind that if you examine this carefully,
you will find that although the immediate circumstances that gave rise
to a person's joy and happiness may be a wrong means of livelihood, that
is merely the immediate circumstance: the actual cause of that happiness
is the individual's merit in the past. So one has to see the difference
between immediate circumstances and long-term causes. One of the
characteristics of karmic theory is that there is a definite,
commensurate relationship between cause and effect. There is no way that
negative actions or unwholesome deeds can result in joy and happiness.
Joy and happiness, by definition, are the results or fruits of wholesome
actions. So, from that point of view, it is possible for us to admire
not so much the immediate action, but the real causes of joy. Q: In
cases of injustice, do we accept it and use it for our patience, or
attempt to change the structure of society which caused it? Where is the
balance?

A: Yes, definitely, you must take the initiative to change the
situation. I have no doubt. Shantideva's teaching, although written many
centuries ago, should be considered a source of strength for today, in
order to change our society. Shantideva is not advising us to remain
totally submissive and passive and not do anything. Rather, we should
generate patience and tolerance, and use that as a strength for then
changing the situation. Q: After someone has wronged me, I remember
this, and I think about it later and get angry again and again. How can
I keep from doing this? A: As I usually point out, in thinking about the
person who caused this anger in you, if you look at it from a different
angle, that person surely will have a lot of other positive qualities.
Furthermore, if you look carefully, you will find that the event to
which you initially responded with anger has also given you certain
opportunities, something which otherwise would not have been possible,
even from your point of view. So you can see many different angles to a
single event. However if in spite of your efforts you do not find any
such perspectives on this particular person's act, then for the time
being the best course may be simply to try to forget about it. Q: Would
Your Holiness comment further on the relationship between the
realization of emptiness, dependent arising, and patience? Would the
practice of patience without the realization of emptiness and dependent
arising always remain superficial? A: Here, what we mean by the word
"superficial" can again be seen from different perspectives. From the
perspective of a more profound level of practice, then any practice of
patience which is divorced from its complementary factor of wisdom and
understanding of emptiness will remain, in some sense, superficial,
because it may not be able to root out anger and hatred completely.
However, that is not to say that we have to wait until we have
realization of emptiness to start practicing patience. That is not the
implication. We find mentioned even in the Mahayana literature itself
that there are many bodhisattvas who have great realizations but no
realization of

emptiness. The problem is, if we were to search for such a bodhisattva,
it might be quite difficult to find one. I think, among Tibetans, there
are some people who really have a deep experience of bodhichitta. Then
among my friends there is one, I think, who has actually achieved the
state of calm abiding. And according to him, he achieved calm abiding
within four months, which is something quite amazing. But then, he also
told me that he finds it difficult to develop bodhichitta. So he is not
showing any keen interest in Tantrayana, because without bodhichitta the
practice of Tantrayana is meaningless. So in my conversation with him, I
discussed my practice a little bit. You see, because we became very
close friends, he told me about his experiences. Otherwise, these people
never show off. People such as myself who have no experience sometimes
like showing off. Q: Is it possible for a student to have a Tibetan
teacher and only see that teacher once or twice a year? A: It is very
possible, but as I pointed out earlier, what is crucial is to see that
this person possesses the minimum qualifications of a teacher. What is
also important is to reserve only the most important questions for the
teacher and not to ask silly questions. Q: If certain conditions,
delusions, or influences cause an individual to do harm to others,
and/or act irrationally, when is it justified for this individual to be
punished or imprisoned by others for that action? A: Here, I feel it may
be important to make distinctions between punishment in the form of
prevention, and punishment simply as retribution for the act committed.
It seems there are justifications for punishing someone as a means of
preventing similar actions in the future. This reminds me of the death
penalty. It is, I feel, very, very sad that it still exists. Some
nations actually prohibit it and stop the death sentence. This, I feel,
is very good. Q: In the large cities, many of the people we meet are
strangers whom we meet only once and never see again. There is much
indifference. Is there a special technique for compassion for this kind
of brief meeting?

A: In order to generate a feeling of compassion and love toward another
person, it is not presupposed that you need to know that person. If that
were the case, then there would be no possibility of generating
universal compassion because of the sheer number of sentient beings,
until you became fully enlightened in the first place. This is analogous
to generating realization of the dynamic, transient nature of all
phenomena. If that realization required being familiar with each and
every single thing and event, then it would be impossible. However, it
is possible through a universal approach to see that all things and
events which come into being due to causes and conditions are
impermanent and are transient, and so on. So you can adopt a much more
universal approach and then realize their impermanent nature. Similarly,
you can think that all experiences which are products of contaminated
actions are ultimately unsatisfactory. For that realization, you don't
need to go through each and every experience and think, "This is
unsatisfying, this is unsatisfying, that is unsatisfying." You can
generate that realization in a more universal way. Similarly when
generating universal compassion, you can generate compassion for all
sentient beings in a universal way by thinking that all beings who have
the capacity for feeling pain and pleasure, who regard their life as
precious, have this innate, instinctive wish to be happy and overcome
suffering. Therefore, I wish that they fulfill this aspiration and that
I may be able to assist them. In that way, one can generate universal
compassion. Q: If one is studying and practicing Lamrim and Dzogchen, is
there a necessity or a purpose in yidam yoga, or Anuttara Yoga Tantra?
A: In order to engage in the meditation of Dzogchen, it requires
preliminary empowerment and blessings which are associated with the
practices of Highest Yoga Tantra. So without the practice of Highest
Yoga Tantra, you cannot undertake a successful practice of Dzogchen. It
may be possible that certain teachers, when giving instructions on
Dzogchen and the preliminary practices, may not identify that this
practice belongs to a particular tantra. However, when one considers the
distinctions between Maha, Anu, and Ati,

the three inner yogas in the Nyingma terminology, one has to understand
that these three divisions are in fact divisions within Highest Yoga
Tantra. Q: Would His Holiness explain the role of solitude in achieving
enlightenment? How is it similar to a monastic environment? A: In fact,
some of the monasteries are very busy and active, I think a bit to the
extreme. In the past, there were great meditators living in the
monasteries, in fact, some people that some of my friends have known. In
order to engage in intensive practices in a more isolated way, one of
the techniques these meditators used was to arrange a particular system
of locking their door so they could take the key from the inside. In
this way, from the outside it looked as if the person was not in. That
way, they could keep the privacy and the solitude they were seeking.
Some of these meditators have, in fact, advanced to a very high level of
realization. Indeed, some of them have attained what is called the
completion stage in Highest Yoga Tantra. The Tibetan word for monastery
is gompa (Tib. dgon pa), which etymologically contains the idea that it
is a place of solitude set apart from the town. Because of that, in
Tibet, in some of the monasteries, there were strict regulations that
within the monastery one could not keep dogs because they would bark and
make noises; one could not even ring bells for ritual purposes, no
cymbal playing, no hand drum playing, no beating of drums. The only
sound was people discussing Dharma in the debating courtyards. Other
than that, there was a strict prohibition of any noise-making
activities. These days, unfortunately, it seems that people have the
impression that if in a monastery there are no ritual performances, such
as someone beating drums, or playing cymbals, or ringing bells, then it
seems as if this monastery is not complete. That is a very wrong
impression and is unfortunate. Monasteries must be filled with
meditation and self-discipline in the meditation. Without that it's just
like any other institution. Q: What should I consider in trying to
decide whether I should take the Bodhisattva vows at this time? I want
to avoid the downfalls and practice the six perfections, but wonder
whether I am capable.

A: Tomorrow, I will perform the ceremony for taking Bodhisattva vows,
preceded by a ceremony of generating bodhichitta, which is different
from taking vows. So in your case, it may be more advisable not to take
the Bodhisattva vows, but to generate bodhichitta. I don't know your
particular situation, but if you are someone who has had exposure to
Buddhism in general, and particularly Mahayana Buddhism, and has given a
lot of thought to many of the practices of Mahayana, it may be
different. Otherwise, if it is the first time you are being exposed to
this kind of practice, Bodhisattva practice, then perhaps it is wiser
not to take Bodhisattva vows at this point. Q: What should the sangha
collectively and individually do to serve others? A: This is a very
difficult issue because for the monks and nuns in the West, and
particularly for the nuns, there is no established, reliable support
system. So it is an issue that we must pay attention to and give a lot
of thought to. However, individually, if monks and nuns can make any
contribution to the society in general, then that is very admirable and
wonderful, because, in fact, that is the very purpose of one's spiritual
endeavor. Like our Christian brothers and sisters: Christian monks and
nuns are heavily involved in and committed to the service of society,
mainly in the field of education, but also in the health field. This is
really wonderful. Traditionally, among Buddhist monks and nuns, that
kind of practice is still minimal. So, as soon as we came to India---I
think, in early '60 or '61---I urged the authorities of our monasteries
and nunneries that our monks and nuns eventually should carry out more
work in these two fields. But, so far, there has been little response.
Then, there are Western Buddhist monks and nuns. Although there are some
institutions here and there in Europe and Australia and many other
places, still, at the moment, everywhere, you will find some
difficulties. Of course, it will take time. So I really admire those
Western monks and nuns who, in spite of many difficulties, keep their
vows and enthusiasm. Last March, we had a very fruitful meeting at
Dharamsala; many nuns also participated, and some are

here. They explained their difficulties. Their explanation made me cry.
They are very efficient in that they are capable of piercing the hearts
of their audience. Q: Could you give advice to the person who comes to
Buddhism late in life and starts practicing and studying the complexity
of scriptures? A: Don't worry. We have a historical precedent here from
which you can draw strength and encouragement. During the time of the
Buddha, there was a householder called Pelgye. At the age of eighty, he
decided to take serious interest in Dharma practice. As a result, he was
insulted and derided by his sons and grandchildren. Finally, he gave up
his life as a householder and joined a monastic order. And in fact, at
the age of eighty, he gained high levels of realization. When my senior
tutor, Ling Rinpoche, became the Abbot of Gyuto Monastery, his immediate
predecessor was a very good scholar and a very good monk. Until that
person was around twenty-five years old, he was one of the dop dops, or
"stupid monks." They never are interested in learning or study, but just
in playing and going here and there. This type of monk we call "dop
dop." Sometimes, they are troublemakers also, not only in the monastery,
but even in the town; sometimes they fight. They even use swords, and
this is very stupid, very naughty. So it was with this person. Until the
age of twenty-five, he remained like that. Then, somehow he changed and
put all his energy into study. Then, he became the top scholar. Such
stories should give us more hope. I think quite a number of the past
great masters and teachers had many difficulties in their early life and
family life. Then, at age thirty, forty, fifty, they started their
serious practice and then became great masters. There are many stories.
So even in old age, the physical situation declines, but still,
comparatively, the human brain is still there. Then, in addition, in
Buddhist belief, there is the theory of rebirth. Given that there is a
belief in rebirth in Buddhism, no time is too late. If you start even
just one year before your death, the fruits of your efforts will not be
wasted, because there is rebirth. They will be carried on and will be
continued in the next life.

The great Sakya Pandita Kunga Gyaltsen said that knowledge is something
that needs to be developed, that needs to be acquired, even if you are
definitely going to die tomorrow. You can claim it in your next life, as
if you asked someone to keep something for you. However, for people who
do not believe in rebirth, these arguments are quite silly. Q: Your
Holiness, please explain the concept of prayer in Buddhism. Who or what
are the prayers directed to, since there is no Creator? A: There are two
types of prayer. I think prayer is, for the most part, simply reminders
in your daily practice. So, the verses look like prayers, but are
actually reminders of how to speak, how to deal with other problems,
other people, things like that in daily life. For example, in my own
daily practice, prayer, if I am leisurely, takes about four hours. Quite
long. For the most part, I think my practice is reviewing: compassion,
forgiveness, and, of course, shunyata. Then, in my case, the major
portion is the visualization of deity, mandala, and attendant tantric
practices including visualization of death and rebirth. In my daily
practice, the deity mandala, deity yoga, and the visualization of death,
rebirth, and intermediate state is done eight times. So, eight times
death is eight times rebirth. I am supposed to be preparing for my
death. When actual death comes, whether I will succeed or not, still, I
don't know. Then, some portion of prayer is appeal to Buddha. Although
we do not consider Buddha as a Creator, at the same time we consider
Buddha as a higher being who purified himself. So he has special energy,
infinite energy or power. In certain ways, then, in this type of prayer,
the appeal to Buddha can be seen as similar to the appeal to God as the
Creator.

SECOND SESSION Editor's Note: In the final teaching session, His
Holiness began with the question and answer session in order to present
a discourse on the twelve links of dependent origination at the end of
the teaching.

QUESTIONS Q: Is it necessary to seek an actual experience in order to
fully understand it and have compassion toward it? For instance, many
people in this room have generally lived lives free of suffering, such
as poverty and political oppression. Does this mean we should be going
beyond our television sets and newspapers and getting closer to really
experiencing these things? Is this an effective way to counterbalance
apathy? A: At the initial stage, if you directly face suffering
situations where you actually see suffering, then it will have greater
impact on your developing compassion. However, there are different ways
of reflecting on suffering. For instance, as I pointed out earlier, you
could directly encounter a sight of someone suffering, which would give
rise to your feeling of empathy and compassion, although you were not
undergoing conscious or concrete sufferings as such. Then, toward those
who are engaged in activities which are negative or harmful, one could
also direct one's compassion, remembering that what they are doing is
accumulating causes and conditions which will later lead them to
undesirable consequences. The difference is only a matter of time. In
one case, they are already at the resultant state, at the level of
fruition; in the second case, they are not actually suffering, but they
are at the causal stage during which they are already working toward
that. So you can develop compassion toward that. Even in the case of
suffering, as I said earlier, there are different levels of suffering.
For example, what we conventionally identify as pleasurable experiences
are, in reality, sufferings of change. Underlying that is the basic
unsatisfactory nature of existence in samsara. So once you begin to
develop compassion based on such deeper levels of realization of
suffering, then you don't need immediate experiences of suffering in
order to motivate you to compassionate acts. Q: You say that compassion
consists of treating others with tolerance and kindness, and not doing
harm to others. Should not compassion cause us to actively reach out to
those in need, such as to alleviate the suffering of those who are ill,
who live in extreme poverty, or who are victims of true

injustice? Buddhism has sometimes been accused of neglecting the
sufferings that exist in society. Please comment. A: I think that to
some extent this is true. As I mentioned earlier, Buddhist monks and
nuns must take more active work in the society, like their Christian
brothers and sisters do. For example, on my first visit to Thailand, I
think during the late '60s, I particularly discussed this with the
patriarch, and he explained that it is also true, according to the
Vinaya texts, that monks and nuns must remain isolated from society.
That is true, and my point is also true. So I explained, "Yes, that is
true about the Vinaya texts. But at the same time, the very purpose of
our practice is for the benefit of others. Therefore, at a practical
level, if we can do more, it is very worthwhile." One should not lose
sight of the basic principle behind the monastic way of life, which is,
so far as one's own interest is concerned, to have as little involvement
as possible, as little business as possible. On the other hand, when it
comes to the interest of serving others, then one should have as much
involvement as possible. Q: Do Buddhists attempt to "evangelize" or send
missionaries to the world? There is so much spiritual hunger. If you
don't, is there a reason? A: I think during Ashoka's period, there were
some Buddhist missions. But basically, in the Buddhist tradition there
is no emphasis on evangelism, or sending missionaries to convert, or a
movement for conversion, unless someone comes to seek the teaching.
Then, of course, it is our duty or responsibility to explain. In the
past, maybe it was different, but today the world has become much
smaller, and the spirit of harmony is very essential. So, I believe, the
Buddhist missionary is out of the question. But even about the
missionary work of other religious traditions, I still have some
reservations. If one side tries to propagate their religion, and another
side also does a similar thing, then logically, there is the possibility
of conflict. So I don't think this is something good. My belief is, out
of five billion human beings, I think there are only a few sincere, very
genuine believers. Of course, I do not count those people who say "I am
Christian" because their family background is Christian, because

in daily life they may not consider the Christian faith very much. So
excluding these people, of those who sincerely practice their religion,
there are perhaps around one billion. That means that four billion, the
majority of the people, are nonbelievers. So we must find a way to try
to reach this majority of people, four billion people, to make them good
human beings, or moral persons, without any religion. That is the point.
Regarding compassion and related things, I consider them just good
qualities of human beings, not necessarily religious subjects. So one
can remain without any religious faith, but be a good, sensible human
being and have a sense of responsibility or commitment for a better
world, a happier world. In this regard, I think a proper way of
education is very important. And media also is very important. Q: I have
been betrayed and treated unfairly by two people. This has created a
great monetary loss for me and made it difficult to support my family.
When I analyze this situation, I see that if I had been more aware, I
could have recognized the betrayal earlier, cut off from these others,
and saved myself from loss. So I am to blame. How can I stop hating
myself for this loss? I know hating myself does no good, but I cannot
stop. A: It is not possible to stop hating oneself, if one is already in
that situation, simply by adopting a particular thought once or twice.
In fact, we have been discussing various techniques and methods over the
last few days relevant to dealing with such situations. It is through a
process of learning, training, and getting used to it that one will be
able to deal with these difficulties. Q: I have read in Buddhist books
that it is inaccurate to believe we are learning any particular lessons
in a given lifetime. Yet it feels that way, and seems consistent with
karma. What is the correct or useful understanding? A: I think there is
some misunderstanding here, maybe related to the Buddhist idea of
rebirth. According to Buddhism, there is definitely new knowledge which
you gain through learning and practices, and you also gain many new
experiences. For example, if we look at the Buddhist epistemological
theory of mind and mental factors, according to one of the Abhidharma
texts called Compendium of Knowledge, there are fifty-one

types of mental factors. These are all different modalities of mind
which we possess in our ordinary state as human beings. As we progress
on the path, through our meditation and practice, there are many other
types or modalities of mind which cannot be found within this list of
fifty-one, but which we have to consciously and newly acquire as we go
along on the path. For example, with regard to concentration or
single-pointedness of mind, we find in Buddhist literature so many
descriptions of various levels and stages of concentration and
single-pointedness of mind, and all of these are to be developed newly,
through practice and meditation. Q: How does one meditate on emptiness?
A: I will deal with this in the presentation after the question/answer
session. Q: Is there a way to train our minds so that we don't always
feel tremendous sadness because of the overwhelming suffering in the
world? In other words, how can we feel joyful in the face of so much
suffering? A: Bringing about transformation in one's outlook and way of
thinking is not a simple matter. It requires application of so many
different factors from different directions. For instance, according to
Buddhist practices, we emphasize the unification of method (or skillful
means) and wisdom. So you should not have the notion that there is just
one secret, and if you can get that right, then everything will be okay.
One should not have that kind of notion. For example, in my own case, if
I compare my usual mental attitude today, my mental attitude in this
situation, to that of twenty or thirty years ago, there is a big
difference. But these differences came about step by step. Although I
started learning Buddhism at the age of five or six years, at that time
I had no interest in it, although I was seen as the highest
reincarnation. Then---I think around sixteen years old---I really began
to feel serious and really tried to start serious practice. Then, in my
twenties, even when I was in China and there were a lot of difficulties,
still, whenever I had the occasion, I received teaching from my tutor.
Then, unlike the previous time, I really made an effort from within.
Then---I think around the age of thirtyfour or thirty-five---I really
just started to think about shunyata, emptiness.

And as a result of intensive meditation based on serious effort, my
understanding of the nature of cessation became something real. Then, I
could feel some sense: "Yes, there is something, there is a
possibility." That really gave me great inspiration. Still, at that
time, bodhichitta was very difficult. I admire bodhichitta, that kind of
mind is really marvelous. But the practice was still very far away in my
thirties. Then, somehow in my forties, mainly as a result of studying
and practicing Shantideva's text and some other books, eventually I came
to have some experience of bodhichitta. Still, my mind is in bad shape.
But somehow, now I have conviction that if I had enough time,
appropriate time and an appropriate area, I could develop bodhichitta.
This has been forty years. So, when I meet people who claim to have
attained high realizations within a short period of time, sometimes it
makes me laugh, although I try to hide that feeling. But you see, deep
down, mental development takes time. If someone says, "Oh, through
hardship, through many years, then something will change," then I see
something is working. If someone says, "Oh, within a short period, two
years, something big changed," that is unrealistic. Q: I have heard the
mind described or defined as a container for thoughts. Is the object of
meditation to remove the clutter of thoughts from the container of mind?
Will doing this let the light shine? A: In Buddhist terminology, we use
the expression "purifying the stains of mind," rather than "emptying
mind of its thought," because when we say "thoughts," we include both
positive and negative thoughts. However, the aim of meditation is to
arrive at what is known as the "state of nonconceptuality." And here,
one must understand that when we use the term "nonconceptual," it can
mean different things in different contexts. So the "nonconceptual
state" means one thing in the context of the sutra explanation, and
something different in the various classes of tantra. Even within
Highest Yoga Tantra, it means something different in what are called the
"Father Tantras" and the "Mother Tantras." We find the term
"nonconceptual" quite frequently used in the context of Dzogchen
teachings and Mahamudra teachings. And in these two cases, the
association really is from the point of view of Highest Yoga Tantra
understanding.

In a text on Mahamudra written by Dakpo Tashi Namgyal, a great scholar
and practitioner, he claims that the Mahamudra path belongs neither to
the sutra system nor to the tantra system. He describes it as a unique
path, and he must have some grounds for making that claim. However, when
you look at the statement, the notion of a path that belongs neither to
sutra nor tantra is quite difficult to understand. In any case, that is
not Buddhism. Buddha taught only the Sutrayana and the Tantrayana. But
here is something which belongs to neither, which means that it is
something different. Anyway, in the Mahamudra practice, and in the
Dzogchen practice, the main emphasis is on the combination of shunyata
and clear light. Here again, when we use the term "clear light," it can
mean two different things. In one way, it can refer to the object which
is the emptiness, and "emptiness" can be understood in terms of clear
light. In another way, it means the subjective experience of that
emptiness. So "clear light" can have both objective and subjective
connotations. The unification of both the subjective and objective
aspects of clear light is what is emphasized in the Dzogchen and
Mahamudra approaches. However, when using the words "object" and
"subject" here, one should not have the uncomfortable feeling that, "Oh,
still, there is duality," because so far as the phenomenological
experience, or the state of the individual who is the meditator is
concerned, from his or her perspective there is no duality. It is only
from the perspective of a third person, or if you examine it in
retrospect, that you would see that kind of a subject and object. But in
the actual experience there is no duality between subject and object. So
when we talk about how to develop this state of nonconceptuality, there
must be the potential or seed inherent within the individual
practitioner to arrive at the state of nonconceptuality. However, we
should not have the notion that, since the goal is to arrive at a
nonconceptual state, nothing which involves conceptual thought processes
can be of benefit to that goal. In fact, we find extensive discussion of
this point in the second chapter of the Exposition of Valid Means to
Cognition by Dharmakirti, where, with a lot of reasoning and argument,
he demonstrates how conceptual thought processes, thinking, reflection,
and meditations which

involve intellectual thought processes ultimately culminate in an
experience of nonconceptuality. This is something to bear in mind. Also,
we speak of two principal types of meditation: one is analytic, in which
you employ your analytic faculty for investigation; the other is more
absorptive, where single-pointedness is really the key. Since analysis
involves using thought and thought processes, in Highest Yoga Tantra,
when you cultivate special or penetrative insight, analysis is not used.
Rather, it is done through a technique which emphasizes
single-pointedness of mind. This is the type of method which you also
find in Dzogchen and Mahamudra. Q: Would you be kind enough to elaborate
on the possibility of choice for doing good or bad deeds? Do your past
deeds determine your actions and your view? A: In fact, as you pointed
out, much of our behavior, thought patterns, and views may be determined
or governed by our past deeds. When talking about being influenced by
past deeds, we are talking about the influence of conditioning. However,
it is possible by exerting one's will and freedom of choice to distance
oneself from the effects of those past deeds and try to habituate one's
mind to ways with which you were not familiar in the past. You can
consciously develop that familiarity and thus try to free yourself from
the constraints of past deeds. However, there are certain biological
forces from which it may be more difficult to free oneself. In fact,
according to Buddhism, the very physical body that we have is seen as an
aggregate, a product of ignorance and delusions. It is seen not only as
a basis of our current state of existence, which is characterized by
limitations and suffering, but also as a kind of springboard for
producing future experiences of suffering as well. There is something
very biological within our body that obstructs us from trying to get out
of that bondage, almost like something in-built, a sort of lethargy or
something which makes it heavy. This also obstructs our clarity of mind.
But it is possible to gain control over the very subtle levels of energy
in the bodily elements through training the mind and through meditative
experiences---especially in tantra, where, generally speaking, we can
find within our bodily elements the gross levels, the subtle levels, and
the very

subtle levels. Then, in that way, one can outweigh the influences which
are felt at the grosser levels of bodily elements. So there is that
possibility too. Q: In my understanding, enlightenment is, in a sense,
freedom from the bondage of causes and conditions. How can one attain
this state and still remain in this world where the nature of existence
is relative and causal? A: So far as the bounds of causes and conditions
are concerned, they are universal, and reach even the stage of
Buddhahood. For example, let us take the case of Buddha's omniscient
mind, which is totally enlightened but interacts with objects. It is
transient and momentarily changing, it is a process, so it is
impermanent. You can see the principle of causality operating even
there. However, sometimes the state of Buddhahood is defined as a state
of immortality, the state of permanence. This should be understood in
its proper context---it is described as a permanent state in terms of
its continuum. Sometimes the state of Buddhahood is described as
permanent because when we talk of the embodiments of the Buddha, there
are both impermanent ones, which are subject to causes and conditions,
and also permanent ones. Now, when we speak of the embodiments of the
Buddha, the Buddhakayas, we can find some which are momentarily changing
and some which are not momentarily changing. So because there are two
aspects when we talk of Buddhakaya or the "embodiments" of the Buddha,
in its generality it is said to be unchanging and eternal. Q: I am
confused by your statement that causing injury is the perpetrator's
essential nature and should not be held against him. Is not everyone's
essential nature Buddha-nature? A: I think there is a slight
misunderstanding here. Shantideva used the argument in a hypothetical
sense. There was a conditional clause there. Verse 39 reads: Even if it
were the nature of the childish To cause harm to other beings, It would
still be incorrect to be angry with them,

For this would be like begrudging fire for having the nature to burn.
There was that conditional "if." However, when we use the term
"essential nature," here again we have to understand that in different
contexts it can mean very different things. When we say the essential
nature of sentient beings' mind is pure, we are talking about
Buddha-nature, which is at a very different level. Related to this point
is the need to appreciate the subtle meanings of the various technical
terms when we read texts dealing with the Buddhist philosophy of
emptiness. For example, one of the key Sanskrit words critical to our
understanding of the concept of emptiness is svabhava, which can be
translated as "intrinsic being" or "self-nature," or simply as
"essence." Thus it has varied connotations according to differing
contexts. When you read these texts, you should be very careful to not
be rigid about a particular understanding of the term and then try to
apply that in all the contexts in which it is used. The same term may be
used by one philosophical system, such as Madhyamika, in one way, and
then in a different way by another school of thought. So it is important
to have that flexibility and to appreciate the diversity of its meanings
in different contexts. Q: Can you explain something about Wednesday's
Green Tara empowerment? What commitment is involved, etc.? A: The
ceremony which is being performed in relation to Green Tara tomorrow is
that of a blessing, not a full empowerment. It also will be combined
with a Long Life empowerment, the transmission of which comes from the
Fifth Dalai Lama. So it is a practice which is unique to the lineage of
the Dalai Lamas, and there is no specific commitment. So isn't that
nice? You get the blessing, but there is no commitment! However, if you
take Bodhisattva vows in the morning, there will be commitment. These
are principally the eighteen root vows and forty-six auxiliary vows or
precepts of a Bodhisattva. So as I mentioned this morning, if this is
your first exposure to Buddhist practices then maybe it is wiser not to
take the vows.

Q: What advice would you offer to a Christian who studies Buddhism and
who is considering taking the Bodhisattva vows this week? A: It should
be okay.

TWELVE LINKS OF DEPENDENT ORIGINATION Up until now, we have been talking
about the practice of patience and tolerance, which, as I pointed out
earlier, is one of the six perfections, the main practices of
Bodhisattvas. Again, as I pointed out, there are three principal types
of patience or tolerance: acceptance of harm and injuries inflicted by
others; voluntarily taking upon oneself the pain, sufferings, and
hardships that are involved in the practice; and developing and
enhancing one's capacity for patience and tolerance by developing one's
appreciation of the nature of reality, such as the complexity of
situations. This could also include insight into the ultimate nature of
reality, such as emptiness and so on. One thing which I haven't pointed
out is that a genuine or ideal practice of each of the perfections must
be complete; it must contain within itself all of the aspects of the
other five perfections. For instance, in the case of the practice of
patience, while remaining in the state of patience and tolerance,
encouraging others also to do so is the practice of giving or
generosity. The second is basing your practice of patience and tolerance
on honesty and sincerity, which are aspects of ethical discipline
involved in the practice of patience. The third, of course, is patience
itself. The fourth, which is joyous effort, refers to all the efforts
which are involved in maintaining patience and tolerance. The fifth is
that when you engage in such a practice, you maintain a
single-pointedness of mind and the ability to focus on whatever you are
doing and remain single-pointed. Mindfulness can also be included here,
which is the aspect of concentration and single-pointedness in one's
practice of patience. The wisdom practice is your ability to judge what
is appropriate and what is inappropriate as well as what is required in
a given situation. These are all faculties of wisdom and intelligence
that are a concomitant part of your practice of patience. This could
also include the wisdom of realizing the empty nature of phenomena, if
you have it. This is

the same in the case of the practices of all the other perfections, such
as generosity: within the practice of generosity, all of the other
perfections must be complete. And the same is true for ethical
discipline, and so on. When we talk of the six perfections---generosity,
ethical discipline, patience, perseverance, concentration, and
wisdom---they also can be found in other, non-Bodhisattva practitioners
who are working more toward their own individual liberation. What makes
the practice of these six factors perfected is the motivation involved.
In order for one's practice of patience to be a practice of the
perfection of patience, you need the motivation which is bodhichitta. If
your practice of patience and generosity and so on is motivated by
bodhichitta, the aspiration to attain enlightenment for the benefit of
all, then your practice becomes truly a practice of perfection. All of
these practices of the six perfections belong either to practices
associated with the accumulation of merit or practices principally
associated with the accumulation of wisdom. The reason there is this
division into two principal categories on the path, the method aspect
and the wisdom aspect, is because the resultant state of Buddhahood is
characterized in terms of two kayas of the Buddha, or the two
embodiments. One is the dharmakaya state, which can be seen as the state
of ultimate realization of the Buddha's being, or self-realization. The
other embodiment is called rupakaya, which is the form body. These two
kayas or embodiments have different functions: the dharmakaya state is
like the self-realization of one's own perfected state; the rupakaya,
the form body, is specifically assumed in order to be of service, in
order to make the Buddha accessible to other sentient beings. It is a
kind of medium through which the dharmakaya can interact with and
benefit other sentient beings. So what you have here is a general
framework of the Mahayana path according to the sutra system, in which
your whole motivation to embark on the spiritual path to perfection is
that of bodhichitta, the aspiration to attain full enlightenment for the
sake of all. Then, motivated by that intention, you engage in a path
that is characterized by the practice of six perfections, which
constitute the unification of method and wisdom. And through the stages
of the ten Bodhisattva levels, you arrive at the resultant state of
fruition, where there is an embodiment of dharmakaya and rupakaya. That
is the general approach you find in the sutra system according to the
Mahayana path.

Now what is unique and what makes the Buddhist tantric approach
different from the Mahayana sutra approach is that, according to tantra,
the unification of method and wisdom is understood at a deeper, more
profound level. This is because in the sutra system the unification of
method and wisdom is understood in terms of two distinct entities, two
totally different cognitive events. So although method and wisdom
complement each other, the unification is understood in terms of
complementarity, one complementing the other, one supporting and
reinforcing the other. However, in tantra, the unification is taken to a
much deeper level, where the understanding is that within one event of
consciousness or mental state, both the method and the wisdom aspects
are complete. It is not as if there are two distinct states of mind, one
complementing the other, but rather there is a kind of assimilation
within a single cognitive event of both method and wisdom. That is what
forms the basis in all the stages of tantra. Within the tantra, there
are different systems or divisions. Sometimes the tantric path is
divided into six classes; generally, it is divided into four. The
differentiating characteristic between the first three classes of tantra
and Highest Yoga Tantra is that in Highest Yoga Tantra there is an
extensive presentation and emphasis on the practice of clear light,
which is absent in the three lower classes of tantra. In order to
understand the idea of clear light properly, one has to understand the
possibility of being able to perceive consciousness, and energies that
go along with the consciousness, at many different levels of subtlety.
Because of this, in Highest Yoga Tantra literature we find a lot of
discussion of the chakras, the energy channels, the energies that flow
within them, and the essential drops that are located at principal sites
within the body. This is because they are all inextricably linked with
the idea of differentiating various levels of consciousness and energy.
So it is because of these principles that you find in the Highest Yoga
Tantra approach imageries and iconography which depict either very
wrathful or erotic forms. Many of these Highest Yoga Tantra practices
that are related with energy channels, chakras, subtle energies, and so
on, take into account certain basic constituents that form our bodily
existence, such as the six elements. Due to the flow of these elements
and energies within our body, and due to their movements and energy
levels, these affect the states of our

mind, the levels of our consciousness. For example, we find that there
are certain situations or occasions in our life where we can have
glimpses of what could be called the experience of the subtle mind. This
is described by Buddha-shrijnana in one of his texts, in which he says
that in our ordinary state we have certain occasions when we naturally
get a glimpse of the experience of the subtle mind, such as in deep
sleep, sexual climax, when we faint, and at the time of death. During
these stages, we naturally experience a form of subtle consciousness. So
out of these four naturally occurring situations, if the meditator
applies certain meditative techniques, it is possible for him or her to
create opportunities for grasping the moment and consciously generating
the experience of subtle clear light. This is especially so during the
time of death, and then, in order, during the times of deep sleep and
sexual climax. So it is in the light of these factors that one has to
understand the idea of the yab-yum principle, the male-and-female union.
If our understanding is correct, we find that the kind of sexual act
that the male-female deities are engaged in is very different from what
we would understand by a sexual act in the ordinary sense. What is
required here is the capability on the part of the participants in this
kind of yab-yum act to hold the energy and protect it from emission. In
fact, when a tantric practitioner fails in holding the energy and spills
it, this is considered a great fault. This is very much emphasized and
is considered a very grave mistake on the part of the practitioner,
especially in Kalachakra Tantra. So what we understand here is that the
greater or more profound the unification of method and wisdom is, the
more effective and powerful one's path is toward enlightenment. However,
a successful practice of all of these principles is foundationally
grounded in the generation and realization of bodhichitta. Without that
prerequisite, there is no way one can successfully engage in these
practices. In order to successfully generate bodhichitta, one needs a
sense of commitment and responsibility, taking upon oneself the
responsibility to help others become free from suffering. That is a
precondition for generating bodhichitta. That, in turn, requires the
condition of having developed universal compassion.

We find in the tradition two principal techniques or methods for
cultivating such universal compassion: the "seven-point cause and
effect" method, and the "exchange and equality of oneself with others."
These are the two principal techniques or methods for cultivating
compassion. Exchanging oneself for and equalizing oneself with others is
the technique which you find in the eighth chapter of Shantideva's Guide
to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life. So these are all various aspects of
the Mahayana path toward the attainment of full enlightenment. However,
in order to generate genuine compassion, which is the feeling that the
sight of other sentient beings' suffering is unbearable, what is
required on the part of the individual first of all is to be able to
appreciate the seriousness, or the intensity, of suffering. So here a
realization of the nature of suffering is necessary. The type of
compassion that we normally have is such that when we come across the
sight of someone who is really in pain, we feel spontaneous empathy. We
think, "Oh, how bad, how pitiful." However, when you come across someone
who is successful in worldly terms, instead of feeling sorry and
compassionate, you feel envious and jealous. So that is really a
childish compassion. The reason we have this kind of feeling is that we
haven't really understood the true meaning of suffering. So in order to
develop that genuine appreciation of suffering, the meaning of
suffering, we have to train ourselves in the foundational paths. It is
not sufficient to simply develop the realization of the suffering nature
and recognize the true meaning of suffering. It is also important to
develop an appreciation of the possibility of the alternative, that is,
liberation from suffering. Here, an understanding of the principles of
the Four Noble Truths becomes relevant. This is a path which is common
to both Mahayana Buddhist and non-Mahayana Buddhist approaches. When we
speak of the Four Noble Truths, we find that there are two sets of cause
and effect. One set relates to our experience and existence in samsara,
suffering being the result and the origin of suffering being the cause.
So one set of causes and effects deals with the manner in which we
remain in the cycle of existence. Another set deals with the process
that allows us to get out of that bondage and attain freedom from
suffering. These two are cessation as the result, and the path leading
to cessation as

the cause. When we understand these two sets of causes and effects in a
more extensive way, then we focus on the principles of the twelve links
of dependent origination. In other words, the twelve links of dependent
origination is an elaboration on the themes summarized in the Four Noble
Truths. In the twelve links of dependent origination, there is both a
reverse order and the order in its proper sequence. If one reflects on
its proper sequence of order, then one sees that ignorance is the first.
Ignorance leads to volitional acts; this leads to implanting imprints on
consciousness; which leads to name and form; culminating in aging and
death. By reflecting on this chain, we understand the mechanism by which
we take rebirth in the cycle of existence and then go through the
vicious cycle of life and death. When we reverse the order and reflect
upon the cessation of each of the twelve links, then we will see that
the cessation of aging and death depends upon the cessation of becoming;
the cessation of that depends on the cessation of grasping or clinging,
and so on. So in its reverse order, we understand the process by which
one can get out of this bondage and obtain freedom and liberation from
samsara. All the practices which are based on appreciation of the
sequential and reverse order of the twelve links of dependent
origination are found in what are known as "the practices of the
thirty-seven aspects of the path to enlightenment." And this begins with
the practice of the four mindfulnesses and so on. So the thirty-seven
aspects of the path to enlightenment are, in other words, practices
associated with the twelve links of dependent origination. The first of
the thirty-seven aspects of the path to enlightenment is mindfulness of
the body. Next is mindfulness of our feeling and emotions. Then,
mindfulness of mind or consciousness. Then, mindfulness of phenomena.
When one meditates on mindfulness of the body, reflecting upon the
manner in which the body comes into being, and examining the causal
conditions, then one will also see the impurities of the body. Then,
from that perspective, one will find that even those who seem successful
in worldly terms are not really objects worthy of envy; they are still
within the bondage of suffering and dissatisfaction. In fact, if we
think about this more

seriously, we find that the greater the success that one enjoys in
worldly terms, the more complex the psychological make-up seems to be,
because there is a much more complex nexus of hopes and fears and
apprehensions and inhibitions. What Āryadeva says in his Four Hundred
Verses seems to be very true. He states that those who are successful or
fortunate in worldly terms are plagued by mental and emotional pains,
and those who are poor are plagued by physical suffering and pains. This
seems to be very true. What makes all sentient beings live a life
characterized by suffering and pain is that ultimately they are all
under the power or influence of ignorance. One should try to develop a
sense of urgency, as if one were an AIDS patient. Once one has that
illness, there is a sense of urgency because one's days are numbered.
Similarly, one should think, "As long as I am under the influence and
power of ignorance and misknowledge, then sooner or later something is
bound to turn up. So I must work now." One must develop that sense of
urgency. As long as one remains under the influence and power of the
three poisons of the mind, there is no room for real happiness. So in a
way, we are like slaves of the three poisons of mind. And while there
exists a possibility or a method of freeing ourselves from bondage, then
not making the effort to obtain such freedom seems to be quite wretched
and foolish. So when one meditates and thinks along these lines, when
one says the words, "the three realms of existence in samsara," then
from somewhere in the depths of one's heart comes a sense of "Oh, I must
get out of it. I must attain freedom from this." What we generate from
our heart is the desire to free ourselves from the bondage of these
three poisons of mind. However, in order to successfully attain that
liberation, it requires a long period of meditation and practice---in
some cases, even several lifetimes. What becomes urgent in that case is
to make sure that we obtain a favorable form of existence in the future
so we will have the opportunity to carry on and pursue this goal from
where we left off. So although our ultimate goal is liberation and we
set that as our objective, in order to arrive there the first step is to
ensure that we have a favorable rebirth. And in order to do that, what
is required is principally living an ethically disciplined way of life
in which one refrains from the ten

negative actions or ten nonvirtues. These ten nonvirtues include three
actions of body (killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct); four of
speech (lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, and meaningless gossip);
and three of mind (covetousness, harmful intent, and distorted views).
In order to generate a genuine enthusiasm to live a way of life within
the kind of ethical discipline characterized by refraining from the ten
nonvirtues, it is important to develop a good understanding of the
mechanisms of karma, cause and effect. Now, when it comes to trying to
understand the mechanisms behind the concept of karma, and how actions
and effects relate to each other, and how one leads to the other at a
very subtle level, these remain beyond the scope of our ordinary
understanding. At the initial stage, the most subtle aspects of the
karmic theory remain beyond our comprehension. Therefore, a degree of
faith, or reliance on the Buddha's word regarding the doctrine of karma,
seems to be necessary. Because of this, observing the law of karma is
very closely associated with taking refuge. In fact, living a
disciplined way of life within the law of karma is seen as the precept
of taking refuge. In order to engage in such practices as taking refuge,
living a way of life which accords with the law of karma, and living in
an ethically disciplined way characterized by observance of the ten
virtues, and so on, we require a tremendous sense of confidence that we
can do it. To generate that, and also a kind of enthusiasm, we find in
the Buddha's texts a discussion of the preciousness of the human body
and human existence. At that stage, we never talk about how impure the
body and bodily substances are, or how imperfect they are. In fact, we
are talking about how good it is, how meaningful, how purposeful, how
much potential lies within our body, what good purpose it can be used
for, and so on. This is to instill a sense of confidence and courage.
Therefore, at that stage, one should not focus on the negative aspects
of the body, particularly if one has the problem of low self-esteem or
self-hatred. If one talks about imperfections of the body, impurities,
and so on to such a person, it might aggravate the problem and make it
even worse. At that stage, we are talking mainly about the
characteristics, benefits, and advantages of the human form, in order to
generate not only a sense of urgency to appreciate the potentials of our
body, but also a sense of commitment to use it in a positive way.

Then, the practitioner is reminded of impermanence and death. When we
talk about impermanence here, we are using very conventional terms: one
day, we will no longer be here. This awareness of impermanence is
encouraged, so that when it is coupled with an appreciation of the
enormous potential of human existence, it will give a sense of urgency:
"I must utilize every precious moment of my life." That kind of
enthusiasm, eagerness, and confidence must be developed. To reach that
point, it is important to study first. But as Dromtonpa said, when he is
studying and learning, he does not forget the practices of contemplation
and meditation. Similarly, when he is contemplating a given topic, he
hasn't forgotten the importance of study and meditation. And when he is
meditating, he doesn't forget the importance of learning and
contemplation. In other words, he always combines the three. That is a
concerted, coordinated, and combined approach. This is very important so
that there won't be any imbalances between intellectual learning and
practical implementation. Otherwise, there is a danger of too much
intellectualization, which will kill the practice, or too much emphasis
on practical implementation without study, which will kill the
understanding. There has to be a balance. The overview that I have
given, the procedure of the path as given in reverse order, starting
from the top down, is found in Āryadeva's Four Hundred Verses, where he
sums up the entire Buddhist path. He states that at the initial stage,
what is important is to reverse one's negative and destructive actions
of body, speech, and mind. So that is the importance of living an
ethically disciplined way of life. At the second stage, the importance
should be shifted to overcoming delusory states and their underlying
ignorance, which apprehends things and events as if they were inherently
existent and possessed intrinsic reality and identity. Then, at the
third stage, all forms of imprints, tendencies, and dispositions which
are implanted on one's psyche by delusory states are to be removed. So
there are three distinct stages in one's evolutionary process toward
full enlightenment.

Meditation

Let us pause a moment for silent meditation. During the past sessions,
as we have been having discussions, you might have had some experience
of joy or happiness, some pleasant experience. Some of you might have
felt tired, exhausted. So now, let us try to focus on and examine what
that "I" or "self" is that has experienced this joy. Let us focus our
attention on this and search for it. What is definite is that it does
not exist independently of our body and mind. And out of the two, the
body and mind, it is clear that the body cannot be seen as this "self."
Feelings are also not the self because in our ordinary notion of self,
we say "I feel," as if there is an agent, as if there is a "feeler" and
a feeling. So feeling cannot be the person. Nor can you identify
perception as the self, because again we say, "I perceive," and it seems
that there is an act of perception and someone who perceives. So
perception cannot be identified with the "self" or the person. Now, if
you were given the choice to exchange your mind for a mind that was more
perfect and clear and aware, most of us seem to be willing to do that.
Similarly, we also feel this way toward our body; if there were a
possibility of exchanging it for something much more desirable or
attractive....Again, although so far medical technology hasn't allowed
us to be able to transplant brains, there is a kind of willingness; if
it were possible, we would like to exchange it. What this shows is that
the way we naturally perceive ourselves, the way the sense of "self"
arises, is that there is something like the agent, or the subject, which
experiences and perceives. Then, the aggregates are something that, in
some sense, are owned by the "self," or something which are part of the
"self." Similarly, when you feel intense anger or hatred, there is that
strong sense of "I": "I am angry." Then, when your hatred and anger are
directed toward, let us say, your enemy, you feel him or her with a kind
of grasping, an idea of some kind of solid, concrete person who is one
hundred percent negative, or one hundred percent positive, depending on
how you feel. So if the person, our object of hatred and anger, existed
in the way we perceive, then whatever quality we project onto the person
should be part of that reality. That means that the object of our anger
and hatred will remain one

hundred percent negative, and there is no room for change. But this is
not the case. So to our naive, natural mind, everything appears to us as
if it has an independent, solid, objective entity, an objective
status---as if it is existing in its own right, objectively and
independently. However, if things and events existed in the way we
perceive them, then the more we search for them, the clearer they should
become. What is very clear is that when we begin to search, they sort of
disintegrate and disappear, and they are unfindable. Even in modern
scientific terms, physicists, in their pursuit of understanding the
nature of physical reality, have reached a stage where they have lost
the concept of solid matter; they can't come up with the real identity
of matter. So they are beginning to see things in more holistic terms,
in terms of interrelationships rather than discreet, independent,
concrete objects. If things and events existed as we perceive them,
objectively enjoying some sort of independent status as discrete,
concrete identities, then when we look for them, when we look for the
true referents behind the terms, they should become clearer and clearer.
That doesn't seem to be the case. The moment we begin to look for them,
the concept seems to disintegrate and disappear. What that indicates is
not that things and events do not exist. Because the fact that they
exist is very real, our experience tells us that events make
differences: because of different events, we either suffer pain or enjoy
pleasure and joy. The reality of phenomena is such that our experience
affirms their reality. So the conclusion that we can draw from this is
that there is a disparity between the way we perceive things and the way
things and events actually exist. There is a disparity between our
perception and the reality, in other words, between appearance and
reality. So once we have gained some inkling of understanding of this
disparity, then keeping that in mind, we should simply judge how we
normally relate to the world and others---how we perceive people, the
environment around us, and ourselves. In this analysis, we see that we
tend to relate to the world, ourselves, and others in a manner that
indicates that we believe that there is something independent and
objective. Then we realize that this is not the way things exist. Things
do not exist in the way they appear to us. Then,

simply place your focus on your conclusion that things do not exist
inherently or intrinsically and do not enjoy the independent status that
we perceive in them. Since they exist, what is the manner in which they
exist? What is the status of their existence? We are forced to conclude
that we can understand their existence and identity only in terms of
interrelationships: something that is derived through interaction with
others and in dependence upon other factors and labels and designations
that we impose on reality. Then simply place your mind on that
conclusion that things do not exist independently, inherently, and do
not enjoy that intrinsic reality or intrinsic identity. That is what is
meant by meditating on emptiness. So when we meditate on emptiness, we
are not thinking, "Oh, this is emptiness"; we are not thinking, "Oh,
things do not exist in this way, but may exist in another way." There
should not be any attempt at affirming something. What there should be
is a simple placement of the mind on this conclusion that things and
events are lacking independent or intrinsic reality, which is not the
same as placing the mind on total vacuity or mere absence. Rather, one
places the mind on the absence of independent existence and intrinsic
reality.

GLOSSARY

Note: Explanations in this glossary were drawn from those appearing in A
Handbook of Tibetan Culture, compiled by the Orient Foundation and
edited by Graham Coleman (Boston: Shambhala, 1994). For further
elaboration of technical terms, please refer to that work. Abhidharma
(Skt.) One of the three divisions of the Buddhist canon (the Tripitaka,
or "Three Baskets"), which contains scriptures dealing with such
subjects as phenomenology, psychology, knowledge, and cosmology.
aggregates (Skt. skandha) The five principal faculties which constitute
a sentient being, namely those of form, feeling,
perception/discrimination, conditioning/motivational factors, and
consciousness. Arhat (Skt.) A being who has attained liberation from the
cycle of existence by eliminating the karmic tendencies and afflictive
emotions which give rise to compulsive existence in a cycle of birth,
death, and rebirth. The goal to which practitioners of the Hinayana
aspire. bindus (Skt.) Literally "drops," referring to the pure essence
of the white/male and red/female generative or seminal fluids of the
body which, along with the energy channels and winds that flow through
them, form an important aspect of human physiology according to Buddhist
medical theory and tantra. bodhichitta (Skt.) The altruistic aspiration
to attain full enlightenment in order to benefit all beings.

bodhisattva (Skt.) A spiritual trainee who has generated the altruistic
mind of bodhichitta and is on the path to full enlightenment. Dedicated
fully to bringing about the welfare of all sentient beings, bodhisattvas
vow to remain within the cycle of existence to help beings instead of
seeking liberation for themselves alone. cessation See Four Noble
Truths. chakra (Skt.) Literally "wheel" or "circle." In the context of
tantra, it refers to the energy centers within the human body. The
principal chakras are said to be located at the crown, throat, heart,
navel, and sexual organ. Chandrakirti The sixth-century Indian Buddhist
scholar who clarified Nagarjuna's presentation of Middle Way philosophy.
Chittamatra (Skt.) One of the four major Buddhist philosophical schools
of ancient India. Founded in the fourth century by the Indian scholar
and saint Asanga, its main tenet is that all phenomena are either actual
mental events or extensions of the mind. Often translated as the
"Mind-Only school." delusions (Skt. klesa, Tib. nyon mongs)
Psychological afflictions that disturb the mind and obstruct the
expression of its essentially pure nature. The three primary afflictions
or "three poisons" are greed/attachment, hatred/aversion, and delusion,
or fundamental ignorance which misperceives the nature of reality.
Dharma (Skt.) A term with a wide range of uses. In doctrinal contexts it
refers to the realizations of the Buddhas, both the state of cessation
and the paths leading to it, and the transmission of authoritative texts
and their oral commentarial lineages which expound the path to
Buddhahood. dharmakaya (Skt.) See three kayas. Dharmakirti The
sixth--seventh-century Indian philosopher and logician whose works form
the basis for the study of logic and epistemology in the Tibetan
Buddhist tradition.

Dzogchen (Tib.) Literally "Great Perfection" or "Great Completion." The
highest system of practice within the Nyingma tradition of Tibetan
Buddhism. emptiness See shunyata. Father Tantras A classification within
Highest Yoga Tantra which includes those tantras that place greater
emphasis on the yogas associated with skillful means and the attainment
of the illusory body. Four Noble Truths The truth of suffering, the
truth of the origins of suffering, the truth of the cessation of
suffering, and the truth of the path leading to the cessation of
suffering. The teaching on the Four Noble Truths was the basis of the
first public discourse of Buddha Shakyamuni after his enlightenment.
Highest Yoga Tantra (Skt. anuttarayogatantra) The highest of the four
classes of tantra, which are differentiated by means of the different
emphases each places on external practices, visualization, internal yoga
practices, and techniques for manifesting the three kayas. Hinayana
Literally the "Lesser" or "Smaller" vehicle, so-called on the basis of
the primary motivation of the practitioner, which is for individual
liberation from cyclic existence as opposed to the "Greater Vehicle"
motivation of liberating all sentient beings. See Mahayana. Jataka Tales
Past-life stories of the Buddha which make up one of the twelve
traditional divisions of the Buddha's discourses. They illustrate how,
in previous lives, the Buddha dedicated himself to the bodhisattva's way
of life. Kadampa (Tib.) Followers of the Kadam school of Tibetan
Buddhism founded by the eleventh-century Indian scholar and saint Atisha
and his Tibetan disciple Dromtonpa. This school is particularly known
for its emphasis on the practical application of the ideals of the
bodhisattva and was responsible for the development of a collection of
writings and practices known as "lojong"---"mind training" or "thought
transformation."

karma (Skt.) Literally "actions." Actual physical, verbal, and mental
actions and the psychological imprints and tendencies created within the
mind by such actions, which remain within the mental continuum through
successive rebirths. Such a karmic potential is later activated when it
meets appropriate circumstances and conditions. The doctrine of karma
has two main features: (1) one never experiences the consequences of an
action not committed; and (2) the potential of an action once committed
is never lost unless obviated by specific remedies. Madhyamika (Skt.)
The most influential of the four major philosophical schools of Indian
Buddhism. Its name literally means the "Middle Way," between the
extremes of eternalism and nihilism. Prasangika Madhyamika is one of the
two main sub-schools of Madhyamika. Mahamudra (Skt.) Literally "Great
Seal," it is defined differently according to sutra or tantra
explanations. As a meditative approach it applies both shamatha and
vipashyana while focusing on the nature of the meditator's own mind.
Mahamudra meditation is found within both the Kagyu and Gelug schools of
Tibetan Buddhism. Mahayana (Skt.) One of the two main systems or
vehicles of Buddhism, the other being known as Hinayana. In terms of
motivation it emphasizes altruism and has as its goal the liberation of
all beings. It is therefore called the "Great Vehicle." Maitreya One of
the eight bodhisattva disciples of Buddha Shakyamuni, to whom are
attributed five great works which are foundational for the Chittamatra
school of Indian philosophy. Mother Tantras A classification within
Highest Yoga Tantra which includes those tantras that place greater
emphasis on the yogas associated with the attainment of the mind of
clear light. Nagarjuna The second-century founder of the Madhyamika
school of Buddhist thought.

nirvana (Skt.) Literally the "state beyond sorrow." Refers to the
permanent cessation of all suffering and the dissonant emotions which
cause and perpetuate suffering. Nyingma (Tib.) The oldest school of
Tibetan Buddhism, based on the teaching traditions and texts introduced
to Tibet during the eighth and ninth centuries. Prasangika Madhyamika
See Madhyamika. pratyekabuddha (Skt.) Sometimes translated into English
as "solitary realizer," indicates one who attains the state of
liberation without reliance on verbal instruction. See also shravaka.
Rendawa (Tib. Red mda' ba) A great fifteenth-century teacher of the
Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism. He was one of the main teachers of
Tsongkhapa, the founder of the Gelug school. rupakaya (Skt.) "Form body"
in Mahayana Buddhism, used to refer to both the sambhogakaya (enjoyment
body) and the nirmanakaya (emanation body). See also three kayas. Sakya
Pandita Kunga Gyaltsen (1182--1251) One of the five great founders of
the Sakya school of Tibetan Buddhism. samsara (Skt.) "Cyclic existence,"
a state of existence conditioned by karmic tendencies and imprints from
past actions---recurring habitual patterns---which is characterized by a
cycle of life and death and by suffering. sangha (Skt.) The spiritual
community of ordained practitioners, both monks and nuns. When viewed as
an object of refuge in the context of the three precious jewels, it is a
sublime, highly realized assembly of those who have gained direct
insight into the true nature of reality, emptiness, and is represented
by the monastic community.

shamatha (Skt.) A meditative state characterized by the stabilization of
attention on an internal object of observation. In addition, shamatha is
characterized by suppleness of mind and body, and the calming of
external distractions to the mind. Also called "calm abiding." shravaka
(Skt.) "Hearer," referring in the sutra-based texts of Buddhist
literature to one of the three types of spiritual trainee---the others
being pratyekabuddha and bodhisattva. Inclined to seek merely their own
liberation from cyclic existence, shravakas depend heavily on verbal
instruction and aim in their practice to eliminate mistaken belief in a
personal identity. shunyata (Skt.) Translated into English as
"emptiness," referring to the ultimate nature of reality, which is the
total absence of inherent existence and self-identity with respect to
all phenomena. Its precise meaning varies according to different schools
of philosophic tenets. six perfections The six practices which form the
basis of the bodhisattva's way of life: (1) generosity; (2) ethical
discipline; (3) patience; (4) perseverance or joyous effort; (5)
meditative concentration; and (6) discriminative awareness or wisdom.
sutra (Skt.) The original discourses taught publicly by Buddha
Shakyamuni. Sutrayana (Skt.) In Mahayana Buddhism, the entire path to
enlightenment is presented within the framework of two main systems or
vehicles, the Sutrayana and the Tantrayana. The Sutrayana includes those
systems and practices based on the sutras. tantra (Skt.) Literally
"continuum." Tantra has two basic meanings in Buddhism---it refers to
the systems of practice and to the literature which expounds those
practices. The tantras present sophisticated techniques which enable the
practitioner to transform dissonant emotions into blissful states of
realization. These teachings are said to have been given by Buddha
Shakyamuni while appearing in the form of esoteric meditational deities.

Tantrayana (Skt.) A division of Mahayana Buddhism, based upon the
tantric texts. Also referred to as Vajrayana and Mantrayana. Tathagata
(Skt.) A synonym for Buddha, used frequently in the sutras. "Tatha"
literally means "thus," and "gata," "gone" or "departed." The word is
interpreted in different ways, corresponding to the different classes of
Mahayana sutras and tantras. Theravada (Skt.) The "way expounded by the
elders," the surviving school of ancient Indian Buddhism, maintained
principally in Thailand, Burma, Cambodia, and Sri Lanka. Its canon is
fully extant in the Pali language. three jewels The Buddha, or the
expression of the ultimate nature; Dharma, the true path and the
consequent states of freedom it leads to; and the Sangha, the ideal
spiritual community. These three are regarded as the perfect objects in
which refuge may be sought from the unsatisfactory nature of life in
cyclic existence. three kayas The "three bodies" of a buddha, used in
this context to refer not only to the physical body of a buddha, but
also to the differing "dimensions" in which the embodiment of fully
enlightened attributes occurs. These three are the dharmakaya (truth
body); sambhogakaya (enjoyment body); and nirmanakaya (emanation body).
three poisons See delusions. tong-len (Tib. gtong len) "Giving and
taking." A Mahayana practice, in which one visualizes giving one's
happiness to others and taking upon oneself the suffering, unhappiness,
and misfortunes of others. This practice aims to develop loving-kindness
and compassion. Two Truths The conventional or relative truth
(appearances) and the ultimate truth (emptiness). All Buddhist
philosophical schools formulate their metaphysics within the framework
of the two truths, yet their definitions of these differ according to
their differing epistemological interpretations.

Vaibhashika school One of the four major Buddhist philosophical schools
of ancient India. Vinaya (Skt.) Literally, "discipline," referring in
general to the codes of ethical conduct that regulate the life of
ordained monks and nuns. Also refers to the division of the Buddhist
canon containing Buddha's discourses on discipline. Vipashyana (Skt.)
"Penetrative insight," an analytical meditative state which penetrates
the nature, characteristics or function of its chosen object of
meditation and is generated on the basis of shamatha. Yogachara (Skt.)
In this context, a synonym for Chittamatra.

WORKS CITED

SUTRAS "The Pratimoksha Sutra" Prātimokṣa-sūtra "The Rice Sapling Sutra"
Śālistamba-sūtra

Treatises by Indian Commentators Āryadeva "Four Hundred Verses"
Catuḥśataka Asaṅga "Compendium of Knowledge" Abhidharmasamuccaya
Chandrakirti "Entry into the Middle Way" Madhyamakāvatāra Dharmakirti
"Exposition of Valid Means to Cognition" Pramāṇavārttika Guṇaprabhā
"Vinaya Sutra" Vinayasūtra Maitreya "Ornament of Clear Realizations"
Abhisamayālaṃkāra "Ornament of Scriptures" Mahāyānāsūtralaṃkāra "Sublime
Continuum" Uttaratantra Shantideva "Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of
Life" Bodhisattvacaryāvatāra "Compendium of Deeds" Śikṣāmuccaya

RECOMMENDED READING

Dalai Lama. The Complete Foundation. Boulder: Shambhala Publications,
2018. ---------. For the Benefit of All Beings. Boulder: Shambhala
Publications, 2009. ---------. Kindness, Clarity, and Insight. Boulder:
Snow Lion Publications, 2013. ---------. The World of Tibetan Buddhism.
Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995. Hopkins, Jeffrey. Emptiness Yoga.
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1987. Garfield, Jay. The Fundamental
Wisdom of the Middle Way. New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Khyentse, Dilgo. Enlightened Courage. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion
Publications, 1993. Piburn, Sidney, ed. The Dalai Lama: A Policy of
Kindness. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1990. Powers, John.
Introduction to Tibetan Buddhism. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications,
1995. Rinchen, Geshe Sonam. The Thirty-Seven Practices of Bodhisattvas.
Translated & edited by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications,
1997. Shantideva. A Guide to the Bodhisattva's Way of Life. Translated
by Stephen Batchelor. Dharamsala, India: Library of Tibetan Works and
Archives, 1979.

BOOKS BY THE DALAI LAMA

CORE TEACHINGS OF THE DALAI LAMA SERIES The Complete Foundation: The
Systematic Approach to Training the Mind An Introduction to Buddhism Our
Human Potential: The Unassailable Path of Love, Compassion, and
Meditation (forthcoming) Perfecting Patience: Buddhist Techniques to
Overcome Anger Stages of Meditation: The Buddhist Classic on Training
the Mind (forthcoming) Where Buddhism Meets Neuroscience: Conversations
with the Dalai Lama on the Spiritual and Scientific Views of Our Minds
(more forthcoming)

ALSO AVAILABLE FROM SHAMBHALA PUBLICATIONS Answers: Discussions with
Western Buddhists The Bodhisattva Guide: A Commentary on The Way of the
Bodhisattva The Buddhism of Tibet Dzogchen: Heart Essence of the Great
Perfection From Here to Enlightenment: An Introduction to Tsong-kha-pa's
Classic Text The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment The Gelug/Kagyu Tradition of Mahamudra The Great
Exposition of Secret Mantra, Volume 1: Tantra in Tibet The Great
Exposition of Secret Mantra, Volume 2: Deity Yoga

The Great Exposition of Secret Mantra, Volume 3: Yoga Tantra The Heart
of Meditation: Discovering Innermost Awareness Kindness, Clarity, and
Insight The Pocket Dalai Lama The Union of Bliss and Emptiness:
Teachings on the Practice of Guru Yoga

INDEX

Note: Index entries from the print edition of this book have been
included for use as search terms. They can be located by using the
search feature of your e-book reader. Abhidharma abortion absolutism,
extreme of absorptive meditation actions, unwholesome. See also
nonvirtuous actions, ten actions, wholesome affection afflictive
emotions antidotes to avoiding in Buddhist and Western psychology
changing sides of conditioning in cutting root of elimination of energy
of fear of leaving unattended and positive emotions, differences between

recognizing six root three Buddhist approaches to agents aggregates
alertness altruistic mind of awakening. See bodhichitta analogies AIDS
patient of apparitions beggars doctors enemies fire fisherman's hook
ignorance as poison and antidote prisoner river flowing strongly
sandcastles of children sapling/seedling sky, overcast slaying corpses
sprout treasure appearing in house voltage stabilizer war analysis. See
also reasoning analytic meditation anger antidotes to

arising of attachment and bodhichitta and causal mechanism of of
children, responding to combating concern for others' opinions and
decreasing destructive effects of energy of futility of and harm,
symmetry between and hatred, distinctions between immediate and
long-term factors, consideration of justifying as object, meditation on
of others at others' praise of enemies preventing causes of sense of
self and society's responses to toward obstructers of our material gain
toward oneself utilization on Tantric path Western and Buddhist
approaches to animals antidotes to anger Buddha-nature as to delusions
efficacy of

to greed to pride See also countermeasures Arhats arrogance Āryadeva.
See Four Hundred Verses Aryas Asanga. See Compendium of Knowledge Ashoka
aspirational prayers aspirations. See also bodhichitta atheism
attachment and anger, relationship between Bodhisattvas' utilization of
compassion and feeding intensity of ignorance and types of See also
desire Awakening Mind. See also bodhichitta big bang theory birth
control blame bodhichitta among Tibetans anger as greatest obstacle to
ceremony of generating cultivating

Dalai Lama on his practice of in dedication of merit deterioration of
emptiness and in Highest Yoga Tantra impediments to and insight,
relationship between levels of meditation on merits and benefits of in
six perfections as worthy of veneration Bodhisattva levels bodhisattva
vow Bodhisattvas anger of anger toward attachment, skillful utilization
of body sacrifice of courage of female five characteristics of ideal of
negative actions of patience of service of three levels of activity of
without realization of emptiness body and affection, well-being of as
contributing factor to pain

influence of ignorance on mental feelings and and mind, relationship
between mindfulness of as product of karma as self, refutation of
suffering of See also subtle body breathing exercise Buddha Shakyamuni
enlightenment of on guru-disciple relationship homage to past lives of
prayer and public discourses of reliability of on wrong livelihood
Buddhahood attainment of causality and compassion of emotions at essence
of (see also Buddha-nature) as highest happiness wishing for others' See
also enlightenment Buddhakayas Buddha-nature as antidote to self-hatred
confidence in

contextual meanings of as nature of mind as subtle consciousness
Buddha-qualities Buddhas anger toward destruction of images of as
becoming perfected duty of embodiments of (see also Buddhakayas)
kindness of, repaying and sentient beings, comparisons of
Buddha-shrijnana Buddhism compassion as foundation of contextualization,
importance of in Dalai Lama on his practice of evangelism in, absence of
meditation in misunderstanding for practitioners of other religions
prayer in social service in women in See also Mahayana; Tibetan Buddhism
calm abiding. See shamatha (calm abiding) carelessness causal nexus
causality, principle of cause and effect, correspondence between causes,
two principal types

causes and conditions chakras Chandrakirti. See also Entry into the
Middle Way childish (Tib. byis pa) beings children, setting good example
for Chittamatra School. See also Yogachara School Christianity clear
light cognitive events commitment communities, negative karma in
compassion in accumulating merit as antidote to anger and attachment,
differences between developing as emotion as foundation of spiritual
paths as general human quality in interacting with others meditation on
nonobjectified in overcoming conflict and patience, as complementary
peace of mind and in relationships skill in spontaneous for suffering of
others three principal types of toward others that harm us

universal, generating value of Compendium of Deeds (Shantideva)
Compendium of Knowledge (Asanga) completion stage conceit concentration
conditionality confidence in Buddhahood in Dharma in gurus loss of in
reconciliation conflict confusion consciousness continuum of levels of
as mere experience natural state of six types of subtle tantric
understanding of consequences, short- and long-term contentment
conventional reality cosmology, Buddhist countermeasures. See also
antidotes courage creators

belief in refutation of cyclic existence. See samsara (cyclic existence)
Dakpo Tashi Namgyal day-to-day experience affection in causality in
childishness in Dharma practice in happiness in patience in
self-criticism in using imaginative faculty in death death penalty
dedicating merit deity yoga delusions/delusory states aggregates and
derivative direct antidote to eliminating influence of overcoming
recognizing suffering and dependence, principle of dependent
origination. See also twelve links of dependent origination depression
desire. See also attachment

determination devotion Dhammapada Dharma destruction of as genuine
guru's instructions as according with hearing, contemplating, meditating
in veneration of wheel of Dharma practice age for balance in of Dalai
Lama effort in factors needed for for psychological and emotional
well-being skillful method in, importance of solitude in three
capacities for as voltage stabilizer dharmakaya Dharmakirti discipline
discontent discouragement disintegration dispositions disrespect
dissatisfaction. See also suffering dream yoga

dreams Dromtonpa Dzogchen education effort. See also joyous effort ego,
two types eight worldly concerns emotions. See afflictive emotions
empathy emptiness (shunyata) appearance and and bodhichitta,
relationship between clear light and and Creator, difficulties in
reconciling direct realization of levels of meditation on in Prasangika
Madhyamika realization of of suffering terms for, subtle meanings of
types of enemies anger toward gratitude for happiness at misfortune of
happiness of material successes of others' praise of as worthy of
veneration

enlightenment attaining causality and effort required for as "instant,"
male form needed for potential for stages of thirty-seven aspects of
path to enthusiasm Entry into the Middle Way (Chandrakirti) eons
equality of Buddhas and sentient beings of samsara and nirvana of
sentient beings essential drops ethical discipline perfection of as way
of life ethics euthanasia evolution, four stages of existence,
unsatisfactory nature of Exposition of Valid Means to Cognition
(Dharmakirti) faith fame familiarity, constant Father Tantras

fear forbearance, use of term forgiveness fortitude four foundations of
mindfulness Four Hundred Verses (Āryadeva) Four Noble Truths freedom of
choice possibility of from suffering Freud, Sigmund friendship
functions, principle of fundamental consciousness (alayavijnana) Gampowa
Ganden Monastery (India) generosity genocide gentleness "giving and
taking" (tong-len) practice global economic gap God good heart gratitude
greed Greek Orthodox Church Green Tara blessing Guide to the
Bodhisattva's Way of Life (Shantideva) aspirational prayers in

Buddha-nature in eighth chapter of in Indian tradition on learning local
manners ninth chapter of Shantideva's recitation of in Tibetan tradition
guru yoga guru-disciple relationship gurus. See also spiritual masters
Gyuto Monastery happiness destruction of due to past merit of enemies
four factors of innate desire for levels of from praise and fame,
absence of state of mind and temporary hardship harm becoming acquainted
with caused by others, responding to countermeasures against gratitude
for indifference toward perpetrator of inflicted on "mine," motivation
and

not returning punishment for retaliating against wishing for others
hatred and anger, distinctions between antidotes to arising of and
attachment, difference between as beginningless destructive effects of
fear and feeding intensity of function of ignorance and immediate
consequences of motivations for of others, tolerating as translation of
zhe dang trying to justify health helplessness hermit and herdsman story
Highest Yoga Tantra bodhichitta in clear light in Dzogchen and gender
equality in guru-disciple relationship in insight in nonconceptuality in

human existence fully endowed preciousness of humility Hussein, Saddam
identity, personal identitylessness ignorance anger and antidotes to
arising of compassion for grasping intrinsic existence influence of in
twelve links ill will illnesses imaginative faculty immediate
gratification impermanence imprints independent status indifference,
cultivating inference injustice insight inspiration intellect, role of
intelligence and compassion, as complementary factor to

in Dharma practice in overcoming conflict and patience, as complementary
factor to intention. See also motivation intrinsic reality intuition
investigation. See also analysis Jataka tales jealousy joy causes of of
Langri Tangpa mental, pledge not to disturb of others suffering as, view
of worldly joyous effort Jung, Carl Kalachakra Tantra karma as active
process aggregates and anger and causing others' negative conditioning
and continuity of exhausting potential of negative four principal
categories of importance of understanding

merit and misunderstandings about role of suffering and killing kindness
knowledge development of and experience, assimilation of gaining new
intellectual need for obstructions to Lam Rim Langri Tangpa liberation
aspiration for attaining as "other side," personal/individual
possibility of See also nirvana life, purpose of Ling Rinpoche
livelihood happiness for others' successful wrong Lobsang Samten logical
proof, principle of lo-jong (mind training) literature

Long Life empowerment love. See also compassion loving-kindness
luminosity lying Madhyamika (Middle Way) school. See also Prasangika
Madhyamika Mahamudra Mahayana bodhichitta as basis of Bodhisattva vows
in causality in compassion in, necessity of complementary factors needed
for framework of gender equality in inclination toward method and wisdom
in scriptural authority in sutra and tantra, differences between wisdom
in, centrality of Maitreya. See also Ornament of Clear Realizations
(Maitreya); Sublime Continuum (Maitreya) male-and-female union Marpa
media meditation aim of on emptiness examining "self," as key element of
spiritual path

in monasteries nonconceptual on patience single-pointedness on suffering
on thoughtlessness two principal types variety of wisdom from See also
absorptive meditation; analytic meditation; "giving and taking"
(tong-len) practice; visualizations meditatively acquired wisdom
meekness mental factors mercy killing mere conditionality merit
accumulating anger toward obstructers to destruction of fields of
striving for Merton, Thomas Middle East peace agreement middle way
philosophy. See also Madhyamika (Middle Way) school mind Abhidharma view
of and body, relationship between clarity of emptiness of genuine peace
of

guarding nature of nonvirtues of plasticity of purifying skill of subtle
(see also clear light) transforming "Mind Only" School. See Yogachara
School mind-body composite, clinging to mindfulness. See also four
foundations of mindfulness monasticism Mother Tantras motivation. See
also intention mysticism, Christian Nagarjuna Naiyayika school Nalanda
university Naropa natural law, principle of natural resources natural
world Ngawang Lobsang Gyatso, Fifth Dalai Lama nihilism nirvana. See
also liberation "no soul" theory nonconceptuality nonsubstantiality
nonviolence nonvirtuous actions, ten

Nyingma system. See also Dzogchen obstructions, two omniscient mind
origin of suffering Ornament of Clear Realizations (Maitreya) Ornament
of Scriptures (Maitreya) pain conscious acceptance of contributing
factors to obvious suffering of as one's own creation types of path
benefits of dispositions suited for effort on foundational importance of
understanding state of mind and wisdom and method aspects of patience
benefits of consequences of developing familiarity with enemies as
necessary condition for enhancing importance of key challenge to levels
of

meanings of opportunities to practice other perfections and three
characteristics of types of peace of mind and being "spaced out,"
distinguishing destruction of maintaining Pelgye phenomena dependent
arising of disintegration of emptiness of experiencing extremely hidden
as illusion-like/apparitions momentariness of nature of three categories
of very obscure Potowa praise distraction of of enemies futility of for
oneself and others, inconsistency of Prasangika Madhyamika
Pratimoksha-sutra prayers, two types precepts, universal

Precious Garland (Nagarjuna) precious human life pride primal substance,
refutation of punishment reasoning four key principles of on
nonconceptuality on production, four extremes of on rebirth types of as
ultimate authority rebirth belief in conditioning factors in
continuation of consciousness in Dharma practice and favorable,
attaining greed and higher and lower realms of recollection of twelve
links and reconciliation refuge refugee camps regret relationships,
intergender Rendawa renunciation respect

for enemies for gurus happiness for others' receiving for others in
relationships responsibility in guru-disciple relationship personal of
societies revenge Rice Sapling Sutra, The rituals rupakaya Sakya Pandita
Kunga Gyaltsen Samkhya school samsara (cyclic existence) desiring
freedom from disillusion with, undermining emptiness of as "here and
now," nirvana and unsatisfactory nature of scriptural authority
scriptures, definitive and interpretable seeds (potentials) self arising
sense of Buddhist view of diverse opinions on grasping at

refutation of self-centeredness self-criticism self-hatred selflessness
sensory objects, withdrawing from sentient beings benefiting
Buddha-nature of compassion for all equality and commonality of
gentleness of happiness of pleasing rupakaya and well-being of all
sexual misconduct shamatha (calm abiding) Shantideva. See also Guide to
the Bodhisattva's Way of Life (Shantideva) shunyata. See emptiness
(shunyata) six perfections skillful means of Bodhisattvas disposition
and importance of and wisdom, unification of social change soe-pa (Tib.,
"patience/tolerance/forbearance") soul space particles speech,
nonvirtuous

spiritual masters spontaneous experience free of exertion stealing
students, responsibilities of study, importance of Sublime Continuum
(Maitreya) substantial causes subtle body suffering animate and
inanimate factors in attitude toward, transforming in benefiting others
benefits of causes of conscious acceptance of creating causes of in
developing compassion fear and of fortunate and unfortunate beings
innate desire to overcome meditation on Noble Truth of as one's own
creation of others, compassion for as real experience taking others'
three forms of types of sugata state suicide supernatural powers

Sutrayana Tantrayana. See also Highest Yoga Tantra Tara (goddess)
Thailand thirty-seven aspects of path thought experiments
thoughtlessness thoughts, afflictive three kayas. See Buddhakayas three
poisons three spheres, being sealed by Tibet, Chinese occupation of
Tibetan Buddhism Tibetan expressions clearing conch shell by blowing on
hiding feelings of hatred letting go of one hundred to get back on
thousand wind behind one's ear Tilopa tolerance attitude for engendering
benefits of and meekness, distinctions between toward injuries from
others use of term See also patience tong-len. See "giving and taking"
(tong-len) practice Tsongkhapa twelve links of dependent origination Two
Truths

ultimate nature of reality bodhichitta and conventional reality and God
and insight into interdependence of nonobjectified compassion and
unhappiness universal causation. See causality, principle of urgency,
sense of Vaibhashika school Vajrayana. See Tantrayana Vinaya Vinaya
Sutra virtue. See also merit visualizations on anger of others on
annoying person Dalai Lama's practice of on suffering of sentient beings
in tong-len vows Bodhisattva monastic tantric wealth and material gain
attachment to constructive use of happiness and

jealousy of others' joy in others' of others protection from, lack of as
result of virtue from wrong livelihood wisdom accumulation of necessity
of perfection of three types virtue accumulated through women's issues
world religions changing, difficulties in common elements in Communist
view of dispositions for worldly gain wrathful deities yab-yum principle
Yogachara School

Sign up to receive news and special offers from Shambhala Publications.

Or visit us online to sign up at shambhala.com/eshambhala.


