Copyright information can be found at the end of the book. Copyright ©
1995, 2005 by Sarah Ban Breathnach All rights reserved. Except as
permitted under the U.S. Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this
publication may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form
or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without
the prior written permission of the publisher. The legal and moral
rights of Sarah Ban Breathnach to be identified as the creator of the
intellectual property concepts contained within, including "Gratitude
Journal," "illustrated discovery journal," "authentic self" and other
works, have been asserted. Grand Central Publishing Hachette Book Group
USA 237 Park Avenue New York, NY 10017 Visit our Web site at
www.HachetteBookGroupUSA.com. First eBook Edition: November 1995 ISBN:
978-0-446-54531-0 OceanofPDF.com

Upon Reading This Book JANUARY JANUARY 1: A Transformative Year of
Delight and Discovery JANUARY 2: Loving the Questions JANUARY 3: Simple
Abundance: The Inner Journey JANUARY 4: This Isn't a Dress Rehearsal
JANUARY 5: The Woman You Were Meant to Be JANUARY 6: Standing Knee-Deep
in a River and Dying of Thirst JANUARY 7: How Happy Are You Right Now?
JANUARY 8: The Underrated Duty JANUARY 9: What Is It You Truly Need?
JANUARY 10: Until It Is Carved in Stone JANUARY 11: Is It Recession or
Depression? JANUARY 12: There Is No Scarcity JANUARY 13: Gratitude:
Awakening the Heart JANUARY 14: The Gratitude Journal JANUARY 15: Simple
Gifts: Embracing Simplicity JANUARY 16: A Sense of Order: Cultivating
Contentment JANUARY 17: Harmony: Achieving Balance in Our Lives JANUARY
18: Beauty: Opening Our Eyes to the Beauty That Surrounds Us JANUARY 19:
Joy: Learning Life's Lessons with a Light Heart JANUARY 20: Acres of
Diamonds JANUARY 21: Letting Go of Limiting Illusions

JANUARY 22: The Prosperity of Living JANUARY 23: Accepting Real Life
JANUARY 24: Blessing Our Circumstances JANUARY 25: Working with What
You've Got JANUARY 26: Simple Abundance: The Basic Tools JANUARY 27: The
Daily Dialogue JANUARY 28: The Illustrated Discovery Journal JANUARY 29:
Your Personal Treasure Map JANUARY 30: The Golden Mirror Meditation
JANUARY 31: Embracing Joyful Simplicities FEBRUARY FEBRUARY 1: Creative
Excursions: The Gift of Time FEBRUARY 2: Knowing What You Love FEBRUARY
3: Discovering Your Authentic Self FEBRUARY 4: The Authentic Self Is the
Soul Made Visible FEBRUARY 5: The World Is Too Much with Us FEBRUARY 6:
Remaking Your Own World FEBRUARY 7: An Artist Is Someone Who Creates
FEBRUARY 8: You Are an Artist FEBRUARY 9: A Fresh Canvas Every
Twenty-Four Hours FEBRUARY 10: Creating an Authentic Lifestyle for
Yourself and Those You Love FEBRUARY 11: Divine Discontent: Learning to
Live by Your Own Lights FEBRUARY 12: Once Upon a Time You Trusted
Yourself

FEBRUARY 13: You Have a Unique Point of View: Loving Your Authenticity
FEBRUARY 14: Buried Dreams FEBRUARY 15: Meeting the Inner Explorer
FEBRUARY 16: At the End of Our Exploring FEBRUARY 17: A Safari of Self
and Spirit FEBRUARY 18: Safari Life FEBRUARY 19: Rendezvous with the
Authentic Archaeologist FEBRUARY 20: The Authentic Dig FEBRUARY 21:
Excavating the Real You, Part I FEBRUARY 22: Excavating the Real You,
Part II FEBRUARY 23: Making Your Own Imprint FEBRUARY 24: Now That I've
Gotten Your Attention FEBRUARY 25: Reordering Your Priorities FEBRUARY
26: Real Life Begins with Reverence FEBRUARY 27: Committing to Your
Spiritual Awakening FEBRUARY 28: Creating a Sacred Space FEBRUARY 29: A
Day of Grace MARCH MARCH 1: Restoring Serenity to Your Daily Endeavors
MARCH 2: Meditation: Many Paths to the Present Moment MARCH 3: Setting
Aside a Personal Sabbath MARCH 4: Priming the Pump for Inspiration MARCH
5: Creating a Hope Chest

MARCH 6: Creating a Toy Box MARCH 7: Outfitting a Comfort Drawer MARCH
8: Taking the Plunge MARCH 9: A Radiant Reflection: Projecting Your
Authentic Self MARCH 10: You Are Not Your Appearance, but Does the Rest
of the World Know That? MARCH 11: Sending and Receiving Personal Signals
MARCH 12: How Do I Look? MARCH 13: Accepting Yourself as You Are Today
MARCH 14: Loving Yourself into Wholeness MARCH 15: Self-Nurturing: The
Hardest Task You'll Ever Do MARCH 16: What Do You Like about Yourself?
MARCH 17: Accentuating the Positive MARCH 18: Awakening Sleeping Beauty
MARCH 19: Repose of the Soul MARCH 20: Inner Beauty, Outward Charm MARCH
21: What Is Self-Confidence? MARCH 22: Why Self-Confidence Can't Be
Bought but Can Be Borrowed MARCH 23: Always Be a First-Rate Version of
Yourself MARCH 24: The Secret Saboteur: When You're Feeling Blue MARCH
25: Real Life: Clothes That Fit Your Lifestyle MARCH 26: The Unspoken
Language of Authenticity MARCH 27: Glimmers from the Golden Mirror MARCH
28: Clearing: Parting with Fashion Mistakes

MARCH 29: Comfort Clothes and What They Mean MARCH 30: Developing a
Sense of Style MARCH 31: Never Fall for Fashion, Always Be in Style
APRIL APRIL 1: Playing Dress-Up: Empowering Your Authentic Self with Fun
APRIL 2: Verve: The Secret of Personal Style APRIL 3: Secret Lives:
Gleaning Tips from Our Imaginary Selves APRIL 4: An Elegant Art:
Learning That Less Is More APRIL 5: Whom Do You Admire? APRIL 6: Classic
Chic 101: The Color Story APRIL 7: Come Alive with Color APRIL 8: More
Dash Than Cash APRIL 9: Affordable Luxury APRIL 10: Trompe I'oeil:
Thrift-Shop Pleasures APRIL 11: Finishing Touches: The Art of Fashion
Accessories APRIL 12: Learning to Love and Honor Your Body APRIL 13: The
Only Weight-Loss Aid You'll Ever Need APRIL 14: When You Hunger and
Thirst APRIL 15: Discovering the Momentum of Creative Movement APRIL 16:
Walking as Meditation APRIL 17: Making Peace with Your Hair APRIL 18:
The Face in the Looking Glass APRIL 19: Spring Rituals of Replenishment
APRIL 20: Taking the Cure: Bathing Pleasures

APRIL 21: Aromatherapy: The Restorative Comfort of Fragrance APRIL 22:
Sensory Awakening APRIL 23: The Scent of a Woman APRIL 24: A Taste for
Living APRIL 25: On a Clear Day You Can See Forever APRIL 26: Major and
Minor Chords of Pleasure APRIL 27: Reach Out and Touch Someone APRIL 28:
The Intuitive Sense APRIL 29: Allure: The Feminine Mystique APRIL 30:
When Did You Feel Most Beautiful? MAY MAY 1: Everyday Epiphanies MAY 2:
Living in the House of Spirit MAY 3: A Welcome Retreat: Home as a Haven
in a Hectic World MAY 4: The Personality of Your Home MAY 5: Eminent
Domain: Whose Home Is It, Anyway? MAY 6: After the Fact: The Art of
Decorative Detection MAY 7: Everyday Edens: Spending Another Day in
Paradise MAY 8: Rediscovering the Sacred Soulcraft of Homecaring MAY 9:
Getting Your House in Order MAY 10: A Place for Everything: Preserving
Your Sanity with a Personal Plan MAY 11: The Tao of Homecaring MAY 12:
Restoring a Sense of Harmony to Your Habitat

MAY 13: Honoring the Great Mother MAY 14: A Sense of Charm MAY 15:
Progress, Not Perfection MAY 16: Clearing Out What Isn't Useful or
Beautiful MAY 17: The Ruskin Spring Ritual of Restoration MAY 18:
Simplify, Simplify, Simplify MAY 19: Order Within MAY 20: The Art of
Puttering MAY 21: A Nest of Comforts MAY 22: The Home of Your Dreams MAY
23: Nurturing Your Authentic Flair MAY 24: The Fullness of Nothing MAY
25: Passion: The Authentic Muse MAY 26: Let Passion Be Your Decorator
MAY 27: An Interior Vision Inventory MAY 28: By Love Possessed MAY 29:
Favorite Things: Enjoying Cherished Collections MAY 30: Finders,
Keepers: The Fun of Foraging MAY 31: Child's Play: Introducing a Touch
of Whimsy and Wit to Your Surroundings JUNE JUNE 1: Encountering Hestia
JUNE 2: In Praise of Modesty JUNE 3: Ask, Ask, Ask

JUNE 4: Classic Chic 102 JUNE 5: Your Bedroom: Cradle of Civilization
JUNE 6: The Bath: Secret Haven of Self-Absorption JUNE 7: The Joy of
Living Rooms JUNE 8: In Praise of Real-Life Dining Rooms JUNE 9:
Bringing a Sense of Order to the Kitchen JUNE 10: A Nook of Your Own
JUNE 11: Creating a Plan for Personal Papers JUNE 12: Secret Passions:
Scented Linen Closets JUNE 13: Secret Passions: The Fancy Pantry JUNE
14: Decorating with the Seasons: Summer Houses JUNE 15: The Secret
Anniversaries of the Heart JUNE 16: The Fragrant Home JUNE 17:
Affordable Splendor JUNE 18: Choosing to Blossom JUNE 19: Onward and
Upward in the Garden JUNE 20: Secret Gardens JUNE 21: Bloom Where You're
Planted JUNE 22: The Gourmet Victory Garden JUNE 23: Midsummer Night's
Dreams JUNE 24: Splendor in the Vase: Living with Flowers JUNE 25:
Getting Started JUNE 26: Everywoman's Essence of Paradise JUNE 27:
Rosemary for Remembrance: Sowing Herbal Hopes and Wishes

JUNE 28: Repotting: Giving Roots and Yourself Room to Grow JUNE 29:
Pruning Back, Plowing Ahead JUNE 30: Being There: Lessons from the
Garden JULY JULY 1: Constant Craving JULY 2: The Simplest of Pleasures:
One Good Thing That Is JULY 3: The Hungry Soul JULY 4: Getting Real and
Personal in the Pursuit of Happiness JULY 5: Cooking Companions JULY 6:
The Good Life JULY 7: Cooking for Comfort JULY 8: In Search of Soul Food
JULY 9: Nursery Fare for Children of All Ages JULY 10: Kitchen Mysticism
JULY 11: Cooking as Art: Creative Discoveries in the Kitchen JULY 12:
How to Cook a Wolf JULY 13: Stocking the Larder JULY 14: The Celebrating
Table JULY 15: Guess Who's Coming to Dinner? JULY 16: A Seasonal Feast:
The Joy of Anticipation JULY 17: Loaves and Fishes, Part I JULY 18:
Loaves and Fishes, Part II JULY 19: Carving Out Time for Personal
Pursuits That Bring Contentment JULY 20: True North

JULY 21: The Importance of Solitude JULY 22: Neglect Not the Gifts
Within You JULY 23: Snatch Stolen Moments of Solitude JULY 24: Paying a
High Price JULY 25: Opening a Door That Separates Two Worlds JULY 26:
Discovering What You'd Like to Do, If You Ever Had the Time JULY 27:
Solitary Pleasures JULY 28: The PliÉ of Pleasure JULY 29: The Home as a
Hobby JULY 30: Habits That Steal Precious Moments JULY 31: Desire, Ask,
Believe, Receive AUGUST AUGUST 1: The Harmonic Convergence of an
Authentic Life AUGUST 2: The Gentlest Lessons Teach Us the Most AUGUST
3: A Net for Catching Days AUGUST 4: Preserving Prime Time AUGUST 5: The
Gift of Sacred Idleness AUGUST 6: Letting Mother Nature Nurture AUGUST
7: Creature Comforts AUGUST 8: The Pleasurable Pull of the Past:
Antiquing AUGUST 9: Eighth Day of Creation: Honoring Our Personal Gifts
AUGUST 10: Calling Forth Our Gifts AUGUST 11: Second Thoughts AUGUST 12:
The Great Collaboration

AUGUST 13: The Artist's Way: Tuning to the Higher Harmonic AUGUST 14:
The Courage to Create AUGUST 15: Sometimes Ignorance Is Bliss AUGUST 16:
You Can't Be Original---You Can Be Authentic AUGUST 17: Taking On Quite
a Task AUGUST 18: Owning Your Talent AUGUST 19: Spinning Straw into Gold
AUGUST 20: The Golden Storehouse of the Subconscious Mind AUGUST 21: The
Comfort Found in Good Old Books AUGUST 22: The Poetry Prescription
AUGUST 23: Music as Therapy AUGUST 24: Eye of the Beholder AUGUST 25:
The Smell of the Greasepaint, the Roar of the Crowd AUGUST 26: Reel Life
Lessons AUGUST 27: Meditative Handwork AUGUST 28: Home Art AUGUST 29:
Artists of the Everyday: Loving, Knowing, Doing AUGUST 30: If Not Now,
Then When? AUGUST 31: This Too, Is God SEPTEMBER SEPTEMBER 1: Turning
Over a New Leaf SEPTEMBER 2: The Work of Understanding SEPTEMBER 3:
Scrambled or Fried? SEPTEMBER 4: Answering a Higher Call

SEPTEMBER 5: Job, Career, or Calling? SEPTEMBER 6: Working from the
Heart SEPTEMBER 7: Wishcraft: Getting from Here to There SEPTEMBER 8:
Getting from Here to There: When You Haven't a Clue What to Do SEPTEMBER
9: The Courage to Answer the Call SEPTEMBER 10: Setting Your Own Pace
SEPTEMBER 11: A Psalm for Life SEPTEMBER 12: Uncommon Women and Others
SEPTEMBER 13: Thoughts on Success SEPTEMBER 14: Giving Yourself Credit
SEPTEMBER 15: Authentic Success SEPTEMBER 16: The Fear of Success
SEPTEMBER 17: Having Your Cake and Eating It, Too SEPTEMBER 18: The Gift
of Failure SEPTEMBER 19: Affinities SEPTEMBER 20: The Enemy Within
SEPTEMBER 21: The Spiral Path SEPTEMBER 22: Real Life Has a Steep
Learning Curve SEPTEMBER 23: For Thine Is the Kingdom, and the Power,
and the Glory SEPTEMBER 24: Do What You Love and the Money Will
Follow---or So They Say SEPTEMBER 25: If One Woman Has Done It, So Can
You--- And If Not, Why Not You? SEPTEMBER 26: The Tao of Success

SEPTEMBER 27: Only the Heart Knows SEPTEMBER 28: A Time for Everything
SEPTEMBER 29: Self-Nurturing on the Job SEPTEMBER 30: Traveling on
Business OCTOBER OCTOBER 1: Recognizing Burnout Before You're Charred
OCTOBER 2: The Ultimate Seduction OCTOBER 3: Little Miss Perfect OCTOBER
4: Homework OCTOBER 5: Mediation as Meditation OCTOBER 6: Downshifting:
Living in Lower Gear OCTOBER 7: Learning to Create Boundaries OCTOBER 8:
A Passion for Beauty OCTOBER 9: Coping with Stress OCTOBER 10: Poise
Wreckers OCTOBER 11: It's Always Something OCTOBER 12: A Tale of Two
Times OCTOBER 13: Absolutely Fabulous OCTOBER 14: The Ultimate Result of
All Ambition OCTOBER 15: The Quality of the Day OCTOBER 16: Ceremonials
for Common Days OCTOBER 17: The Habit of Being OCTOBER 18: A Lesson from
Loss OCTOBER 19: Compliments

OCTOBER 20: Complaints OCTOBER 21: Comparisons OCTOBER 22: Compromises
OCTOBER 23: Money and the Meaning of Life OCTOBER 24: Worrying about
Money OCTOBER 25: On Paying Bills OCTOBER 26: Spending Habits OCTOBER
27: Quieting the Wants OCTOBER 28: Financial Serenity OCTOBER 29:
Affirming Abundance OCTOBER 30: Becoming More Magnetic to Money OCTOBER
31: Make Room for Mystery, Awaken to the Magic NOVEMBER NOVEMBER 1:
Embracing the Ebb NOVEMBER 2: Caring for Your Soul NOVEMBER 3: Becoming
Real NOVEMBER 4: Return of the Goddess NOVEMBER 5: The Goddess Within
NOVEMBER 6: Rising to the Occasion NOVEMBER 7: Shepheard's Hotel
NOVEMBER 8: Everyday Life Is the Prayer NOVEMBER 9: The Sacrament of the
Present Moment NOVEMBER 10: The Gaps NOVEMBER 11: Amazing Grace

NOVEMBER 12: Celestine Moments NOVEMBER 13: Answered Prayers NOVEMBER
14: Miracles NOVEMBER 15: Heaven Watching Over You NOVEMBER 16: Riding
the Big Kahuna NOVEMBER 17: Weather Report NOVEMBER 18: The Blessing of
Friends NOVEMBER 19: The Kindness of Strangers NOVEMBER 20: Blessed Be
the Ties That Bind NOVEMBER 21: Playing Hooky NOVEMBER 22: Meditation
for Bad Girls NOVEMBER 23: True Thanksgiving NOVEMBER 24: The Blessing
of Health NOVEMBER 25: When You're Sick NOVEMBER 26: Rx for Harried
Hearts and Frazzled Minds NOVEMBER 27: What Women Want NOVEMBER 28:
Daydreams NOVEMBER 29: Nightscapes NOVEMBER 30: The Loss of Control
DECEMBER DECEMBER 1: Charmed Lives DECEMBER 2: Passionate Kisses
DECEMBER 3: No Sex Please, We're Married DECEMBER 4: The Refinement of
Everyday Thinking

DECEMBER 5: Sigh Some More, My Ladies, Sigh Some More DECEMBER 6: The
Festival of Lights DECEMBER 7: Are Women Human? DECEMBER 8: Tidings of
Comfort and Joy DECEMBER 9: The Christmas Letter DECEMBER 10: Gifts of
the Magi DECEMBER 11: Only Fourteen Shopping Days Till Christmas
DECEMBER 12: A Partridge in a Pear Tree DECEMBER 13: Yes, Virginia,
There Is a Santa Claus DECEMBER 14: Legacy of Love DECEMBER 15:
Meditation for Women Who Read Too Much DECEMBER 16: Gold-Star Days
DECEMBER 17: Act Two DECEMBER 18: A Birthday Ritual DECEMBER 19: A Woman
of a Certain Age DECEMBER 20: The Glad Game Reconsidered DECEMBER 21:
Seasonal Soulcraft DECEMBER 22: Here Comes the Light DECEMBER 23: It's a
Wonderful Life DECEMBER 24: Here Is All I've Counted Splendid DECEMBER
25: Christmas DECEMBER 26: Two Lives DECEMBER 27: A Woman of Substance
DECEMBER 28: The Courage to Create the World You Want

DECEMBER 29: A Success Unexpected in Common Hours DECEMBER 30: Ithaka
DECEMBER 31: Pray the Journey Is Long WITH THANKS AND APPRECIATION ABOUT
THE AUTHOR BIBLIOGRAPHY OceanofPDF.com

ALSO BY SARAH BAN BREATHNACH Sarah Ban Breathnach's Mrs. Sharp's
Traditions: Reviving Victorian Family Celebrations The Victorian Nursery
Companion The Simple Abundance Journal of Gratitude Something More:
Excavating Your Authentic Self The Illustrated Discovery Journal:
Creating a Visual Autobiography of Your Authentic Self The Simple
Abundance Companion: Following Your Authentic Path to Something More A
Man's Journey to Simple Abundance Romancing the Ordinary: A Year of
Simple Splendor Moving On: Creating Your House of Belonging with Simple
Abundance Hold That Thought: A Year's Worth of Simple Abundance Simple
Abundance: The Music of Comfort and Joy OceanofPDF.com

Her eye, her ear, were tuning forks, burning glasses, which caught the
minutest refraction or echo of a thought or feeling ... She heard a
deeper vibration, a kind of composite echo, of all that the writer said,
and did not say. ---WILLA CATHER OceanofPDF.com

For Chris Tomasino with love and gratitude and Katie who is the deeper
Vibration Always One moved Heaven for this book, the other moved Earth.
OceanofPDF.com

... in a time lacking in truth and certainty and filled with anguish and
despair, no woman should be shamefaced in attempting to give back to the
world, through her work, a portion of its lost heart. ---LOUISE BOGAN
OceanofPDF.com

Upon Reading This Book Preface to the Tenth Anniversary Edition of

SIMPLE ABUNDANCE A Daybook of Comfort and Joy I asked how long it was.
"Eight hundred and ninety-seven pages," he said. Then he added,
earnestly, "You don't suppose they'll think I wrote it in a fit of
pique?" ---RENATA ADLER Speedboat (1986)

Welcome, dear Reader. It's hard to imagine that a decade has passed
since Simple Abundance, a book that celebrates living by your own
lights, was published. In 366 essays, one for every day (including leap
year!), I shared the revelations that came while trying to reconcile my
deepest spiritual and creative longings with often overwhelming
commitments to family and work. I had long suspected that I wasn't alone
in my frustrations and desires, but nothing could have prepared me for
the way women around the world---millions of you---responded. We began
an exciting adventure together, which is a continuing source of
gratitude, grace, and fulfillment for me. I hope it is for you, as well.
Bringing Simple Abundance into the world was the biggest struggle and
challenge of my life. Believe it or not, the original manuscript of
Simple Abundance was 957 pages. Written between 1991 and 1995, in a
spirit of daring introspection (at least for me) and an ever-increasing
sense of

wonder, Simple Abundance was my third book. It was also the book I was
born to write. However, despite the fact that I had been a published
journalist for twenty-five years, a nationally syndicated columnist and
the author of two previous books, finding a publisher willing to take on
my blessed behemoth was a demoralizingly difficult battle. The proposal
was turned down thirty times over a two-year period; eventually, to
soften the blow, my agent, Chris Tomasino, would break the news to me a
few painful letters at a time. The reasoning behind the rejection?
Simplicity wasn't commercial, and a lifestyle book based on gratitude?
Forget it. Ten years, seven million copies, and thirty languages later
suggest a different story. In preparation for this new Preface, I went
back to my publishing memorabilia files to trace how the miracle came
about. Some of the rejection letters are still so difficult to read they
make me wince. It's no wonder I cried myself to sleep more nights than
anybody can imagine. But the next morning, I'd say, "Let's give it one
more shot" and I'd start another meditation; eventually the thoughts,
paragraphs, and pages began to accumulate taking on a creative energy of
their own. The most poignant piece of paper I've rediscovered is a
letter written by my then-eleven-yearold daughter, Katie, to her
guardian angel. (She'd asked me to mail it for her and so I promptly
posted it in my heart.) Dear Guardian Angel, This prayer is not for me,
it is for my Mom. Please Angel, let my Mom get a book contract. Please
talk to the Guardian Angels of the People who decide about
publishing...." A few weeks later our prayers were beautifully and
bountifully answered when Liv Blumer at Warner Books said the holy "Yes,
we will, yes." By then I'd been writing Simple Abundance for two years;
it would take another two years to complete. Next, the mammoth job of
whittling the manuscript down began for Liv and her co-editor, Caryn
Karmatz Rudy, which they did so seamlessly, I never knew what was tossed
out. I do remember, however, that I begged Caryn not to number the
pages; I knew that no woman on the face of the earth would ever allow
herself to buy a

book over five hundred pages, let alone read it. Instead, I asked if
there could be a ribbon bookmark, so that the reader could keep her
place. To this day, I don't know how long it is. As it turned out, when
Simple Abundance was first published in November 1995 women didn't buy
it for themselves. Instead, they bought it for their sisters, best
friends, daughters, daughters-in-law, mothers, mothersin-law, nieces,
cousins, neighbors, bosses, and secretaries. They bought it to give to
others for Christmas, birthdays, anniversaries, and graduations; in
turn, they received it from family on Mother's Day, and their friends
when the marriage ended, the job was eliminated, or the diagnosis was
devastating. When a phone call sent a woman reeling, dashing her dreams
and shattering the life she took for granted, the "pink book" turned up
as often as casseroles. Psychotherapists have told me they prescribed
it; 12step program participants passed it on; abused women found it in a
shelter's communal library. Women read it while waiting to receive
chemotherapy then left it behind for the nurses who cared for them so
tenderly. To celebrate, to commiserate, to comfort, to cheer, but above
all, to communicate, women around the world shared Simple Abundance with
each other and blessed the life they found in between its lines---their
own. I'll never completely understand why, although thousands of you
have written me letters trying to explain its impact on your lives.
You've shared your poignant stories and told me how the book had helped
you through great difficulty, struggle, and sorrow. You also shared how
Simple Abundance sparked a new passion or inspired you to resurrect an
old dream. It has affected you in ways I never dreamed possible. Not
long ago I had lunch with a senior economist assigned to the secretary
general of the United Nations. She told me that Simple Abundance is used
as a resource tool by her female colleagues when they need to interpret
and implement globalization programs on a human scale. They use my
concept of the "authentic self" to help Third World countries retain
their pride and maintain their traditions while adopting modern methods
of living. "When you wrote Simple Abundance, was that your intention?"
she asked me earnestly. I'm afraid I disappointed her. Because here's
the truth: Simple Abundance wasn't meant to be a book at all. It began
as a process devised to help me discover, possibly for the first time in
my life, what mattered

most. If anything, I adopted Rosa Parks's strategy for changing the
world. When asked how she became the symbol of the civil rights
movement, Mrs. Parks candidly confessed she wasn't protesting, she was
just too tired to move to the back of a Mississippi bus: "All I was
doing was trying to get home from work." Forgive me, but when I was
creating Simple Abundance, the only woman whose life I wanted to change
was my own. As you read this book, may you be similarly inspired. And
why did my life need to change? Like fifty million other working
mothers, my daily round had become a tug-of-war between other people's
demands and expectations and my own genuinely conflicted desires and
unrequited needs. I frantically multitasked from one obligation to the
next so fast that my spirit felt as if it was constantly sprinting to
catch up with me, which it finally did when I collapsed into bed.
Mornings were a major source of dread; my first conscious breath was a
sigh; my awakening thought was how to make it through the day. Of
course, I never complained to anyone else, but I whined to myself and
Spirit until, literally, the sound of my own nagging nearly drove me mad
and to my knees. This was in 1991, when a sudden downturn in the economy
shocked America into a scarcity syndrome. It wasn't quite the Great
Depression, but who knew what tomorrow might bring the baby boomers? As
Harry Truman explained it, "It's a recession when your neighbor loses
his job and it's a depression when you lose your own." Call it what you
want to, but there was doom and gloom everywhere---an absolute pandemic
of lack. But when you focus only on lack you become depressed, and when
you're depressed you don't see the glass half-full; you see it empty.
And you're dying of thirst. This sets in motion a relentless, repetitive
cycle of misery and near-life experiences. There's no light at the end
of that tunnel. One morning I woke up physically exhausted and
spiritually bankrupt; money was tight, too. I'd lost two lucrative
consulting jobs and the freelance market was shrinking fast because the
only story in town was downsizing. I was so sick and tired of
concentrating on what was missing from my life, God knows I didn't want
to write about it. I felt drained, depleted, discouraged. Worrying about
money had squandered my most precious natural resources---time, creative
energy, and emotion. So I forced myself to sit down at the kitchen table
and start writing an inventory of what was good in my life, right at
that moment. Think Pollyanna on Prozac.

When I stopped six hours later, to my great astonishment I'd created a
master list of my life's many overlooked blessings. I had over 150 and
none of them had anything to do with money! And then, what I call an
everyday epiphany occurred: I realized I didn't need a single thing,
except the awareness of how blessed I was. That was the first time that
gratitude beckoned and invited me to use its transformative power, not
to revamp my life, but to rejoice in it. The thirteenth-century German
mystic Meister Eckehart believed, "If the only prayer you ever say in
your life is 'ThankYou,' it will be enough." I discovered just how right
he was and got so excited that I started writing down five new things to
be thankful for every day. Ironically, the only passage in Simple
Abundance written in a fit of pique was the Foreword, which a lot of
readers have confided was the thing that made them buy the book in the
first place. Women identified with an angry, envious, resentful,
workaholic, careaholic, perfectionist who secretly fretted over
everything and everybody but herself; a woman who frequently felt she
was holding her life together with double-sided stick tape; who couldn't
remember the last time she'd taken a nap, got a haircut without
pretending it was a root canal, or had an hour to do nothing at all. It
gave them hope that they, too, could change their lives for the better
one grateful moment at a time. Naturally, it goes without saying that
this refreshing frankness only occurred because my feet had been put to
the fire. I had already turned in what I believed to be a perfectly
wonderful introduction. My editor, however, diplomatically demurred.
Said she who had to be obeyed: "We all know that Simple Abundance
changed your life, but we don't really know what you were like before.
You can't have always been this calm, collected, and content. You must
have had some bad days. Tell us the juicy bits---not so much philosophy;
we need more candor. The real woman. Tell us something we don't know and
won't find out in the book. Who was Sarah Ban Breathnach before she
wrote Simple Abundance?" Tell us something we don't know? Upon hearing
this ridiculous, unreasonable, and completely inappropriate request I
was incredulous. Indignant. Irate. Have you ever been so angry that all
you can do is burst into tears? Then I got mad. "Something you don't
know, huh ... Okay, I'll give you something you

don't know." An hour later I faxed her a revised version, which made me
feel better but look like a stark naked raver. Between you and me, I was
only blowing off steam. They weren't really going to publish that, were
they? "It's terrific," my editor said excitedly. "Just what we wanted."
Many writers will tell you they write to create a cosmos in which they
can cozily cohabit with themselves. Of course, we read for the same
reason. To find refuge, a soul shelter, a safe place in a world clearly
gone mad. We read for pleasure or we read to quiet the pain from a
deafening roar to a dull throb. We read to forget who we are or discover
it; we read to understand. But most of all, we do read to learn
something we didn't know before we turned the page. Sadly, one doesn't
have to look very far or wide to see how starved the modern woman
remains for daily inspiration. Despite the fact that there are now
hundreds of women's Web sites and cable channels available, each month
brings another onslaught of superficial self-help books and
selfappointed life coaches offering quick-fix solutions on how to dress,
decorate our homes, "handle" our relationships, raise geniuses, double
our money, halve our weight, and overhaul our lifestyles. I don't know
about you, but as a busy, exhausted, and very often frazzled woman (what
can I say, enlightenment ebbs and flows around here), I don't want
strident exhortation, but gentle encouragement. I don't need another
12-step scheme but I sure do appreciate brief dollops of common sense,
compassionate reminders, and comforting reassurance. If Simple Abundance
often reads like a 500-page permission slip nudging you toward
self-nurturance, that's because it is. You must believe your happiness
and well-being is not frivolous but a spiritual prime directive. If you
don't yet, can we have a brief word? The author Toni Morrison declared,
"If there is a book you really want to read, but it hasn't been written
yet, then you must write it." I took her advice to heart. My prayer for
you, dear Reader, is that if there is a life you really want to enjoy,
but haven't started yet, then you must turn the page. May reading Simple
Abundance remain a comforting conversation with a good friend who shares
your gratitude that our paths crossed. When I look down our cherished
path of everyday enchantment, I see delightful days

ahead. Blessed are we among women, and how wonderful that, finally, we
both know it. Dearest love and boundless thanks, SARAH BAN BREATHNACH
Newton's Chapel Lincolnshire, England November 2005 OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY And now let us welcome the New Year Fully of things that have
never been ---RAINER MARIA RILKE

January, the month of new beginnings and cherished memories, beckons.
Come, let winter weave her wondrous spell: cold, crisp, woolen-muffler
days, long dark evenings of savory suppers, likely conversations, or
solitary joys. Outside the temperature drops as the snow falls softly.
All of nature is at peace. We should be, too. Draw hearthside. This is
month to dream, to look forward to the year ahead and the journey
within. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 1

A Transformative Year of Delight and Discovery There are years that ask
questions and years that answer. ---ZORA NEALE HURSTON

New Year's Day. A fresh start. A new chapter in life waiting to be
written. New questions to be asked, embraced, and loved. Answers to be
discovered and then lived in this transformative year of delight and
self-discovery. Today carve out a quiet interlude for yourself in which
to dream, pen in hand. Only dreams give birth to change. What are your
hopes for the future as you reflect on the years that have passed?
Gradually, as you become curator of your own contentment, you will learn
to embrace the gentle yearnings of your heart. But this year, instead of
resolutions, write down your most private aspirations. Those longings
you have kept tucked away until the time seems right. Trust that now is
the time. Ask the questions. The Simple Abundance path brings confidence
that the answers will come and we will discover---day by day---how to
live them. Take a leap of faith and begin this wondrous new year by
believing. Believe in yourself. And believe that there is a loving
Source---a Sower of Dreams---just waiting to be asked to help you make
your dreams come true. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 2

Loving the Questions You only live once---but if you work it right, once
is enough. ---JOE E. LEWIS

How often in the past have you turned away from all that is unresolved
in your heart because you feared questioning? But what if you knew that
a year from today you could be living the most creative, joyous, and
fulfilling life you could imagine? What would it be? What changes would
you make? How and where would you begin? Do you see why the questions
are so important? "Be patient toward all that is unsolved in your heart
and try to love the questions themselves," the German poet Rainer Maria
Rilke urges us. "Do not now seek the answers which cannot be given you
because you would not be able to live them and the point is to live
everything. Live the questions now...." The answers to your questions
will come, but only after you know which ones are worth asking. Wait.
Live your questions. Then ask. Become open to the changes that the
answers will inevitably bring. This may take some time, but time is the
New Year's bountiful blessing: three hundred sixty-five bright mornings
and starlit evenings; fifty-two promising weeks; twelve transformative
months full of beautiful possibilities; and four splendid seasons. A
simply abundant year to be savored. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 3

Simple Abundance: The Inner Journey simple, adj. 1: without
embellishment; 2: clarity of form and thought; 3: fundamental abundance,
n. 1: an ample quantity, profusion; 2: wealth; 3: plentifulness simple
abundance, 1: an inner journey; 2: a spiritual and practical course in
creative living; 3: a tapestry of contentment

Today I want you to become aware that you already possess all the inner
wisdom, strength, and creativity needed to make your dreams come true.
This is hard for most of us to realize because the source of this
unlimited personal power is buried so deeply beneath the bills, the car
pool, the deadlines, the business trip, and the dirty laundry that we
have difficulty accessing it in our daily lives. When we can't access
our inner resources, we come to the flawed conclusion that happiness and
fulfillment come only from external events. That's because external
events usually bring with them some sort of change. And so we've learned
to rely on circumstances outside ourselves for forward or backward
momentum as we hurtle through life. But we don't have to do that any
longer. We can learn to be the catalysts for our own change. At the
heart of Simple Abundance is an authentic awakening, one that resonates
within your soul: you already possess all you need to be genuinely
happy. The way you reach that awareness is through an inner journey that
brings about an emotional, psychological, and spiritual transformation.
A deep inner shift in your reality occurs, aligning you with the
creative energy of the Universe. Such change is possible when you

invite Spirit to open up the eyes of your awareness to the abundance
that is already yours. There are six principles that will act as guides
as we make our inner journey over the next year. These are the six
threads of abundant living which, when woven together, produce a
tapestry of contentment that wraps us in inner peace, well-being,
happiness, and a sense of security. First there is gratitude. When we do
a mental and spiritual inventory of all that we have, we realize that we
are very rich indeed. Gratitude gives way to simplicity---the desire to
clear out, pare down, and realize the essentials of what we need to live
truly well. Simplicity brings with it order, both internally and
externally. A sense of order in our life brings us harmony. Harmony
provides us with the inner peace we need to appreciate the beauty that
surrounds us each day, and beauty opens us to joy. But just as with any
beautiful needlepoint tapestry, it is difficult to see where one stitch
ends and another begins. So it is with Simple Abundance. Pick up the
needle with me and make the first stitch on the canvas of your life.
Invite Spirit to open up the eyes of your inner awareness. Be still and
wait expectantly, knowing that in the warp and woof of your daily life
as it exists today are the golden threads of a simply abundant tomorrow.
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 4

This Isn't a Dress Rehearsal When you perform ... you are out of
yourself---larger and more potent, more beautiful. You are for minutes
heroic. This is power. This is glory on earth. And it is yours, nightly.
---AGNES DE MILLE

You've probably heard the expression "life's not a dress rehearsal."
Unfortunately, many of us unconsciously act as if it were. Like an
actress just going through the motions in order to conserve her creative
energy and focus for opening night, we hold back. Perhaps you save the
pretty china for when company comes; perhaps you're like me and rarely
dress up when you're home alone. If we're not playing to an audience,
does it really matter? That's a good question to ask ourselves as the
New Year begins and we examine the quality of our real life journey. It
does take more effort to set an inviting table, but it enhances our
enjoyment of eating. We all feel better when we take those few extra
minutes to fix our hair and put on makeup, but what's more, we act
different. Every actress knows the magic power of props and costumes to
create special moods both onstage and off. None of us can be expected to
perform every minute of our lives. But a lot of us might tap into the
power, excitement, and glory of Real Life more frequently if we cast
ourselves as the leading ladies in our own lives. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 5

The Woman You Were Meant to Be Many women today feel a sadness we cannot
name. Though we accomplish much of what we set out to do, we sense that
something is missing in our lives and---fruitlessly---search "out there"
for the answers. What's often wrong is that we are disconnected from an
authentic sense of self. ---EMILY HANCOCK

Has this ever happened to you? You are washing your face, and suddenly
you do not recognize the woman staring back at you. "Who is this?" you
ask the mirror on the wall. No reply. She looks vaguely familiar but
bears little resemblance to the woman you were expecting to see there.
Psychologists call this phenomenon a "displacement of self," and it
usually occurs during times of great stress (which for many of us is an
everyday occurrence). But what's wrong? What is this sadness we cannot
name? Here is a question that deserves loving meditation. Perhaps the
heart of our melancholy is that we miss the woman we were meant to be.
We miss our authentic selves. But the good news is that even if you have
ignored her overtures for decades ("Wear red ... Cut your hair ... Study
art in Paris ... Learn the tango ..."), your authentic self has not
abandoned you. Instead she has been waiting patiently for you to
recognize her and reconnect. Turn away from the world this year and
begin to listen. Listen to the whispers of your heart. Look within. Your
silent companion has lit lanterns of love to illuminate the path to
Wholeness. At long last, the journey you were destined to take has
begun. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 6

Standing Knee-Deep in a River and Dying of Thirst The thirst after
happiness is never extinguished in the heart of \[woman\].
---JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU

The first time I heard Kathy Mattea's beautiful rendition of the country
song "Standing Knee-Deep in a River (Dying of Thirst)," I was on my way
to my daughter's school to pick up the afternoon car pool. Suddenly I
had to pull over because I was crying so much I couldn't see the road in
front of me. Until then, it had been a busy but good day. I was not
consciously aware of being sad or depressed. So why was I crying? As
Kathy sang of friends who had been taken for granted, sweethearts she
had known, and a wonderful world full of strangers just waiting to make
a connection with us (while we turn our eyes away), something deep
within me stirred. There was so much I was taking for granted. I didn't
want to continue to live unconsciously. The revelation that we have
everything we need in life to make us happy but simply lack the
conscious awareness to appreciate it can be as refreshing as lemonade on
a hot afternoon. Or it can be as startling as cold water being thrown in
our face. How many of us go through our days parched and empty,
thirsting after happiness, when we're really standing knee-deep in the
river of abundance? Yet make no mistake about it. The Universe will get
our attention one way or another---with a sip or a splash. Let's choose
today to quench our thirst for "the good life" we think others lead by
acknowledging the good that already exists in our own lives. We can then
offer the Universe the gift of our grateful hearts.

OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 7

How Happy Are You Right Now? Perhaps if one really knew when one was
happy one would know the things that were necessary for one's life.
---JOANNA FIELD

How happy are you right now? Do you even know? Most women know what
makes their parents, partners, or children happy. But when it comes to
an awareness about the little, specific things in life that bring a
smile to our faces and contentment to our own hearts, we often come up
short. In 1926 a young Englishwoman, Joanna Field, began to feel that
she was not living a truly authentic life, that she did not know what
made her truly happy. To remedy this she kept a journal in order to
discover what specifically triggered the feeling of delight in her daily
life. The journal, A Life of One's Own, was published in 1934. It was
written, she confided, in the spirit of a detective who searches through
the minutiae of the mundane in hopes of finding clues for what was
missing in her life. What is missing from many of our days is a true
sense that we are enjoying the lives we are living. It is difficult to
experience moments of happiness if we are not aware of what it is we
genuinely love. We must learn to savor small, authentic moments that
bring us contentment. Experiment with a new cookie recipe. Take the time
to slowly arrange a bouquet of flowers in order to appreciate their
colors, fragrance, and beauty. Sip a cup of tea on the front stoop in
the sunshine. Pause for five minutes to pet a purring cat. Simple
pleasures waiting to be enjoyed. Simple pleasures often overlooked.
Joanna Field discovered that she delighted in red shoes, good food,
sudden bursts of laughter, reading in French, answering letters,
loitering in a crowd at a fair and "a new idea when first it is
grasped."

Let us each grasp a new idea this year. Let us grasp the awareness of
what it is that makes us truly happy. Let us consider our personal
preferences and learn how to recognize, then embrace, moments of
happiness that are uniquely our own. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 8

The Underrated Duty There is no duty we so much underrate as the duty of
being happy. By being happy we sow anonymous benefits upon the world.
---ROBERT LOUIS STEVENSON

Perhaps you think you'll be happy when you get a bigger kitchen, or a
new job, or the perfect someone with whom to share your life. But don't
you want to start making happiness a habit right now? Every morning when
we wake up we've been given a wonderful gift---another day of life---so
let's make the most of it. No one can do it for us. "Happiness is not a
possession to be prized," Daphne du Maurier wrote in Rebecca. " It is a
quality of thought, a state of mind." Let's adopt a new state of mind
about happiness. Let's stop thinking that things outside our control
will bring us happiness. Admittedly, remodeling the kitchen, landing the
job we've been dreaming of, or finding that special someone can make us
feel---at least momentarily---happier. But the magic seeds of
contentment are planted deep within us. Happiness that the world cannot
take away only flourishes in the secret garden of our souls. By tending
to our inner garden and uprooting the weeds of external expectations, we
can nurture our authentic happiness the way we would nurture something
that's beautiful and alive. Happiness is a living emotion. Your
happiness is not a frivolous, expendable luxury. The pursuit of
happiness is an inalienable right guaranteed by the Declaration of
Independence. But we have to be willing to pursue it. Ultimately,
genuine happiness can only be realized once we commit to making it a
personal priority in our lives. This may be new behavior for some of us
and a bit intimidating. Be gentle with yourself. It will all unfold.
Today you may not

be familiar with the happiness habit. But like any new behavior,
happiness can be learned. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 9

What Is It You Truly Need? In my life's chain of events nothing was
accidental. Everything happened according to an inner need. ---HANNAH
SENESH

Do you have everything you need right now? What about your wants? Few of
us have everything we want, and at times our wants can seem positively
all-consuming. Our sensibilities become confused and overstimulated by a
mass media that glorifies beautiful people and expensive objects. It's
easy to lose clarity about what it is we need to live authentically.
Most of us are hungering for something more in our lives. But do you
really think the answer can be found in a glossy magazine or on the
movie screen? If we are to live happy, creative, and fulfilled lives, it
is crucial to distinguish between our wants and our needs.
Unfortunately, many women blur the distinction and then wonder why they
feel so diminished. Make peace with the knowledge that you can't have
everything you want. Why? Because it's more important for us to get
everything we need. Like infants, we feel contentment when our essential
needs are met. Be courageous. Ask yourself: what is it I truly need to
make me happy? The deeply personal answers to this vital question will
be different for each of us. Trust the loving wisdom of your heart. It
is only after we acknowledge our inner needs that we can harness the
creative energy necessary to manifest them in our lives. "It is
inevitable when one has a great need of something, one finds it,"
Gertrude Stein reminds us. "What you need you attract like a lover."
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 10

Until It Is Carved in Stone It's only when we truly know and understand
that we have a limited time on earth---and that we have no way of
knowing when our time is up---that we will begin to live each day to the
fullest, as if it was the only one we had. ---ELISABETH KÜBLER-ROSS

Visiting old cemeteries can be very illuminating. They are so still and
silent. So quiet. Old cemeteries remind us that until it is carved in
stone, realizing our heart's desire is possible every day if we
recognize what it is that makes us happy. In Thornton Wilder's play Our
Town a deeply poignant scene takes place in a graveyard. Ghosts comfort
the young heroine, who has recently died in childbirth. Emily, still
longing for the life she has just left, wishes to revisit one ordinary,
"unimportant" day in her life. When she gets her wish, she realizes how
much the living take for granted. Eventually her visit is too much for
her to bear. "I didn't realize," she confesses mournfully, "all that was
going on and we never noticed.... Good-by, world. Good-by, Grover's
Corners ... Mama and Papa. Good-by to clocks ticking ... and Mama's
sunflowers. And food and coffee. And new-ironed dresses and hot baths
... and sleeping and waking up. Oh, earth, you're too wonderful for
anybody to realize you." This is the season of Epiphany, when the
renewal of light and revelation are celebrated in the liturgy of the
Catholic, Episcopal, and Eastern Orthodox churches. On our new path we
seek everyday epiphanies--- occasions on which we can experience the
Sacred in the ordinary---and come to the awakening, as Emily finally
does, that we cannot longer afford to throw away even one "unimportant"
day by not noticing the wonder of it

all. We have to be willing to discover and then appreciate the authentic
moments of happiness available to all of us every day. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 11

Is It Recession or Depression? No pessimist ever discovered the secrets
of the stars, or sailed to an uncharted land, or opened a new heaven to
the human spirit. ---HELEN KELLER

It's a recession when your neighbor loses his job," Harry Truman
observed, "and it's a depression when you lose your own." As downturns
in the economy disturb more and more households, we begin to question
seriously the financial yardstick by which we have been measuring our
personal net worth and therefore our happiness. Perhaps the recession
has personally affected you and yours. It's hard to believe there's
anybody that it hasn't touched, at least indirectly. Millions of women
are scaling down their expectations of what constitutes the good life,
redefining their values, reordering their priorities, and accepting the
challenge of making a virtue out of necessity. But it's very easy to
surrender to an emotional depression when a financial one occurs. It's
easy to be pessimistic about tomorrow when today seems so bleak. It's
time we put thoughts of lack behind us. It's time for us to discover the
secrets of the stars, to sail to an uncharted land, to open up a new
heaven where our spirits can soar. But first we'll have to make changes.
And lasting change does not happen overnight. Lasting change happens in
infinitesimal increments: a day, an hour, a minute, a heartbeat at a
time. And the change I'm encouraging you to make with me is fundamental.
Take a deep breath. We're going to learn to become optimists. Now be
reassured. Optimism, like the happiness habit, can be learned. Start
today with a little experiment. Smile at everyone you meet. Today expect
something good to happen to you no matter what occurred yesterday.

Realize the past no longer holds you captive. It can only continue to
hurt you if you hold on to it. Let the past go. A simply abundant world
awaits. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 12

There Is No Scarcity When money is plenty this is a man's world. When
money is scarce it is a woman's world. When all else seems to have
failed, the woman's instinct comes in. She gets the job. That is a
reason why, in spite of all that happens, we continue to have a world.
---LADIES' HOME JOURNAL, October 1932

When you are worried about your health or the health of a loved one,
your concentration focuses like a laser. Suddenly there's a clarity
about all of life because you realize what is important. Living is
important. Every day is a gift. You ask for another chance to get it
right. Most of the time you're given it, and you're very grateful. But
worries about money mock you. They steal the joy of living because they
follow you around all day like a dark, menacing shadow. At night they
hover at the foot of your bed waiting to rob you of sleep. When you're
worried about money you dread the days and you agonize at night. Without
thinking, you throw away every precious twenty-four hours that come your
way. You cease to live, and merely exist. If you are worried about money
today, take heart. You have the power to change your lifestyle and move
from a feeling of lack and deprivation to a feeling of abundance and
fulfillment. Money ebbs and flows in our lives. What should remain
constant is our realization that abundance is our spiritual birthright.
American gospel singer Mahalia Jackson once said that "It is easy to be
independent when you've got money. But to be independent when you
haven't got a thing---that's the Lord's test." This is what I have
learned and share with the seeker in you. The simpler we make our lives,
the more abundant they become. There is no scarity except in our souls.

OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 13

Gratitude: Awakening the Heart The eyes of my eyes are opened. ---E.E.
CUMMINGS

Has this ever happened to you? You pick up a book and a sentence leaps
off the page as if it had been written just for you. Or you hear a
revelation in the lyrics of a song. Sometimes an angel seems to whisper
in your ear. One ordinary morning I realized I was emotionally and
physically exhausted from concentrating on things I wanted to buy but
couldn't afford. I felt trapped in a vicious circle. The more I focused
on lack and on what I couldn't have, the more depressed I became. The
more depressed I became, the more I focused on lack. My soul whispered
that what I really yearned for was not financial security but financial
serenity. I was still---quiet enough to listen. At that moment I
acknowledged the deep longing in my heart. What I hungered for was an
inner peace that the world could not take away. I asked for help and
committed to following wheresoever Spirit would lead me. For the first
time in my life I discarded my five-year goals and became a seeker, a
pilgrim, a sojourner. When I surrendered my desire for security and
sought serenity instead, I looked at my life with open eyes. I saw that
I had much for which to be grateful. I felt humbled by my riches and
regretted that I took for granted the abundance that already existed in
my life. How could I expect more from the Universe when I didn't
appreciate what I already had? Immediately I made an inventory of my
life's assets: my health, a wonderful husband, a beautiful and happy
daughter, their health, our home (small but comfortable), and three
precious pets who daily bring me faithful companionship and great joy.
There's always plenty of good food on the

table and wine in the pantry. We are also blessed with many wonderful
friends who care deeply about us and share in our lives. Once I started,
my list grew. I loved my work; it was being sent out into the world and
had been well received. Many women had let me know that my first book
had enriched their lives. I truly believe that what you give to the
world will be returned to you---maybe not all at once or in the way you
expect it---but if you give your very best, the very best will come back
to you. Now was the moment to live my beliefs. When I looked at my
life's ledger I realized I was a very rich woman. What I was
experiencing was merely a temporary cash-flow problem. Finally, I came
to an inner awareness that my personal net worth couldn't possibly be
determined by the size of my checking account balance. Neither can
yours. It doesn't matter how awareness arrives. What matters is that it
comes. My heart began to overflow with gratefulness. I started giving
thanks for everything: daisies in a jelly jar on my kitchen windowsill,
the sweet fragrance of my daughter's hair, the first sip of tea in the
morning, pork roast with apples and cranberries for Sunday supper,
hearing the words "I love you" before I went to sleep. Each day began to
offer me authentic moments of pleasure and contentment. But hadn't they
before? The difference was that I was now noticing and appreciating each
day's gifts. The power of gratefulness caught me by surprise. All I ask
you to do today is to open "the eyes of your eyes" and give your life
another glance. Are your basic needs met? Do you have a home? Food on
the table? Clothes to wear? Is there a regular paycheck coming in? Do
you have dreams? Do you have your health? Can you walk, talk, see the
beauty that surrounds you, listen to music that stirs your soul or makes
your feet want to boogie? Do you have family and friends whom you love
and who love you? Then pause for a moment and give thanks. Let your
heart awaken to the transforming power of gratefulness. Be open to
exchanging your need for emotional and financial security for serenity.
"No trumpets sound when the important decisions of our life are made,"
Agnes de Mille reminds us. "Destiny is made known silently."
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 14

The Gratitude Journal Gratitude unlocks the fullness of life. It turns
what we have into enough, and more. It turns denial into acceptance,
chaos to order, confusion to clarity. It can turn a meal into a feast, a
house into a home, a stranger into a friend. Gratitude makes sense of
our past, brings peace for today, and creates a vision for tomorrow.
---MELODY BEATTIE

There are several tools that I'm going to suggest you use as you begin
your inner exploration. While all of them will help you become happier
and more content and will nurture your creativity, this first tool could
change the quality of your life beyond belief: it's what I call a daily
gratitude journal. I have a beautiful blank book and each night before I
go to bed, I write down five things that I can be grateful about that
day. Some days my list will be filled with amazing things, most days
just simple joys. "Mikey got lost in a fierce storm but I found him
shivering, wet but unharmed. I listened to Puccini while cleaning and
remembered how much I love opera." Other days---rough ones---I might
think that I don't have five things to be grateful for, so I'll write
down my basics: my health, my husband and daughter, their health, my
animals, my home, my friends, and the comfortable bed that I'm about to
get into, as well as the fact that the day's over. That's okay. Real
life isn't always going to be perfect or go our way, but the recurring
acknowledgment of what is working in our lives can help us not only
survive but surmount our difficulties. The gratitude journal has to be
the first step on the Simple Abundance path or it just won't work for
you. Simplicity, order, harmony, beauty, and joy---all the other
principles that can transform your life will not blossom

and flourish without gratitude. If you want to travel this journey with
me, the gratitude journal is not an option. Why? Because you simply will
not be the same person two months from now after consciously giving
thanks each day for the abundance that exists in your life. And you will
have set in motion an ancient spiritual law: the more you have and are
grateful for, the more will be given you. I have told you that the
Simple Abundance path is a transformative process. We're going to work
on one principle for two months at a time, trying to weave that
principle into the fabric of our daily life. Let's begin today with
gratitude. Select the prettiest, most inviting blank book you can find
for your gratitude journal. Make a pleasant outing for its selection.
Note the fabric or design of the cover. The look and feel of the paper.
Do you prefer ruled pages or blank? Perhaps you can find one with a
ribbon clasp. One of the most valuable lessons Simple Abundance has
taught me is that it is in the smallest details that the flavor of life
is savored. As the months pass and you fill your journal with blessings,
an inner shift in your reality will occur. Soon you will be delighted to
discover how content and hopeful you are feeling. As you focus on the
abundance rather than on the lack in your life, you will be designing a
wonderful new blueprint for the future. This sense of fulfillment is
gratitude at work, transforming your dreams into reality. A French
proverb reminds us that "Gratitude is the heart's memory." Begin this
day to explore and integrate this beautiful, life-affirming principle
into your life, and the miracle you have been seeking will unfold to
your wonder and amazement. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 15

Simple Gifts: Embracing Simplicity 'Tis a gift to be simple, 'Tis a gift
to be free, 'Tis a gift to come down Where we ought to be And when we
find ourselves In the place that's right 'Twill be in the valley Of love
and delight. ---NINETEENTH-CENTURY SHAKER HYMN

Is there a woman today who does not yearn for a simpler life? But for
what do we yearn? To chuck it all in and open up a bed-and-breakfast in
Vermont? Or could it be something more fundamental, like the simple
pleasure of concentrating on one task at a time? Once we take stock of
our lives and let gratitude begin its transformative work, the next step
on the path unfolds naturally. When we appreciate how much we have, we
feel the urge to pare down, get back to basics, and learn what is
essential for our happiness. We long to realize what's really important.
Is it more important for you to work overtime to buy that new dining
room set or to attend Little League games? Perhaps you could refinish
the table and chairs you now have and add some colorful cushions. These
choices are part of simplifying our lives. Welcome them. They are part
of the authentic journey. Many people believe simplicity implies doing
without. On the contrary. True simplicity as a conscious life choice
illuminates our lives from within. True simplicity is both buoyant and
bountiful, able to liberate depressed spirits from the bondage and
burden of extravagance and excess. True

simplicity can elevate ordinary moments, dreary lives, and even
inanimate objects---as anyone who has ever looked at an exquisite piece
of Shaker furniture will attest---from the mundane to the transcendent.
Less can mean more for those of us on the Simple Abundance path. Today
just think about how appealing simplicity can be. Visualize a bouquet of
bright yellow daffodils in a white milk jug on a pine mantel, sunlight
streaming through sparkling clean windows, the shine of beautifully
varnished wooden floors, the shimmering glow and fragrance of pure
beeswax candles. Trust that through the balm of simplicity your frazzled
and weary soul can discover the place where you ought to be. Every day
offers us simple gifts when we are willing to search our hearts for the
place that's right for each of us. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 16

A Sense of Order: Cultivating Contentment Order is the shape upon which
beauty depends. ---PEARL BUCK

For years I have suspected that in happy and fulfilled lives domesticity
and spirituality are invisibly but inexorably connected---one a golden
thread, one a silver filament---which, when woven together, create a
tapestry of contentment. The Shakers, a religious communal sect that
flourished in America during the mid-nineteenth century, invoked a
prayer each morning for the grace that would enable them to express
their love of God through their daily tasks---tasks as simple and
mundane as making a bed. And the seventeenth-century Carmelite friar,
Brother Lawrence, wrote in his devotional classic, Practicing the
Presence of God, that frequently he felt the spirit of God among the
pots, pans, and potatoes in his kitchen as he was preparing a meal for
his fellow monks. Whenever I am feeling overwhelmed by outside
circumstances---worries about money, concern over a sick family member,
or anxiety over prolonged business negotiations---instinctively I turn
to homegrown rituals to restore my equilibrium. There is an immediate
emotional and psychological payoff to getting our houses in order. We
might not be able to control what's happening externally in our lives
but we can learn to look to our own inner resources for a sense of
comfort that nurtures and sustains. I have even noticed that there is a
direct correlation between the days when I'm feeling depressed and the
days when the house is in disarray. I suspect that I'm not alone. "It's
not the tragedies that kill us," Dorothy Parker once observed, "it's the
messes."

If you feel constantly adrift but don't know why, be willing to explore
the role that order---or the lack of it---plays in your life. No woman
can think clearly when constantly surrounded by clutter, chaos, and
confusion, no matter who is responsible for it. Begin to think of order
not as a straitjacket of "shoulds" (make the bed, wash the dishes, take
out the garbage) but as a shape---the foundation---for the beautiful new
life you are creating. It may be as simple as putting something back
that you take out, hanging something up that you take off, or teaching
those who live with you that they must do the same for the common good
of all. There is a Divine Order---a Sublime Order---inherent in the
Universe. We can tap into this powerful source of creative energy when
we are willing to gradually cultivate a sense of order as to how we
conduct our daily affairs. Invite Divine Order into your life today and
a more serene tomorrow will unfold. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 17

Harmony: Achieving Balance in Our Lives The notes I handle no better
than many pianists. But the pauses between the notes---ah, that is where
the art resides. ---ARTUR SCHNABEL

A Chopin piano nocturne played by a novice musician and by a virtuoso
will not sound the same. That's because one of the two pianists has had
a lifetime to practice the music as well as learn when to pause in order
to color the notes with passion. So it is with the concerto of our
lives. Individual notes must be learned and played and practiced before
we achieve harmony. And above all, we must learn how to pause. Harmony
is the inner cadence of contentment we feel when the melody of life is
in tune. When somehow we're able to strike the right chord---to balance
the expectations of our families and our responsibilities in the world
on the one hand with our inner needs for spiritual growth and personal
expression on the other. This is one of the most difficult challenges
any woman faces because it requires that we make choices every day. And
yet most of us often feel too tired to choose anything more than what to
have for dinner! Perhaps this explains why we often hear only a
cacophony of dissonant demands that drown out the symphonies our souls
long to compose. Usually, when the distractions of daily life deplete
our energy, the first thing we eliminate is the thing we need the most:
quiet, reflective time. Time to dream, time to think, time to
contemplate what's working and what's not, so that we can make changes
for the better. On the Simple Abundance path we begin to learn how to
pause. As we bring the principles of gratitude, simplicity, and order
into our lives, harmony emerges. We learn to balance demands with
pleasures, moments

of solitude with a need for companionship, work with play, activity with
rest, the inner woman with the outer packaging. Today, just try slowing
down. Approach the day as if it were an adagio--- a melody played in an
easy, graceful manner. Listen to music that soothes and uplifts your
spirit. And while you listen, pause to consider how all the individual
notes come together harmoniously to give expression to the entire score.
So it shall be with your world. With harmony as your guide, trust that
your everyday moments will soon begin to resonate in a rhapsody of
fulfillment. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 18

Beauty: Opening Our Eyes to the Beauty That Surrounds Us You agree---I'm
sure you agree, that beauty is the only thing worth living for.
---AGATHA CHRISTIE

While the Simple Abundance path is gentle, its lessons are powerful.
First of all, we learn to be grateful no matter what our circumstances
may be. In offering gratitude for our real lives, we discover how to
change them for the better. As we embrace simplicity, we learn that less
is truly more. This freedom encourages us to bring order to our affairs
and cultivate harmony in our inner world. Going at our own pace,
learning to recognize our limitations, appreciating our progress, we
weave the lessons into the fabric of our daily moments until they become
a part of us. Suddenly one day we feel very much alive and desire more
beauty in our personal quest. We come to a deep awareness that creating
a beautiful life is our highest calling. "It was as if I had worked for
years on the wrong side of a tapestry, learning accurately all its lines
and figures, yet always missing its color and sheen," the journalist
Anna Louise Strong confessed in 1935. We understand her sentiments as
life's color and sheen and beauty call to us. Today, explore ways to see
your world differently. Let your eyes drink in the beauty that surrounds
you. Walk to a gallery on your lunch hour and meditate upon a beautiful
painting or into your backyard this afternoon to catch that "certain
Slant of light" that so enthralled Emily Dickinson. Gaze into the faces
of those you love, set the table with care, and relish the preparations
you make for dinner, delighting in the presentation of your

meal. Light the candles, pour wine or sparkling water in your prettiest
goblets, and celebrate this new awareness. It is in the details of life
that beauty is revealed, sustained, and nurtured. Outside, winter's
darkness closes in. Inside, you have found your own Light.
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 19

Joy: Learning Life's Lessons with a Light Heart I cannot believe that
the inscrutable universe turns on an axis of suffering; surely the
strange beauty of the world must somewhere rest on pure joy. ---LOUISE
BOGAN

The Simple Abundance journey takes us to undiscovered territory. We
learn each day how cultivating gratitude tills the soil of our soul and
then how the seeds of simplicity and order send their roots down deep
into the earth of our everyday existence. As we progress, harmony
inspires us with quiet courage to create an authentic life for ourselves
and those we love. With patience, beauty blossoms and our hearts
experience not only happiness, which is often fleeting, but a wellspring
of joy that refreshes and renews. We have found our true place in the
world. "With an eye made quiet by the power of harmony, and the deep
power of joy," William Wordsworth wrote, "we see into the life of
things." Seeing into the life of things is what engages us at this point
in the transformative process. From deep within there comes a longing to
give up the path of struggle as a way to learn life's lessons. Finally
we are ready to embrace the path of joy. Learning to live in the present
moment is part of the path of joy. But this requires a profound inner
shift in our reality. Many of us unconsciously create dramas in our
minds, expecting the worst from a situation only to have our
expectations become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Inadvertently, we become
authors of our own misfortune. And so we struggle from day to

day, from crisis to crisis, bruised and battered by circumstances
without realizing that we always have a choice. But what if you learned
how to stop the dramas and started to trust the flow of life and the
goodness of Spirit? What if you began to expect the best from any
situation? Isn't it possible that you could write new chapters in your
life with happy endings? For many of us this is such a radical departure
from the way we have been behaving that it seems unbelievable. Yet it is
possible. Suspend your disbelief. Take a leap of faith. After all, what
have you got to lose but misery and lack? Begin today. Declare out loud
to the Universe that you are willing to let go of struggle and eager to
learn through joy. It just may take you at your word. What's more,
you'll discover, much to your amazement and delight, that such blessings
have been waiting patiently for you to claim them all along.
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 20

Acres of Diamonds Your diamonds are not in far distant mountains or in
yonder seas; they are in your own backyard, if you but dig for them.
---RUSSELL H. CONWELL

Few motivational talks have influenced or inspired as many people as the
famous Victorian lecture that was known as "Acres of Diamonds." Russell
H. Conwell, a former newspaper correspondent and minister, delivered his
speech more than six thousand times between 1877 and 1925. When it was
published it became an immediate best-seller and a classic in
inspirational literature. The story Conwell told in his lecture had
enormous appeal. It recounted the life of a Persian farmer named Ali
Hafed who sold his farm and left his family to travel the world in
search of wealth. He looked everywhere but he could not find the
diamonds he lusted after. Finally, alone and in despair as a homeless
pauper, he ended his own life. His search for riches had consumed him.
In the meantime, the man who bought the land from Hafed was grateful for
every blade of grass that was now his and lavished love and hard work on
his farm. At night, surrounded by his family and eating the fruits of
his labor, he was a contented man. Finally one day he made a remarkable
discovery. In the backyard that Ali Hafed had abandoned was a diamond
mine---literally an acre of diamonds. The simple farmer became wealthy
beyond his wildest dreams. Conwell used this parable to illustrate an
extraordinary and wonderful message: within each of us lies a wellspring
of abundance and the seeds of opportunity. For each of us there is a
deeply personal dream waiting to be discovered and fulfilled. When we
cherish our dream and then invest love,

creative energy, perseverance, and passion in ourselves, we will achieve
an authentic success. Where is your acre of diamonds? If you could do
anything in the world, what would it be? Yes, that very thing right now
that you believe is impossible! Would you open a store, nurture a
family, design a dress, write a screenplay? We all have an acre of
diamonds waiting to be discovered, cherished, and mined. We all have a
place from where to begin. Let your imagination soar, for it is your
soul's blueprint for success. On the Simple Abundance path you will
discover that your own opportunity for personal success, authentic
happiness, and financial serenity is as close as your own backyard.
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 21

Letting Go of Limiting Illusions I like living. I have sometimes been
wildly, despairingly, acutely miserable, racked with sorrow, but through
it all I still know quite certainly that just to be alive is a grand
thing. ---AGATHA CHRISTIE

For some of us the thought of trusting a power outside ourselves to help
make our dreams come true is definitely a threatening concept,
especially if we're used to being in control---or rather, used to the
illusion of being in control. Many more of us go through life trapped by
another illusion: that an uncaring, capricious fate determines our
destiny. Shellshocked from some of the acutely miserable things that
life throws our way, we are deeply afraid to believe that a loving,
generous Creative Force supports our endeavors. We are afraid to trust
that the same Spirit that created the Universe probably knows how to
help us write for the grant, get the promotion, go back to school, start
our new business, find the new job. Like mirrors in a carnival fun house
that distort appearances, what we see with our eyes is not real. We buy
in to the illusion that external events possess the ultimate power to
deny our dreams. And we wonder why we're so unhappy? Let go of limiting
illusions that have held you back from knowing that just to be alive is
a grand thing. Suspend disbelief. Experiment with a loving, supportive
Universe that embraces even skeptics. Today, be willing to believe that
a companion Spirit is leading you every step of the way, and knows the
next step. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 22

The Prosperity of Living Woman must be the pioneer in this turning
inward for strength. In a sense she has always been the pioneer. ---ANNE
MORROW LINDBERGH

These are challenging times in which to live. But we are not the only
generation of women to have known difficult days. It is comforting to
realize that others before us have persevered and prospered. During the
dark days of the Depression an editorial in the October 1932 issue of
Ladies' Home Journal encouraged readers to remember that "The return of
good times is not wholly a matter of money. There is a prosperity of
living which is quite as important as prosperity of the pocketbook." But
the magazine stressed that "It is not enough to be willing to make the
best of things as they are. Resignation will get us nowhere. We must
build what amounts to a new country. We must revive the ideals of the
founders. We must learn the new values of money. It is a time for
pioneering---to create a new security for the home and the family....
Where we were specialists in spending, we are becoming specialists in
living." I remember the exact moment when I found that quote. I was
mining my acre of diamonds: seated on the floor of an antique shop
perusing women's periodicals from the past for hints on how to live
successfully today. I had been on the Simple Abundance path for a year
and felt like a pioneer. In fact, I felt exactly like a woman who had
packed up her family and all her worldly possessions in Boston to start
across country in a covered wagon in search of the Promised Land. For
two thousand miles I had kept the dream of a better life alive while
enduring Indian attacks, epidemics, drought, blizzards, tornadoes,
snakes, and salted beef. By this time I was in the Nebraska Territory
with a thousand more miles to go, but I had come too far

to turn back. Like that pioneer woman, I was discouraged. When I found
that magazine I immediately embraced it as a telegraph message to my
soul. "Keep going. Don't stop. You're on the right path and you are not
alone." From that moment, I have never looked back. I learned firsthand
that the Simple Abundance path has the power to transform lives. Are you
ready to become a pioneer? Then it's time to invest your soul with all
the creative energy at your disposal. Think of me as your scout, your
own personal pathfinder. These past few years I've gone ahead and
cleared brush from the trail. This much I'll tell you at the outset. The
path spirals and takes time---it will take us a year---but it is
comforting and nurturing. It can also be undertaken only one day at a
time. Don't be afraid. We are not alone. Like pioneers on the trail, we
will learn to live by our own lights and the stars of heaven, for that
is all we need. There is no obstacle that true grit and Amazing Grace
cannot overcome. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 23

Accepting Real Life Everything in life that we really accept undergoes a
change. ---KATHERINE MANSFIELD

Accepting and blessing our circumstances is a powerful tool for
transformation. In fact, this potent combination is a spiritual elixir
that can work miracles in our lives. What is acceptance? Acceptance is
surrendering to what is: our circumstances, our feelings, our problems,
our financial status, our work, our health, our relationships with other
people, the delay of our dreams. Before we can change anything in our
life we have to recognize that this is the way it's meant to be right
now. For me, acceptance has become what I call the long sigh of the
soul. It's the closed eyes in prayer, perhaps even the quiet tears. It's
"all right," as in "All right, You lead, I'll follow." And it's "all
right," as in "Everything is going to turn out all right." This is
simply part of the journey. Over the years I have discovered that much
of my struggle to be content despite outside circumstances has arisen
when I stubbornly resisted what was actually happening in my life at the
present moment. But I have also learned that when I surrender to the
reality of a particular situation---when I don't continue to resist, but
accept---a softening in my soul occurs. Suddenly I am able to open up to
receive all the goodness and abundance available to me because
acceptance brings with it so much relief and release. It's as if the
steam of struggle has been allowed to escape from life's pressure
cooker. What happens when we accept our circumstances? Well, first of
all, we relax. Next we change our vibration, our energy pattern, and the
rate of our heartbeat. Once again we're able to tap into the boundless
positive energy

of the Universe. Acceptance also illuminates reality so that we're
better able to see the next step. Whatever situation exists in your life
right now, accept it. Natalie Goldberg believes that "Our task is to say
a holy yes to the real things of our life as they exist." Cast a glance
around and acknowledge what's going on. This is my tiny kitchen with the
dirty floor, this is how much I weigh, this is my checking account
balance, this is where I work right now. This is what is really
happening in my life at the present moment. This is okay. This is real
life. Today, let go of the struggle. Allow the healing process of change
to begin. You're ready to move on. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 24

Blessing Our Circumstances Bless a thing and it will bless you. Curse it
and it will curse you.... If you bless a situation, it has no power to
hurt you, and even if it is troublesome for a time, it will gradually
fade out, if you sincerely bless it. ---EMMET FOX

After accepting our present circumstances, no matter what they are, we
must learn to bless them. Right. Bless misery? Through your gritted
teeth if necessary. Usually we don't know why something has occurred and
we won't until there's enough distance to take a backward glance.
However, blessing whatever vexes us is the spiritual surrender that can
change even troublesome situations for the better. Blessing the
circumstances in our lives also teaches us to trust. Over the years my
easiest and most joyous lessons have been learned through blessing. If
you're sick and tired of learning life's lessons through pain and
struggle, blessing your difficulties will show you there's a better way.
A powerful set of blessings that I learned from the teachings of Stella
Terrill Mann, a Unity minister who wrote during the 1940s, encourages us
to greet the morning with the affirmation "Blessed be the morn for me
and mine." At noon declare, "Blessed be the day for me and mine," and in
the evening, invoke this prayer: "Blessed be the night for me and mine."
As you go about your work at home or in the office, affirm, "My work is
a prayer for good for me and mine." These affirmations of good will
bring many blessings into your daily life, as they have in mine. Then
start to count your blessings. Start today. Make a spiritual inventory
of all your blessings. See if you can't get to one hundred. So

much good happens to us but in the rush of daily life we fail even to
notice or acknowledge it. Writing it down focuses our attention on the
abundance already within our grasp and makes it real. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 25

Working with What You've Got If your everyday life seems poor, don't
blame it; blame yourself; admit to yourself that you are not enough of a
poet to call forth its riches; because for the creator there is no
poverty and no poor indifferent place. ---RAINER MARIA RILKE

Up until now many of us have secretly believed that we had to wait until
things calmed down a bit before we started to get our acts together.
Tomorrow we'll begin discovering authentic pleasures. Tomorrow we'll
treat ourselves better. Tomorrow we'll take the time to enjoy ourselves.
Tomorrow, when everything calms down. This I can report from the front
lines: life never calms down long enough for us to wait until tomorrow
to start living the lives we deserve. Life is always movement, always
change, always unforeseen circumstances. There will always be something
trying to grab your attention: the phone call, the child, the fax, the
car breaking down, the check that never arrives in the mail. Let's just
acknowledge that as far as real life is concerned, we are only one step
away from dealing with dysfunction. So what are we going to do about it?
We can stop waiting for life to become perfect and start working with
what we've got to make it as satisfying as we can. We can accept, bless,
give thanks, and get going. Today, we can begin to call forth the riches
from our everyday life. Today we can move from lack to abundance.
Procrastination has robbed us of too many precious opportunities. Call a
friend for lunch, begin to read or even write that novel, organize your
papers, try a new recipe for dinner, smile at

everyone you meet, sit and dream before a blazing fire, pick up your
needlepoint again, act as if you're grateful to be alive, scatter joy.
Think of one thing that would give you a genuine moment of pleasure
today and do it. Great! The first steps in the journey are always the
most difficult to take. "Life begets life. Energy creates energy," the
famous French actress Sarah Bernhardt reminds us. "It is by spending
oneself that we become rich." OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 26

Simple Abundance: The Basic Tools Take the gentle path. ---GEORGE
HERBERT

There is no companion so companionable as Solitude," Thoreau reminds me
as I carry a hot cup of tea back to bed. The house is hushed now after
the hustle and bustle of a weekday morning. The cats follow me up the
stairs, scurrying for nests in the rumpled bed covers. Everyone here
knows that a reassuring ritual is about to take place, a civilized
ceremonial for a common day. Although it is still too early to receive
business calls, to avoid interruptions I turn on my telephone answering
machine. The next hour is spent going within: working with my
illustrated discovery journal, writing my daily dialogue, in prayer,
playing with my treasure map collage, embarking on the golden mirror
meditation, planning my day, and then just sitting in silence. Listening
attentively. Waiting expectantly. These are the basic tools that have
helped me on the Simple Abundance path to authenticity. Use them
together as I do, or begin to use whichever one sounds intriguing. See
if you can't give yourself the gift of one hour a day to journey within.
You need enough breathing space to allow your heart to ponder what is
precious. Or perhaps you can let your imagination soar to the twilight
where dreams first dwell. If you feel a solid hour is too much of a
luxury in the beginning (it isn't, but we'll go gently), break up the
time during the day. Start with a half hour in the morning and another
half hour before you retire in the evening. Most days after my inner
excursion is over, it appears as if nothing has happened that has
dramatically changed my life. I have just spent an hour alone. I am not
aware of any new insights, inspiration, or guidance. But

sometimes I am able to bring the larger picture into sharper focus. You
will, too. This much I know: if you go deep enough, often enough,
something good is bound to come back to you. Very often glimmers of the
inspiration I desire or the insights I need will come later in the day
when I am driving the car pool or preparing supper. But whether or not
revelations have been part of my morning, each day offers its own gift.
OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 27

The Daily Dialogue I will write myself into well-being. ---NANCY MAIR

Because I write all day long professionally and work very hard at my
craft, most of my adult life I have passionately resisted keeping a
personal journal. It just seemed like too much effort and I really
didn't have the time. But when I embarked on the Simple Abundance path,
I became aware of all the conversations that I continuously carry on
with myself. There was rarely a quieting of my mind. Instead, I'd hear:
"The cat's acting funny, is she sick? If the Cleveland airport gets
snowed in on Thursday, how will I get home? Am I ever going to get paid
again? We need new slipcovers in the living room---the old ones are
starting to look shabby." And so forth. I discovered that my mind will
grab hold of a single thought like a pit bull terrier with a bone and
not let it go until I'm exhausted or have lost interest. One day,
desperate to quiet the voice in my head, I took a spiral notebook and
began having a conversation with myself on the paper. Everything I was
worried about just spilled out in a rapid stream of consciousness. What
I was doing was not so much recording the events in my life as much as
eliminating the mental minutiae that was depleting my creative energy
and driving me crazy. I was then able to let go and get on with my day.
"Groan and forget it," the writer Jessamyn West advised. She's right.
This ritual became very centering and therapeutic. I have been doing my
daily dialogue for several years now, and while I may sometimes skip a
few days, I always look forward to checking in with my consciousness
because this inner tool really works. It clears my head and calms my
restless spirit. It will do the same for you. Interestingly, after a
while, the pages take on a life of their own. I call this ritual the
daily

dialogue because you are really conversing with someone much wiser and
saner as you write: your authentic self. Try writing a daily dialogue as
an experiment for twenty-one days. That's the length of time
psychologists tell us we need to perform a new behavior before it
becomes habitual. Neither the time of day nor the amount you write seems
to matter as much as the repetition. Stressed souls need the reassuring
rhythm of self-nurturing rituals. Sometimes, when I have a particularly
thorny issue to resolve, I'll write two pages in the morning and come
back in the evening to see if there isn't an answer that's forthcoming.
Very frequently there is. And until there is, at least there is relief
and release. When you start writing the daily dialogue, you will
probably be shocked at how much complaining you do at the beginning.
That's okay. Actually, that's a very healthy reaction. You can't moan
about a situation for months and not decide to do something about it.
You'll get tired of the sound of your own nagging and be inspired to get
moving. Another suggestion: don't use a fancy, pretty journal for your
daily dialogue. It's too intimidating, because you'll then want it to be
perfect and profound and that's not the point; use a spiral notebook or
loose-leaf pages. Just get down on paper whatever's hovering on the
horizon of your brain disguised as a dull headache. Alison Lurie
confessed that "With pencil and paper, I could revise the world."
Writing a daily dialogue is a sure way of revising yours as you search
for your authenticity. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 28

The Illustrated Discovery Journal Knowledge of what you love somehow
comes to you; you don't have to read nor analyze nor study. If you love
a thing enough, knowledge of it seeps into you, with particulars more
real than any chart can furnish. ---JESSAMYN WEST

The key to loving how you live is in knowing what it is you truly love.
"To know what you prefer instead of humbly saying Amen to what the world
tells you you ought to prefer, is to keep your soul alive," Robert Louis
Stevenson reminds us. Keeping our soul alive and nurturing our
creativity is what interests us today. One of the most pleasurable ways
to start finding out your personal preferences is by creating an
illustrated discovery journal. This is your explorer's log as you begin
to make your way into the darkest terra incognita: your authentic inner
world. We feed our imaginations and get in touch with our authenticity
by gathering together beautiful images that speak to our souls. You
didn't know that the sun-drenched colors of Santa Fe called to you? Then
why do they keep popping up in your pictures? You thought American
country was your style but rose-covered chintz is what you're collecting
on paper? Isn't that interesting. Here is an occasion when one picture
speaks a thousand words. Meditating on one visual image a day can
jump-start your creativity and lead to revealing insights. Today get a
blank, black-bound artist's sketchbook at an art supply store, a pair of
sharp scissors, rubber cement, and your favorite magazines. Put them all
in a basket and keep it by your bed. At night before you go to bed, when
you're in a drowsy, relaxed, and receptive state, flip through the
magazines. When you see an image you love, cut it out and paste it in
your book. Don't try to arrange the pictures in any specific sort of
way. Let the

collages you are creating simply evolve. Soon they will give you
directions about where your heart wants you to go. I have also added
quotes, sketches, greeting cards, and art postcards to my discovery
journal, crafting with paper what the poet W. H. Auden calls "a map of
my planet." OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 29

Your Personal Treasure Map For where your treasure is, there will your
heart be also. ---MATTHEW 6:21

No self-respecting, swashbuckling buccaneer would set out in search of
buried treasure without a map. Why should you? A personal treasure map
is a collage of your ideal life that you create as a visual tool to
focus your creative energy in the direction you wish to go. First of
all, you'll have to visualize your ideal life. Take a moment to get
quiet and go within. Close your eyes. Now see how you live and who lives
with you. What does your dream house look like? What part of the country
is it in? Do you have children? How many? What type of garden do you
have? Is there a gazebo in the backyard? A swimming pool? Do you have
any pets? What kind of car is parked in the driveway? What kind of job
do you have? Are you publishing your own newsletter, directing a feature
film, or raising thoroughbred horses? Now see if you can't find pictures
in magazines to match your ideal ones. Cut them out and create a collage
on an eight- by ten-inch piece of posterboard. If you can't find images
to match your dreams, tap into the creativity deep within and draw a
picture. When you're finished, find a photograph of yourself that you
especially like. Make sure it's a picture of you looking radiant and
happy. Cut yourself out and place yourself in the center of your
treasure map collage. When making your personal treasure map, think fun.
Think delight. Think seven years old. This is not an intellectual
exercise in existentialism. This is a wish list to the Universe. Our
deepest wishes are whispers of our authentic selves. We must learn to
respect them. We must learn to listen. "Put your ear down next to your
soul and listen hard," the poet Anne Sexton advises.

Above all, remember that no one needs to be privy to your personal
treasure map but you. Our wishes for the future, our hopes, our dreams,
our aspirations are our truest treasures. Guard yours in the sanctuary
of your heart. Keep your personal treasure map in the back of your
illustrated discovery journal and look at it often. When you do, give
thanks for the wonderful life you are leading. The greatest secret to
living a happy and fulfilled life is the realization that everything is
created in our minds before it manifests itself in the outer world. We
must believe it before we can see it. You have to know what you're
digging for, before X can mark the spot. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 30

The Golden Mirror Meditation Almost always it is the fear of being
ourselves that brings us to the mirror. ---ANTONIO PORCHIA

For years I have used a special meditation I call the golden mirror
meditation. I visualize in my mind an enormous mirror the size of a
room, with an elaborately carved, 24-karat gold frame. This is my
materializing mirror. Those dreams I wish to materialize in my life are
first viewed here. Now let me share with you an amazing coincidence that
a French proverb would suggest is "God's way of remaining anonymous."
After I had been doing the golden mirror meditation for about a year, I
was invited on an all-expenses-paid business trip to Dublin, one of my
favorite cities. I was to stay at one of Dublin's oldest, most
beautiful, and expensive hotels, the Shelbourne, where I had never been
before. When I arrived at the hotel and walked into the lounge, what
should I see but the physical manifestation of my daily meditation: a
beautiful mirror with a gold-leaf frame that was so large it took up an
entire wall of the lounge. I laughed with delight when I saw my
reflection in it, for here was the Universe's way of demonstrating to me
that whatever we visualize in our minds can come to pass in the physical
world. Today, find a few minutes to get quiet and journey within. Close
your eyes. Visualize a beautiful, large golden mirror surrounded by
shimmering white light. This light is Love and it surrounds you, enfolds
you, enwraps you, and protects you as you look into the mirror. See the
reflection of an extraordinary woman. She is beautiful and radiant. She
possesses a strong, healthy, vibrant aura. Her eyes are sparkling and
she is smiling warmly at you. Do you know who this woman is? You feel as
if you have known her

all your life. And you have. She is your authentic self. Spend a few
moments with her now. What is she doing? How is she doing it? Visit her
as often as you like. She is waiting to help you find your way as you
make the journey of self-discovery. There are days when we all fear the
harsh glare of the looking glass, but there is never a time when you
should hesitate to encounter the woman in the golden mirror. She is the
highest reflection of your soul, the embodiment of the perfect woman who
resides within and she sends you Love to light your path. OceanofPDF.com

JANUARY 31

Embracing Joyful Simplicities Year by year the complexities of this
spinning world grow more bewildering and so each year we need all the
more to seek peace and comfort in the joyful simplicities. ---WOMAN'S
HOME COMPANION, December 1935

As we become curators of our own contentment on the Simple Abundance
path, one of the great payoffs is that we start to seek peace and
comfort in the joyful simplicities. Little things begin to mean a lot to
us. Joyful simplicities nourish body and soul by engaging our senses.
They teach us how to live in the present moment. Life comes together
when we seek out the Sublime in the ordinary. We all have days in our
lives that are marked by great moments of rejoicing and celebration: the
baby is born, the promotion comes through, the book contract is signed.
But life is not an endless round of cake and champagne. There's a lot of
drudgery to most of our days: sheets to be changed, dry cleaning to pick
up, garbage to put out. To keep our daily round from being all drudgery,
we've got to savor the art of the small: discovering diminutive delights
that bring us peace and pleasure. In 1949, the British playwright J. B.
Priestly gathered together such moments in a book of essays entitled
Delight. Among his favorites: waking in the morning to the smell of
coffee, eggs, and bacon; reading detective stories in bed; suddenly
doing nothing in the middle of the day; buying books; and enjoying the
company of (instead of just tolerating) small children. It's a winter's
day. Can you make a pot of homemade soup for supper tonight? I relish
this joyful simplicity once a week during the winter. Chopping, paring,
and scraping are very calming activities. Really look at

the colors of the vegetables---the orange of the carrots, the bright
green celery, the pearly white onion. You have a beautiful still life in
front of you. Don't rush through the process but enjoy the mindfulness,
or the Zen, of cooking. Isn't the fragrance of homemade soup wonderful?
It makes you glad to be alive or at least at your own house for dinner.
Don't you see how we have to seize the essence of life? We have to
embrace every moment. "People need joy quite as much as clothing. Some
of them need it far more," Margaret Collier Graham wrote in 1906. Today,
make discovering those joyful simplicities that bring you personal
comfort and a sense of well-being one of your highest priorities.

Joyful Simplicities for January • Write out the aspirations of your
heart as you begin the Simple Abundance path. • Serve a traditional New
Year's Day dinner of Hoppin' John: blackeyed peas (for luck), rice (for
health), collard greens (for prosperity), baked ham and cornbread (for
delicious eating!). I make a scrumptious winter salad of cooked
black-eyed peas, diced green and red peppers, and red onion dressed in a
French vinaigrette, which is served at room temperature. • Go through
your personal papers at home and organize your desk to get a fresh start
on the new year. Discard as much as you can. Hang your new calendars.
Try to make your personal space at home where you do paperwork as
inviting as possible. • Visit a good stationery store or a very large
bookstore and search for a beautiful blank book to use as your gratitude
journal. Or look for the Simple Abundance Journal of Gratitude (Warner),
which I created especially for this purpose. For expressive journals
available on the web visit www.journalsandmore.com. • Visit an art
supply shop and simply look around. Take in all the different ways that
you can begin to express yourself: in vivid color, on paper, canvas, in
clay. If you can't find my Illustrated Discovery Journal: Creating a
Visual Autobiography of Your Authentic Self (Warner), pick up a
black-bound spiral artist's notebook to use for your collage therapy. My
favorite size is ten inches square.

• Put up some acrylic magnet picture frames to create a gratitude
collage for your refrigerator. Place in it photographs of those you love
and are grateful for, such as family, friends, and pets. Also place in
it reminders of the little things you're thankful for, like the car
repair bill that was less than you had anticipated. If there's something
that you particularly want to come into your life, place a picture of it
here and give thanks for it ahead of time. • Prepare for a winter's
idyll. Stock the pantry with real cocoa, tiny marshmallows and a bar of
good chocolate (for a shaved-chocolate topping). Get some whipped cream
and keep it in the refrigerator. When snow comes and school is
cancelled, stay home with the kids. Lounge about in your pajamas. If you
have a fireplace, have a fire all day. Build a snowman together, go
sledding, then have tomato soup in mugs and toasted cheese sandwiches
for lunch. Take a nap. Luxuriate in an unexpected day off. • Pay a visit
to a great junk store. If you don't know one, start looking. Every woman
needs a great junk store in her repertoire. • Bake a pan of dense, dark,
moist gingerbread for after-school tea with the children or for dessert.
Read Laurie Colwin's delightful More Home Cooking: A Writer Returns to
the Kitchen (Perennial). Laurie's most important tip is not to use
ordinary molasses. Instead she "wholeheartedly" recommends C. S. Steen
Syrup Mill of Abbeville, Louisiana. Visit them on the web at
http://www.steensyrup.com/links.html. British cooks can use Lyle's
Golden Syrup. • Visit the local library and read some new magazines you
don't normally subscribe to. I do this once a month. It's fun and
frugal. • Force some spring bulbs to blossom---miniature daffodils,
paper whites, hyacinths and tulips---to brighten your spirits and home
with color and fragrance in midwinter. Visit a local nursery and ask for
bulbs specifically bred for this purpose or browse online at
www.whiteflowerfarm.com (800-503-9624). • Visit two outstanding websites
devoted to helping you develop a green thumb. In the U.S., Renee
Shepherd offers gourment vegetables, kitchen herbs and cottage garden
suggestions at www.reneesgarden.com and in the UK, Sarah Raven will have
you growing a "cutting garden" that's simply sublime,
www.thecuttinggarden.com.

• Browse through gardening catalogs this month. Cut out your favorite
flowers and create your ideal garden on paper. Indulge your passion for
a rose-covered gazebo in a gardening collage and keep it in your
illustrated discovery journal. Pretend you're creating a secret garden
for solitary sojourns. What does it look like? What gardening
accessories and furniture appeal to you? Add them to your collage. Let
your fantasies come to life on paper first. • Send for annual seeds that
you can begin planting indoors next month. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY China tea, the scent of hyacinths, wood fires and bowls of
violets---that is my mental picture of an agreeable February afternoon.
---CONSTANCE SPRY

February arrives cold, wet and gray, her gifts disguised for only the
most discerning spirits to see. Gentle is our path. Gratitude is the
thread we weave into the fabric of our daily lives this month, giving
thanks for our simply abundant lives and asking for the gift of one
thing more: grateful hearts. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 1

Creative Excursions: The Gift of Time I celebrate myself, and sing
myself I loafe and invite my soul ... ---WALT WHITMAN

Now that you've met your authentic self, wouldn't you like to get to
know her better? You can when you start going on creative excursions
together. Creative excursions are regular solo rendezvous with your
authentic self designed for this purpose. In the beginning of any
intimate relationship the best gift you can offer another person is the
investment of quality time together. So it is with your authentic self.
You have probably been ignoring her for decades; now it's time to make
amends. What will you do? Celebrate yourself, find pastimes that make
your heart light and your spirit sing. Take in a movie (one of those
English period dramas you love), have an early breakfast before work at
a new French cafÉ, cruise the aisles at that incredible Italian market,
explore a fabulous thrift shop, browse in used-book stores, visit an art
supply store and imagine all the wonderful ways in which you can begin
expressing yourself. When you embark on creative excursions, your
authentic self will lovingly reveal to you the beautiful mystery that is
you. This occurs spontaneously as you make the pursuit of personal
growth a sacred endeavor. Having encouraged you, now let me warn you.
This is not as easy as it sounds. In fact, for me the hardest part of
the Simple Abundance path was creative excursions. I was simply not used
to having fun by myself. It seemed too frivolous, too self-indulgent. Be
prepared for strong, emotional resistance. Excuses will be plentiful:
you're too broke, you're too busy, who will watch the kids, maybe next
week when you're not so frazzled. Don't

give in. Creative excursions require an investment of time, not money.
None of us are too busy to find two hours a week. If we are, we
seriously need to reconsider our personal priorities. Hire a babysitter,
let your spouse watch the kids, carve out time when they are in school,
use your lunch hour at work. There are ways to do it, once we realize
that nurturing our imaginations and developing a relationship with our
authentic selves is an investment we can no longer afford to put off.
This week commit to a weekly creative excursion with your authentic self
as you follow the Simple Abundance path. Expect nothing less than signs
and wonders to follow. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 2

Knowing What You Love Perhaps loving something is the only starting
place there is for making your life your own. ---ALICE KOLLER

It should be straightforward, this knowing what we love. But it seldom
is. After decades of letting other people influence us---the media, the
magazines, our mothers, our friends---we're going to have to go cold
turkey. The only opinion that counts from now on is your own. This week,
try an experiment. Plan a creative excursion to go browsing in a home
furnishings and decorative accessories shop. Go somewhere you've never
been before, so that you're looking at everything with fresh eyes. What
startles you, calls to you, excites you? Write it down in a small spiral
notebook that you can keep in your purse. Is it the shape of a teapot,
the colors of a hooked rug, the textures in an exquisite dried flower
arrangement? You'll know what you love the moment you see it. It's that
familiar "Wow" reaction. Trust the impulse, capture the encounter,
record the clues. These will be important later on. Then next week on
another creative excursion, go browsing (not to buy) at a new clothing
boutique. You know, that place that always intrigues you but you stay
away from because it's too expensive. The spring fashions should be
arriving about now. See what's new. See what's you. Your spirit perks at
the sight of a goldenrod linen blazer. So why are you always dressed in
black? A fabulous flowered georgette pleated skirt and tunic top wows
you, but you always wear jeans because it's more practical. Maybe, just
maybe, feeling gorgeous outweighs practicality. Be open to authentic
aspirations.

Remember this is the year for asking questions. The most essential one
we can ask is: what is it I truly love? Be patient. We're not going to
overhaul our lives, our homes, or our wardrobes in a week. Trust that
your authentic life will unfold naturally and with grace. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 3

Discovering Your Authentic Self To love oneself is the beginning of a
life-long romance. ---OSCAR WILDE

One of the surprises that comes when you catch glimpses of your
authentic self is the discovery that she's such a positive, upbeat
woman. She's always smiling. She's always calm. She's always reassuring.
She exudes confidence. Who is this woman, you might ask, and does she
bear any resemblance to you? Yes and no. This is who you are on the
inside. The real you. If you don't act this way all the time, it's
simply because you haven't evolved to a higher plane of existence yet.
Neither have I. Marianne Williamson believes this will come when we
"embrace the Goddess" who resides within. "When a woman falls in love
with the magnificent possibilities within herself, the forces that would
limit those possibilities hold less and less sway over her," she writes
in A Woman's Worth. But occasionally we get glimmers of what it's like
on this higher plane: on a good-hair day; when we've had twelve hours of
sleep; when we soar through a business meeting, thoroughly prepared;
when we fit into last year's clothes; when we throw a great party and
everyone enjoys themselves immensely. When moments like these occur, we
tend to think that all's right with the world. Everything just fell into
place. What we don't realize is that all's right with ourselves. We're
in the flow of life and loving it. We're in place: that special
alignment when authenticity and reality merge into Wholeness. But how do
we tap into this spiritual energy source more often? How do we access
the flow of life more frequently? How do we learn to live at full
throttle?

Meditation helps. So do long walks, soaks in scented bubble baths,
washing our hair a day before it needs it, smiling at everyone we meet,
being more gentle with ourselves, watching a sunrise or a sunset,
petting an animal, playing with a child, having some small pleasure to
look forward to every day, being grateful. But above all, being open to
change. Welcoming it. "Watch. Wait. Time will unfold and fulfill its
purpose," Marianne Williamson advises. "While we wait, we must not go
unconscious. We must think and grow. Rejoice and dream, but kneel and
pray. There is holiness in the air today; we are giving birth to
goddesses. They are who we are, for they are us: friends, therapists,
artists, businesswomen, teachers, healers, mothers. Start laughing,
girls. We have a new calling." OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 4

The Authentic Self Is the Soul Made Visible My business is not to remake
myself, But make the absolute best of what God made. ---ROBERT BROWNING

Making the absolute best of ourselves is not an easy task. It is a
pleasurable pursuit, it is the reason we were born, but it requires
patience, persistence, and perseverance. For many of us it also requires
prayer. That's because we find it far easier to learn to live by our own
lights when we access a Higher Source of Power to illuminate our path.
The filmmaker and writer Julia Cameron calls this switching on
"spiritual electricity" that transcends our own limitations. In my own
journey I have found this to be very true. Usually I limited the times I
requested that the Power be turned on to the occasions when I was
appearing in public: giving workshops, lecturing, holding business
meetings. Then it occurred to me that this was like living in a house
with electricity but turning on the lights only for a couple of hours
every few months. And I wondered why I was frequently bumping into
obstacles. So I started to ask for the Power to be switched on in my
daily life: as a mother, a wife, a writer, and a friend. When I asked,
it was turned on. When I didn't, I stayed in the dark. You don't have to
be a master electrician to understand what's going on here: someone has
to turn on the switch. Asking is the way of activating spiritual
electricity. When there is Light we see remarkably well. We see with
clarity. And what we can see if we look deep within is that the
authentic self is the Soul made visible.

Do not try to remake yourself into something you're not. Just try making
the best of what God made. The sacred art and craft of nurturing our
souls and the souls of those we love is Simple Abundance soulcraft.
Begin today by turning on the Light. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 5

The World Is Too Much with Us What I mean by living to one's self is
living in the world, as in it, not of it. ---WILLIAM HAZLITT

The world is too much with us," poet William Wordsworth complained over
two hundred years ago. "Getting and spending, we lay waste our powers."
Today many women would agree with him. We're chronically exhausted from
the "getting"---the amount of energy spent earning a living and juggling
the demands of home and career. And the reality of the recession means
we're paying now for the "spending" of yesterday. But despite all the
doom and gloom that constantly assaults our senses, there is a way for
us to ransom our lives and reclaim our futures: it consists in turning
away from the world to recognize what in life makes us truly happy. For
each of us, what that is will be different. But once we obtain this
inner knowledge, we will possess the ability to transform our outer
world. "You can live a lifetime and, at the end of it, know more about
other people than you know about yourself," the pilot and writer Beryl
Markham reminds us. We cannot let this continue to occur. Today,
deliberately turn away from the world. Don't read the newspapers or
watch the nightly news for a week---longer if you can stand it. Shun the
glossy magazines featuring expensive suits designed for success. Wean
yourself away from the opinions of others---however talented, creative,
and celebrated they may be---as you continue to journey within. Absorb
the shock of becoming aware that many of your preferences and opinions
are not truly your own. Begin, instead, to listen for the whisper of
your authentic self telling you which way to go. We are always being
shown the next step of our uniquely personal journey. It may be as
simple as clearing

up your desk so that you can find that adult extension course brochure
with the watercolor classes. Only when the clamor of the outside world
is silenced will you be able to hear the Deeper Vibration. Listen
carefully. Spirit's playing your song. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 6

Remaking Your Own World I have made my world and it is a much better
world than I ever saw outside. ---LOUISE NEVELSON

Many creation myths say it took only six days to make the world. It will
take us a little longer to remake our own. But we can begin where Spirit
did by declaring that there be Light to illuminate our journey of
self-discovery. The Quaker tradition teaches that this Light is within
each of us. The Quakers, or members of the Religious Society of Friends,
are a perfect example of individuals who manage the delicate balance of
living in the world but not belonging to it. This is because they refuse
to segment their lives into the Sacred and the secular. Instead, Quakers
believe that all of life's daily experiences are spiritual in nature,
from preparing a family meal to protesting political policy. The British
writer George Gorman has observed that "the essence of Quaker
spirituality is the certainty that everything we do has religious
significance. It is not cutting ourselves off from life but entering
deeply and fully into it." Simplicity is the common thread that stitches
together Quaker lives, homes, and dress. Their weekly worship service,
or Meeting, is a silent meditation. Rhythm, reverence, and reflection
are their hallmarks. These touchstones can help us as well as we attempt
to remake our personal world. Restoring a sense of rhythm to our lives
is the first step. How much rhythm do you have in your personal world?
Children are not the only ones who need regular bedtimes, mealtimes, and
quiet times. Their mothers do, too. Think of the steady, reassuring
rhythm of the natural world---the ebb and flow of the tides, the
recurring cycle of the four seasons, the monthly

phases of the moon, and the daily progression from day into night.
Rhythm needs to be the cornerstone in our personal world as well. All of
us lead busy lives, some more frantic and frazzled than others. We need
to learn where to draw the line and how to say "no." Today be willing to
reflect quietly on the role that rhythm plays in your daily life. Your
heart will always tell you what's working and what's not. Restoring
rhythm to the way you conduct your affairs can bring you contentment and
a sense of well-being that will nurture and sustain you when the cares
of the world can't be left behind. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 7

An Artist Is Someone Who Creates Living is a form of not being sure, not
knowing what next or how.... The artist never entirely knows. We guess.
We may be wrong, but we take leap after leap in the dark. ---AGNES DE
MILLE

Most of us feel more secure when we play it safe. We wear a string of
pearls, for example, instead of the hand-painted glass beads we glimpsed
and passed up at the crafts fair. Yet it is precisely those red and
purple glass beads around the neck of another woman that stop us dead in
our tracks. "Wow," we mumble as we pass her on the street, "that looks
fantastic." We also wonder how she knew it would. She probably didn't.
She probably just took a leap in the dark and trusted her instincts. She
trusted her own sense of style. The necklace whispered "Try me!" and she
listened. She played at living---in a small way to be sure, but relevant
all the same---by taking a chance. Every day we're given chances to
embrace the new. It could be serving focaccia at dinner tonight instead
of garlic bread. It could be choosing a pair of floral socks that make
our feet want to dance, instead of the plain pair we automatically reach
for. It could be trading in the headband for a short, sleek
sophisticated cut that really feels right. Psychologist Susan Jeffers
suggests we "take a risk a day---one small or bold stroke that makes you
feel great once you have done it." Today, take a real risk that can
change your life: start thinking of yourself as an artist and your life
as a work-in-progress. Works-in-progress are never perfect. But changes
can be made to the rough draft during rewrites. Another color can be
added to the canvas. The film can be tightened during editing. Art
evolves. So does life. Art is never stagnant. Neither is life. The
beautiful,

authentic life you are creating for yourself and those you love is your
art. It's the highest art. "Since you are like no other being ever
created since the beginning of time, you are incomparable," writer
Brenda Ueland reminds you. Hold that thought. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 8

You Are an Artist Inside you there's an artist you don't know about....
Say yes quickly, if you know, if you've known it from before the
beginning of the universe. ---JALAI UD-DIN RUMI

Most of us feel uncomfortable thinking of ourselves as artists, but we
are. We think artists write novels, paint pictures, choreograph ballets,
act on Broadway, throw pots, shoot feature films, dress in black, drink
absinthe, and line their eyes with kohl. But each of us is an artist. An
artist is merely someone with good listening skills who accesses the
creative energy of the Universe to bring forth something on the material
plane that wasn't here before. It was a part of Spirit before we could
see it as a book, a painting, a ballet, a film. So it is with creating
an authentic life. With every choice, every day, you are creating a
unique work of art. Something that only you can do. Something beautiful
and ephemeral. The reason you were born was to leave your own indelible
mark on your personal world. This is your authenticity. Today, accept
that you are creating a work of art by making big and little choices
between playing it safe and risking. Is there something you'd like to do
that's new and different? Why not order an espresso at lunch, if you've
never tried one? Visit the perfume counter and try on new scents? Stick
a small bottle of balsamic vinegar in the shopping cart to drizzle over
melon? Switch the dial on the radio station and listen to country and
western instead of classical as you drive home? Each time you experience
the new, you become receptive to inspiration. Each time you try
something different, you let the Universe know you are listening. Trust
your instincts. Believe your yearnings are blessings. Respect your
creative urges. If you are willing to step out in faith and take a leap
in

the dark, you will discover that your choices are as authentic as you
are. What is more, you will discover that your life is all it was meant
to be: a joyous sonnet of thanksgiving. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 9

A Fresh Canvas Every Twenty-Four Hours Another real thing! I am not dead
yet! I can still call forth a piece of soul and set it down in color,
fixed forever. ---KERI HULME

Before a painter begins a new work, she takes preparatory steps to get
ready. She has probably made preliminary sketches of the scene she is
trying to capture. She mixes her pigments to achieve the right colors.
She has also prepared the canvas with a fixative coating so that the
paint will adhere. All of this takes time. Of course, we don't see the
preparations when we look at her completed work. We only see the entire
vision. And as artist Helen Frankenthaler once commented, "A picture
that is beautiful or that works looks as if it was all made at one
stroke. I don't like to see the trail of a brushstroke or a drip of
paint." Preparatory steps are necessary in all the arts. They are also
necessary in life if we want to live authentically. Every twenty-four
hours we are given a fresh canvas to prime, to make ready for the
vision. Quieting our minds in meditation, carving out time to dream and
express ourselves with our daily dialogue and illustrated discovery
journal, becoming aware of our true preferences, slowing down to
concentrate on completing one task at a time ---these are the
preparatory steps we need to take if we wish to experience contentment.
But our preparation won't have been in vain. For when we are in the flow
of life, savoring the moment, the brush strokes don't show. Today, don't
rush through your inner preparations as you get ready to set down a
piece of your soul on life's canvas.

OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 10

Creating an Authentic Lifestyle for Yourself and Those You Love It's a
funny thing about life; if you refuse to accept anything but the best,
you very often get it. ---SOMERSET MAUGHAM

It's far easier to live an elegant, beautiful life when you're not on a
budget. When cash is readily available, you don't have to learn the
lessons that delayed gratification teaches us. But having money does not
guarantee that we live authentically. Nor does being surrounded by
beautiful things guarantee a lifetime of happiness. If you receive
heartbreaking news, it's not more comforting to sob into a damask and
silk-tasseled cushion. When I was beginning the Simple Abundance path
and began to wean myself away from worldly distractions for several
months by choosing not to read magazines and newspapers, not to watch
the news, and especially not to go shopping (except for groceries and
essential kid's clothing), the symptoms I experienced were similar to
withdrawal pains. At times, I actually felt achy, shaky, and even dizzy.
When this occurred, my authentic self would reassure my conscious self
(who didn't think much of the new program) that I was undergoing a deep
inner shift in reality. I was learning to differentiate between my needs
and my wants and this powerful lesson had to be mastered before I could
move forward. I had to learn what I could live without. Whatever I
needed I could budget for---in other words, I could have---but
self-knowledge had to come first. When you learn what you can live
without, you are able to ask life for the very best because you possess
the gift of discernment. You develop patience that enables you to wait
gracefully and gratefully until the best

arrives because you know it will. You are able to create an authentic
life for yourself and those you love because you are able to make
conscious choices. "Long afterwards, she was to remember that moment
when her life changed its direction," Evelyn Anthony writes in The
Avenue of the Dead. "It was not predestined; she had a choice. Or it
seemed she had. To accept or refuse. To take one turning down the
crossroads to the future or another." Turning away from the world and
toward your own happiness is the path of authenticity. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 11

Divine Discontent: Learning to Live by Your Own Lights Grace strikes us
when we are in great pain and restlessness.... Sometimes at that moment
a wave of light breaks into our darkness, and it is as though a voice
were saying: "You are accepted." ---PAUL JOHANNES TILLICH

When we practice switching on the "spiritual electricity" that Julia
Cameron speaks of in her wonderful book, The Artist's Way: A Spiritual
Path to Higher Creativity, what should we expect? More energy and
inspiration, amazing and delightful coincidences, and the ability to
accomplish goals with grace? Yes, certainly. That has, at least, been my
experience. But one thing you might not expect---one thing that might
throw you---is how dissatisfied you may feel when the Power is not
present, when you are in the dark and left to your own devices because
you forgot to turn the switch on. I have learned that asking is the only
way to activate spiritual electricity. It is always there for me, but I
always have to ask for it. The dissatisfaction you can feel when the
switch is off manifests itself in different ways. Suddenly you don't
like any room in your house. Decorating mistakes from past lives haunt
you. Your clothes don't fit or look right on you anymore. You're bored
with the meals you're cooking. You're sick of opening the front hall
closet and covering your head. But worse, that expansive, even giddy
hopefulness that came from starting to integrate gratitude into your
life gives way to restless discontent. You begin to think that the
Simple Abundance path might work for some women, but it's not right for
you. Hold on. As the English historian Dame Cicely

Veronica Wedgwood points out, "Discontent and disorder \[are\] signs of
energy and hope, not of despair." What is going on is part of the
process. I call it Divine Discontent. It is the grit in the oyster
before the pearl. This creative second chance is when we come into our
own. When we finally claim our own lives and wrestle our futures from
fate. When we learn how to spin straw into gold. When we realize
gratefully that we can live by our own lights if we access the Power.
Ask for it. Claim it. Today. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 12

Once Upon a Time You Trusted Yourself Just trust yourself, then you will
know how to live. ---JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE

Today, try to find a photograph of yourself when you were about ten.
Make sure you're smiling. Put it in a pretty frame and place it on your
dressing table, desk, or in your illustrated discovery journal and look
at it every day. Send love to that young girl. Try to travel back in
time and imagination. See yourself at ten: at home, at school, and at
play. Where did you live? Can you see your house or apartment, and the
street? Walk through the rooms in your childhood home. What did your
bedroom look like? Who were your friends? Did you have a best pal? Who
was she? How did you play? What was your favorite color in the Crayola
pack? Did you play a musical instrument? Who was your favorite doll? Can
you recall the scent of Play-Doh? What were your favorite foods? What
subject did you like best in fifth grade? Can you remember? Try to
recall yourself at ten in your daily dialogue pages. Have fun with this
exercise because age ten was probably the last time you trusted your
instincts. You didn't listen to the opinions of your mother, your
sister, or your friends because you had your own. To watch my
ten-year-old daughter in the dressing room of a department store is a
revelation. "No, that's not me," she'll frequently say as I show her
outfits to try on. With an assurance that I envy, she reaches for a
tapestry vest and a black felt slouch hat. "There," she announces with
satisfaction, "this looks like me." I remind myself that once upon a
time, I trusted my instincts. You did, too. Once upon a time there
weren't second and third guesses. It can be that way again.

Try to contact the girl you once were. She's all grown up now. She's
your authentic self and she's waiting to remind you how beautiful,
accomplished, and extraordinary you really are. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 13

You Have a Unique Point of View: Loving Your Authenticity A sobering
thought: what if, right at this very moment, I am living up to my full
potential? ---JANE WAGNER

Take a deep breath and relax. The reassuring news is that you've not
completely lived up to your potential or you wouldn't be drawn to this
book. You're still striving, still dreaming, still yearning, and now
still doing. I've not completely lived up to my full potential or I
wouldn't be writing this book. We're both on an exhilarating adventure
that's sometimes a little scary. One of the most important milestones
we'll hit along the way is the moment when we finally own our unique
point of view and realize how priceless it is. "I'd gone through life
believing in the strength and competence of others; never my own,"
writer Joan Mills observes. "Now, dazzled, I discovered that my
capacities were real. It was like finding a fortune in the lining of an
old coat." Today, or as soon as you can, indulge yourself with one of my
favorite perk-ups. Get \$25 from the bank in \$5 notes and place them in
the pockets of all your coats and jackets. Now forget about it. The next
time you wear a coat and find \$ 5, laugh and let it remind you that
each day that you love, honor, and respect your own unique point of
view, you're a step closer to finding a fortune. Now do one thing more.
Start to treat yourself more generously. Begin with \$ 5. Buy one
beautiful flower for your desk, enjoy a French pastry with your morning
coffee, stop in at a fancy salon and get yourself some almond-scented
shampoo. Just do something out of the ordinary that you

normally wouldn't do that will lift your spirits. "Love yourself first
and everything else falls into line," Lucille Ball advised. "You really
have to love yourself to get anything done in this world."
OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 14

Buried Dreams Where there is great love there are always miracles.
---WILLA CATHER

It takes great love and courage to excavate buried dreams. Today is the
day set aside for love, a perfect occasion for going within and glancing
back with affection and understanding at your real life journey so far.
Once we were going to set the world on fire. Remember? Today we all have
our share of ashes, along with the memory of a few bright sparks, to
show for our efforts. Over the years we've buried many a precious dream
under layers of soot and rubble. Layers of naivete, good intentions,
relinquishment, bitter failures, detours, disappointments, rejections,
wrong choices, bad timing, bungled efforts, stupid mistakes, unforeseen
circumstances, whims of fate and missed opportunities. It's no wonder
that we'll need courage to retrace our steps. But "courage is the price
that Life extracts for granting peace," the pilot Amelia Earhart reminds
us. A wise woman once advised me not to be a "would-be-if-I-could-be or
a could-be-if-I-would-be. Just be." And while I have learned that dreams
need doing as much as they need being, I have learned that the being
always comes first. Today is a day for being. Be with those you love, be
kind to yourself. Be quiet and call forth the dream you buried long ago.
The ember is still glowing in your soul. See it in your mind, hold it
tenderly in your heart. "The dream was always running ahead of one,"
AnaÏs Nin confessed. "To catch up, to live for a moment in union with
it, that was the miracle." OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 15

Meeting the Inner Explorer There is only one journey. Going inside
yourself. ---RAINER MARIA RILKE

I craved to go beyond the garden gate, follow the road that passed it
by, and set out for the unknown," Alexandra David-Neel wrote in 1923,
recalling her daring journey to the Himalayas in search of spiritual
truth and high-spirited adventure. A former actress, the Parisian-born
explorer dressed as a pilgrim to make her way into the heart of
Tibet---the closed and sacred city of Lhasa. Never before had a woman
from the West seen its face. As I drive the afternoon car pool, I
wonder, how does a woman today satisfy such wanderlust? How do I
reconcile the dream of visiting the temple of Egypt's Queen Hatshepsut
near ancient Thebes with the reality of transporting a station wagon
full of children from school to soccer practice? If you, too, crave
scenes beyond the garden gate, do what I do to keep the spark of
adventure alive: journey within to meet your authentic explorer. Where
is she headed? If you could go anywhere in the world, all expenses paid,
baby-sitter at your disposal, where would you go? Why? Who would you be
with? How long would you stay? What would you do? Yes, this is a
first-class fantasy, and it's supposed to be fun. To inspire your
far-flung creative visualization, stop in at the library and peruse the
travel shelves. Let your fingers do the wandering. Read about famous
women explorers. Collect their exploits and tuck them into your
subconscious mind. Next, take a creative excursion to a travel agent and
collect colorful brochures for your discovery journal. When asked, be
noncommittal about the date of departure. No one needs to know that
you're traveling in your

armchair, indulging your imagination on a cold winter's night as you
consider exploration as a personal metaphor. And why, you might ask?
Because, as Alice Walker astutely observes, we're learning day by day
that "the most foreign country is within." We are our own dark
continent, we are our own savage frontier. Many marvels await discovery
as we continue on the path to authenticity. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 16

At the End of Our Exploring We shall not cease from exploration And the
end of all our exploring Will be to arrive where we started And know the
place for the first time. ---T. S. ELIOT

When we live our lives authentically, we discover our true place in the
world for the first time. But this self-knowledge is not easily
acquired. It takes tenacity and daring to travel to the darkest interior
of one's self. Who knows what we might find there? "It does not do to
leave a live dragon out of your calculations, if you live near him," the
writer J. R. R. Tolkien advises. Our dragons are our fears: our day
stalkers, our night sweats. Fear of the unknown. Fear of failing. Fear
of starting something new and not finishing. Again. Or the real fear,
the one that sends shivers up our spines: the fear of succeeding, of
becoming our authentic selves and facing the changes that will
inevitably bring. We might not be happy with the way we are living now,
but at least it's safely familiar. We don't know where we are headed and
it's very scary. Old dreams are resurrecting, new desires are wooing.
Instead of clarity, we feel confused. At moments like this, it is
comforting to consider T. S. Eliot's belief that there is really nothing
to fear from self-awareness because at the end of all our personal
exploration, we will arrive back where we started and know in our hearts
that we finally belong there. Women have always known how to deal with
dragons hiding under beds or lurking in closets. We turn on the lights
and reassure worried souls with love. We need to slay the dragons in our
minds the same way.

Today, if you feel frightened or unsure about the future, pick up the
double-edged sword of Light and Love. Always remember, it's simply not
an adventure worth telling if there aren't any dragons. But as in the
best old tales, at the end of your exploring, you will live happily ever
after. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 17

A Safari of Self and Spirit The woods were made for the hunters of
dreams The brooks for the fisher of song To the hunters who hunt for the
gunless game The streams and the woods belong. ---SAM WALTER FOSS

In the summer of 1893, an English woman named Mary Kingsley traveled to
the wildest and most dangerous part of the French Congo in search of
herself. Both her parents had recently died, and suddenly, at the age of
31, Miss Kingsley found herself "not only desolate with grief but bereft
of purpose." Her adventures in West Africa changed all that. Several
years later her writings and naturalist discoveries, including the
documenting of unknown species of fish and animals, were applauded by
the Victorian scientific community. Mary Kingsley was a hunter of a
dream: the knowledge of who she really was and her place in the world.
So are you. Yet even without encountering the daily dangers she
faced---wild animals, menacing spears, and deadly diseases---you have
embarked on an adventure as exciting as that of any explorer. Uncovering
the source of the Nile or charting the course of the Amazon are outward
parallels to the inner journey you are on today---a safari of the self
and the spirit. In Africa, to go on safari---the Swahili word for
journey---is to leave the comfort and safety of civilization to venture
into the wilderness. Each time you listen to the woman within---your
authentic self---you do the same. Remind yourself of this often. "You
have to leave the city of your comfort and go into the wilderness of
your intuition," Alan Alda advises the inner

explorer in you. "What you'll discover will be wonderful. What you'll
discover will be yourself." OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 18

Safari Life The heart is a lonely hunter that hunts on a lonely hill.
---FIONA MACLEOD

Winter is the dry season in Africa, the time of safaris. We can learn
from the dry seasons in life, and from life on safari. "You could expect
many things of God at night when the campfire burned before the tents,"
Beryl Markham wrote about safari life. "You were alone when you sat and
talked with the others---and they were alone.... What you say has no
ready ear but your own, and what you think is nothing except to
yourself. The world is there and you are here---and these are the only
poles, the only realities. You talk, but who listens? You listen, but
who talks?" A safari of the self and Spirit is at times lonely. But we
know we are never alone. It is a comfort to realize that this sense of
isolation is necessary if we are to encounter Mystery, and mystery is
very much a part of a safari. Each day in the wilderness brings with it
the struggle to survive and a heightened awareness of how wonderful it
is just to see the sun set and rise again in the morning. Each day on
safari is lived to the fullest because it is all that is guaranteed. If
only we could learn this lesson as well in our everyday lives. Today,
expect many things as you sit around the campfire of your heart. Someone
is listening. Someone is talking to you, encouraging you to take that
next step as you embrace the Mystery of the wilderness within. Expect to
have hope rekindled. Expect your prayers to be answered in wondrous
ways. The dry seasons in life do not last. The spring rains will come
again.

OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 19

Rendezvous with the Authentic Archaeologist We cannot kindle when we
will The fire that in the heart resides The spirit bloweth and is still
In mystery our soul abides. ---MATTHEW ARNOLD

Like the inner explorer who seeks adventure and the unknown, the
authentic archaeologist knows how to unearth remnants of memory buried
deeply in the fertile soil of the subconscious mind. Archaeologists
"read" artifacts much the way a detective reads clues. The reason we
want to awaken the authentic archaeologist is to excavate the real you.
"How we remember, and what we remember, and why we remember form the
most personal map of our individuality," writer Christina Baldwin
reminds us. Today, become willing to remember. Prepare yourself for a
gentle but authentic dig that will help you discover the Mystery in
which your soul abides. Whether you realize it or not, you have lived
many lives, and each one has left an indelible mark on your soul. I'm
not referring to reincarnation. I'm referring to the episodic way in
which our lives evolve: childhood, adolescence, college years or early
career, marriages, motherhood, perhaps life as a single mother,
widowhood and onward. At each stage in our lives, we have both laughter
and tears. But more important for our interests, we develop personal
preferences. Each life experience leaves a layer of memory like a
deposit of sediment: things we've loved and moments of

contentment we've cherished that when recalled, reveal glimmers of our
true selves. Some women are hesitant to recall their past because
they're afraid they'll dredge up painful memories. But just as each
illness brings a gift for us if we will look for it, so each painful
memory comes bearing a peace offering. There is nothing to fear. The
past asks only to be remembered. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 20

The Authentic Dig Sometimes a person has to go back, really back---to
have a sense, an understanding of all that's gone to make them---before
they can go forward. ---PAULE MARSHALL

Unearthing a mosaic is one of the most exciting discoveries on an
archaeological dig. Mosaics are pictures or decorative patterns formed
by inlaying thousands of small, multicolored chips to create a larger
visual representation. Early mosaics tell sacred stories about ancient
worlds---how people lived and what was important to them---providing
archaeologists with revealing glimpses into the past. On the authentic
dig we shall also go in search of a mosaic: what brought us moments of
happiness and contentment in our past lives. When taking a backward
glance, always bear in mind that memory is fickle. She must be wooed and
courted if she is to succumb to our charms. Sometimes she surprises us
with her generosity, and we recall moments with astonishing clarity.
Most of the time, however, our memories are fragmented, like small
colored chips. When this happens, we need to be patient as we brush away
the sediment of the past. Today, prepare for your personal dig in a
thoughtful way. Let your authentic archaeologist gather artifacts that
can coax memory: old photographs, letters, mementos. Carve out time when
you can be alone and take a leisurely trip back in time. Enjoy a glass
of wine or a cup of tea. Listen to your favorite music from yesterday:
Elvis, the Beatles, the Bee Gees. Peruse the photographs, flip through
your high school yearbook, read the old love letters. Trace your life
back to when you were ten, sixteen, twenty-one, twenty-five, thirty,
thirty-five, forty, and onward. See what

memories are triggered as you reacquaint yourself with the girl and
woman you once were. Linger only on the happy times. What you are
searching for is a pattern of personal, authentic pleasures and
preferences. These are the chips in your mosaic. "The events in our
lives happen in a sequence in time, but in their significance to
ourselves they find their own order," writer Eudora Welty confides. With
patience and quiet observation, these events will provide the seeker in
you with a "continuous thread of revelation." OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 21

Excavating the Real You, Part I Maybe being oneself is always an
acquired taste. ---PATRICIA HAMPL

Excavating is not glamorous work on an archaeological dig. It demands
painstaking effort in often harsh conditions. Tons of dirt need to be
removed carefully from the site if the search to uncover treasures from
the past is to be successful. No matter how impatient everyone on the
dig is, the excavation process cannot be rushed. But there wouldn't be
the thrill of discovery if time weren't invested in slowly digging in
the dirt. We must dig patiently with our pens to excavate our real
selves. "As long as one keeps searching, the answers come," Joan Baez
tells us. And for what are we searching? Shards of our authentic style.
For centuries women have displayed their innate sense of style to the
world through choice: in their personal appearance, in the way they
decorated their homes, in how they entertained, in their work, and in
the pursuit of their personal passions. The more we learn about
ourselves and our preferences, the easier it is to make these choices.
And creative choice is at the heart of authenticity. Choice confers
freedom---the freedom to embrace the new because it speaks to your soul
and you are listening. Today be willing to consider the choices you have
made in the past as you trace your life. Have they been the right ones
for you? Do you make choices with your heart, mind, or gut? Are you
comfortable with your style of making choices, or do you wish to try a
different approach? Was there something you did not choose in the past
that, with hindsight, you now wish you had? Perhaps a long-buried dream
still calls to you from a road you chose not to take. If this is true,
then stop telling yourself that it's too late. Instead,

take comfort in what Faith Baldwin tells us: "Time is a dressmaker
specializing in alterations." The delay of our dreams does not mean that
they have been denied. Perhaps now you have the wisdom to make
alterations in your dream so that it can come true. Perhaps now you have
the wisdom to choose differently. Dig with your pen. Have a dialogue
with your authentic self. Ask her about the choices you have made or
didn't make. Listen for the wisdom she has to offer. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 22

Excavating the Real You, Part II My memory is certainly in my hands. I
can remember things only if I have a pencil and I write with it and I
can play with it. I think your hand concentrates for you. I don't know
why it should be so. ---DAME REBECCA WEST

We're back at the site of your soul this morning for some more digging.
Perhaps you wonder why we are spending so much time excavating. Maybe
you balk at having to search your past for clues as to how to live
contentedly in the present. Please be open: the excavation process
expands your sense of the possible because it provides you with inner
knowledge. Pick up your pen to play and in your daily dialogue pages
return to the home of your childhood. How was it decorated? Do you
remember? Take a walk through the rooms and see them once again. Did you
clean your room? Was the door usually kept closed? What was your
favorite spot in the house? Was your mother a good cook? Do you ever
prepare any of her special recipes for yourself? How did your mother
comfort you when you were sick? When was the last time you had alphabet
soup and saltines for lunch on a tray in bed? Where did you go on
vacation? To your grandmothers' houses? Can you remember them? Is there
a sense memory you associate with childhood vacations? Now fast-forward
to your teenage years. Where there any girls in your class that you
admired? Envied? Who were they and why? Did you go to a prom? Describe
your gown. How did you fix your hair? Who initiated you into the
feminine rituals of good grooming? Was there an older woman in your life
whose sense of style impressed you?

Let's move ahead to when you set up your first home, either as a young
working woman or when you first got married. Where was it? How was it
furnished? Are you still living with some of your early decorating
choices? Do they reflect who you are now or have you outgrown them? Are
you living with things that you've inherited from your family? Do they
really suit you? Now slowly let your attention return to the room. You
have excavated some more chips to place into your authentic mosaic.
"Minor things can become moments of great revelation when encountered
for the first time," the great ballerina Margot Fonteyn observed. We
tend to think it is the major events that mark our lives, when really it
is the minor moments that resonate in memory. Lovingly pick one pleasant
recollection and think about it today. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 23

Making Your Own Imprint God is in the details. ---LUDWIG MIES VAN DER
ROHE

Making your own imprint on life implies that you know exactly how to
express "your own inimitable style," as my wonderful Irish father used
to say. But do you? Today continue to expand your sense of the possible
and find out. Consider the following scenarios strictly for fun. You
move into a completely empty house and start over from scratch--- money
is not a consideration. Write down twenty specifics for your ideal home
from architectural features to furnishings that are "must haves" for
you. They can range from a window seat in the upstairs hall to an
English club chair with a tufted ottoman beside a fireplace. Let your
imagination and creative flair have free rein. Are any of these items
from your past? Where did you first encounter them? Do you remember? How
long have you been dreaming about having them? Are there any items here
from your childhood home? Next, imagine that your closet and drawers are
empty. You need to fill them. What are the first ten things you would
either hang up or put away? You may either keep favorites from your
present wardrobe or buy entirely new items. Which comes first for you,
comfort or career? Your kitchen cabinets are bare. You need to buy new
china, flatware, glasses, and linens for everyday use and for
entertaining. Where do you begin? What pattern do you want to see every
day? What shape glass do you enjoy drinking from? Have you ever thought
about this? Do you prefer a pottery mug or a paper-thin china teacup for
your morning brew? These details are your authentic preferences.

"The soap in the bathroom, the flowers in the garden, the book on the
bedside table are all strong symbols of a life in progress," notes
writer and interior decorator Charlotte Moss in her book A Passion for
Detail. "You look at these details and a world unfolds." Each day you
create yourself anew through choice. By paying attention to the
details---your authentic gestures---you give expression to the most
personal of all the arts: making your own imprint on life.
OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 24

Now That I've Gotten Your Attention Sometime in jour life you will go on
a journey. It will be the longest journey you have ever taken. It is the
journey to find yourself. ---KATHERINE SHARP

For nearly two months we have contemplated the journey within to
authenticity. Perhaps you've started to let gratitude till the soil of
your soul, preparing it for the seeds of Simple Abundance: finding the
Sacred in the ordinary, realizing that all you have is all you need,
welcoming creative choices, and savoring life's small moments. Maybe
you've set aside time to begin a daily dialogue in search of your
authentic self, indulged in the pleasure of dreaming with the
illustrated discovery journal, or embarked on the golden mirror
meditation to meet the woman within. Then again, maybe you haven't ...
If you wonder why I suspect this, it's because I've been where you are
now. I know. I know how days, weeks, months, even years can escape your
grasp. I know what it's like to put everyone else's needs before your
own so that you can't find a half-hour a day for yourself. I know how
easy it is to find heartfelt excuses for why you can't begin something
new even if you yearn to, desperately. I know how easily the word
"tomorrow" slips out unconsciously. Tomorrow you'll begin. Tomorrow. All
this I know. But what I know most of all is that reading about a journey
is not the same thing as taking one. Now that I've gotten your
attention, let me tell you about the rest of the year. Each day from now
on we're going to use the daily grist of our real lives as a cause for
celebration. That's right, celebration. I have learned many lessons on
the Simple Abundance path. Chief among them is that the

details of our days do make a difference in our lives, that no
experience is ever just for drill, and that everything can be a
springboard for inspiration if we are willing to be open to the goodness
of life. How many times in the past have we chosen not to change our
lives for the better simply by not choosing? Today, make a choice.
Choose to continue on the Simple Abundance path or close this book now.
If you choose to close the book, my blessings accompany you. May peace
and plenty be your portion. Pass this book on to a friend. If you are
still with me, you know what you need to do today, not tomorrow. Take
another look at your life. Give thanks. Accept your circumstances. Give
thanks. Count your blessings. Give thanks. Show up for each day's
meditation. Be willing to give the basic tools a fair chance. They can
help you find your way. Above all, have faith in yourself and Divine
Change. "One does not discover new lands without consenting to lose
sight of the shore for a very long time," the French writer AndrÉ Gide
warns us. Set the sails. Pull anchor. Cast away. Feel the wind at your
back. Keep your eyes on the horizon. Or stay on shore. But choose.
OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 25

Reordering Your Priorities Learn to get in touch with the silence within
yourself and know that everything in this life has a purpose.
---ELISABETH KÜBLER-ROSS

Most women I know have only one conscious priority: making it through
the day. This is a direct result of having been torn in a thousand
different directions in any one twenty-four hour period for decades.
Writer, pilot, wife, and mother Anne Morrow Lindbergh calls it "the
centrifugal forces of today" that pull at women. But acknowledging,
recognizing, and reordering our priorities so that they can give purpose
to our days is a deeply personal task that we all need to do if we are
to learn how to live by our own lights. A priority is anything that is
important to you. Providing for your children's education by starting a
systematic plan of saving could be a priority. So could increasing your
health and vitality through diet and exercise. Achieving financial
serenity is another priority for many of us, as is nurturing a family
and sustaining a loving, happy marriage. Priorities are not written in
granite. They need to be flexible and change as we do. I find it helpful
to think of priorities as the wooden frame upon which we stretch the
canvas of our days so that we may apply color and form to the work of
art we are creating without the entire painting collapsing in the
middle. It takes peace of mind and clarity to recognize and reorder
meaningful, personal priorities. Maybe that is why so many of us
procrastinate. But the more our lives and attention spans are segmented
by our children, our careers, our homes, our marriages, and our needs
for personal expression, the more we need to identify what is truly
important in our lives.

Many of us assume that we can continue to get along just by "winging it"
indefinitely. We can't. We need an antidote for the hurried and harried
lives that threaten to tear us apart. Follow the advice of Anne Morrow
Lindbergh and make carving out a small portion of each day for yourself
a personal priority. "Quiet time alone, contemplation, prayer, music, a
centering line of thought or reading, of study or work. It can be
physical or intellectual or artistic, any creative life proceeding from
oneself. It need not be an enormous project or a great work. But it
should be something of one's own. Arranging a bowl of flowers in the
morning can give a sense of quiet in a crowded day.... What matters is
that one be for a time inwardly attentive." Today make getting in touch
with the Silence within yourself your first priority. As you do, you
will be amazed at how everything else seems to find its own order.
OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 26

Real Life Begins with Reverence Let knowledge grow from more to more But
more of reverence in us dwell; That mind and soul, according well, May
make one music as before. ---ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON

When my daughter was four years old, I asked my husband if he minded if
I went away for a weekend by myself. He didn't. It was the first time
since Katie's birth that she and I would be apart and I felt I needed to
have some centering time to myself, something I seemed unable to do at
home. At that time I didn't realize that solitude had to be woven into
the fabric of my daily life. While fantasies of sleeping uninterrupted
for twenty-four hours and ordering from room service at a local hotel
tempted me briefly, I finally decided to spend a retreat weekend for
women at a contemplative convent of Episcopal nuns. I realized that what
I really wanted to do was to hear the exquisite sounds of Silence. There
were many wonderful moments about that special weekend that I treasure,
but the one thing that has stayed with me is the hush of reverence that
enveloped life within the beautiful stone convent walls. Reverence is
that altered state of consciousness when you feel awe and wonder because
you know you are in the presence of Spirit. Reverence enwraps you in
perfect peace because there is no past or future, only the present
moment, and you are one with Heaven and earth. There is no distinction
between body and soul. Meditation can sometimes spiritually induce this
special moment of Wholeness, as does creating something beautiful,
whether it's a meal, a painting, or a flower bed. Concentrating on one
task at a time with care and attentiveness can invoke reverence as well.

Unfortunately, most of us do not live behind cloistered walls where
reverence resides. But I have learned on the Simple Abundance path that
gratitude is the gateway to experiencing more reverence in our daily
lives. The thirteenth-century German philosopher Meister Eckhart, whose
teachings so influenced the Quaker movement, believed that "If the only
prayer you say in your life is 'thank you,' that would be enough." Real
Life---the real life of joy we are meant to be living---begins when we
restore a sense of reverence to our daily affairs. Today, search for the
Sacred in the ordinary with gratitude in your heart and you will surely
find it. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 27

Committing to Your Spiritual Awakening I don't believe; I know. ---CARL
JUNG

By this time it's no secret that the Simple Abundance path is spiritual
as well as creative and practical. But Simple Abundance will work for
you even if you're ambivalent about whether God exists. If you
consciously work to bring more gratitude, simplicity, order, harmony,
beauty, and joy into your daily life, your world will be transformed
whether you believe a Higher Power is guiding you or not. But if you
commit to your spiritual awakening as the most important part of the
process, something marvelous will happen. Life will not feel as fraught,
as frazzled, or as fragmented as before because you'll realize that the
spiritual, the creative, and the practical can't be separated. They each
count. They each mean something. They're all connected. You think you
are only making a meatloaf, when really you're ministering to hungry
bodies and weary souls in need of love and nourishment. A friend is
hurting, so you spend a lunch hour searching for the perfect card to
send her. Months later she tells you how much comfort you conveyed
across the miles. A woman calls your small and struggling mail-order
business looking for a certain item that you are out of temporarily. She
can't wait for you to reorder because she needs it for her daughter's
birthday party. Instead of sending her away disappointed, you give her
the name and telephone number of a competitor who also carries the item.
You set in motion a cycle of good that blesses all concerned. A year ago
you might not have done this, but now you know that there is no
competition in the spiritual realm. A year ago you were not aware that
every choice you make every day is part of the Sacred Whole. But as

Christina Baldwin writes in her inspiring book, Life's Companion:
Journal Writing as a Spiritual Quest, if we "ready ourselves with
spiritual openness," eventually we will come to the awareness that
"Spirituality is the sacred center of which all life comes, including
Mondays and Tuesdays and rainy Saturday afternoons in all their mundane
and glorious details." A year ago you might not have believed this could
be true. But with each day of the journey, you have become more open to
the mystery, the magic, and the majesty of the Master Plan because you
are committed to your spiritual awakening. You don't have to just
believe anymore, because you know. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 28

Creating a Sacred Space You must have a room or a certain hour of the
day or so where you do not know what was in the morning paper ... a
place where you can simply experience and bring forth what you are, and
what you might be.... At first you may find nothing's happening.... But
if you have a sacred place and use it, take advantage of it, something
will happen. ---JOSEPH CAMPBELL

I resisted creating a sacred space for myself for a very long time. The
excuses were: (1) I am not a nun and altars belong only in churches or
convents; (2) I live in a very small house and don't really have any
space to set aside; and (3) I didn't want my husband, who respects and
honors my spiritual quest but doesn't share it, or my daughter, to think
I was extremely weird. But I kept discovering other women writers whom I
admire (and whom I don't think are weird at all) such as Joan Borysenko
and Julia Cameron have created sacred spaces for themselves, and the
concept intrigued me. Then one day in meditation my authentic self
suggested that I become open to the idea of creating a sacred space to
celebrate, concentrate, and consecrate my inner work. "Okay," I said,
"I'll be open to it but I don't know where I'll put it." The very next
morning I was propped up in bed writing my daily dialogue pages. When I
looked up I "saw" with my inner vision a small blue bench up against my
bedroom wall surrounded by white light. Flash! It was exactly like the
one discarded on our porch. I leaped out of bed in a burst of excited
enthusiasm and started gathering meaningful objects that evoke love and
gratitude to me from various scattered places around the house. A
half-hour later I had created a sacred space that delighted me.

Let me tell you about my "meditation table" as it is now called by the
family (and if anyone thinks it's strange, they have kept this opinion
to themselves). The dark-blue-enamel bench is only eighteen inches long
and eight inches deep and is against my blue bedroom wall. A small,
white linen and crocheted lace tablecloth covers it. On the table I have
a large golden pillar candle sitting in the center; a beautiful
Victorian lithograph of an angel representing the guidance of my
guardian angel; a print of the Madonna and Child in an oval gold frame
(representing the male and female natures of Divinity); a small
gold-framed mirror for my authenticself meditation; pictures of my
family and pets; a small blue-and-white china vase (a wedding present)
for fresh flowers; rose quartz crystals representing the natural world;
a rose-patterned incense holder; and a small bowl of rose and jasmine
potpourri. Hanging above the table at my eye level (whenever I kneel or
sit) is a beautiful print in a gold frame by the artist Michael Podesta
that represents the essence of Simple Abundance. The table is only about
two feet away from the foot of my bed so that the bed supports my back
comfortably when I sit and meditate. This encourages me to meditate more
often. After I had pulled everything together I consecrated the table
with a small ritual of blessing. Afterwards I was surprised by the
powerful sense of positive energy that seemed to surround the table. Of
course, now I know that this energy is Love. Love created this space for
me once I became open to allowing it in my life. The objects displayed
on the table represent all that I love and for which I am so grateful.
You might also like to create a sacred spot to celebrate, concentrate,
and consecrate your inner work. You don't have to have a lot of room.
Joan Borysenko now has a house large enough for a small meditation room
but she has used in the past "the top of a bureau, a corner of the
kitchen, a nook in the hall." Julia Cameron encourages the seeker in us
to create a small personal place for inner work even if it's just a
window ledge. She tells us: "In order to stay easily and happily
creative, we need to stay spiritually centered. This is easier to do if
we allow ourselves centering rituals. It is important that we devise
these ourselves from the elements that feel holy and happy to us." Don't
think it will work for other women but not for you. Today, all I ask is
that you be open to allowing a creative, sacred space to come into your

world. If you are, Spirit will do the rest. OceanofPDF.com

FEBRUARY 29

A Day of Grace Sweet February Twenty-Nine!--- This is our grace-year, as
I live Quick, now! this foolish heart of mine; Seize thy prerogative!
---WALTER DE LA MARE

What a wonderful, unexpected gift is Leap Year's extra day and the
realization that this is certainly a wonderful year of grace. Quickly we
must seize the moment, for this day won't come again for another four
years. We can begin by asking for just one day's portion of grace to
guide us today. I do this every morning even before I get out of bed. My
favorite way to ask for a daily portion of grace is writer Marjorie
Holmes's prayer, "Just for Today." Oh, God, give me grace for this day.
Not for a lifetime, nor for next week, nor for tomorrow, just for this
day. Direct my thoughts and bless them, Direct my work and bless it.
Direct the things I say and give them blessing, too. Direct and bless
everything that I think and speak and do. So that for this one day, just
this one day, I have the gift of grace that comes from your presence ...
Now let me share something I've discovered about grace. In my lifetime,
I have been on my knees many times. Gratefully, most of my prayers have

been answered as I had hoped. Some were not, or at least not as I had
expected they would be. Others were delayed until I thought my heart
would break. Still others were denied. But never have I asked for just
one day's portion of grace and not received it. Grace is available for
each of us every day---our spiritual daily bread--- but we've got to
remember to ask for it with a grateful heart and try not to worry about
whether there will be enough for tomorrow. There will be.

Joyful Simplicities for February • Light candles all over your home on
Candlemas Day, February 2. Bask in the glow. Relax and see how different
the world seems without electricity to blur the distinction between
night and day. Consider that you might like to live by candlelight more
often. Invest in beeswax candles. They come in a rainbow of exquisite
colors and reflect the light beautifully. Store them in the freezer and
they will burn twice as long without dripping. Visit
www.candlebeefarm.com. Or try your hand at making your own candles! One
visit to www.nwCandleMaking.com will encourage the restoration of this
venerable home craft. • Invite a few friends over the Sunday before
Valentine's Day to make hand-crafted paper confections for those you
love at a "Cupid's tea." Assemble the prettiest doilies you can find,
along with wired silk ribbon, floral fabric, wrapping paper, stickers,
and construction paper. Don't forget glue sticks and sharp scissors.
Borrow some books of poetry from the library and try your hand at
reviving this lost art form. Serve a heart-shaped cake with pink butter
frosting, heart-shaped scones with strawberry jam, tea, and sherry. Try
this once and it is sure to become a February tradition. • Write a long,
wonderful love letter to yourself from your authentic self. Compliment
yourself for everything you are doing right now, just the way you are.
Let your authentic self encourage you as you would a young child. Mail
the letter and save it for when you're feeling discouraged. • This month
become an incurable romantic. Read Elizabeth Barrett Browning and then
delight in "everyday's most quiet need." • Add a bit of lace to a suit
or a pantry shelf.

• Have you found a wonderful picture of yourself when you were ten? If
you have, find the perfect frame for it and put it on your bureau or
dressing table. If you haven't yet, ask your mother or whomever keeps
your family photographs to help you. • Start forcing fragrant bulbs of
hyacinths. • Wear perfume every day. • Try a red lipstick. • Treat
yourself to one perfect long-stemmed rose for your desk. • Listen to the
music of Cole Porter. • Rent Out of Africa from the video store. Read
Isak Dinesen and Beryl Markham. • Make a batch of old-fashioned
chocolate fudge for Valentine's Day. • Create a sacred space.
OceanofPDF.com

MARCH It is the first mild day of March. Each minute sweeter than before
... There is a blessing in the air ... ---WILLIAM WORDSWORTH

March arrives, the last hurrah of winter and the first whisper of
spring. Slowly our spirits reawaken, along with the natural world, from
a long winter's slumber. Branches that just days ago were bare, now
blossom with new growth. Deep within we feel stirrings of hope. Turn
over the earth in the inner garden. This month we plant the seeds of the
second Simple Abundance principle---Simplicity---in the fertile soil of
our souls. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 1

Restoring Serenity to Your Daily Endeavors God give us the grace to
accept with serenity the things that cannot be changed; Courage to
change the things that should be changed; And the wisdom to distinguish
the one from the other. ---REINHOLD NIEBUHR

When thinking about serenity, many people think of the famous prayer
written by Protestant theologian Reinhold Niebuhr. Frequently invoked by
members of twelve-step programs, it is popularly known as "The Serenity
Prayer." I believe, however, that the time has come for us to stop
associating serenity with things that cannot be changed. For we can
dramatically change the quality of our lives when we consciously seek to
restore serenity to our daily endeavors. How exactly can this be
accomplished in our lifetime? When women stop behaving as if they were
whirling dervishes. If you frequently feel as if you're about to spin
off this planet, it's probably because you are. I know of a woman who
will begin to brush her teeth only to leave the bathroom to start making
her bed while she is still foaming at the mouth. And why? Because out of
the corner of her eye she saw the rumpled sheets. Before she could rinse
her mouth, she had flung herself into the next task. Needless to say, a
day that starts off this frenzied can only go from bad to worse. This is
not how the cool and regal Grace Kelly, beloved as Her Serene Highness
the Princess of Monaco, spent her days. Nor is it how we should

spend ours. And while I'm sure Princess Grace had somebody else making
her bed, the point is still valid. Serene women do not become
sidetracked. Sidetracked women, who scatter their energies to the four
winds, never achieve serenity. (Nervous breakdowns, to be sure, but not
serenity.) It's as simple as that. Today, we must start to recover our
sanity. The way we do this is to concentrate slowly on completing one
task at a time, each hour of the day, until the day is over. Like the
members of twelve-step programs, we will act "as if" we are serene
(think Grace Kelly), by bringing all our attention and conscious
awareness to whatever we are doing---from brushing our teeth to putting
the children to bed. What we will gain from this exercise is the inner
peace that comes from living fully in the present moment. I realize, of
course, that for most of us, accustomed as we are to performing six
tricks simultaneously, what I'm proposing sounds ridiculous. You wonder
how you'll get everything done if you don't do everything at once. But I
assure you that you will accomplish all you set out to do and need to do
with much more ease, efficiency, pleasure, and satisfaction when you
merge mind, body, and spirit with the task at hand. And you will
experience serenity. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 2

Meditation: Many Paths to the Present Moment Meditation is simply about
being yourself and knowing about who that is. It is about coming to
realize that you are on a path whether you like it or not, namely the
path that is your life. ---JON KABAT-ZINN

If you do not already practice meditation, when you hear the word you
probably conjure up the unpleasant image of sitting uncomfortably in a
lotus position, back aching, mind racing ahead to all the things you
need to be doing, and hyperventilating because now you are concentrating
on whether you are breathing or not. This image is unappealing and
incorrect. But it goes a long way toward explaining why many people do
not meditate. However, there are compelling physiological,
psychological, and spiritual reasons why we should engage in regular
meditation. It is the mortar that holds mind, body, and Spirit together.
There are many ways of meditating. Dr. Joan Borysenko, the gifted and
inspired psychologist, scientist, and spiritual teacher, explains that
meditation is intentional concentration on one thing, which can be
either secular or spiritual. "Perhaps you have become so absorbed in
gardening, reading or even balancing your checkbook that your breathing
slowed and you became as single-pointed as a panther stalking her
dinner! In this state creativity flowers, intuition leads to a deeper
wisdom, the natural healing system of the body is engaged, our best
physical and mental potential manifests itself and we feel
psychologically satisfied," she writes. Spiritual meditation, on the
other hand, "will help you become aware of the presence

of the divine in nature, in yourself and in other people. The love and
joy that are inherent in Spirit---that are the very essence of
Spirit---will begin to permeate your life." I have many different ways
of meditating, depending on my inner needs: the golden mirror
meditation, writing my daily dialogue pages, gazing into the flame of a
candle, concentrating on a sacred word in a centering prayer, focusing
on a poetic phrase to find deeper personal meaning, or setting out on a
walking meditation. There are many paths to the present moment. Joan
Borysenko's "all-time favorite meditation is a small, moist piece of
chocolate cake eaten with exquisite attention and tremendous gratitude.
Any time we are fully present in the moment we are meditating." Today,
retreat to a quiet place where you can sit or even lie down in a
comfortable position so that you can relax your body. Now close your
eyes and let your breathing become slow and steady. Get in touch with
the Silence within. Consider how you might be able to carve out twenty
minutes a day to meditate. That is all, merely consider. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 3

Setting Aside a Personal Sabbath Anybody can observe the Sabbath but
making it holy surely takes the rest of the week. ---ALICE WALKER

It was all right for the Great Creator to rest on the seventh day, but
many contemporary women I know assume they just can't take the time.
After all, they're not creating the world six days a week, just carrying
its weight on their shoulders. The Greeks had a wonderful word for this
attitude: hubris. Hubris is an "exaggerated sense of self-confidence"
and it usually comes before a humbling. A heart attack is certainly very
humbling, and it does not surprise me in the least that heart disease is
now the leading killer of women. "Some keep the Sabbath going to
Church," Emily Dickinson confided, "I keep it, staying at Home." So do
I. There are some Sundays, especially in winter or when it rains, that I
don't even get out of my pajamas until noon. Long ago, I stopped feeling
guilty about this because I've learned how to honor my Sabbath by
keeping it holy and happy. Many people look upon the Sabbath as Sunday;
others keep the Sabbath from Friday at sundown through Saturday. It
doesn't matter what day of the week you set aside as your own personal
Sabbath, it just matters that you keep one. Here is a short guide to
what you should not be doing on your Sabbath: strenuous household chores
(preparing meals is permitted, but they should either be easy or festive
depending on your choice); catching up on work that you didn't complete
last week or getting a head start on work you're supposed to start on
Monday; shopping at large department stores that insert slick circulars
in weekend papers.

This is what the Sabbath is for: reverence, rest, renewal, rejuvenation,
reassuring rituals, recreation, rejoicing, revelation, remembering how
much you have to be grateful for, and saying "thank you!" You can do
this in a church, mosque, temple, or synagogue, on a walk, while
antiquing, sitting in bed propped up on pillows reading something
wonderful with a breakfast tray, working the crossword puzzle before a
roaring fire, attending a marvelous art exhibition or movie matinee, or
listening to opera in the kitchen as you sip sherry and prepare a
fabulous feast. What matters is that you do something special that
speaks to your soul and that you revel in whatever you do. Your
activities on the Sabbath should uplift you and provide enough
inspiration to sustain you during the week to come. "Sunday is sort of
like a piece of bright golden brocade lying in a pile of white muslin
weekdays," Yoshiko Uchida wrote in A Jar of Dreams. If this is not what
the Great Creator intended when She created the Sabbath, then I have no
idea what is Sacred. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 4

Priming the Pump for Inspiration The well of Providence is deep. It's
the buckets we bring to it that are small. ---MARY WEBB

Whenever I prepare to write, I have a carefully crafted ritual of
comfort that eases me into creating. I work from my bed with a fresh pot
of tea on my bedside table and a beautiful tape of piano nocturnes
playing softly in the background. Next to me is a new spiral notebook
and cup full of my favorite pens, along with a revered pile of dog-eared
books. You see, I am not alone but in the company of my circle of
saints---beloved women writers---each of whom has an authentic voice and
a special message for me. I savor the work of their hands, hearts, and
minds once again to get my own creative juices flowing. My writing
ritual is what I refer to as "priming the pump for inspiration." When
you have to pump water from a well the old-fashioned way, by hand, you
need to pour a pitcher of water down the pump to get it going. I prime
my personal pump in a very particular way because the repetitiveness of
the process activates the right side of my brain where creativity
dwells: I use the same Blue Willow mug for the tea, listen to the same
music, write with the same type of pens and notebooks, reread the same
books. The instantly recognizable ritual informs my brain that I'm now
working. Before I realize it, I'm jotting down notes as if I'm taking
dictation from Spirit. When I've got a rough draft written in longhand,
I head into my office to work on the computer. Then the real writing
begins. Once again I have coaxed Inspiration into helping me through the
power of ritual.

You need to create a reassuring ritual for yourself to access your inner
reservoir---that place deep within you inhabited by imagination. Why not
create an inviting one for when you work with your illustrated discovery
journal? If you find that you can't work on it every day, pick one night
a week that you can devote to searching for the visual images that
reveal your authentic preferences. Make the process as appealing as
possible. Perhaps, after putting the children to bed, you can take a
long, leisurely soak in the bathtub. Then, after you are comfortable and
relaxed, bring the basket containing your magazines, scissors, and
journal over to your bed. Prepare a special hot drink to enjoy only at
this time. Light a pretty candle on your dresser to invoke Inspiration.
This week, think of creating a reassuring ritual that primes your
personal pump. Carry a large bucket to the well of Providence with a
ceremony of comfort. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 5

Creating a Hope Chest "Hope" is the thing with feathers--- that perches
in the soul ... ---EMILY DICKINSON

Hope chests were traditional gifts from mothers to daughters in the days
when young women brought household dowries with them when they married.
Hope chests contained bed linens, quilts, table linens, crockery,
flatware, and dreams of domestic bliss. I didn't have a hope chest when
I got married. Did you? I dreamed of getting one for my sixteenth
birthday, but we didn't have the money, so it became a dream deferred. I
remember poring over the Lane Furniture ads in Seventeen magazine
featuring a loving mother and daughter packing hopes for the young
woman's future into a beautiful cedar-lined chest. Why do I remember
this? Because I've been excavating my authentic self. If you dig deep
enough, it all comes back to you. And you'll often be surprised by what
you discover. So here I am, thirty years later, looking once again at
hope chest advertisements. However, since I've established a household
without one, my hope chest differs from the traditional version.
Instead, I use a wicker picnic hamper filled with projects that I hope
to do in the future. A few weeks ago I found a beautiful fabric at a
remnant sale that will make a lovely tablecloth and napkins for
Thanksgiving Day's dinner. Until I can set aside time to sew them, I'm
storing the material in my hope chest. A friend who recently separated
from her husband of thirty years is starting life over again so she's
redecorating the house they shared. She found some gorgeous needlepoint
squares at a thrift shop that she's going to

use to recover her dining room chairs some rainy Saturday afternoon.
They'd be perfect in a hope chest until she gets around to it. Get the
idea? Not every one of our desires can be immediately gratified. We've
got to learn to wait patiently for our dreams to come true, especially
on the path we've chosen. But while we wait, we need to prepare
symbolically a place for our hopes and dreams. I've even started a
wicker hamper for my daughter which I'm filling up with books by my
favorite women authors to give her on her sixteenth birthday. I "hope"
to present them to her in a beautiful cedar-lined chest. Then my dream
of a loving mother and daughter packing hopes together for a young
woman's future will come true. I believe it will. Faith is the very
first thing you should pack in a hope chest. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 6

Creating a Toy Box I pray you ...your play needs no excuse. Never
excuse. ---WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

When my daughter was born, one of the unheralded joys of motherhood was
that I finally had a legitimate excuse for buying toys. As Katie grows
older and her gift preferences inevitably evolve from miniature china
tea sets to compact discs and clothes, I have to constantly remind
myself that I don't need an excuse anymore to make toys a part of my
life. If I am to continue to grow as a human being and as an artist,
it's imperative for me to respect the power of play. That's why I have
my own toy box. Playing is hard for most women I know. Creating your own
toy box symbolically suggests the importance of fun if you're to
function at full throttle. First, find the perfect box. A wicker picnic
basket, or a small wooden or fabric-covered box with a lid can do duty
as a toy chest. But the lid is the most important feature because what
goes in there is your business. These are your toys. Your toy box. Maybe
you'll share. Maybe you won't. Take it to your bedroom and put it high
on a shelf in your closet. Close the door. Now this week, plan a
creative excursion to begin filling it. Take \$ 10 and go to a
well-stocked five-and-dime or a great stationery-and-gift shop. Get some
stickers, some colored paper clips, some pretty pencils and whimsical
erasers. Now look through the funny cards. Get a few that tickle your
fancy. What else do you see? A milk jug in the shape of a cow, a string
of chili pepper lights, a magic wand. Store your stickers and cards in
your toy box until the right moment comes along to use them, place the
paper clips and erasers on your desk at work, hang the chili pepper
lights over

your spice rack, put the cow milk jug in the refrigerator. Laugh when
you see your toys and let them visually remind you to lighten up. Now
think about the toys you yearned for as a child but never had. It's not
too late to own a Steiff stuffed teddy bear, build a beautiful dollhouse
with real electric lights, or complete a thousand-piece jigsaw puzzle.
Start changing your holiday or birthday wish list. You don't have to get
a Dustbuster if what you really want is an antique French Jumeau
porcelain doll. Tell the people in your life your new preferences. "Play
is the exultation of the possible," Martin Buber reminds us. Now get
your toys. Go out and play like a good big girl. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 7

Outfitting a Comfort Drawer A little of what you fancy does you good.
---MARIE LLOYD

Life requires that we prepare ourselves for the inevitable times that
try our souls. This is achieved with a comfort drawer. Comfort drawers
are for those nights when you feel as if you'd like to pull the covers
over your head and never come out. My refuge is the righthand bottom
drawer of my dresser, where I stockpile small indulgences throughout the
year. But many of my comforts were originally gifts that I simply saved
for whenever a homegrown unhappiness remedy might be required. Let's see
what we find: a box of chocolate truffles; miniature (oneserving size)
fruit cordials and after-dinner drinks; an aromatherapy bath treatment
to promote serenity; various British decorating magazines (look for them
at large cosmopolitan newsstands); a small vial of Bach's "Rescue
Remedy," a homeopathic essence available at health food stores; a velvet
herbal sleeping pillow to induce pleasant dreams; a satin eye mask to
shut out distractions; rose-scented bubble bath and talc; old love
letters tied with a silk ribbon; a scrapbook of personal mementos; a tin
of fancy biscuits; and an assorted gift sampler of unusual teas. Notice
the simply abundant pattern of pleasure? Here is all that is required
for the spoiling and pampering of a world-weary woman: a fabulous bath,
something scrumptious to nibble, something sentimental to conjure up
happy memories, something lovely to sip, and something delightful to
read. Now change your sheets, fill your hot water bottle, and assemble a
half-dozen white votive candles on a tray. Place the tray on your
dresser in front of a mirror, strike a match, and ceremoniously create
your own northern lights. Play some soothing music and put on your
favorite

pajamas or nightgown. Get into bed and luxuriate. If this doesn't work,
take two aspirins and call me in the morning. When outfitting your
comfort drawer, be sure to line it with a lovely floral shelf paper and
tuck in some scented sachets so that the drawer will delight your
senses. Wrap your comforts in pretty jewel-colored tissue paper and tie
them with beautiful ribbons. This way, when you open your drawer, you'll
see a dazzling array of wonderful presents---gifts of the heart for the
most deserving person you know. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 8

Taking the Plunge Until you make peace with who you are, you'll never he
content with what you have. ---DORIS MORTMAN

Simplicity gains importance in our lives as we begin to make peace with
ourselves. This is because we gradually come to the inner awareness that
we don't need to gild the lily. Some of the trappings can be
relinquished because the Real Thing is finally ready to be revealed. I
call this point in the Simple Abundance process "taking the plunge"
because it involves a courageous leap of faith in the most intimate way:
exploring the way we express ourselves to the outside world through our
personal appearance. But this is much more than just how we dress or
style our hair. It's about the many subtle ways we choose either to
celebrate or conceal our authenticity. It's about finally acknowledging
and accepting the woman within. It's about learning to become
comfortable with who we really are. "We are not born all at once, but by
bits. The body first, and the spirit later," Mary Antin wrote in 1912 in
The Promised Land. "Our mothers are racked with the pains of our
physical birth; we ourselves suffer the longer pains of our spiritual
growth." Simone de Beauvoir put it another way: "One is not born a
woman, one becomes one." This becoming takes time. We need time to
consider, time to reflect, time to make creative choices, time to emerge
from the cocoon, time to clean out our closets, and time to clear away
psychic cobwebs so that we might pare down to our essence. Some of us
have remained dormant for years---oblivious to our genuine
beauty---drugged senseless by our own numbing disapproval, nagging
doubts, and benign neglect. Coping strategies that once brought a sense
of

relief now only offer regret. To undo the damage and reconnect with our
authentic selves we need to take the plunge, confident that Spirit is
holding the net. Above all, we need to treat ourselves gently with the
kindness we would bestow on amnesiacs who need the patient reassurance
of their true identities. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 9

A Radiant Reflection: Projecting Your Authentic Self So many women just
don't know how great they really are. They come to us all vogue outside
and vague on the inside. ---MARY KAY ASH

Few women know how great they really are. If truth were told, we'd all
probably admit to feeling pretty vague about our personal appearance.
Many of us would like to trade ourselves in for a sleeker version. Some
of us have been wearing our hair the same way for the last decade---not
because it's so flattering but because it feels safe. Still others of us
haven't changed our makeup since our twenties even though the face in
the mirror does not wear the color fuchsia as well as she once did. But
even when we don't consciously know how to pull together our outside
packaging, there is someone who does. As we become more intimate with
this wonderful source of style, personal fashion know-how, and comfort,
we will begin to awaken to our own radiance. This source, our authentic
selves, is waiting to help us evolve into the women we were meant to be.
An easy way to let her begin is to gather different mail-order catalogs.
Whenever you have a quiet moment to yourself, sit down and flip through
the catalogs. Cut out the pictures of the women you think are attractive
and the clothing you'd love to wear. Don't even consider whether you can
afford anything you select or whether you can fit into it today. This is
a creative brainstorming session. Always remember that dreams---your
creative visualizations---must come before their physical
manifestations. Play with the pictures in your discovery journal. Create
a collage of your

ideal woman: find the perfect hairstyle, put together a fantastic
wardrobe for home and work. Have fun with this. Pretend you're ten years
old and playing with paper dolls. See what you discover. Does anything
in your discovery journal collage resemble anything hanging in your
closet? Consider this carefully. Now make yourself a promise. Since you
have embarked on this adventure to awaken your authenticity and discover
your own sense of style, be willing not to buy another item of clothing
unless you absolutely cannot live without it. No more settling for
something that's not you or that's second-rate. On the Simple Abundance
path you're going to discover the joy of surrounding yourself only with
things you love, and the pleasure of wearing only clothes that make you
look and feel fabulous and project your authentic sense of style. Let
the potent power of simplicity begin to work in your life. If it's not
authentically you, live without it. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 10

You Are Not Your Appearance, but Does the Rest of the World Know That?
The tragedy of our time is that we are so eye centered, so appearance
besotted. ---JESSAMYN WEST

All of us can pull ourselves together some of the time. Some of us can
pull ourselves together all of the time. But none of us wants to be
"pulled together" every single moment of our lives. Let's consider those
days when you just don't give a damn or are too exhausted to remember to
pick up a brush. Can we find inspiration in dirty jeans, an unwashed
face, stringy hair? Can there be incarnational revelations when the
skirt is too tight and the pantyhose pulls at your hips? I hope so. For
I know those days and those days know me. Probably you were taught, as I
was, that how we present ourselves to the world is very important.
Unfortunately, our outside packaging counts for far more than it really
should. Often, when we don't live up to the world's expectations of how
we should look or behave, we fall victim to a vicious circle of
self-loathing and denial that can be difficult to escape from unscathed.
At times like these, it's a comfort to remember that our souls are more
dazzling than cellophane. "Beauty is an internal light, a spiritual
radiance that all women have but most women hide, unconsciously, denying
its existence. What we do not claim remains invisible," Marianne
Williamson observes in A Woman's Worth. But as you become more intimate
with your authentic self---as you recover your true, incandescent
identity---there will come a gradual but undeniable physical
transformation. It is absolutely impossible to commit to

your spiritual growth, awaken to your own radiant Light and not have it
reveal itself on the outside. "It is God's will that we be beautiful,
that we love and be loved and prosper in all good things," Marianne
Williamson reminds us. "It is God's will that we all become the
goddesses we were created to be." OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 11

Sending and Receiving Personal Signals If you will resolve to work each
day for self-realization, your whole world can change.... The two women
you are, they can make you over. ---POND'S COLD CREAM ADVERTISEMENT,
GOOD HOUSEKEEPING, December 1947

I had not seen my friend in months. At first when she approached through
the crowd of strangers, I literally did not recognize her. Her hair,
always beautifully styled, was disheveled; her unmadeup face was red and
puffy with large dark circles under her eyes, and she was wearing a pair
of jeans and a lumpy sweater instead of the attractive Laura Ashley
dresses she normally favored. I was absolutely stunned. What was wrong
with this picture? When we sat down together to talk over a cup of
coffee, she told me about a serious life crisis she was experiencing.
But even before she confided in me, I knew only too well that something
was seriously wrong. Each of us transmits personal signals about our
self-esteem every day in myriad ways. Most of them are not as dramatic
as my friend's but are rather subtle. When we are feeling on top of the
world there's a spring in our step, a smile on our face, and a sparkle
in our eyes. Then there are those occasions when, through lack of time,
energy, or emotion, we become careless about our attire and our personal
grooming. We literally begin to care less---until it looks as though we
don't care at all. Of course, deep within, we care very much. But there
is an important reason why we should give a second thought to our
personal appearance, even when we're alone: the inner joy we experience
when we look our best. "Many women feel in their hearts that they have
missed full self-realization," another advertisement for Pond's

Cold Cream in the March 1949 issue of Good Housekeeping advised readers.
"Yet they need not accept this---help is within themselves. You can feel
it within you---an inner drive for happiness. The close interrelation
between this Inner You and this Outer You, the almost uncanny power of
each to change the other---can change you from drabness to joyous
selffulfillment." When I first discovered this "New Age" series of
beauty advertisements from the late 1940s, I was amused---and then
grateful. For one of the most marvelous lessons you learn on a path of
personal transformation is that when your heart is open to change,
you're able to recognize the personal signals of encouragement your
authentic self is constantly sending, no matter how unlikely the source.
OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 12

How Do I Look? How women look and how their looks change in the course
of their lives, is not a frivolous question.... "How do I look?" she
asks as her eyes meet the eyes in the mirror. She listens carefully for
an answer, because it might prove quite illuminating. ---KENNEDY FRASER

How do I look?" is a question all of us have spent our lives asking
others. But now that you are on the path toward your authenticity you
have reached the point when you need to gently ask yourself this loaded
question. And, once having asked, you need to listen carefully for the
answer. Better yet, when you gaze into the mirror you should ask, "How
do I feel?" because how you feel about yourself on any particular day
will influence how you look more than what you are wearing. After years
of concentrating on the glitz of the outside packaging, we need to
change our approach to beauty completely. Personal transformation begins
with a strong inner life. We need to let Spirit show us the way, whether
it's changing our wardrobe, losing weight, or finding the right
hairstyle. Twenty minutes of meditation a day, quiet reflection, or a
restorative walk seeking your authentic self will do more for your looks
than you will believe. But of course, you'll believe it when you see it.
So what are you waiting for? Start today. Choose one inner tool and make
it part of your daily beauty ritual. "If we go down into ourselves we
find that we possess exactly what we desire," the French philosopher and
mystic Simone Weil believed. Remember this. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 13

Accepting Yourself as You Are Today Seek not outside yourself, heaven is
within. ---MARY LOU COOK

Today, we make peace with the past: with the bodies and faces we were
born with and those that have evolved. Today, we embrace the lines that
stare back at us, the parts that sag in the middle or stick out where
they shouldn't, the hair that never keeps a curl or never loses it. We
begin when we invoke the Tibetan poet and teacher Saraha's song of
praise. "Here in this body are the sacred rivers: here are the sun and
moon as well as all the pilgrimage places ... I have not encountered
another temple as blissful as my own body." It will take a bit of doing,
learning to love all our personal pilgrimage places. However, before
genuine love can flourish, we must finally accept ourselves exactly as
we are today. Not tomorrow or next week or when we lose twenty-five
pounds. Remember, acceptance is acknowledging the reality of a
situation: that we're heavier than we'd like to be, for example, or that
our complexion is ruddy or sallow, or that we've got gray streaks, or
that leggings just don't work for us. Most of us think of other women as
beauties, never ourselves. But every woman was created by Spirit to be a
genuine beauty. We learn how to reveal to the world our unique radiance
only after we acknowledge it ourselves. Today, take as your personal
mantra: "I am what I am and what I am is wonderful." OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 14

Loving Yourself into Wholeness I did not lose myself all at once. I
rubbed out my face over the years washing away my pain, the same way
carvings on stone are worn down by water. ---AMY TAN

Life batters us whether we are rich or poor, public or private. The
wound we suffer may be an open cut or a slow, silent hemorrhage of the
soul. On the outside we may look as if we've got our act together, but
each of us encounters those dark stormy days when we feel very small,
very fragile, and very frightened, as if we might shatter into a
thousand pieces and break into heartrending sobs at something as simple
as "How are you?" When this happens we have to be kind to ourselves, not
beat ourselves up. Leave that to the rest of the world. Our feelings are
valid, our fears very real, even though they are probably not based on
reality. Always remember that the best description of fear is "false
evidence appearing real." When these occasions occur in your life,
recall that your first duty is to love yourself into Wholeness. How to
do this? By pampering yourself with simple pleasures and small
indulgences. By treating yourself like the baby you are right now. Could
you bring home something wonderful for dinner tonight from a Chinese or
Indian carryout? Could you treat yourself to some of the potted
daffodils or tulips that are appearing in the shops about now? Could you
take the afternoon off and sneak into a matinee? If not, how about
bringing home two or three classics from the video store and enjoying a
movie marathon with a big bowl of popcorn? Why not delight in an
icecream cone for lunch, taking it to a park to bask in the sunshine and
hear the birds singing? What about saying "no" to the next request for
you to do something?

Yes, you can. You don't have to do everything and be everything for
everyone else all the time. If you think you can't possibly do one more
thing without screaming or crying, you're probably right. Start by
saying, "No, I'm sorry, I've got a prior commitment." For, of course,
you do. Today you need to be there for yourself. Remember, we did not
lose ourselves all at once. But we recover our authentic selves one kind
gesture at a time. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 15

Self-Nurturing: The Hardest Task You'll Ever Do Any little bit of
experimenting in self-nurturance is very frightening for most of us.
---JULIA CAMERON

Why should self-nurturance be so frightening for most women? Why is it
for you? If you don't think this is true, how many creative excursions
have you been on in the last month? Have you outfitted a comfort drawer
for yourself? Started a hope chest or a toy box? Have you been working
in your discovery journal or writing your daily dialogue pages? Hmmmmmm
... Perhaps we are all Scrooges when it comes to self-nurturing because
if we were kind to ourselves, our creativity might begin to blossom like
a plant moving toward the light. Of course, this would mean we'd want to
make some changes in our lives, and we all know how we feel about
changes, even positive ones. We may be in a rut, but at least our own
familiar grooves are comforting in their own insidious fashion. The way
to take giant leaps and strides toward our authenticity, however, is
through small changes. Leo Tolstoy believed that "True life is lived
when tiny changes occur." Take an honest look at how good you are to
yourself. How much sleep are you getting? Are you walking often or
getting enough exercise? Have you given meditation a fair chance? How
much time do you have every week just to relax? To dream? To engage in
personal pursuits that bring you pleasure? When was the last time you
laughed? "There is a connection between self-nurturing and
self-respect," Julia Cameron reminds us.

Self-nurturing has been a struggle for me. But believe me, I have
learned on the Simple Abundance path that if you want your life to come
together, you have to start treating yourself better. No one else can do
it for you. Today, make a list of ten nice things you could do for
yourself. Now select one and do it. You have absolutely nothing to lose
from experimenting with self-nurturing and everything to gain.
OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 16

What Do You Like about Yourself? If you want to find the answers to the
Big Questions about your soul, you'd best begin with the Little Answers
about your body. ---GEORGE SHEEHAN

Like all of us, you see yourself in the mirror every day. But when was
the last time you nodded your head in approval at what you saw? Today,
I'd like to ask you to try something radically different: look at
yourself lovingly and begin to appreciate what you see. This exercise is
more than just skin deep because I want you to take an inventory of what
you like about yourself. Most of us are very quick to criticize
ourselves. We're always finding things wrong with the way we look. Today
we're going to discover and give thanks for what pleases us. Tonight,
set aside an hour to celebrate how marvelous you really are. Prepare an
inviting bath, using scented oil or bubble bath. Bring a candle into the
bathroom and bathe by candelight. Allow yourself at least twenty minutes
to soak in the warm water to renew yourself. Ask your authentic self to
bring to your conscious mind all the special things you should discover
tonight. After you pat yourself dry, gently apply some talc or lotion to
your body. Give yourself a slow massage and as you work your way down
from your shoulders to your toes, visualize each body part surrounded by
the most beautiful white light imaginable. This light is Love and you
are sending it to every cell in your being. In your most nurturing
voice, tell yourself aloud how wonderful you are. Now go into your
bedroom and before getting dressed for bed, take a compassionate look at
yourself in the mirror. Continue to gaze approvingly into the mirror
until you find ten things that you absolutely love about your face and
your body---maybe a perfect nose, beautiful hands, trim ankles.

Start at the top and work your way down. Consider everything. You may
not like the way your hair is styled, for instance, but you love its
color. Write all ten down in your gratitude journal. Now think about
aspects of your personality that you like. You're a gifted improviser, a
savvy shopper, an empathetic listener, an inspired cook, a patient and
loving mother, a great woman for detail. Write it all down. Do not stop
until you have at least ten things about your personality for which to
be grateful. Now record them all in your gratitude journal. And if you
think you can't find twenty things to love about yourself, go back to
the mirror. Do this exercise every day until you can. "Nature never
repeats herself and the possibilities of one human soul will never be
found in another," Elizabeth Cady Stanton wrote in Solitude of the Self
in 1892. Today, be willing to search genuinely for your glorious
possibilities and rejoice in your divine authenticity. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 17

Accentuating the Positive If one is a greyhound, why try to look like a
Pekingese? ---DAME EDITH SITWELL

In an age when a woman's beauty was considered her most prized
possession, the famed English poet Dame Edith Sitwell, born in 1887,
stood out in a crowd. But not for the reasons you might expect. As a
young girl she was so homely, awkward, and thin that her family fretted
constantly over the fact that marriage would not be in her future.
Needless to say, "poor little E," as she was known, endured a miserable,
lonely, and frustrated childhood until her beloved governess introduced
her to the world of literature and music. She fell in love with the
poetry of Swinburne and the Symbolists and in so doing fell in love with
her authentic self. This authenticity found expression in her poetry and
in an eccentric personal style rooted in fantasy and drama. She became
famous for her long, flowing Pre-Raphaelite dresses fashioned from
brocades or upholstery fabrics, for her furs and for her extraordinary
hats that highlighted her strong, bony profile and became her own
distinctive trademark. To accentuate her long, slender fingers (of which
she was very vain) she grew her nails to Mandarin length, painted them
red, and wore massive rings. Dame Edith's flamboyant sense of style is
not for many of us. But her glorious way of celebrating her authentic
self and of accentuating the positive can speak to every woman. By now
you should have discovered wonderful things about your own face and
body. Each of us has at least one special feature that can set us apart.
Do you accentuate your assets? Are your eyes your most beautiful
feature? Then make them up every day, even if you are staying at home
with the children. You're turning gray? Have you thought about letting
your head shimmer in silver? You're blessed with a

beautiful smile and full, luscious lips? Think about wearing red
lipstick to call attention to them. "I have often wished I had time to
cultivate modesty," Dame Edith confessed toward the end of her life,
"but I am too busy thinking about myself." Most of us don't spend nearly
enough time thinking good things about ourselves. Today, follow Dame
Edith's example. Discover, flaunt, and celebrate your authentic assets.
OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 18

Awakening Sleeping Beauty We are the hero of our own story. ---MARY
MCCARTHY

In every one of us there lies a sleeping beauty waiting to be awakened
through love. Because she has slumbered for so long, she must be
awakened very gently. But instead of waiting for Prince Charming to
storm the palace gates, you must summon the magic powers of your
authentic self to break any cruel enchantment that has left you unaware
of your own glory. Let me tell you a story about a pretty girl I knew
when I was young. Once upon a time there was a garbage strike in our
town. For weeks the garbage piled up in front of trim suburban homes.
One day a photographer from a newspaper drove up in front of a house and
asked if there were any children present. He wanted to photograph
children near the garbage pile to emphasize how much had accumulated.
The little girl was shyly standing behind her mother when he came to the
door, so she was selected and propped up on piles of garbage for the
photograph. After the photograph was printed in the newspaper, some
children in the school yard taunted the little girl by calling her "just
a pile of garbage." In order to handle this public humiliation, she
became numb to her own beauty for a very long time. Sitting on the pile
of garbage was the same thing as pricking her finger on a spindle and
falling into a deep sleep. "It's hard to tell our bad luck from our good
luck sometimes. Hard to tell sometimes for many years to come," writer
Merle Shain gently reminds us. "And most of us have wept copious tears
over someone or something when if we'd understood the situation better
we might have celebrated our good fortune instead."

If that young girl had not pricked her finger, would she have retreated
to her bed every afternoon and sought comfort in the world of books?
When she became older would she have studied theater to learn the
secrets of make-believe? Would she have traveled to London and Paris to
write about fashion in order to learn about style? I think not, and I
should know. What was your spindle? Was there a moment when you pricked
yourself and fell into a deep slumber? Or did you just slowly shut down?
Perhaps the cruel enchantment was caused by overly critical parents, by
a devastating breakup, or by a numbing reliance on food, drugs, or
alcohol. It is time to awaken, sleeping beauty. Your creativity,
imagination, and authentic sense of style are far superior to any
sorcerer's spell, no matter how strong. "One can never change the past,
only the hold it has on you," Merle Shain reassures us, "and while
nothing in your life is reversible, you can reverse it nevertheless."
OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 19

Repose of the Soul Repose is a quality too many undervalue.... In the
clamor one is irresistibly drawn to the woman who sits gracefully
relaxed, who keeps her hands still, talks in a low voice and listens
with responsive eyes and smiles. She creates a spell around her,
charming to the ear, the eye and the mind. ---GOOD HOUSEKEEPING,
November 1947

We have all met her, that special woman who draws you into her orb with
a radiant smile. Her eyes light up as you tell her how you've been. She
attracts men, women, children, and animals, for her complete attention
is soothing and hypnotic. When you walk away from her you feel as if you
have been bathed in a beautiful warm light. You have. It's called Love,
and this ancient beauty secret is available to all of us. When we are
genuinely interested in others, a graciousness comes over us that is
compelling. "She did not talk to people as if they were strange hard
shells she had to crack open to get inside. She talked as if she were
already in the shell. In their very shell," Marita Bonner wrote of a
soulful woman in 1926. Would that each of us were such a woman. Would
that each of us could become one. We can. Most of us have more harried
moments in our daily lives than tranquil ones. But by taking the time to
step outside our own sphere to embrace others, we open ourselves up to
the power of Spirit. We are suddenly lit up from inside, and this
illumination can transform our looks more effectively than any fancy
salon beauty makeover. Today, act as if you are a woman with repose of
the soul. Greet everyone you meet with a warm smile. No matter how busy
you are, don't rush your

encounters with co-workers, family, and friends. Speak softly. Listen
attentively. Act as if every conversation you have is the most important
thing on your mind today. Look your children and your partner in the
eyes when they talk to you. Stroke the cat, caress the dog. Lavish love
on every living being you meet. See how different you feel at the end of
the day. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 20

Inner Beauty, Outward Charm Don't you love it when some incredibly
beautiful woman like Linda Evans or Cindy Crawford tells us that the
real beauty secret is finding your inner light? No shit. But I've done
the same things these women have done to find my inner light and while
it's true I'm happier, I still don't look like them. ---MARIANNE
WILLIAMSON

We can't all look like Linda Evans or Cindy Crawford, but we can each
look our best. Simplicity plays a part in striking the right chord of
self. This occurs naturally as we begin to rethink how to put together
our best look. Our authentic look. Gradually we learn that the "less is
more" approach applies to makeup and fashion as well as to decorating
and entertaining. Ironically, this desire to look our best comes after
we have committed to our inner work. As we go within, searching for
spiritual growth, we begin to blossom on the outside. Time well spent in
meditation gives us more serenity, and it shows on our faces. Learning
to love ourselves exactly as we are gives us the motivation to move
forward, whether in searching for a healthier way of eating or finding
the right exercise regime. Perhaps we're starting to wear makeup more
frequently and caring how we dress even when we're just doing errands or
carpooling. These are subtle changes that have a profound impact on how
we feel about ourselves. Why does working on our inner beauty produce
outward charm? Perhaps it is because the two are inexorably connected. A
Gnostic axiom teaches "As is the inner, so is the outer." Women who
realize their full potential delight the Great Creator with their
brilliance. Marianne Williamson tells us that the process of personal
transformation---whether it be in our lifestyle or in our
appearance---"is the true work of spiritual growth."

OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 21

What Is Self-Confidence? My after forty face felt far more comfortable
than anything I lived with previously. Self-confidence was a powerful
beauty-potion; I looked better because I felt better. Failure and grief
as well as success and love had served me well. Finally, I was tapping
into that most hardwon of youth dews: wisdom. ---NANCY COLLINS

Many women confuse self-esteem with self-confidence. For me, selfesteem
is how we really feel about ourselves in the secret sanctuary of our
soul. Do we love, accept, and approve of ourselves unconditionally? Do
we believe that we are worthy of the love of others and the best that
life has to offer? The quality of our self-esteem is very deeply
connected to the relationship with our first and most important critics:
our parents. If they unconditionally loved, accepted, and approved of
us, then we probably do, too. But self-confidence is a special elixir
that Spirit has prepared to help each of us face and surmount the
challenges of life. It's an aromatic blending of invigorating essences:
attitude, experience, knowledge, wisdom, optimism, and faith. If we were
fortunate enough to grow up in loving, supportive homes and our
self-esteem is strong, we learned our own homeopathic formula early. If
we did not, then we need to learn how to mix our own custom blend.
What's important to realize is that self-confidence is available to all
of us. An optimistic attitude is essential to self-confidence. So is
learning from our mistakes and recognizing that everything in life can
be used as a lesson once we are willing to be taught. "If you think you
can, you can," the

American cosmetics entrepreneur Mary Kay Ash tells us. "And if you think
you can't, you're right." Today, tell yourself that you can do anything
you want to do. Because you can. Like an expensive perfume, only a
smidgen of self-confidence is needed to enhance a woman's authentic
aura. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 22

Why Self-Confidence Can't Be Bought but Can Be Borrowed I was thought to
be "stuck up." I wasn't. I was just sure of myself. This is and always
has been an unforgivable quality to the unsure. ---BETTE DAVIS

It would be wonderful if we could simply waltz up to a cosmetic counter
and purchase a bottle of self-confidence the way we can buy
"revitalizing" or "performance" creams for our faces. Unfortunately this
spiritual elixir, like an expensive perfume, is different on every woman
because of individual chemistry. When I was younger, my self-confidence
potion was heavily scented with attitude, optimism, and faith;
experience, knowledge, and wisdom had to come later. But even today,
every new opportunity or challenge requires that I prepare a special
batch of moxie for myself. I do this by becoming as thoroughly prepared
as possible and by looking the part---wearing an outfit, for example,
that exudes self-confidence even when it's hanging in the closet. Next I
say my prayers and ask for the Power to be switched on. Then "it's
showtime." I act as if I'm self-confident and the world takes me as
such. When you're unsure of yourself but life requires you to be
otherwise, it is comforting to remember that you can always borrow a
self-confident attitude from your authentic self. She knows how terrific
you are and can give you that little boost, which is all you really
need. Our subconscious mind cannot distinguish between what's real and
what's imaginary (which is why creative visualization works). If we act
as if we're confident, we become so. At least for a little while. "You
must do the thing you think you

cannot do," Eleanor Roosevelt once observed, and her life was spent
proving the point. When life challenges arise, you can surmount them by
calling on Spirit and borrowing the scent of self-confidence from your
authentic self. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 23

Always Be a First-Rate Version of Yourself Always be a just-rate version
of yourself, instead of a second-rate version of somebody else. ---JUDY
GARLAND

I make a terrible Judy Garland but I do a pretty good Sarah Ban
Breathnach. It's taken me nearly my entire lifetime to come to this
awareness, but I've not been the same woman since I did. Neither will
you be once this truth awakens in your heart. You see, whether we are
consciously aware of it or not, we're constantly programmed by the world
to be other women, not ourselves. We're supposed to look like Cindy
Crawford, entertain like Martha Stewart, and decorate like Alexandra
Stoddard. With this pervasive social schizophrenia, it's no wonder that
most women are terribly confused about the issue of authenticity.
According to Webster's Dictionary, to be authentic is to be "not
imaginary, false or imitation." To be authentic is to be "genuine,
veritable, bona fide, being actually and precisely what is claimed." The
only thing that we can genuinely claim to be is ourselves. But our best
is good enough, even on a bad day. I know a woman who is a high-powered
advertising executive in New York. There is no one I know on the planet
who is more creative, articulate, accomplished, and funny, but some days
she doesn't see it that way. She grew up in a home where performance was
always graded, and as a result she's extremely hard on herself. Her
personal grade of C- is probably everybody else's A+. We are all so hard
on ourselves. We not only want to be other people, we want to be perfect
versions of them.

Let me tell you about another woman I know. When her first book was
published, close friends will testify, she acted like a raving lunatic.
Instead of congratulating herself on producing such a beautiful book
after years of effort, she was about to throw herself off a cliff
because she had used the wrong verb tense in one sentence. Instead of
celebrating her achievement, she robbed herself of joy. Now she knows
better, thank God. Did you know that Amish quilters will deliberately
add a mismatched patch to each quilt to remind themselves that only
Spirit can create perfectly? We need to remember that. We should only
strive to be first-rate versions of ourselves. And our best is always
good enough. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 24

The Secret Saboteur: When You're Feeling Blue Listening to your heart is
not simple. Finding out who you are is not simple. It takes a lot of
hard work and courage to get to know who you are and what you want.
---SUE BENDER

After self-nurturance, listening to the whispers of our hearts is
probably the hardest task we've ever attempted. Some days the Simple
Abundance path comes naturally. You realize that all you have is all you
truly need. Other days, it's impossible to quiet down the wants. It
seems as if you have too many unfulfilled desires and delayed dreams.
You're sick and tired of waiting for inner changes to manifest
themselves on the outside. When the dark days come, we need to remember
that even if a secret saboteur---depression---is at work temporarily
derailing our progress (or so it seems), each day offers us a gift if we
will only look for it. Sometimes we're sad for a very apparent
reason---an overwhelming loss, for example, or worries over money or
health. Other times we don't know why we feel so bad, which makes us
feel even worse. It could be for a million different reasons---an
appalling lack of appreciation (by ourselves and by others), exhaustion,
the weather, hormones, the advent of the flu, or simply part of the
process of personal transformation. I wish I could tell you that
spiritual and creative growth was smooth, predictable, and without pain.
"All the best transformations are accompanied by pain," Fay Weldon tells
us. "That's the point of them." Personal growth also comes in spasms:
three steps forward, two steps back, and then a long plateau when it
seems as though nothing is happening. But

it's important to realize that this dormant period always seems to
precede a growth spurt. Unfortunately, during the dormant period we very
often become depressed and decide to give up. It's on days like these
that you can barely get yourself dressed and out the door. You look like
hell and couldn't care less. You can't remember if you took a shower
yesterday or when the last time was you washed your hair. The children's
voices are insistent and yours is shrill. You haven't any patience. Life
seems bleak, not bright with promise. It's taking more work than you
expected to discover who you really are, and now you're no longer sure
you even want to find out. When dark clouds hover, what should you do
besides holding on and riding out the storm? You have two choices. One
is simply to give in, stop resisting. You've got the blues, so sing
them, baby. But before you do, ask for grace. Then have a good cry.
Leave work early. Take a nap and try to sleep it off. Indulge---without
guilt---in something purely for medicinal reasons, like a piece of
cheesecake or a bowl of HÄagen-Dazs, but don't eat it standing in front
of the refrigerator. Sit down, eat your treat slowly and savor it. If
you have the energy, fix comfort food for dinner tonight. If you don't,
fix something simple like soup and sandwiches. Rent a three-hanky movie.
Put the kids to bed early. Soak in a hot tub. Raid your comfort drawer.
Pull up the covers and snuggle down. Find five things for which to be
grateful. Turn out the light. The alternative blues-kicker is to shift
gears. Ask for grace. Call a good friend and talk. Put the kettle on for
a fresh pot of tea. Wash your face, comb your hair, put on some
lipstick, perfume, and earrings. Smile at yourself in the mirror.
Straighten the living room so that you can find a place to sit down.
Take a walk around the block and clear your head. If you're working in
an office, give yourself permission to put off that new project at work
until tomorrow when you can concentrate. Instead, clean your desk and
organize your papers. On the way home treat yourself to a bouquet of
daffodils. Peruse your cookbooks and prepare something different for
dinner. No matter which route you take, within twenty-four hours the day
will be over. Tomorrow should be better. But if it's not, nor the next
day, or the next, then know that it's okay to ask for help from friends,
a support group, a therapist, a doctor, or your Higher Power. Dark days
come to all of us. Yet

discouraging days bring with them golden opportunities when we can learn
to be kind to ourselves. Believe it or not, today offers you a hidden
gift, if you're willing to search for it. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 25

Real Life: Clothes That Fit Your Lifestyle "I haven't got a thing to
wear" does not, of course, mean that we must resort to nakedness or
seclusion; it means that our wardrobes contain nothing that might match
our mood or offer a just reflection of our current lives. ---KENNEDY
FRASER

Most of us have had the experience of looking at a closet full of
clothes and finding nothing wearable that matches our mood. With a sigh
of resignation we resort to a well-worn and time-tested "uniform,"
whether it be a black dress and pearls or a denim skirt, sweater, and
boots. Actually, most of us wear, with few exceptions, the same thing or
its incarnation over and over again. The outfits may vary according to
the season, but not our dependence on a few staples, which, in their own
way, offer a revealing reflection of how we view our current lives. The
legendary editor-in-chief of Vogue, Diana Vreeland, was famous for
favoring the same style black couture skirts and sweaters every workday
for many years. So what do we do with all the clothes we don't wear?
Nothing. They just hang there abandoned, because of their size or color
or lack of appropriateness, because they itch, or because we had that
last terrible fight with our ex-husband in that sorry dress and don't
want to be reminded of the pain. Sometimes clothes hang around season
after season, phantoms waiting for some unforeseen occasion in the
future that never comes. Spring is the perfect time to take stock of our
wardrobes and reconsider our relationship to clothes. The wind of
refreshing change is in the air. We long to shed our heavy coats and
sweaters for lighter garb. Let's shed our outmoded attitudes about
what's fashionable, and replace them with new

ideas about what works for us in our real lives and truly reflects our
authenticity. What if everything hanging in your closet were something
you loved--- something that made you look beautiful or made you feel
wonderful when you put it on? Think of how good you would feel every
day. Embracing the second Simple Abundance principle of simplicity can
spiritually induce such a miracle. Later you'll clean out your closets
and dresser drawers, but not today. Today, I only want you to consider
your real life and the clothes you wear every day. Do they really
reflect the woman within? What about the clothes that speak to you from
the pages of your illustrated discovery journal? What about the clothes
that hang abandoned in your closet? Every dress, skirt, pair of slacks
or jeans, blouse, sweater, T-shirt and jacket tells a story. "Clothes
have a life that is quite independent of their shape and color," Kennedy
Fraser reminds us in The Fashionable Mind. Get quiet, go within, and be
willing to really listen to the tale that the threads of your life have
woven. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 26

The Unspoken Language of Authenticity To choose clothes, either in a
store or at home, is to define and describe ourselves. ---ALISON LURIE

Most of us do not think we're carrying on a conversation with our
psyches, our families, and the outside world when we get dressed in the
morning, but we are. Alison Lurie tells us in her fascinating book The
Language of Clothes that the vocabulary of our wardrobe conveys much
more than we ever dreamed possible. "Long before I am near enough to
talk to you on the street, in a meeting, or at a party, you announce
your sex, age and class to me through what you are wearing---and very
possibly give me important information (or misinformation) as to your
occupation, origin, personality, opinions, tastes, sexual desires and
current mood. I may not be able to put what I observe into words, but I
register the information unconsciously; and you simultaneously do the
same for me. By the time we meet and converse we have already spoken to
each other in an older and more universal tongue." After you begin
searching for your authentic self, one of your more startling insights
will occur when you discover that for years another woman has been
carrying on conversations for you---at home, at work, in social
situations, even on errands. At first this revelation can be
disconcerting, even discouraging. But on reflection, it can be an
exciting discovery because now that you're beginning to cherish and
channel your authenticity through creative choices, you can learn how to
become not only bilingual but fluent in expressing yourself. As the
famous French fashion designer Gabrielle "Coco" Chanel confessed, "How
many cares one loses when one decides not to be something but to be
someone."

OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 27

Glimmers from the Golden Mirror It is never too late to be what you
might have been. ---GEORGE ELIOT

When I began to embark regularly on the golden mirror meditation to meet
with my authentic self, one of my recurring insights didn't seem very
spiritual but certainly was uplifting. I delighted in discovering that
my authentic self was very well dressed and always managed to look
glorious, whether the occasion of my creative visualization called for a
cotton sweater from the Gap or a wool crepe Giorgio Armani suit. You've
probably also received revealing glimmers from the other side of the
golden mirror. By paying attention to the subtle signals the woman
within is constantly trying to send us, we can learn how to reflect our
own best image, even if our pocketbooks don't match our exquisite taste.
Paying close attention to the nuances, I noticed that simplicity was my
authentic self's signature. Simplicity is also the key to pulling
together and conveying a personal style with panache. It's a woman of
substance's secret weapon. Think of Katharine Hepburn's trousers in the
1930s, Grace Kelly's hair and handbags in the 1950s, Jacqueline
Kennedy's pillbox hats in the 1960s, Lauren Hutton's white T-shirts and
khakis in the 1990s. Understated. Elegant. Chic. Classy. Stunning.
Simplicity is a fashion statement every woman today can make no matter
what her personal style has been in the past. That's because true
simplicity never disappoints. Once you learn that less is more, then
enough becomes plenty, and your entire outlook on life---including
fashion---is transformed. Today, I want to ask you to consider clearing
away the fashion clutter of past incarnations that lurks in your
closets. Just because you bought it once doesn't mean you have to keep
it forever. Be willing to let simplicity pare

down your wardrobe to your authentic essence: identify the clothes you
absolutely love and can't imagine living without. That is all. Merely
consider and identify, while remembering that it is never too late for
you to become the woman you were meant to be. Today you're one step
closer to her. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 28

Clearing: Parting with Fashion Mistakes It's never too late---injiction
or in life---to revise. ---NANCY THAYER

Revising your wardrobe to reflect your authenticity begins when you
ruthlessly part with the fashion mistakes and mismatches that crowd your
closets and confuse your cluttered mind. But let's be realistic for a
moment. Most women I know have to be psyched up before they can tackle a
project like this. Clearing out closets and dresser drawers is daunting
to contemplate (all that money, all those bad choices) and hard work
once you're at it. But few things are as satisfying as bringing order to
a closet in which chaos once reigned. A change of seasons provides the
perfect opportunity to get to work because it's time to pack away winter
clothes and bring out spring and summer ones. With a plan of attack, you
can also clear away the past. Find two hours for this activity; for many
women Saturday afternoon is perfect. Make sure you gather enough boxes
and large plastic garbage bags ahead of time so that after you begin,
your energy won't be scattered by constantly having to leave the room to
find more containers. Play some delightful music; I like Broadway show
tunes for clearing chores. Take a deep breath. Now start by taking
everything out of your closet and putting it on the bed. There, it's too
late to turn back now. Go through your wardrobe, item by item. Try
things on if you're not sure and look at yourself in a full-length
mirror honestly but with compassion. Edit your fashion accessories as
well: jewelry, scarves, purses, hats, shoes. Keep only those things you
love---things that make you look beautiful or feel fabulous. This is
simplicity at work. What if some of the items don't fit you today but
you still love them? Save only one size smaller than you're

wearing now, because getting back into it is a realistic goal and
something to work toward. Consider the various real lives you lead and
the clothes you need for them: work, dress-up, and comfort. If you
haven't worn something in a year, why not? Be willing to part with it,
even if it was expensive. Don't save it unless it has tremendous
sentimental value. For example, I went through a phase a decade ago
where I wore nothing but Laura Ashley. Today the cottage sprig look
doesn't suit me. But because I have so many happy memories of dressing
alike with my daughter, I can't bear to part with my Laura Ashley past,
so it's packed away in the attic for my daughter to consider when she's
older. If you have room to pack away sentimental favorites, then do so.
If you don't, be willing to pass them on to someone else who will love
them as much as you once did. Now take the plunge and give away the rest
to those who will bless your generosity. In return, you'll experience a
sense of grateful abundance when you realize how much you can give away.
This positive attitude is essential for attracting more prosperity into
our lives. One of my friends has come up with a very therapeutic way of
dealing with her expensive discards that her frugal conscious self wants
to hoard. She donates them to a charity for women on welfare who need
nice clothes in order to go on job interviews. This makes it easy for
her to edit her wardrobe because she really is helping other women in a
wonderfully positive way. I might also add, my friend is extremely well
dressed and regularly finds gorgeous clothing at unbelievable markdowns.
She thinks she's just lucky. I think it is the Universe's way of
rewarding her for keeping a cycle of good going. Every woman has fashion
mistakes that clutter up her sense of style and tempt her to whine about
her wardrobe. Clearing our closets of past incarnations provides the
space and freedom for us to choose clothing in the future that
authentically reflects the women we are becoming. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 29

Comfort Clothes and What They Mean I base my fashion taste on what
doesn't itch. ---GILDA RADNER

Most women feel passionately about their comfort clothes. I have a
beloved pair of paisley cotton knit pajamas that I would wear
twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, if I could only figure out
how to get away with it. During the day they wait patiently on a hook in
my bedroom closet; at night they whisper my name. Because I wear these
pajamas so religiously, I wash them often, which is why they have become
as soft as a baby's cheek. Alas, I have searched in vain to find another
pair so that I might have more variety in my "at-home wear" but either
the style or the fabric doesn't quite match the perfection of my
paisley, so the holy quest continues. I used to own a special sweater
that was an incredible silk/cotton blend. I wore it and washed it so
often that it began to unravel at the sides. I wore it anyway. I called
it my lucky literary sweater because the days I wore it were incredibly
productive. This synchronicity occurred because I felt such exquisite
pleasure and experienced such divine comfort all day long that I was
free to be a creative conduit. Finally, when the book I was writing was
completed, my husband beseeched me to discard the ratty old thing. Since
I was known to strangers in our town as simply "the mayor's wife," I
reluctantly agreed. Now one of our cats makes a nest on my lost love in
our basement. Her look of unadulterated bliss at having inherited such a
treasure somewhat alleviates the loss. Somewhat, but not quite. I am
convinced that we are our own best selves in comfort clothes. Somehow,
through the alchemy of fiber and fit, we are once again restored

to Paradise, this time not naked before the Great Creator, but reveling
in the clothes She intended for us to wear. Unfortunately, comfort
clothes exist for most of us only as a footnote to our lives, not center
stage as they would if a sensible woman were in charge of the earthly
scheme of things. Perhaps we feel good for eight hours out of every
twenty-four, but that is not nearly good enough. The rest of the time
we're squeezed into uncomfortable things that pull, pinch, tug, choke,
itch, hike up or down, and make the days of our lives miserable. We wear
these creations of torture, we tell ourselves, in order to be agreeable
to the rest of the world. But why shouldn't we find a way of making the
world agreeable to us instead? This week, play detective. Examine
closely the items in your wardrobe you reach for when in need of
comfort. Look for clues to help you bring more comfort into your life.
What fabrics feel good against your skin? Make a note of it on the small
spiral notebook you're carrying in your purse. What size are you really
comfortable in? Be honest, not vain. It has been my experience that
comfort clothes are usually our true size or even a tad loose. You don't
squeeze into comfort, you slip into something that's more comfortable.
What collar style suits you? Yes, these details make all the difference.
Expand the comfort concept to how you care for your wardrobe. In the
future look for clothes that are easy to maintain---limit labels that
say "Dry clean only." Now see if you can't find clothing that matches
your personal preferences and be willing to wait until you do. Consider
budgeting and saving for quality comfort clothing you can wear all day
long and love for years. The Simple Abundance path encourages us to be
patient until we find what's perfect for us, rather than continue to
waste our money, energy, and emotion settling for second-best or the
second-rate. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 30

Developing a Sense of Style Taste concerns itself with broad, lifetime
progress and never makes mistakes; style moves by fits and starts and is
occasionally glorious. ---KENNEDY FRASER

Celebrating your authentic style through the clothes you wear is an art
form. But like any of the arts, a sense of style is one that needs to be
nurtured after it is initially divined and devised. Style begins when
you seek and discover your strengths, then bank on them for all they're
worth. Personal style flourishes when you realize that you really don't
need as much clothing, accessories, jewelry, or makeup as you once
thought you did because you've got attitude. "We all know style when we
see it---Bogart and Bacall, Garbo and Jackie O., Audrey Hepburn, Lauren
Hutton, Lena Home---all different, and all synonymous with style," Leah
Feldon-Mitchell writes. "Their clothes, however grand or simple,
proclaim not simply taste but intelligence, wit---a little daring. What
you see is self-definition rather than trendiness. Style is the
intersection of what you wear with who you are." Remind yourself today
that you are an artist. In searching for your authenticity you will
uncover your own signature look. It may be the great way you wear hats,
highlight stunning eyes with smoky gray kohl, showcase a chic short cut
with fabulous earrings, show off gorgeous slender legs with sheer
stockings and elegant pumps, or have enough pluck to pair a white cotton
T-shirt with a tailored wool jacket. This year, be willing to experiment
to find out what works for you and what doesn't. Then stick with what
works, no matter what everybody else is wearing. Linda Ellerbee believes
"Styles, like everything else, change. Style

doesn't." Your own sense of style may come in fits and starts, but trust
that it will come and when it does, it will be glorious. OceanofPDF.com

MARCH 31

Never Fall for Fashion, Always Be in Style Fashion fades. Only style
remains. ---COCO CHANEL

Women frequently want to have a mad passionate fling with fashion, but
given a choice, most of us would marry style. That's because style, like
a good man, doesn't let you down. When fashion seduces you, the affair
usually burns itself out before the next season. Fashion is a show-off,
concerned with the cutting edge. Style has seen it all before and knows
that the classic tenets of simplicity, beauty, and elegance have staying
power. Fashion is a cult; style is a philosophy. Fashion mocks
individuality; style celebrates it. Never forget that fashion, while
frequently a charmer, is also a self-centered, frivolous bore. Style is
high-spirited and generous, given to touting your best features for all
the world to see. Fashion is a provocateur; style prefers to soothe.
Fashion is self-congratulatory; style waits for the inevitable
compliments. "Fashion can be bought," Edna Woolman Chase observed in
1954. "Style must be possessed." Fashion guesses, so it can only bluff.
Style knows. Fashion is impatient and eventually passes away. Style is
steadfast and waits for every woman's awakening, because authentic style
is born of Spirit.

Joyful Simplicities for March • If you don't have them growing in your
garden, bring home a bouquet of daffodils, now available in the shops
and from street vendors, to brighten your dining room table.

• Take a spring walk, scout your backyard, or visit a nursery and get
some bare branches for forcing: cherry, crabapple, forsythia, birch. Cut
the ends sharply on a slant and place them in a variety of attractive
containers ---large vases, colorful bottles, pottery jugs, even old milk
cans---filled with tepid water. Use your imagination! Place your
branches in a sunny spot and wait for spring to arrive indoors. • Find a
five-and-dime. Cruise the aisles. You'd be amazed at what they still
sell. Buy some old-fashioned terry-cloth dish towels to replace the
ratty ones in the kitchen or get yourself the kind of mascara you put on
with a brush. For a dime store website, check out the website of Things
from the Attic, www.thingsfromtheattic.com (620-245-5285). • Celebrate
St. Patrick's Day (March 17). Wear green. Try your hand at baking a loaf
of delicious Irish soda bread, along with a supper of corned beef,
cabbage, boiled potatoes, and carrots. Serve with hot tea and cold beer.
For those who don't imbibe, there are marvelous nonalcoholic brews
available that impart the taste but not the buzz of alcohol. Play some
traditional Irish music and dance a jig in your living room. (I'm
serious!) Get a small pot of Irish shamrocks at the greengrocer's for
your desk. • Observe the Vernal Equinox on March 21 with a springtime
dinner of salmon cakes, fresh asparagus, and new potatoes. • Gather
pussy willows, either on a walk or from a florist, and make a seasonal
wreath for your front door. Get a circular wire base at a crafts shop
and overlap branches of pussy willow, securing with florist wire. Add a
festive bow with long streamers to whip in the March winds. • Collect
your favorite affirmations and then record them on your tape recorder in
your own voice. After you've recorded your tape, lie down on your bed,
close your eyes, and play it back using headphones. Do this several
times a week. This is a very powerful tool for transformation. • When
the blues---the secret saboteur---strikes, my favorite homeopathic
defense is to play the original soundtrack to the movie Boys on the Side
(Arista Records) over and over again until I can pick myself up off the
floor and boogie. Whenever I hear Whoppi Goldberg reinvent the Roy
Orbison hit, "You Got It," I hear the voice of my authentic self
reassuring me to just hang in there; I'm not alone. Neither are you.
Listen to The Indigo Girls sing about the "Power of Two" and you'll hear
about the

nurturing relationship you can cultivate with your authentic self. It's
great music that heals on a very deep level. • If you have space, this
is the month to begin sowing flower and vegetable seeds indoors. This is
also the time you must get pansies and primroses. Next month, they'll
all be gone! Gather them in a basket; let their bright little faces
cheer you. • The last week in March is the time to plant a living Easter
basket. Find a pretty pastel-colored Easter basket, line it with pebbles
(or a reusable plastic liner available at gardening centers) and add two
inches of potting soil. Sprinkle fast-growing rye grass seed on top of
the soil and then cover with another quarter inch of soil. Water well
and cover with a brown paper sack for a few days until the seeds
germinate. When the grass sprouts, place the basket in a warm sunny
window and continue to water. In a couple of weeks you'll have a basket
of living grass. Add a bow to the handle and tuck in some painted wooden
Easter eggs and a small stuffed bunny for a charming springtime
centerpiece. This is a delightful hostess gift to make if you're
expected somewhere for Easter dinner. • Have you started a hope chest,
created a toy box, or outfitted a comfort drawer this month? If not, why
not? If money is the reason, select one pleasure and begin slowly with
one small symbolic item. The crucial point is to start self-nurturance
in a tangible way. • How many creative excursions have you gone on this
month? Remember, they don't have to cost a dime---just an investment of
time. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL April, the Angel of the Months. ---VITA SACKVILLE-WEST

Perhaps it's because April is so full of dazzling sunlight. Perhaps it's
because the earth seems greener. Perhaps it's because resurrection is
this month's signature. Is this why our spirits start to soar? Now the
season of darkness diminishes as the season of Light increases in
strength. In the garden, primroses, pansies, violets, tulips, and lilacs
burst with color. Each flower, plant, and bough bears profound witness
to the power of authenticity. This month, on the Simple Abundance path,
we continue to grow gracefully, creatively, and joyously into our
authentic selves, awakening to our own beauty. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 1

Playing Dress-Up: Empowering Your Authentic Self with Fun Learn the
craft of knowing how to open your heart and to turn on your creativity.
There's a light inside of jou. ---JUDITH JAMISON

Today---All Fools' Day---is a day that for centuries has been associated
with high spirits and merriment. It's a perfect day for us to remember
the importance of lightening up. A lighthearted sense of spontaneity is
closely aligned with Spirit. Think of the brother who makes you laugh or
the friend who will call you up and ask you to meet her on the spur of
the moment for an ice-cream cone. Don't you just love to be in their
company? Lighthearted people possess the special gift, as dancer Judith
Jamison tells us, of being able to open up their hearts to life and turn
on their creativity. Perhaps it is because these special people still
honor the child within. This sacred craft of Knowing is one that we can
gradually learn to nurture on the path we have chosen. Children love to
play dress-up. Think of the excitement of a little boy putting together
his costume at Halloween or a little girl lost in the pleasure of
exploring her mother's closet and jewelry box on a rainy afternoon.
Today we're going to play dress-up, too. I love to indulge in this
pastime in the spring and in the fall when I change my seasonal
wardrobe. It's fun to play dress-up by yourself or in the company of an
accomplice, such as your daughter or a close friend. (Be forewarned,
however, that with your daughter, you'll frequently hear enquiries such
as, "Do you still want this?" Yes, you do.)

Look at your pared-down wardrobe with fresh eyes. Small changes can have
a big impact on your look. Try jackets on with different skirts and
pants and see if you can't put together new outfits. Try pairing a lean,
tailored crepe jacket with a flounced skirt. Instead of always wearing
the burgundy print silk blouse you bought to go with your navy suit, try
a white cotton one with a lace jabot and big cuffs. If you normally wear
your collars open, try wearing them closed with a pretty pin at the
neck. A new you? Why not? Now pull your hair back and see what dangle
earrings look like. Get out your shoes. Do you always wear plain pumps
with your suits? What about switching to wedge suede sandals? Work with
whatever you've got. Have fun with this exercise. Think seven years old.
Think "what the heck!" Gail Sheehy tells us that "the delights of
self-discovery are always available." All Fools' Day is the perfect day
to engrave this wisdom in our hearts. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 2

Verve: The Secret of Personal Style The soul should always stand ajar,
ready to welcome the ecstatic experience. ---EMILY DICKINSON

French women are famous for their verve. But Princess Diana, who has a
penchant for selecting colorful suits and stunning hats, certainly
possesses verve. So does Diane Keaton, who introduced women to the
marvels of menswear in 1977 with her signature "Annie Hall" look. A
century before, Emily Dickinson showed verve by preferring to dress
entirely in white, year-round, at a time when most Victorian women
dressed in dark, somber colors. Perhaps Miss Dickinson knew that
expressing verve through her clothing could jump-start the ecstatic
experience she so fervently sought and encouraged others to seek as
well. Verve is the special ability or talent to pull something off with
panache, from a fabulous outfit to an exquisite couplet of poetry. Verve
comes into our lives when we finally trust our instincts. When we take
risks and they pay off. Verve is passion. It's also the secret of
personal style. Verve is focused creative energy, a sense of vitality or
zest. And how do we learn to develop a finely honed sense of verve? By
paying attention to the details. By accepting each day's attempt to
teach us more about our authenticity. By being constantly on the lookout
for the ecstatic experience: what excites us or moves us to tears, what
makes the blood rush to our head, our hearts skip a beat, our knees
shaky, and our souls sigh. "A market stall, a fine Bokhara rug, a scrap
of Chinese embroidery---food for the eye is to be found almost
everywhere," the writer Jocasta Innes urges us to remember.

OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 3

Secret Lives: Gleaning Tips from Our Imaginary Selves Inside myself is a
place where I live all alone and that's where you renew your springs
that never dry up. ---PEARL BUCK

What are you going to be when you grow up? Today, let's think about
paths not yet taken---the paths of our secret imaginary selves. Each of
us leads many lives vicariously and often simultaneously. By
acknowledging our secret lives and tapping into the wisdom of our
imaginary alter egos, we can glean tips to help us develop our own
personal sense of style. If you had ten other lives to lead, what would
you be doing? Every time I listen to Mary Chapin Carpenter, I'm a
country and western songwriter/singer. When I read the mystical monk,
Thomas Merton, I'm a contemplative nun. You might want to be a radio
disc jockey, a mountain climber, a Broadway lyricist, a filmmaker, a
romance novelist, a brain surgeon, a syndicated newspaper columnist, a
psychic, a horticulturist, a holistic veterinarian, or a potter. You get
the drift. So first divine who you'd be if not you. Now write down your
secret selves. How do they live? How do they dress? What can you do to
bring some of the magic of your imaginary lives into your everyday
existence? Brainstorm with your authentic self. For example, I
absolutely adore the colorful style of today's country and western women
singers. I'm drawn to their exuberant extravagance even though my
natural inclination as a communicator is more understated. How to
reconcile fantasy with reality and bring more pizzazz into my life?
Maybe it's as simple as realizing that I'd really love to wear beautiful
red

leather cowboy boots. Because this is a recurring fantasy, I'm now
saving and searching. When I find them (on sale naturally), I'm going to
pair them with a power suit. Look within today and have fun. Maybe red
cowboy boots aren't for you. But one of your secret selves might reveal
a passionate wish. Your secret imaginary lives are full of surprises. Be
open to gleaning their secrets of personal style. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 4

An Elegant Art: Learning That Less Is More For me, elegance is not to
pass unnoticed but to get to the very soul of what one is. ---CHRISTIAN
LACROIX

Many people think that Ludwig Mies van der Rohe, one of the founders of
the modern architectural movement, was the first to declare that "less
is more." Surprisingly, it was the English poet Robert Browning, writing
in 1855. But what applies to architecture and poetry applies equally to
personal style. Elegance is the art of restraint. Famous, wealthy women
known for their chic sense of style keep their looks uncluttered:
comfortable, beautifully tailored suits in neutral palettes for day;
simple, graceful dresses for evening; well-bred accessories that never
overpower but always strike the right note. What sets an elegant woman
apart from the crowd is her quiet self-assurance; she knows that she is
what's worth focusing on, not an armload of golden bangle bracelets.
While money is helpful, most women assume it is an essential for an
elegant style. Gratefully, it's not. "Elegance does not consist in
putting on a new dress," the incomparable Coco Chanel assures us.
Rather, elegance in personal style requires only that a woman major in
the classics: comfort, color, shape, fabric, value, and appropriateness.
Elegance means that clothes never eclipse the woman within but permit
her inner light to shine. In fashion, as in life, knowledge is currency:
you need less when you know more. Here is a fundamental lesson that
every woman can learn if she sets her mind to it.

Perhaps the soul of elegance is a simply abundant state of mind. In
fact, Diana Vreeland believed that "The only real elegance is in the
mind; if you've got that, the rest really comes from it." OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 5

Whom Do You Admire? Undoubtedly, we become what we envisage. ---CLAUDE
M. BRISTOL

Whom do you admire? If you tell me whom you admire, I could probably
tell you a great deal about your hopes, dreams, and personal style---and
I'm not a psychic. "People change and forget to tell each other,"
Lillian Hellman once observed. Very often, however, it's the inner you
who changes and at the speed of light. Problems can arise when your
authentic self and your conscious self don't communicate about the new
direction you are moving in. And they probably aren't communicating if
you're not using an introspective tool like the daily dialogue, the
illustrated discovery journal, or meditation. It's no wonder if you feel
confused and disoriented. Don't panic. This is a healthy sign of new
growth. Here's what I mean. For several years after my first book was
published, I gave workshops and lectures. Because I was the author of a
book on Victorian family traditions, people expected me to look the
part, and I didn't disappoint. However, after I had embarked on the
Simple Abundance path and was keeping an illustrated discovery journal,
I began to notice that a lot of pictures of Lauren Hutton---fabulous in
her simple, chic, uncluttered style---kept popping up on my pages. At
the same time, I was wearing flowery, romantic, fussy clothing and my
hair was long and curly. Gradually I began to feel uncomfortable in my
own body a great deal of the time, as if I were a ghost unable to move
on. Without realizing it consciously, I had been changing within, moving
away from what others expected of me and toward my own true identity.
But I only came to this awareness when simplicity began to show up
visually in my journal. Our authentic selves are

constantly alerting us through subtle clues, such as images of the
people we admire. But authenticity rarely screams at us; it prefers to
whisper. Today you might like to cast your net for inspiration and
consider forming a circle of kindred spirits---women whose personal
sense of style you admire. Clip pictures of the way they dress, wear
their hair, and do their makeup and log them in your discovery journal
the way an explorer logs changes en route. At this point in the process,
don't fret about imitation. Besides its being the sincerest form of
flattery, if you begin to trust your instincts, you'll always remain
true to your own sense of style. Just think of the women you admire as
personal tutors. You're not trying to become them, you're trying to
become your authentic self. After a couple of months, see if you don't
notice a pleasing and revealing pattern that inspires you to grow into
the stunning woman you are within. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 6

Classic Chic 101: The Color Story Adornment is never anything but a
reflection of the self. ---COCO CHANEL

When I lived in London during the early 1970s and wrote about fashion,
the first thing I learned to do was to cover "the color story." This was
because one season the color story would be the "neons," such as
"watermelon" (hot pink) and "key lime" (bright green), and the next
season it would be "earthtones," such as "aubergine" (blackish purple)
and "saffron" (golden yellow). So if you spent a small fortune to be
fashionable, nothing in your closet ever matched. At the European
fashion shows two groups of women stood out on either side of the
runway: those who worked in or covered the fashion industry who were
dressed in black and those the industry was courting---wealthy women
dressed in classic colors. Moral of the story: the fly-by-night colors
touted on the runway, in the shop windows, and on the magazine pages
might dazzle, but the real money knew that style banks on classics. If
you have now begun to rethink your wardrobe and your personal style,
consider the role that color plays in your life. To build a wardrobe
with staying power, invest in classic colors for the foundation---black,
white, navy, gray, beige, camel, tan, khaki, ivory, and the "reds"
including wine and russet. Within this palette are literally a hundred
hues for you to choose from. Classic colors don't limit; they liberate.
You can use color to cultivate and coordinate a chic look with
confidence. This means that the beautifully tailored jacket you buy this
year in a classic color can be worn with a skirt from last year or with
a pair of trousers next year, and so on. With classic colors, your
wardrobe gradually grows and never goes out of style. Now

punctuate your personal style with accent colors that you absolutely
adore and that look best on you. How do you find your best colors?
Experiment and study yourself in the mirror. All of us look better in
some colors than we do in others, depending on our complexions. During
the 1980s, discovering your best colors became a growth industry. Today,
books abound on how to find the colors that flatter, and many adult
extension courses feature classes in personal color selection. Finally,
never underestimate the power of love. Years ago I fell passionately in
love with a black silk scarf featuring beautiful red cherries, deep
golden pears, and dark green foliage. It was so gorgeous it made my
heart race. Although it meant economizing in other areas for a month, I
invested in that scarf, and it became a personal palette that has never
failed to please me. Trust your instincts. If you do, every time you
look into the mirror, you'll be rewarded with a vision of your authentic
self. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 7

Come Alive with Color With color, for the price of a pot of paint,
people can express their own style and individuality. But, as with
style, a gift for color has to be developed by experiment. If you don't
dare, you are doomed to dullness. ---SHIRLEY CONRAN

My first visceral experience of how color could change my life occurred
when I was a teenager. We had moved from New York to a small
Massachusetts town and my parents had bought a beautiful New England
Colonial house built in 1789. Set back from one of the main roads and
surrounded by a stone wall, the exterior of the house was white
clapboard with traditional black shutters, like many of the other
houses. Shortly after we moved in, my mother painted the living room a
vibrant shade of red. This was long before the color red became chic,
and my teenage mind could not fathom what had possessed her. Neither
could our new neighbors. But from the street the sight of the red living
room through the windows framed by the white and black exterior took
your breath away with its beauty. Mother never consulted the family
beforehand, she just followed her instincts and the result was stunning,
which is often the case when we seek and find our authenticity. Even
though I had felt unhappy about moving, I always looked forward to
walking through the front door of our new home. The red room transformed
my attitude. But today my living room isn't painted red. It's a bright,
sunny yellow like Claude Monet's dining room at Giverny, the painter's
home for the last half of his life. We don't get a lot of light from our
living room windows and I wanted to lift our spirits, especially during
the winter. But I never realized how happy I could be surrounded by
yellow until I took a creative

excursion one day several years ago to a fancy home decorative accessory
shop that was new to me. The walls of the shop were painted a fabulous
shade of yellow with dark green trim. I felt as if I were standing in a
beautiful garden instead of a city shop. I was so delighted by the color
scheme that I asked for particulars and immediately went out to get
paint chips. My husband was carried away by my enthusiasm and now our
entire family loves our yellow living room. The colors you wear don't
have to be the same colors you live with. I love to wear red and black,
strong, creative, and dramatic colors, but I need to live with soothing
pastels for comfort and joy. There are many facets to your authentic
self just as there are many facets to a beautiful diamond, and you can
use color to express your many moods. Today, think about the colors you
love. Are you surrounded by them or wearing them? If not, why not? Look
for more ways to come alive this spring with color. Too many of us are
afraid of experimenting with color. Take a creative excursion this week
to a paint store and look at the color spectrum. What are the colors
that speak to your soul? Pick up some chips. Next, go to a fabric store
and find a pattern that catches your eye. Buy a yard of it. Drape it
over a couch or pin it up on a wall. Live with the colors for a month,
then make the fabric into a pillow and paint a room or a piece of
furniture your new hue. Brighten up your desk with colored files, paper
clips, and note pads. Tuck in perky paper napkins when you pack your
lunch. Display produce in a bright ceramic bowl on your kitchen counter
so that you can see nature's vibrant spectrum. When next at an art
museum, collect art postcards to post on a bulletin board or
refrigerator, to place on a desk, and to send to friends. Allow yourself
to be carried away by colorful impulses. The English art critic John
Ruskin believed that "The purest and most thoughtful minds are those
which love colour the most." Let your love of color express the many
hues and shades of your vibrant authentic self. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 8

More Dash Than Cash Good taste shouldn't have to cost anything extra.
---MICKY DREXLER

Suppose your authentic self reveals that she'd like to be outfitted in a
\$1,000 cashmere blazer by Giorgio Armani, and all your budget can
spring for is the Gap on sale? How do you reconcile great taste and
limited money? Micky Drexler, president of the Gap, believes you don't
have to, and I agree. But often, especially on the Simple Abundance
path, we need to come to grips with the fact that our material wants and
our wallets don't match. This poses a delicate dilemma if you've
committed emotionally and intellectually to your spiritual growth.
According to one of Jesus's more unpopular instructions, we're not to
worry about what we wear. (Remember the lilies of the field, who neither
toil nor spin?) But of course, we do. Jesus taught his followers that
they should first seek a Source of power and insight within themselves
and that then everything else would fall into place. Or, as Marianne
Williamson puts it, "Seek ye first the kingdom of Heaven, and the
Maserati will get here when it's supposed to." So will the Armani. In
the meantime, call on your creativity to compensate. Your creativity is
a Spirit-given gift. Perhaps your frustration about not being able to
buy what you want will become the catalyst that sends you to sewing
classes and eventually has you designing your own clothes. Perhaps
you'll learn how to become an educated, sophisticated, savvy shopper.
Seek, we are told, and we shall find, be it a suit or our spirituality.
Once we search within for our own special gift of Spirit, our material
desires will diminish, whether through sewing or savvy seeking. Our
souls divest for us rather than our conscious minds.

OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 9

Affordable Luxury Luxury need not have a price---comfort itself is a
luxury. ---GEOFFREY BEENE

When some women hear of Simple Abundance they mistakenly believe the
path is part of the new and much-heralded frugality movement. This is
not true because the frugality movement of the 1990s is based on fear,
and fear repels abundance rather than attracting it. Instead of
practical wisdom, such as "A penny saved is a penny earned," we are
given parsimonious exhortations to transform dryer lint into Halloween
costumes. Simple Abundance is not about deprivation. Nor is it about
spending more than you can afford in order to make yourself feel better.
For me, Simple Abundance has become a daily meditation on the true
comfort and joy of moderation, as well as gentle instruction on how to
become open to receiving the goodness of Real Life. The Universe is not
stingy. We are. Some of us have very stingy souls. Perhaps not in how we
treat others---our family, friends, and those less fortunate---but in
how we treat ourselves. Yet how can Spirit give more to us if our fists,
hearts, and minds are clenched tight? Simple Abundance is about finally
learning how to release feelings of poverty and lack and replace them
with feelings of prosperity and affluence. One of the ways in which we
can start to experience more affluence in our daily lives is through
pampering ourselves with affordable luxuries. Investing in a cord of
wood for the pleasure of sitting before a blazing fire throughout the
winter is one such luxury. Adding real whipped cream and shaved
chocolate to a cup of cocoa to be drunk before the fire is another; it
transforms a simple pleasure into complete contentment. Affordable

luxuries awaken our awareness to the abundance that's readily available
to us once we finally "get it." Many people think that simplicity frowns
on luxury. The Shakers led lives of utmost simplicity, but "the
Believers," as they were known, also believed in the sublime luxury of
eating well and the importance of using only the freshest ingredients,
inventive spices, and herbs a century before Nouvelle Cuisine. In 1886
one visitor at a Shaker table pronounced his meal "worthy of
Delmonico's," a famous landmark in New York City where the wealthy
dined. Think about affordable luxuries when you think about nurturing
your personal style. What simple pleasures could make you feel more
abundant? Perhaps wearing cashmere socks while you save for a cashmere
sweater twinset; perhaps indulging in the intoxicating pleasure of your
favorite coordinated scent---perfume, body talc, and lotion; the
sensuous feel of silk underwear and pure cotton pajamas against your
skin; investing in a handsome leather bag that goes with everything;
trading in paper tissues for white linen handkerchiefs; getting your
hair done between regular visits for color and cut; encouraging your
nails to grow with a weekly manicure; replacing cheap plastic buttons on
clothing with beautiful ones; enjoying a facial or luxuriating in a body
massage; wearing "special occasion" jewelry like your prized diamond
stud earrings on an everyday basis. Today, declare to the Universe that
you are open to receiving all the abundance it's waiting patiently to
bestow. Each day offers us the gift of being a special occasion if we
can simply learn that as well as giving, it is blessed to receive with
grace and a grateful heart. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 10

Trompe I'oeil: Thrift-Shop Pleasures Beauty is altogether in the eyes of
the beholder. ---MARGARET WOLFE HUNGERFORD

Jennie Jerome Churchill, the famous American beauty and mother of
British prime minister Sir Winston Churchill, believed that "thrift and
adventure seldom go hand and hand." Alas, poor Jennie, whose extravagant
tastes led her to worry constantly about money, did not know where to
shop. Let us speak today of the rapturous joys of recycling. However, I
refer not to bottles and cans, but to the white Liz Claiborne lamb's
wool sweater that's yours for \$ 1 and a trip to the dry cleaners. Or
the gorgeous, genuine Gucci leather handbag that's a steal at \$25, the
black Yves Saint Laurent blazer they gave away for \$5. (Cross my
heart.) There are bountiful bargains with your name on them to be
foraged from thrift shops, consignment stores, and vintage clothing
boutiques. Every sane woman needs to have tried-and-true new-to-you
recyling centers up her sleeve. There are three different kinds for you
to cultivate. First, there are the thrift shops, such as Goodwill and
Salvation Army. Because thrift shops sell merchandise donated to them,
you never know the quality of what you might find, but it's always worth
a look. Upscale consignment shops differ from thrift shops because these
are the places where wealthy women who aspire to be fashionable
discreetly sell off last season's sweethearts. This is where you can
find designer suits, coats, dresses, evening wear, and accessories at a
fraction of their original price. Vintage clothing boutiques stock
one-of-a-kind classics from other decades ---from white cotton Victorian
petticoats to Carole Lombard salt-andpepper tweed trousers from the
1930s. I'd recommend that you gradually

work your way up to vintage clothing boutiques; they can be
intoxicating, rather like drinking port in the middle of the afternoon.
There are a few ground rules to the successful art of trompe I'oeil
("fool the eye") scavenger sorties. First you must be in the right frame
of mind: don't go when you're tired or stressed. You can't rush; you
need to take your time and you need to keep your wits about you. Go
alone so that the experience can take on a meditative quality. Have no
expectations of what you're going to find. Just have a happy expectant
attitude as if you were embarking on a treasure hunt. A favorite
affirmation that I use is "Divine abundance is my only reality and
Divine abundance richly manifests for me in the perfect clothing at the
perfect price." It always does. Finally, you must haunt these hideaways
regularly. New merchandise is always coming in. That black cashmere
turtleneck on your wish list may show up next Tuesday. This week indulge
in a new pleasure: thrifting. The thrill of finding thrift and adventure
together makes them worth the search. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 11

Finishing Touches: The Art of Fashion Accessories Perhaps too much of
everything is as bad as too little. ---EDNA FERBER

Elizabeth Taylor punctuates her personal style with priceless gems;
Anjelica Huston's signature is an armload of gold bracelets; Vogue
editor Anna Wintour is never seen without her dark, glamorous shades,
even when indoors. Her predecessor, Diana Vreeland, believed that a
woman's first fashion accessory should be a pair of perfect black
leather shoes to wear with everything, but the exquisite Coco Chanel
argued for perfume, the "unseen but unforgettable fashion accessory."
Women may be ambivalent about their clothing but they often form
passionate attachments to their accessories: the gold monogrammed pin
your best friend gave you for that landmark birthday, the Donna Karan
opaque black hose that make you feel so sleek and sophisticated, the
silver necklace you got on that fabulous trip to Santa Fe, the brilliant
blue silk scarf your sister brought you back from Paris, the bright
straw Nairobi bag that's the depository of your life. Fashion
accessories are the artifacts of our authenticity. They can have
sentimental value, track our mood swings, endow us with a sense of
security, let our personality shine forth, or sabotage our best efforts.
Because of the emotion we invest in them, in many respects our personal
accessories are even more important than our clothing---they are the
finishing touches that define us. Many famous designers like Bill Blass
think women overdo it with accessories. I disagree. I think many of us
hold ourselves back with our choice of fashion accessories, conforming
to what

we think is acceptable or safe. It feels more comfortable when we color
within the lines. But when a woman lets Spirit guide her as she seeks to
discover and nurture her authentic style, fashion accessories can help
her take small but important risks that increase her self-confidence.
Clothes and accessories pulled together in unexpected ways can be
empowering. Just think of how far Dorothy Gale traveled in blue check
gingham and ruby slippers. Your selection of shoes, hosiery, belts,
scarves, jewelry, hats, gloves, handbags, and fragrance can make a big
difference in helping you announce to the world who you truly are as you
unravel this mystery for yourself. Just remember that fashion
accessories, like your wardrobe, should distill your personal style to
its purest essence. Love wearing it, or leave it off. Finally, never
forget that the most essential fashion accessories, the ones no woman
can afford to do without, come from within. A generous heart, a
spontaneous smile, and eyes that sparkle with delight can be part of any
woman's signature look once she awakens to her authentic beauty.
OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 12

Learning to Love and Honor Your Body The body is a sacred garment. It's
your first and last garment; it is what you enter life in and what you
depart life with, and it should he treated with honor. ---MARTHA GRAHAM

Which comes first, learning to love our bodies or possessing a positive
body image? Either way, it works. If you don't possess a positive body
image---and most of us don't---learning to love your body can help you
develop one. "If you can learn to like how you look, and not the way you
think you look," Gloria Steinem assures us, "it can set you free." The
time has come for us to realize that until we work on increasing our
self-esteem by loving ourselves in small ways, we can't begin changing
ourselves for the better in big ways. We must start by choosing to break
the self-destructive cycle of unrealistic expectations, especially our
own. Starting today, shun the world's ideal of beauty, because it's
constantly changing. Cleopatra longed for varicose veins, Middle Age
beauties padded their bellies. Don't wait for the world to celebrate
you. Carve your own niche. Focus on what's great, forget what's not.
Find joy in your own reflection. Instead of obsessing about a body
that's impossible to achieve without a personal trainer, begin to
discover how you can feel better about living in the one you now
inhabit. Learn firsthand the transforming power of nurture over nature.
Nourish your body with healthy food and pure water. Slow down and
remember to breathe before taking a bite. Breathe out stress and
negativity, breathe in oxygen and positive energy. Rediscover how
marvelous it is simply to move: stretch, dance, walk, run, jump, skip,
play, embrace. Pamper your body with comfortable clothes, quiet moments,
and soothing beauty rituals.

"A woman's relationship with her body is the most important relationship
she'll ever have. More important than husband, lover, children, friends,
colleagues. This isn't selfishness---it's just fact," health and fitness
expert Diana K. Roesch tells us. "The body is, quite literally, our
vehicle for being---for giving, for loving, for moving, for
feeling---and if it doesn't work, it's fairly certain that nothing else
in our lives will work, either." Today, instead of hating your body,
make peace with it. Choose to consciously love and honor the sacred
garment Spirit provided for this lifetime's journey. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 13

The Only Weight-Loss Aid You'll Ever Need Self-love is the only
weight-loss aid that really works in the long run. ---JENNY CRAIG

In the beginning, eating was meant to be one of life's sublime simple
pleasures. But then Eve took a bite out of an apple (so much for the
lowcalorie, low-fat, high-fiber theory), and women have been at war with
food ever since. But food is not our enemy. If we're alive, we're
supposed to love to eat. Food is the source of vital fuel our bodies
convert to energy in order to survive. Not wanting to eat---as in
anorexia or illness---is a signal that something's seriously wrong with
us. Don't fight your hunger. Instead, respect it and respond to it with
nutritious food that appeals to all your senses---not just taste but
sight and smell as well. But trusting our bodies to tell us what they
need is scary for most women. We're afraid that if we throw out all the
diets and eat when we're hungry, we'll never stop and end up in the
Guinness Book of World Records. However, the more we starve ourselves,
the more weight we eventually gain, and then we end up hating ourselves.
Any woman who has been on more than one diet in her life knows this
painful truth. The only way to stop this heartbreaking cycle of
self-loathing is to stop dieting and use our common sense. Eat when
you're hungry, drink when you're thirsty, sleep when you're tired, get
in harmony with your body through regular exercise, and nourish your
soul through prayer and meditation. "Be really whole," the Chinese sage
Lao-Tzu told his followers, "and all things will come to you." Even how
to finally make peace with our weight. Taoism---the Eastern

philosophy of Lao-Tzu---teaches that the only way to be made Whole is to
yield. Yield to the fact that your body answers to a Wisdom that's
higher than wanting to look like the waif on the cover of Vogue. Every
woman has a weight that's ideal for her as opposed to an ideal weight.
This is the weight at which you feel the most comfortable, have the most
energy, can stay well and feel good about how you look. We can achieve
that weight when we begin to trust our bodies. Forget size and abandon
the scale. Instead of weighing yourself, let your favorite clothes tell
you how you are doing. Above all, trust the guidance of your authentic
self. Go within and visualize her. See what weight she carries. Ask her
to help you achieve your perfect weight through the power of Love.
Today, be willing to believe that self-love is the only weight-loss aid
you'll ever truly need, because it's the only one that works.
OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 14

When You Hunger and Thirst The body must be nourished, physically,
emotionally and spiritually. We're spiritually starved in this
culture---not underfed hut undernourished. ---CAROL HORNIG

Many women, including myself, swallow life in an attempt to keep it
manageable. I mean this literally and figuratively. Whenever we're
anxious, worried, nervous, or depressed, without thinking, we
instinctively swallow food and drink in order to push away the
uncomfortable negative experience we're feeling in our guts. We hunger
and thirst, but it's not for a bowl of ice cream or a glass of wine.
It's for inner peace and deeper connection. Carl Jung, the famous Swiss
psychiatrist, believed that alcoholism was a sacred disease. M. Scott
Peck relates in his book Further Along the Road Less Traveled how it
occurred to Jung "that it was perhaps no accident that we traditionally
referred to alcoholic drinks as spirits, and that perhaps alcoholics
were people who had a greater thirst for the spirit than others, that
perhaps alcoholism was a spiritual disorder or better yet, a spiritual
condition." I believe this is also true about compulsive overeating,
which is the addiction of choice for many women. We have such a
passionate appetite for life, we just don't know what we truly need to
satisfy our insatiable cravings for Wholeness. When I first became aware
that when I "swallowed" life I was really hungry and thirsty for joy and
serenity, it was a turning point for me in learning self-nurturance.
Finally, I understood that I wasn't underfed but spiritually
undernourished. I realized I could go within and ask my soul--- my
authentic self---what I needed. I learned to stop and ask myself the

questions "How can I care for you at this moment? How can I love you?
What is it you truly need?" The next time you reach to put something in
your mouth, take one minute to focus your awareness on what you're doing
before you do it. Are you eating because you are physically hungry, or
anxious? If you're anxious, a walk around the block instead of into the
kitchen would be better for you and more loving. At the end of the day,
are you pouring yourself a glass of wine out of habit in order to signal
that it's time to relax? Instead, why not take a few moments to slip
into comfortable clothes, sip a glass of delicious fruit-flavored
mineral water as you prepare dinner, and enjoy the wine with your meal?
Learn to create ceremonies of personal pleasure that can nourish your
deeper longings. As you nurture your spirit with kindness, your physical
cravings will loosen their grip. Realize today that you hunger and
thirst for a reason. Ask your authentic self to reveal your deeper
needs, so that Spirit can quench and satisfy your parched and ravenous
soul. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 15

Discovering the Momentum of Creative Movement The body is shaped,
disciplined, honored, and in time, trusted. ---MARTHA GRAHAM

The world as I know it is divided into two types of women---those who
exercise and those who don't. Those who do exercise seem to have more
energy, less stress, fewer weight problems, and generally a more
positive and optimistic outlook on life. Women who are fit will tell you
that regular exercise is the single most important thing they have ever
done to improve their life. Women who do not exercise don't believe them
and have every excuse in the world for why they can't or won't find out
for themselves: they don't have the time, they're too out of shape,
they're coming down with the flu, it's too cold or too hot, they're too
tired, they're too depressed, maybe next week. I know all about the
women who don't exercise regularly because until recently I've been one
of them, even after being scolded by my doctor and shamed by my family.
We are kindred spirits of the writer Robert Maynard Hutchins who once
remarked that "Whenever I feel like exercise, I lie down until the
feeling passes." This is not good. This is not self-nurturing. This is
not healthy. We know this intellectually. Since we are all brilliant
women, there must be a way in which we can slowly convince our brains to
take better care of our bodies. But this won't happen by imposing a
strict new regime on the stubborn, conscious mind that always manages to
outsmart us. It hasn't worked in the past, so why should it now?

We will change by seduction. Don't refer to the activity as exercise or
fitness any longer. If you must call it something, call it creative
movement. Forget about gyms, jogging, weights, and aerobic classes led
by women with no bones. Think about creative movement as a
life-enhancing, enjoyable pastime, because it is. Just pause for a
moment and imagine all the ways that you could move creatively that
might bring you pleasure: dancing (ballet, jazz, or tap), swimming,
fencing, horseback riding, racquetball, tennis, golf, riding a bike.
What about a mind-body-spirit form of movement such as yoga or the
graceful, ancient Chinese martial art Tai Chi. Now think about taking a
walk in the beautiful sunlight today. Walking is the best form of
creative movement there is, and it doesn't cost a cent. Walking clears
your head, fills your lungs with fresh air, lets off steam, builds up
strength and centers your spirit. Start moving, a step at a time, step
after step. The positive momentum will take it from there. Trust me,
seduction works. Once upon a time I was kicking and screaming all the
way to fitness. Now I'm doing deep breathing and stretching with gentle
yoga movements and engaging in walking meditations. I feel better and
I'm ready to move on. Diana Roesch assures us, "With enlightenment and
self-awareness, we can reguide and realign our whole selves: our bodies,
by finding new ways of moving and celebrating them and by adding good
food in amounts they tell us they need; our souls, our sense of
ourselves as good and worthwhile, by connecting them to the earth and to
each other." OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 16

Walking as Meditation I will tell you what I learned myself. For me a
long, five- or six-mile walk helps. And one must go alone and every day.
---BRENDA UELAND

A long as I approached walking as exercise, I never made it past the
front door. But one day I was so anxious I felt as if I would jump out
of my skin, and so I bolted out of the house at lunchtime as if I were
leaving the scene of a crime. Filled with disappointments, painful
memories, and my own unrealistic expectations from the past---terrified
of what the future held and the changes that were inevitable---the only
safe place for me was the present moment: my foot against the pavement,
the wind on my face, my breath entering and leaving my body. Forty
minutes later I stopped, discovered to my amazement that I was on the
other side of town, and headed back home, calm and centered. I have been
walking ever since. Slowly I am learning what Henry David Thoreau knew:
"It requires a direct dispensation from Heaven to become a walker." But
I still don't walk for exercise. Instead, I walk regularly for my soul
and my body tags along. There are different reasons for walking---to
increase the heart rate and build strength, to solve a creative problem,
to finish that argument with yourself or someone else, to saunter and
wake up to the world around you, and to meditate, I walk for all of
them, but most days I go on walks for a "moving meditation"---fitness of
the spirit. I try to quiet the voices in my head, take long strides, and
concentrate on the slow, steady rhythm of my breath, comforted by the
interior silence. Suddenly my reverie might be broken by the sound of
birds singing, a dog barking, or the sight of a pretty garden. Thoreau
complained of walking sometimes "without getting there in spirit.... The
thought of some work

will run in my head and I am not where my body is---I am out of my
senses." This happens to me as well, but I have learned to train myself
to return my awareness slowly to the physical act of walking, for here
in the present moment, one step at a time, I have found peace. If you
have had difficulty sitting down to meditate, you might like to give a
walking meditation a chance, especially now that the beautiful weather
has returned. Take into consideration your preferences---if you are not
a morning person, take a walk at midday, in the late afternoon, or after
supper under the stars. Even if you work in a city during the day, you
can break at lunch and take a walk. No one needs to know that you've
shut the world out and are meditating as you stroll down the street.
Twenty minutes to a half-hour every day is a good amount of time to
restore a sense of serenity. I have found there is no wrong way to do a
walking meditation. Sometimes we expect to experience immediate
transcendence and are disappointed when it seems as if nothing is
happening. Let go of expectations and life will unfold, step-by-step.
OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 17

Making Peace with Your Hair Genius is of small use to a woman who does
not know how to do her hair. ---EDITH WHARTON

A woman's hair has for centuries been called her "crowning glory," but
every woman I know speaks of her intimate relationship with her hair as
a nightmare. I don't know any woman personally who really loves her
hair, just women who cope. Hair is a living, powerful, mercurial,
metaphysical energy force to be respected, reckoned with, and reconciled
to, but it cannot be controlled any more than atomic fusion.
Occasionally, it can be cajoled into becoming conduct (we refer to these
lapses as "good hair days") but it can never be coerced. Think of all
the money, time, creative energy, and emotion we invest in our hair. Yet
most of the time it insists on expressing its authenticity, not
necessarily ours. I don't know about you, but I'm exhausted from the
mini skirmishes I wage with life every day, and the battle with my hair
is not the least of them. Most of us exist under a collective
hallucination Naomi Wolf calls "the beauty myth." We have all been
brainwashed into believing that if we can just get the right shampoo,
conditioner, perm, color, and cut, our hair will finally behave like
that of the women in the display professions---television, film, and
fashion---who, by the way, do not style their own hair. We would all
have, if not fabulous, then at least presentable heads if we had a
professional hair stylist on call every day, or at least whenever we
appeared in public or in print. But that's not real life for me, nor
probably is it for you. At home, my hair never looks the way it does
when I come from my monthly appointment with the hairdresser. This is
because I have yet to

learn how to simultaneously hold a blow-dryer and a curling brush in two
hands and do whatever it is my stylist does as she swirls about me in
the salon. So at home I have given up trying. I wash it, mousse it, let
it dry, and then curl it with electric curlers and a curling iron. Some
days it looks wonderful; other days it looks woebegone, and yet the
process is virtually the same. Hair humbles us, and we need to make
peace with it. The way we do this is to accept it and acknowledge its
personality: whether it's thick or thin, coarse or fine, straight or
curly; the way it breaks when permed, is getting gray, or insists on
parting down the middle. Getting to know your hair and working with it
instead of constantly fighting it is the first step toward rapprochement
and peace of mind. While my authentic self wears her hair in
shoulder-length, Pre-Raphaelite blond waves, I've had to reconcile
myself to the fact that I can't have wavy, blond tresses until they
invent a perm that doesn't frizz color-treated hair (and they haven't).
So I've chosen color over curl. Always it comes down to creative choice.
If you're currently unhappy with your hair, start patiently searching
for pictures of hairstyles you like and bring those pictures to a hair
stylist recommended by your friends for a consultation first. Have a
conversation about the reality of your hair versus your fantasy about
your hair. Consider the time you are willing to spend working with it
every day. This is very important. See if you can't arrive at some
middle ground that will make you happier. If you're thinking of
something drastic, such as going from long hair to short, place pictures
of the new hairstyle on your mirror for a couple of weeks so that you're
familiar with the change before it happens. It won't be so much of a
shock then. Above all, try not to give in to impulse. We all have days
when we scream, "I've got to do something with my hair," but those
aren't the days on which to do it. Remember, the hair you know is easier
to handle than the hair you don't. But be open to change because there
are few joys in life that can equal finally finding a becoming hair
style. And if the worst happens, after you dry your eyes, remember it's
only hair. It will grow again and you will have become wiser. Above all,
learning to accept your hair is part of the process of learning to love
yourself. The poet Marianne Moore believed that "Your thorns are the
best part of you," and she was right. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 18

The Face in the Looking Glass The most beautiful makeup of a woman is
passion. But cosmetics are easier to buy. ---YVES SAINT LAURENT

Who do you see when you look at the face in the looking glass? Are you
beginning to see your authentic self? Are you becoming more comfortable
with the uniquely beautiful face that stares back at you? I hope so. But
this growth of self-acceptance and self-love is slow and very subtle,
especially after years of benign neglect. One of the ways that we can
begin to love our faces is to enhance them with makeup. I have gone
through many stages with makeup. There was a time during my twenties
while I was working in fashion and theater, when I wouldn't have dreamed
of walking out the door without my war paint on. For me, makeup was a
sophisticated mask that endowed me with selfconfidence. Then, in my
thirties, after I had married, had my daughter, and spent so much time
at home writing, I stopped wearing makeup except when I went out with my
husband in the evening. It was a relief to stop wearing cosmetics
because doing so gave me an opportunity to learn to feel comfortable
with my features. The world I had come from had been so selfabsorbed and
obsessed by appearances. Now I was getting in touch with the inner woman
and not concentrating on her outer packaging. But gradually, I noticed a
difference in the way I felt about myself without makeup. When I put it
on, I liked the reflection in the mirror. When I didn't, I rarely
looked. I began to become aware of the fact that looking your best,
working with what you have, and bringing out your natural beauty with
makeup was not as superficial a goal as I had originally thought. Makeup
was simply a tool to help me look my best. When I looked my best, I felt
better. When I felt

better, I had more energy and accomplished more and was more outgoing.
When I accomplished more and reached out more to others, they responded
positively and my self-esteem grew. Making up my face again began a
selfaffirming cycle of acceptance. But more important, it began a
ceremony of self-nurturing. I began to see that the ten minutes I took
in the morning to put my best face forward for myself and not the world
was a small but important way of nurturing my authenticity. Even the
ritual of putting makeup on, when it comes from the heart, can be
spiritual. Today when you glance in the looking glass, bless the face
that stares back at you and put on some lipstick. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 19

Spring Rituals of Replenishment Let your mind be quiet, realizing the
beauty of the world, and the immense, the boundless treasures that it
holds in store. All that you have within you, all that your heart
desires, all that your nature so specially fits you for---that or the
counterpart of it waits embedded in the great Whole, for you. It will
surely come to you. Yet equally surely not one moment before its
appointed time will it come. All your crying and fever and reaching out
of hands will make no difference. Therefore do not begin that game at
all. ---EDWARD CARPENTER

This is the season of renewal and replenishment. What better way to
begin than to meditate on English poet Edward Carpenter's assurance that
all our needs will be satisfied by the great Whole. Whatever we are
waiting for--- peace of mind, contentment, grace, the inner awareness of
Simple Abundance---it will surely come to us, but only when we are ready
to receive it with an open and grateful heart. While you are waiting
patiently, take comfort and joy in simple springtime rituals of
rejuvenation. A favorite of mine is to search for a new sacred space out
in the world. This reminds me that we carry our serenity with us. A
shady grove of trees in an old cemetery, a beautiful public garden
that's new to you, a museum gallery, the stacks of an old library, the
hush of a quiet chapel where you can light a candle, even an outdoor
cafÉ where you can sit basking in the sunshine can help you realize the

boundless treasure and spiritual replenishment of a perfect solitary
hour. Joseph Campbell tells us that "Sacred space and sacred time and
something joyous to do is all we need. Almost anything then becomes a
continuous and increasing joy." OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 20

Taking the Cure: Bathing Pleasures There must be quite a few things a
hot hath won't cure, but I don't know many of them. ---SYLVIA PLATH

Every woman should be aware that there is a significant difference
between bathing and taking a bath. Bathing is merely cleansing, but you
can remove grime and sweat in a shower for heaven's sake! Taking a bath,
as the Victorian social critic Ambrose Bierce described it, is "a kind
of mystic ceremony substituted for religious worship." I believe in the
rejuvenating power of hydropathy as a positive adjunct to psychotherapy.
A century ago water cures were all the rage to combat the "new American
nervousness" or "neurasthenia" which began to sweep the country as our
great-great-grandparents adjusted to the relentless intrusion of
technology into their lives and the resulting disruptions of "hectic
modern living" in the form of telephones and electricity. Victorians
would flock to spas to drink mineral waters and take medicinal dunks to
cure the fidgetiness and racing pulses of anxiety attacks, insomnia,
depression, and headaches. Today, we can "take the cure" in the privacy
of our own bathrooms. And being possessed of common sense, we should do
it daily. Do not underestimate the blessings of a bath. It can calm your
mind, relax your tired, tense body, and soothe your stressed spirit. It
can help you drift off to the exquisite relief of sleep or wake you up
and help you greet the day with enthusiasm. My philosophy in life is
very simple: when in doubt, take a bath. Close the door, run the tap,
pour in the bath salts or essential oils, lay out the fluffy towels, tie
your hair back, and shut out the world by sinking into

the tub. To my mind, baths are as necessary for spiritual replenishment
and centering as is prayer and meditation. In fact, a proper bath is one
of the best ways of meditating, for once you're submerged in delicately
scented warm water, where else would you want to be except in the
present moment? Try bathing accompanied by candlelight, classical music,
a cold drink, or a good book (nothing too strenuous), or just let the
soothing silence envelop you as the ripple of more hot water splashes
against your toes. Begin to indulge in collecting accessories to make
your bath more sublime: a long-necked scrub brush, an inflatable pillow,
a bath tray. When people ask you what you want for your birthday,
holiday, or Mother's Day, tell them pampering bath-products; that way
you'll always have an assortment on hand. There is a dazzling array of
scented salts, oils, powders, bubble baths and milk baths available now.
Start to find your favorites and think of them as affordable luxuries.
"I can't think of any sorrow in the world that a hot bath wouldn't help,
just a little bit," Susan Glaspell wisely wrote in TheVisioning in 1911
(probably while sitting in a tub), and she knew what she was talking
about. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 21

Aromatherapy: The Restorative Comfort of Fragrance Smells are surer than
sounds and sights to make heartstrings crack. ---RUDYARD KIPLING

Skeptics make the best seekers. I came to this realization when I
discovered the restorative comfort and healing properties of
fragrance--- aromatherapy---on the recommendation of a trusted friend
who is a college vice president by day, and a mystic by night. But until
I tried it for myself and became a convert to the simple pleasure and
power of scent to heal my body, mind, and spirit to enhance my moods and
relieve stress, I thought aromatherapy---the ancient therapeutic art of
blending essential oils or extracts distilled from aromatic flowers,
plants, herbs, and fruit for medicinal purposes---was New Age
hocus-pocus. Actually, it has been a part of the medical practices of
the world's great civilizations, including those of ancient Egypt and
Rome, for thousands of years. Why? Because it works. I've personally
discovered that lavender oil massaged on my temples will rid me of a
headache, and that, instead of brewing another cup of caffeine when I
need an energy boost, I can diffuse into the air an inhalation of
essential oils to pick me up: basil (to stimulate the brain), rosemary
(to activate memory), peppermint (to provide mental clarity and
sharpness), and sage (to act as a tonic for mental fatigue and strain).
As I write this, an invigorating inhalation sits on my desk, pleasing
and inspiring me. Here's how aromatheraphy works. Our sense of smell is
our primordial link to our brains. When we inhale a scent,
neurotransmitters in our brains trigger the production of biochemical
secretions that affect our moods,

feelings, and emotions. When an aromatic essential oil permeates our
skin through the bath or a massage, the oil penetrates the epidermis,
stimulates our sophisticated lymph duct system, and enters the
bloodstream, eventually delivering well-being to our frazzled minds. You
can use aromatherapy in many different ways. A body or facial massage
will make you feel like a new woman. Alternatively, you may want to
infuse the air surrounding you with fragrance. You can place a few drops
of essential oil (choosing the oil according to your need) and water in
a ceramic diffuser or potpourri pot that is warmed by a candle. You can
drop a mixture of essential oils in a tub of hot water for a
personalized bath or sprinkle oil on a cotton handkerchief and pull it
out as needed, breathing in fully, deeply, and slowly to encourage
relaxation during the day. You can also burn incense when you meditate
or light a scented candle in your bedroom as you read and relax at
night. Today, allow yourself to become curious about the soothing
spiritual replenishment offered by aromatherapy. Helen Keller tells us
that "smell is a potent wizard that transports us across thousands of
miles and all the years we have lived." The restorative comfort and
power of fragrance also has the ability to enhance the days to come.
OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 22

Sensory Awakening Nothing can cure the soul but the senses, just as
nothing can cure the senses but the soul. ---OSCAR WILDE

We were created to experience, interpret, and savor the world through
our senses---our ability to smell, taste, hear, touch, see, and intuit.
Although we are sentient beings with the capability "to perceive the
world with all its gushing beauty and terror, right on our pulses," as
poet, pilot, author, explorer, and naturalist Diane Ackerman tells us in
her exquisite evocation A Natural History of the Senses, most of us
journey in a dull trance, asleep to the Mystery of everything about us.
In order for us to awaken and "to begin to understand the gorgeous fever
that is consciousness, we must try to understand the senses," Ackerman
urges. "The senses don't just make sense of life in bold or subtle acts
of clarity, they tear reality apart into vibrant morsels and reassemble
them into a meaningful pattern." For the next week, I'm going to ask you
to pause a moment each day with me and marvel at the natural gifts that
have been so richly bestowed on us. George Eliot (the pen name of the
nineteenth-century writer Mary Ann Evans) believed that "If we had keen
vision and feeling for all ordinary human life it would be like hearing
the grass grow and the squirrel's heart beat, and we should die of the
roar which lies on the other side of silence. As it is, the quickest of
us walks about well wadded with stupidity." Today, look at the blue sky,
hear the grass growing beneath your feet, inhale the scent of spring,
let the fruits of the earth linger on your tongue, reach out and embrace
those you love. Ask Spirit to awaken your awareness to the sacredness of
your sensory perceptions.

OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 23

The Scent of a Woman For the sense of smell, almost more than any other,
has the power to recall memories and it's a pity that we use it so
little. ---RACHEL CARSON

We each have our own scent, as distinctive as our DNA. It's a deeply
personal bouquet of diet, hormones, hygiene, and health. Napoleon once
wrote his wife, Josephine, and told her "not to bathe" because he was
coming home in three days and adored her natural aroma. When my daughter
was younger and I went away on business trips she would sleep on my down
pillow and underneath my down-filled comforter because they "smell like
you, Mommy." After my father died five years ago, my mother gave me his
handkerchiefs. I keep one in my bedside table drawer and when I press it
up to my nose I am comforted once again by his immediate presence as
scent memories convey his love across time, space, and eternity. Our
homes have their own particular scent, too. The aroma of freshbaked
bread, lemon-scented furniture polish, cat dander, damp dogs, mud on the
doormat, laundry in the hamper. The scent of coffee, bacon, and ripening
fruit in the kitchen; soapsuds in the bathroom; rumpled sheets in the
bedrooms; fresh flowers, potpourri, burning logs, and newsprint in the
living room. "Smells spur memories, but they also rouse our dozy senses,
pamper and indulge us, help define our self-image, stir the cauldron of
our seductiveness, warn us of danger, lead us into temptation, fan our
religious fervor, accompany us to heaven, wed us to fashion, steep us in
luxury," Diane Acker man reminds us. And if we lost our sense of smell,
if suddenly we experienced anosmia, as do two million Americans? We
would find ourselves bereft and cast

adrift without the internal sextant of scent. Today, let us delight in
the simple pleasure of our sense of smell. Indulge yourself with comfort
aromas. Take a creative excursion to an Italian market; visit a Chinese
restaurant for lunch; browse through a used-books store; stop by the
perfume counter of a large department store and inhale delight. Lie on
the fresh grass in the backyard, turn over the earth in the garden, bury
your nose in a bouquet of lily of the valley (which should be blooming
about now) and smell the sweetness of spring. Take a walk in the woods,
a garden, or your neighborhood after it rains; go to a farmer's market
and gather aromatic herb plants---rosemary, sage, lemon verbena,
tarragon, mint, bay, and fresh lavender---for a kitchen-shelf garden;
put a scented geranium in the bathroom. Cook plum tomatoes, garlic,
onions, sausage, and peppers in olive oil to go on fresh pasta for
dinner tonight; simmer cloves, orange rind, cinnamon, and apples on the
back burner for a delightful fragrance, experiment with blending your
own potpourri; enjoy a scented bath and then a dusting of our earliest
scent memory, Johnson's Baby Powder. The world around us possesses
exquisite smells that can stir our memories, color our emotions, and
transform our feelings and moods. So sacred was the power of scent that
God instructed Moses to build an altar of fragrance and to burn sweet
incense when he prayed. Today, when you inhale something wonderful,
offer a prayer of thanksgiving for this marvelous gift. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 24

A Taste for Living I wish you all manner of prosperity, with a little
more taste. ---ALAIN-RENÉ LE SAGE

Taste is the younger sister of our sense of smell, dependent on her
sibling's guidance for a head start but eager to strike out on her own
as soon as she's able. Diane Ackerman tells us in A Natural History of
the Senses that a child has more taste buds than adults (who have 10,000
taste sensors located in the mouth, primarily on the tongue but also on
the palate, pharynx, and tonsils). Amazingly, our taste buds wear out
and regenerate every ten days, although, when we enter middle age, they
don't regenerate as frequently as we might wish. The idea that our
senses become jaded as we get older---requiring new and fresh
awakening---is alas, correct. The word taste, from the old English word
tasten, meaning to touch and test, has always had a double meaning. In
exploring and celebrating the simple pleasure of this intensely personal
sense, we should look at both interpretations. The primary definition of
"taste" describes the sensory faculty that enables us to distinguish
substances dissolved in the mouth as sweet, sour, bitter, or salty. But
the other definition of "taste" describes the mental faculty by which we
discern or appreciate things for the joy they bring us. Today let us
explore ways to increase our capacity for pleasure---our taste for
life---by delighting in this simple, yet highly sophisticated sense.
First, hunt out unusual (for you) ethnic grocery stores in your
neighborhood (Caribbean, Oriental, Indian or Pakistani, Italian, Cajun,
German, Hispanic, kosher, or soul food). Be open and curious. There's a
world of delicious morsels out there waiting to be discovered and
savored.

Inhale the vibrant aromas and bring home something wonderful, new, and
different to cook for dinner this week. Next, clean out your spice
cabinet. This is both symbolic and necessary. Variety, after all, is the
spice of life, and fresh spices provide our sense of taste with variety.
I had not taken the time to clean out my spice cabinet from the time we
moved into our home until I embarked on the Simple Abundance path and
was trying to introduce more order into my daily affairs. I reveal this
pathetic, embarrassing truth in astonishment and wonder, primarily
because, when I tackled my spice cabinet, I was flabbergasted to
discover that I possessed eleven cans of poultry spice and eleven cans
of pumpkin pie spice. Do you have any idea how much space twenty-two
spice containers occupy? Now it does not take Miss Marple to deduce what
had occurred in the life of the woman in charge of this kitchen. Every
Thanksgiving since 1981 she had purchased new cans of poultry and
pumpkin pie spice. Why did she purchase new tins? Was it because, as a
renowned gourmet chef, she was extremely fastidious about the pungency
of her spices? I don't think so. It was because as a frazzled,
disorganized homecarer, she hadn't a clue she had spices left over from
the previous year and of course didn't want to be caught short. Learn
from this sorry story. Somehow I suspect I am not the only woman in
America with numerous souvenirs of Thanksgiving Days past. And the
reason we need to clean our spice cabinets is to make room for fresh
ones (in case you're wondering, cardamom and coriander seed fossilize
after a decade) because we're going to use them to reawaken our sense of
taste. Think of Indian curry, rice, and mango chutney for dinner soon or
a pan of lasagna redolent of basil, oregano, and garlic, or a pot of
Southwestern chili. Supposedly the dying words of the famous
nineteenth-century frontiersman Kit Carson were "Wish I had time for one
more bowl of chili." Thank God we do. Bon appetit! OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 25

On a Clear Day You Can See Forever The greatest thing a human being ever
does in this world is to see something.... To see clearly is poetry,
prophecy and religion, all in one. ---JOHN RUSKIN

I 've reached that awkward stage in my life when I can't see with my
glasses on or with them off, so I constantly carry them around with me
and momentarily panic whenever I've misplaced them. As my middle-aged
eyesight changes, I've become acutely aware of how precious our ability
to see clearly is. A friend of mine, Susan Abbott, is an extraordinary
artist who creates panoramic watercolors that are breathtaking in their
exquisite detail. Her eyes and hands apprehend a visual catalog of a
woman's daily life with astonishing attention to the subtle
nuances---nothing is too insignificant or uninspired for Susan's
attention. Like a brilliant photograph, her still-life arrangements
seize a moment in time to dazzling effect. Artists especially hold
sacred the sense of sight. Pablo Picasso once said, "If only we could
pull out our brain and use only our eyes" we would be amazed at the
world around us. Paul Klee, the Swiss artist, declared, "One eye sees,
the other feels." As Paul CÉzanne grew older he doubted his powers of
perception and worried that the authenticity of his art might be a quirk
of nature. Because he had trouble with his eyesight he wondered if the
unique way of seeing the world which he captured on canvas in
painstaking single brushstrokes might be mere accident instead of
genius. But perhaps Georgia O'Keeffe expressed it best when she observed
that "In a way nobody sees a flower really, it is so small, we haven't
the time---and to see takes time, like to have a friend takes time."

To see takes time. We haven't the time. Here is the unrelenting truth
and it's chilling to the soul. Most of us have been given a miraculous
gift---the ability to see---but we don't take the time to do more than
glance around. We take our sense of sight for granted. A dear friend of
mine has been having some serious trouble with her eyesight and as she
shares her worries with me about losing it, I feel helpless. What she
laments losing is being able to drive the car pool or take her children
to the dentist, to do her grocery shopping, try out new recipes, read
the newspaper, see the faces of those she loves, put on her makeup.
Infinitesimal, precious moments that make up the days of our lives.
Today, really look around at your world---your family, your home, your
pets, your co-workers, and the strangers on the street. Smile at
everyone you meet because you can see them. Never forget that the gift
of vision was so important that when God created the world, the first
command was for Light in order to see, and after the Great Creator was
finished with each day's task, He glanced back on his handiwork and "saw
that it was good." We need to see how good it is, too. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 26

Major and Minor Chords of Pleasure With stammering lips and insufficient
sounds, I strive and struggle to deliver right the music of my
nature.... ---ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

Most of us who luckily possess all our senses think that if we had to
lose one, the most terrible deprivation would be the loss of sight. But
Helen Keller, who became blind and deaf after a mysterious fever at
nineteen months of age, mourned the loss of her hearing more than her
sight. The writer Hannah Merker tells us in her moving meditation on
losing the sense of hearing, Listening, that "Psychologists say that
deafness, or a severe hearing loss, acquired after a human being has
known hearing, can be the single greatest trauma a person can
experience." Eleven years ago I was at lunch with my almost-two-year-old
daughter in our favorite fast-food restaurant when a large ceiling panel
fell and struck me in the head and sent me crashing into the table. I
sustained a head injury that left me partially disabled for nearly two
years. During the first three months of recuperation I was confined to
bed and my senses were all skewed. My eyesight was very blurry, I was
extremely sensitive to light, and even seeing the different patterns of
the quilt on our bed disturbed my sense of equilibrium so much that we
had to turn it over to the plain muslin backing. I couldn't read or
comprehend words on a page. But the most disorienting disability was
that my sense of hearing was affected. I could not listen to music
because it made me dizzy. I couldn't even carry on a telephone
conversation because, without visual clues such as reading lips, I could
not process the sounds coming through my ears and rearrange them into
meaningful patterns in my brain.

These unsettling side effects lasted for quite a while, but over a
period of eighteen months my senses gradually returned---for which I'm
deeply grateful. I share this story with you because I want you to
consider how much we take for granted until we lose it, either
temporarily or permanently. It deeply saddens me that many of us need to
have pain as a wake-up call. Now I try my best not to stand on the
sidelines of life with deadened, dulled, disinterested senses until
another shock makes me suddenly aware of the magic, marvel, and the
mystery of it all. And so should you. Kate Chopin wrote in 1900, "I
wonder if anyone else has an ear so turned and sharpened as I have, to
detect the music, not of the spheres, but of the earth...." Among my own
favorites: the reassuring rhythm of my husband's breathing in the middle
of the night when I can't sleep; hearing "I love you" and "We're home,"
along with footsteps on the stairs; the voice of a good friend on the
telephone; raindrops on the roof; cats purring; dogs thumping their
tails; teakettles whistling; the melody of words strung together to form
a sentence that stirs the imagination and illuminates the soul; the
exquisite sounds of silence cascading over me when I momentarily let go
and allow the Universe to proceed without my assistance or supervision;
and music---music to soothe, inspire, and move me in unexpected waves of
sublime pleasure. The concerto of Real Life is playing: delight with
thanksgiving in the major and minor chords of its beautiful refrain.
OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 27

Reach Out and Touch Someone O world invisible, we view thee, O world
intangible, we touch thee, O world unknowable, we know thee. ---FRANCIS
THOMPSON

Touch is the first physical sense we experience as strange hands pull us
from the dark realm of the soul into the cold, harsh light of earth.
After the security and warmth of the womb, frigid air assaults our
fragile, naked bodies until we find comfort in our mother's arms with
the sense of touch guiding our first few conscious moments. For many
people touch is also the last sense we experience as we depart this
world---the squeeze of a loved one's hand. Sight, smell, hearing, and
taste have gone before us. "The first sense to ignite, touch is often
the last to burn out," Frederich Sachs tells us, "long after our eyes
betray us, our hands remain faithful to the world." We describe our mood
swings as "feelings" and when something strikes a deep, sentimental
chord in us we say we were "touched." When we feel alienated,
fragmented, and adrift, we often refer to this estrangement as "losing
touch with reality." Bumper stickers ask, "Did you hug your child
today?" And did you? Because we all need to be hugged and touched, not
just to thrive but to survive. A good friend of mine, a hardworking
single mother of two boys, regularly treats herself to a therapeutic
aromatherapy facial and body massage. She budgets for it in her monthly
expenses and thinks of it as preventive medicine---not covered by her
health insurance but vital to her peace of mind and sense of well-being.
She once explained to me that as her life is now---barren of
intimacy---she's rarely touched and she often felt overwrought, ill, and
deprived until she realized that what she needed was

therapeutic touching. Since she started her monthly massage treatments
she's hardly been sick and has enormous amounts of energy which she
needs for the extremely busy and demanding life she leads. She says that
the healing effects of a massage can last up to three weeks and then
it's time for another session. "You should try it," she urged me, but
being practical and sensible (so I thought), I didn't, until she gave me
a body and facial massage as a gift for my birthday several years ago.
Here's how I became a complete "sensuist" (someone who delights in
sensory experiences, as opposed to a "sensualist," someone who is
excessively concerned with physical gratification). Take one
stressed-out woman and isolate her in a tranquil massage room for one
hour. Now, awaken her physical senses with the scent of the aromatic
essential oils; the hypnotic stroking of her face and body (especially
the massaging of her feet and toes); the beautiful strains of
Pachelbel's "Canon" playing softly in the background; the sight of
shafts of sunlight dancing on the wooden floors; and the refreshing
taste of sparkling mineral water and lemon in her mouth after the
sublime massage session is over. My first massage was a mesmerizing way
to encounter the passage of time: when it was over I felt such peace,
joy, and relaxation it was as if I had been drinking champagne for
breakfast or having a transcendental experience. This naturally produced
euphoria lasted for many hours and that night I enjoyed the sleep of the
innocent. The next day I felt ready to take on the world. During the
1980s, a popular advertising campaign for AT&T urged us to "reach out
and touch someone." Today, reacquaint yourself with this powerful,
life-enhancing physical sense so often disregarded. Embrace your
children, stroke their hair, cradle them in your arms (no matter how big
or squirmy they are), kiss your lover, caress your pets, experience the
feel of different fabrics against your skin---do you prefer silk or fur
or lamb's wool? Enjoy a sensuous, warm, scented bath, then sleep in the
nude on fresh cotton sheets. (And if you don't sleep alone be prepared
for what might follow.) Think about treating yourself to a therapeutic
body or facial massage. Call up a salon and find out the cost (the
average session is about \$50), and save \$5 a week until you can afford
it. Don't feel guilty! Think of a massage the way you would think of
getting your teeth cleaned, your hair

styled, or a new pair of eyeglasses---occasional but necessary outlays
to maintain your physical well-being. The English poet William
Wordsworth wrote, "She seemed a thing that could not feel/The touch of
earthly years." Let us become women who embrace our portion of earthly
years with a passion by delighting in our sense of touch. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 28

The Intuitive Sense Intuition is a spiritual faculty, and does not
explain, but simply points the way. ---FLORENCE SCOVEL SHINN

Intuition has been called our "sixth sense" and is often an ability
ascribed to women. The English writer D. H. Lawrence believed that the
intelligence that "arises out of sex and beauty is intuition," while
anthropologist Margaret Mead concluded that feminine intuition was a
result of our "agelong training in human relations." I'm not here to
debate the existence of an intuitive power---the capacity to know
something without rational evidence that proves it to be so---because I
know that it exists. So do you. The question that interests me today is:
do you use your intuition? Have you learned how to fine-tune the inner
instinct that is constantly transmitting signals to you? Think of
yourself as a radio. Is your dial set clearly on the intuitive station
so that you can receive the information you need when you need it, or
are you just picking up static? Intuition is the subliminal sense Spirit
endowed us with to maneuver safely through the maze that is real life.
Wild animals rely on their intuition to stay alive; we should rely on
ours to thrive. "It is only by following your deepest instinct that you
can lead a rich life and if you let your fear of consequence prevent you
from following your deepest instinct then your life will be safe,
expedient and thin," Katharine Butler Hathaway wrote in 1946. Intuition
tries to communicate with us in inventive ways. One way is through what
my friend, a script consultant, Dona Cooper, calls "the educated gut,"
which frequently slaps us to pay attention by triggering a visceral,
physical reaction in our bodies. One such intuitive signal is the

emotional trembling that accompanies creative discovery or warns us not
to take a certain action. Another intuitive message breaks through when
we suddenly grasp that to try something new might be delightful; we do
so and are surprised by joy. A third intuitive nudge occurs through
revelation; the inner knowing that helps us arrive at the right place at
the right time so that we can be swept away by the benevolent flow of
synchronicity that gets us where we're meant to be as easily as the
Universe can arrange it. Today, go within and seek the wisdom and
guidance of your authentic self. She steadfastly waits to speak to you
through the whispers of your imagination and the glimmers of your
intuition. But if you want to learn to develop this marvelous power, you
must first be willing to take a leap of faith and trust it. Put it to
use in little ways. Use it every day, and eventually your sixth sense
will flourish and enhance your life the way the other five senses do.
William Wordsworth believed that we could all become "one in whom
persuasion and belief/Had ripened into faith, and faith become/A
passionate intuition." And we can. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 29

Allure: The Feminine Mystique Taking joy in life is a woman's best
cosmetic. ---ROSALIND RUSSELL

Ingrid Bergman had it in Casablanca. Fifty years later, Michelle
Pfeiffer epitomized it as Edith Wharton's heroine, Countess Ellen
Olenska, in the film version of The Age of Innocence. It is allure, the,
mesmerizing power to entice or attract through personal charm and
mystery. We're not much into mystery these days, which is a pity. These
are the times of tell-all talk shows, tattletale books, and tabloid
truths. Ntozake Shange believes that "Where there is a woman there is
magic," and I agree. But I also believe that where there is a woman,
there should be mystery. What intrigues me most is the mystery---the
allure---of how some women seem to pull it all together so effortlessly.
This is the aspect of the feminine mystique that compels and invites
investigation. Who are these women and how did they evolve into these
higher beings? You see them in business meetings---confident, assured,
and in command---or smiling serenely in the hallway at school while
waiting patiently to pick up the afternoon car pool, a baby over one
shoulder, a toddler in tow. These women don't look frazzled, fatigued,
or fed up; they look fabulous. They do not simply juggle; they fly
through the air with the greatest of ease. You wonder: what is their
secret? Are they all on Prozac? Is it plenty of money, being well
organized, positive thinking, or the favorable alignment of celestial
bodies? Perhaps it is something more profound: a deep spiritual
connection. Does the computer ever break down when these women are on
deadline, do the kids ever whine, does the car ever need to be towed,
have they ever taken a dog who's just wrestled with a porcupine to the
vet? You and I have,

which is why occasionally Rio de Janeiro sounds appealing. Then, without
missing a beat, you wipe a snotty nose, change a dirty diaper, defrost
the hamburger in the microwave, start the spaghetti sauce, sew a button
on a coat, help someone with her homework. You pause for a moment,
wondering what they would do if you weren't here and realize in the same
breath that you're awfully glad you are. Much to your astonishment, it
occurs to you that you must also possess some aspect of allure because
everybody in the house gravitates to you. In the middle of the night
they call your name. And there's certainly enough of mystery to
ponder---such as the mystery of what will happen next. But instead of
worrying or obsessing, you decide to just let go and see what occurs.
You choose to take joy in your real life as it unfolds day by day, hour
by hour, a heartbeat at a time. Emily Dickinson confessed that "To live
is so startling, it leaves little time for anything else." Your face may
never end up on the silver screen. Nor will mine. But we can arrive at
an inner awareness that just living and loving it all is alluring
enough. OceanofPDF.com

APRIL 30

When Did You Feel Most Beautiful? I don't believe makeup and the right
hairstyle alone can make a woman beautiful. The most radiant woman in
the room is the one full of life and experience. ---SHARON STONE

Today, think back over your life to the times when you felt most
beautiful. I have, and I was surprised to discover that my real moments
of beauty resulted from something more powerful than just the
combination of the right hairstyle, makeup, and clothing. The times I
felt most beautiful were on my wedding day, the day I gave birth to our
daughter, and the first time I taught Simple Abundance in a workshop
setting. But on the day I got married I couldn't get my hair to look
right. While my future husband stood waiting uncomfortably in a room
full of curious and bemused guests, I fussed with my hair so much that I
was twenty minutes late for my own wedding. Since we were being married
in the home of friends and I was upstairs in a second-floor bedroom, he
had every reason to wonder why I couldn't get to the ceremony on time.
Finally, I just put my veiled hat on and went downstairs with a smile to
start my new life. When friends see my wedding picture today they never
comment on my hair; instead they mention the jubilant happiness showing
on my face. The next time I felt like the most beautiful woman in the
world was the day our daughter was born. In these pictures I look like a
beached beluga whale sitting up in a hospital bed, but I'm still
beaming. The beams are what I notice now. After I taught my first Simple
Abundance workshop and came back to my hotel room, I accidentally caught
a glimpse of a beautiful woman and I

was genuinely astonished. "Who are you?" I asked the face in the mirror
and my authentic self smiled back at me. The workshop had been so
fulfilling, exciting, and inspiring and I had experienced such rapport
with the women who attended that I was caught up in the exhilarating
flow of life and it showed. Here's the secret I stumbled upon when
trying to solve the beauty puzzle. The situations in my life in which I
felt beautiful were all different, but Love was the common denominator
that transformed me, not the outer trappings: love for my husband, love
for our child, love for my work. This is perhaps the most important
beauty lesson any of us can ever learn. Love has the power to transcend
our physical limitations. "The more I wonder," Alice Walker confesses,
"the more I love." Let us continuously search for the wonder of it all.
If we do, we can't help but notice the love bubbling up from deep
within. When wonder and love become as indispensable to you as
foundation and blush, you will become the most radiant woman in the
world.

Joyful Simplicities for April • Remind yourself what it's like to have
fun on All Fool's Day. Surprise your loved ones and co-workers with
whimsy---not practical jokes that embarrass. Instead, devise comical,
absurd, and amusing surprises. At home, turn everything topsy-turvy:
serve bagel or English muffin pizzas for breakfast, pancakes or waffles
for supper. After school tell them you've got to take them to a doctor
or dentist appointment and then head for the ice cream parlor. • Pick up
a copy of Diane Ackerman's marvelous exploration A Natural History of
the Senses and revel in an exhilarating reading romp that will intrigue
and inspire you to become a sensuist. • April is a wonderful month for
all kinds of walks, whether in warm spring showers or balmy sunshine.
The scent of the earth reawakening and the sight of Mother Nature's
brilliant display of color will rouse and remind you how wonderful it is
simply to be alive. • Visit a hat store and try on a variety of
chapeaux. You're dashing in a black felt fedora, but perhaps the
broad-brimmed straw with the cabbage

rose has captured your fancy? Play around with the many different
possibilities. You might just catch a glimpse of your authentic self in
the mirror. For a fun hat website visit www.kakyco.com (888-KAKYCO8) •
Find a large fabric store for a creative excursion, even if you don't
sew. Browse through the upholstery remnants. They make great inexpensive
tablecloths or covers for furniture. Flip through the pattern book.
Visualize the possibilities. Is there something you'd like to make for
yourself? For the house? Then why not consider the possibilities? Search
out sewing classes at adult extension courses. • Sort through your
lingerie drawer. Discard ratty, old bras and panties and delight in
pretty new undergarments. Lay down scented paper and tuck in
lavender-scented sachets. • Go through your makeup and discard what's
old and dried out. Replace darker colors with a paler palette for
spring. Learn the secret of applying foundation lightly so that it seems
natural by blending with cosmetic sponges and brushes instead of your
fingers. Visit the cosmetic counters of a large department store and
discover who's offering free makeovers. (Many cosmetic companies
introduce their new spring line of makeup at this time of year.)You
don't have to buy anything! When the beauty consultant is finished,
thank her enthusiastically and tell her you want to walk around with
your new face and see how it feels before investing in new makeup. •
Visit a large record store for a half-hour and simply browse. Discover
all the different types of music available: classical, country, soft
rock, New Age instrumental, gospel, opera, jazz, rhythm and blues, and
soul. Flip the radio dial and give something completely different a fair
chance. Visit a large library to check out new tapes and compact discs
to enjoy sound bites before you buy. Spend a few hours in complete
silence (when you're at home by yourself) and discover how restorative
it can be. When you want to reenter the world of sound and want a
soothing sound track for your life, play Sarah Ban Breathnach's Simple
Abundance: The Music of Comfort and Joy (Life2/Compendia Music),
featuring hauntingly beautiful vocal performances by Felicia Starks and
inspired by the six principles of Simple Abundance. It's available from
Amazon.com. • Collect rainwater to wash your hair. Victorian women
believed rainwater made their hair softer.

• Find a refreshing new scent for spring---try rose water, lilac, or
lily of the valley. Wear a scent you love every day. • Dye Easter eggs
and hide them for children of all ages to hunt. • Resume the restorative
pastime of weekend roaming; be on the lookout for vintage linens at
estate sales and for plants and herbs at farmers' markets. • When it
showers, curl up under a blanket in the afternoon and listen to the
raindrops on the roof. • Bake a batch of hot cross buns. Eat jelly
beans. • Find the perfect new hat or trim an old-fashioned bonnet. • You
can learn all about the healing and beauty benefits of aromatherapy in
The Art of Aromatherapy by Robert B. Tisserand. One thing you must be
aware of: essential oils are not to be swallowed because they can be
toxic, even fatal. They are for external use only. If your skin is
sensitive, test a spot on your arm before submerging your body in a
bath. Keep all essential oils out of the reach of children the way you
would any medicine, and treat them with the same respect. Mugwort, for
example, should not be used by pregnant women. Essential oils should
also not be used on the body undiluted; they need to be blended with a
neutral base, such as almond oil, wheat-germ oil, or jojoba oil. For
more information, an excellent source is the website
www.essentialoil.com (800-729-5912). OceanofPDF.com

MAY Let all thy joys be as the month of May. ---FRANCIS QUARLES

The month of May casts her magic spell as spring's promise is finally
fulfilled. This month we turn our attention homeward, as we continue to
weave simplicity into our daily round while reacquainting ourselves with
the transformative power of the third Simple Abundance
principle---Order. With fresh eyes and a loving, appreciative heart, we
reconsider our daily rounds. As we learn to savor everyday epiphanies,
we encounter the Sacred in the ordinary. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 1

Everyday Epiphanies Today a new sun rises for me; everything lives,
everything is animated, everything seems to speak to me of my passion,
everything invites me to cherish it. ---ANNE DE LENCLOS

One of the most famous elegies ever written was "Elegy in a Country
Churchyard" by the English poet Thomas Gray. As the poet wandered
through a graveyard at twilight in 1750, he ruminated on the meaning of
life, the toil of those who achieve and those who don't, the mockery of
ambition, the struggle of both the poor and the rich to be happy, and,
eventually, what difference it all makes for those whose heads rest
"upon the lap of Earth." Not much, Gray decided: simple joys are forever
gone, destiny is obscured. "For them no more the blazing hearth shall
burn/Or busy housewife ply her evening care ... the paths of glory lead
but to the grave." We should write an elegy for every day that has
slipped through our lives unnoticed and unappreciated. Better still, we
should write a song of thanksgiving for all the days that remain.
Sometimes we are aware of the poet who dwells within us and registers
every precious moment of our lives. More often, however, we move through
our days in a fog or a frenzy---until we're startled into consciousness
by an unforeseen threat to something that we hold dear and have been
taking for granted. I call these luminous moments "everday epiphanies,"
because they jar us into a profound awareness of how much we have, and
how much we have escaped, and how much there is to be grateful for.
Through the mystical alchemy of Grace and thanksgiving, what might have
become an elegy is transformed into exultation: our own recovery or

that of a loved one who has been seriously ill; the overwhelming relief
after a child who has wandered off, even for a few minutes, is found,
safe and unharmed; a reconciliation after a painful breach; the
realization of how lucky we are if we are doing work that we love; the
rejoicing that surrounds a long-awaited rite of passage; the enormous
satisfaction that comes after completing an overwhelming task; the
serenity that awaits us after struggle is abandoned. Everyday epiphanies
encourage us to cherish everything. Today a new sun has risen.
Everything lives. Everything can speak to your soul passionately if you
will be still enough to listen. "You have to count on living every
single day in a way you believe will make you feel good about your
life," actress Jane Seymour suggests, "so that if it were over tomorrow,
you'd be content." OceanofPDF.com

MAY 2

Living in the House of Spirit How to be happy when you are miserable.
Plant Japanese poppies with cornflowers and mignonette, and bed out the
petunias among the sweet-peas so that they shall scent each other. See
the sweet-peas coming up. Drink very good tea out of a thin Worcester
cup of a colour between apricot and pink ... ---RUMER GODDEN

It was the small things that helped, taken one by one and savoured,"
English writer Rumer Godden recalls in her mesmerizing memoir of an
authentic life, A House with Four Rooms. "Make yourself savour them,"
she told herself when life was not tidy. Life is not tidy around here
today: schedules are colliding, needs are conflicting, and the house is
strewn with real-life refuse, reflecting outwardly the disarray of my
mind at this moment. My natural inclination ---which I am thwarting with
a tremendous act of will---is to start cleaning. But if I stop to clean,
I'll interrupt the rhythm of the day. I really only have a few precious
hours to work uninterrupted while my daughter is in school. A few
precious hours to hold one thought in my head and follow it word by word
to its completion, even if it takes all morning. One of the reasons I
love Rumer Godden's writing is that she stitches the colorful threads of
her extraordinary life---domestic, creative, and spiritual ---with such
deftness; the hem that seems to hold her life together rarely pulls or
gapes the way mine does more often than I care to admit. She began her
career in 1936 and in nearly sixty years has written fifty-seven books:
novels for both children and adults, nonfiction, short story

collections, and poetry. Many of her renowned novels, which are very
mystical, celebrate the fruitfulness of Real Life: the magic, the
Mystery, and the mundane. The New York Times noted that she was a writer
who "belongs in that small exclusive club of women---it includes Isak
Dinesen and Beryl Markham---who could do pretty well anything they set
their minds to, hunting tigers, bewitching men, throwing elegant dinner
parties, winning literary fame." Of all her books, however, it is her
memoirs that are my favorites. I am captivated by how she lived,
nurtured a family, and created many homes out of shells of houses all
over the world, while writing almost continuously. She is a glorious
storyteller, but no story is as riveting as real life. The soulcraft of
creating and sustaining safe havens, set apart from the world, in which
to seek and savor small authentic joys, is a recurring theme in her
work, whether the haven is behind convent walls or in the nursery at the
top of the stairs. Rumer Godden's secret to living an authentic life
seems to have been dwelling, no matter where she actually kept house, in
the House of Spirit. "There is an Indian proverb or axiom that says that
everyone is a house with four rooms, a physical, a mental, an emotional
and a spiritual. Most of us tend to live in one room most of the time,
but unless we go into every room every day, even if only to keep it
aired, we are not a complete person." OceanofPDF.com

MAY 3

A Welcome Retreat: Home as a Haven in a Hectic World Every spirit builds
itself a house, and beyond its house a world, and beyond its world a
heaven. Know then that world exists for you. ---RALPH WALDO EMERSON

During the nineteenth century the home was viewed as "heaven on earth,"
a hallowed haven in an uncertain world. When man, woman, or child
crossed the threshold they were safe, "not only from injury," wrote John
Ruskin, "but from all terror, doubt and division." Today many of us cast
a nostalgic glance backward. The Victorian era seems so calm, gentle,
and gracious---so completely opposite from our own. Yet the four decades
spanning the Civil War to the turn of the century were among the most
politically, socially, and economically turbulent years in our history.
Why, then, should a period of such profound upheaval come down to us not
only as an age of innocence but as one of stability and tranquillity? I
believe, in large part, it is because of a legacy of love left to us by
our great-grandmothers who reigned over their hearths as surely as
Victoria did over her empire. Victorian women may not have had the vote
or the trappings of power (including personal disposable income and
independence) but they were the moral, spiritual, and physical center of
the home, responsible for creating a welcome retreat of beauty, comfort,
and contentment that would protect, nurture, and sustain those they
loved. To achieve this, ordinary middle-class women elevated the pursuit
of domestic bliss to an extraordinary art form, from white-linen Sunday
dinners to bluechecked-gingham Independence Day picnics. Women
approached the domestic arts---cooking, decorating, gardening,
handicrafts, and

entertaining---not as burdens but as a form of personal expression and a
means of persuasion. Traditions that celebrated the joys of home and
family life acted as the mystical mortar that held bodies and souls
together in a tumultuous society that was changing at the speed of
light. "Home is where we start from," T. S. Eliot observed. Today, a
century after he was born, "home" is the place where many women are
longing to return, if not literally, then figuratively. Begin believing
that the time, energy, and emotion you invest daily in the soulcraft of
homecaring--- carving out a haven for yourself and those dear to
you---is a sacred endeavor. Life holds no more guarantees for us than it
did for our Victorian foremothers. Yet they faced the future with full
hearts, determined to create a lasting work of art: a happy, secure, and
beautiful retreat of love and laughter. We can, too. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 4

The Personality of Your Home A house is who you are, not who you ought
to be. ---JILL ROBINSON

Like it or not, the personalities of our homes are accurate barometers
that reflect, through our surroundings, where we have been, what's going
on in our lives, and who we are---today, this moment---though not
necessarily where we're heading. Admittedly, this is not the most
reassuring thought for a meditation, especially if you could see the
state of my home as I write. Nevertheless, it's true. "You will express
yourself in your house whether you want to or not," said the mother of
modern style, Elsie de Wolfe, who transformed the way America decorated
for half a century with her book The House in Good Taste, written in
1913. Your response is probably: "If I had the money to redecorate,
you'd see the real me." No doubt. I don't entirely disagree. But we
can't afford to put our lives and creativity on hold until there's more
cash, because we only end up shortchanging ourselves and those we love.
Today we can use the Simple Abundance steps---acceptance, blessing our
circumstances, and discovering our personal preferences---to jump-start
the expression of our authenticity through the way we care for and
decorate our homes. When we do, the principles of gratitude, simplicity,
and order will begin to transform the places where we live into hallowed
havens of comfort and contentment ---with or without the new slipcovers.
After my first book was published, a sleek, glossy magazine known for
its lush pictorials (which I adore) wanted to pay me a visit for an
intimate glimpse of "the woman behind the book." So successfully, it
seemed, had I

evoked the Victorian era in my writing that the magazine assumed I lived
in a perfectly restored nineteenth-century home. How could I not? Alas,
I don't. And I panicked. "Calm down," a longtime friend who works in
Hollywood consoled me. "Pull focus and take another look." In the movie
business, "pulling focus" occurs when a cinematographer slowly adjusts
the camera lens for the sharpest clarity of image. "Your home is warm,
charming, cozy, interesting, inviting. There are fabulous shots all
around you. Don't be so hard on yourself." But as a journalist, I knew
what this magazine expected, and I didn't live in it. If my home was
going to be on public display, I wanted it to be perfect; I desperately
wanted to live up to the expectations of others instead of realizing
that living up to my own was difficult enough. Instead, my publicist
arranged for the interview to take place over afternoon tea in a hotel.
While money certainly helps us express ourselves through our
surroundings, creating a warm, inviting home that reflects our own
personality doesn't have to begin by hiring a decorator or pulling out
our credit cards or checkbook. Today, no matter where or how you live,
look upon your home through the eyes of Love. Walk around the rooms and
offer thanks for the walls and roof that safely enclose you and yours.
Pause for a moment to consider all the women who have lost their homes
through death, divorce, debt, or disaster. Be grateful for the home you
have, knowing that, at this moment, all you have is all you truly need.
OceanofPDF.com

MAY 5

Eminent Domain: Whose Home Is It, Anyway? Your house is your home only
when you feel you have jurisdiction over the space. ---JOAN KRON

Unless you live alone, is your home your own? Yes, eminent domain
prevails to a certain extent. But it also belongs to or is being
borrowed by other people as well. This is why your small city apartment
living room is also your writer-husband's study during the day. Or why
your dining room table and chairs do double duty as a castle fortress.
This is why your sewing and crafts snuggery is once again a bedroom for
a grown child who has returned home. Or why your guest room has been
transformed into Grandma's room; your mother-in-law is ill but unwilling
to move into a nursing home. Or perhaps why your basement family room
has been revamped into a hideaway to suit teenagers who crave their own
eminent domain. Recognizing and acknowledging the needs of those you
live with as well as your own is the first step toward making
everybody's habitat happy and harmonious, the way a home is meant to be.
For nearly four years after our daughter, Katie, was born, the tables in
our home were bare (if you don't count crayons or Legos) until she
became old enough to appreciate looking at beautiful objects without
playing with them. This was for her safety and my sanity. Gradually
Waterford crystal wedding presents started to coexist cozily with her
toys as our belongings became intertwined, reflecting the personalities
of everyone who resides here. But recently a young male kitten named
Mikey, who isn't bound by the laws of eminent domain or gravity, came to
live with us (thanks to

Katie) and some of our cherished breakables were once again packed away
until he learns not to climb onto the mantel. Because space is not an
affordable luxury for many women in the 1990s, does this mean we have to
put off the transformative work of authentic homecaring indefinitely?
Can we continue to procrastinate if we truly value our peace of mind? A
home's tranquillity always comes from within no matter what the
circumstances. The space one's soul requires cannot be measured in
inches, feet, or dollars. Don't let your practical considerations
discourage you, even if right now they might defer your dream of truly
expressing yourself through your surroundings. Begin to work with,
instead of fighting against, your real life limitations. Never forget
that your life and decorating styles are works-ofart-in-progress.
Interior decorator and writer Alexandra Stoddard believes that "where we
are in our lives and our relationship with others" must take precedence
over our decorating choices, and she's right. "Sometimes what we want
just isn't practical or right for us now. A home with small children
should be set up differently than one with grown children. If you're
divorced or remarried and stepchildren visit you often, you'll have to
make appropriate arrangements for them. These are not so much questions
of lifestyle as of life passages.... An honest home that rings true to
the lives of the people who occupy it will always be disarmingly
refreshing to visitors." And with the right perspective, it can be for
those who live there as well. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 6

After the Fact: The Art of Decorative Detection When friends enter a
home, they sense its personality and character, the family's style of
living---these elements make a house come alive with a sense of
identity, a sense of energy, enthusiasm, and warmth, declaring, "This is
who we are; this is how we live." ---RALPH LAUREN

Shortly after my husband and I were married, my parents moved to a
smaller home in a different state and began divesting themselves of
furniture and belongings. Because of my love of Victoriana, my mother
gave me my grandmother's nineteenth-century front parlor suite---a love
seat and two chairs---which she had purchased at an auction in 1921 at
the Ritz Hotel in New York City. She also gave me a pair of
turn-of-the-century china lamps. Shaped like urns, the lamps (which sat
on brass pedestal bases and were nearly four feet high) were
forest-green with gold leaf trim and featured a huge pink calla lily in
the center. The lamps were hideous. But it took me years to open my eyes
and realize it. This authentic awareness came as I was attempting to
bring order, the third Simple Abundance principle, into our lives. I
began to do this by wandering through the rooms of our house
dispassionately observing our patterns of living: how we stored things
(or didn't), what areas became catchalls, where we succumbed to the
tendency to take things out but not put them back because it wasn't
convenient. During the course of this investigation I turned my
attention, like a detective perusing a crime scene, to examining
decorative objects that surrounded me daily, especially noting

their presence and validity. "Who lives here?" I asked as I began
searching for myself. Every time I came into the living room, I found
myself recoiling from those lamps. "God, they're horrible," I would
mutter under my breath and move on. Finally one day, God's interior
decorator said in desperation, "Well, get rid of the damn things and
stop whining." "What are you doing?" my husband asked as I was removing
the objects of revulsion. "I hate these lamps and can't stand living
with them for another moment," I told him. "I've hated these lamps for
fifteen years but never said anything because I thought you loved them."
"I thought I had to because I grew up with them and my mother gave them
to me. But I don't and I won't." "Help me understand," he said
incredulously. "It's taken you fifteen years to discover this? Fifteen
years?" What can I say? Some of us are heavy sleepers and rouse very
slowly. Twenty years can go by before you realize one bright sunny
morning that your mother's grand piano doesn't fit into your city co-op
or lifestyle, especially since you don't play the piano. Or perhaps
you've outgrown the veneer bedroom set that you got from a thrift shop
for your first apartment and have repainted three times. If the thought
of picking up the brush again makes you want to cry, don't do it, even
if it's practical. Instead, look for another bargain that you'd like to
live with. During the 1870s and 1880s, a philosophy known as the
Aesthetic Movement sprang up on both sides of the Atlantic and began to
focus on beautifying every aspect of Victorian life. The heart of the
movement was realizing the importance of nurturing the soul through
beautiful surroundings. This week I'd like you to wander slowly through
your home and glance at the objects that surround you daily. Are you
really comfortable with them and what they whisper about you? Do you
love them or just live with them? It doesn't matter how you acquired
these objects. No immediate decisions need to be made as to whether or
not you should keep them. Awareness is all we're seeking. Above all,
don't be embarrassed by how long you may have waited to start searching
for your authenticity. "To one who waits, all things reveal themselves,"
the nineteenth-century English poet Coventry Patmore reassures us, "so
long as you have the courage not to deny in the darkness what you have
seen in the light."

OceanofPDF.com

MAY 7

Everyday Edens: Spending Another Day in Paradise Home is the definition
of God. ---EMILY DICKINSON

Eden is that old-fashioned House we dwell in every day," Emily Dickinson
reminds me as I wander around my living room picking up a purple
hair-band, colored markers, a young artist's sketchbook, a tennis
racket, minutes from last week's city council meeting, a stack of
Beckett's Baseball Card Monthly, assorted compact discs, one viola,
various mailorder catalogs, three days' worth of newspapers, two pairs
of shoes, an empty Doritos bag crumpled up next to the couch, and a
hairbrush (mine, but probably used by the owner of the purple hairband).
This is Eden? Poets, it seems, have waxed lyrical about the joys of
domesticity for centuries, no doubt because they lived with loving,
patient, and nurturing women who created havens of tranquil order in
which they could work in peace and comfort. But did you know that the
spinster Emily Dickinson---who rarely left her home after she was
thirty-four---was also very domesticated? In fact, her greatest
ecstasies were said to be cooking and writing poetry. And since the bulk
of her poems were only published after her death in 1886, it was her
cooking skills that first won the belle of Amherst, Massachusetts, her
fame for (among other culinary delights) a moist, dense black fruitcake
served at afternoon tea and scrumptious parcels of gingerbread lowered
in a basket from her second-floor bedroom sanctuary to hungry
neighborhood children. Separated from us now by the chasm of more than a
century, her contented

and self-contained confinement seems to me to be the perfect antidote to
late-twentieth-century existence. "I don't go from home unless emergency
leads me by the hand," she wrote to a friend in 1854, "and then I do it
obstinately and draw back if I can." How I long to draw back, too. To
simply sit still for twenty minutes in the backyard basking in the
sunshine, watching the birds build their new nests, watching the cats
watching the birds, greeting the new blossoms in the garden, and
enjoying a fresh cup of tea and Miss Dickinson's letters. However,
before this idyllic reverie can commence, I must clean. I must pick up
the debris of our daily life and bring order to this room, for I cannot
stand the chaos, clutter, and confusion here for another single moment.
There is simply no time for poetic musings. Or is there? Perhaps
now---of all times---when I am nearly bowed under physically,
emotionally, and psychologically by the minutiae of the mundane, is the
very moment I need the reverence of poets who bear witness to the
sacredness of the ordinary. Then perhaps I shall see, not just other
people's belongings, but all the beauty, joy, and abundance that
literally lies at my feet. If I can be still for a moment and fully
enter into the experience of bringing order and harmony to my home,
perhaps I can discover that the poetry of this afternoon is to be found
in the perception of my tasks. For what is the purpose of cleaning this
room? Is it simply to pick up trash and dispose of yesterday's
newspaper? Or is some inspired action at work here? In the process of
transforming this room into a safe and serene haven where my family can
come together to enjoy the comfort of each other's company, am I not
changing the perception of my work? We are all given a choice each day.
We can react negatively to the demands made on us or we can choose to
live abundantly, to transform the negative into the meaningful. Attitude
is all. If I do not endow my life and my work with meaning, no one will
ever be able to do it for me. If I don't recognize the value of what I
am doing here in this living room, certainly no one else can. And if
homecaring is not sacred, then forgive me, for I truly have no
conception of the Divine. And so, to lift my spirits and celebrate my
choice, I listen to a Bach concerto as I clean. I put on the kettle to
make myself a fresh pot of tea. I

throw open the windows to catch a spring breeze. Soon my family will
return to this lovely and inviting room. However, before then, I will
carve out a precious interlude of time for myself. I will sit still for
twenty minutes in the backyard basking in the sunshine, with the birds,
the cats, and the new blossoms and contemplate the blessing of having
spent another day in Paradise. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 8

Rediscovering the Sacred Soulcraft of Homecaring The ordinary arts we
practice every day at home are of more importance to the soul than their
simplicity might suggest. ---THOMAS MOORE

For centuries young women have learned how to run a home, how to cook,
and how to raise a family by tying themselves to their mother's or
grandmother's apron strings. George Eliot tells us in her novel The Mill
on the Floss: "There were particular ways of doing things in the Dodson
family---particular ways of bleaching the linen, of making the cowslip
wine, curing the hams and keeping the bottled gooseberries, so that no
daughter of that house could be indifferent to the privilege of having
been born a Dodson, rather than a Gibson or a Watson." Unfortunately, I
wasn't born a Dodson. Nevertheless, when I was a senior in high school I
won a "Homemaker of Tomorrow" award. This greatly amused and perplexed
the nuns who taught me, considering that home economics was not even
part of their curriculum. It also absolutely stunned my mother, who knew
the state of my bedroom and her continuing struggle to get me to clean
it. But I had won the contest---which was based on an essay and not on a
bake-off---by writing about the importance of homemaking as an
endangered calling. This was in 1965, when the rumblings of the feminist
movement were starting to be heard across the land. In the mid-1960s you
didn't prepare your daughter for life as an adult by teaching her how to
make a bed, sort white from colored laundry, organize a closet, or make
a meat loaf. Instead, many mothers handed out

copies of The Feminine Mystique after they had finished reading it
themselves. Now, three decades later, women know how to start successful
mailorder companies, launch banks and new magazines, walk in space,
trade securities on Wall Street, close million dollar movie deals, get
elected to national office, anchor the nightly news, write Supreme Court
decisions, and win Nobel Prizes. We can secure financing, create,
innovate, delegate, and negotiate. But we're also running to the grocery
store on our way home from work with tired, cranky children in tow,
washing the laundry when everyone in the family has run out of clothes
to wear, and searching for a place to sit down comfortably at the end of
a long day in the midst of overwhelming pandemonium. Many women today
run businesses but don't have a clue how to run their own households
competently, which is one of the reasons we are run ragged. The time has
come for us to look deep within. Reconsider how caring for our homes can
be an expression of our authenticity. We may not know how to bleach
linen, make cowslip wine, cure ham, or bottle gooseberries. But it's not
too late for us to rediscover the sacred soulcraft of homecaring.
Creating a comfortable, beautiful, well-run home can be among our most
satisfying accomplishments as well as an illuminating spiritual
experience. Like sweat equity, channeling your time and creative energy
closer to home will produce a big emotional return for yourself and
those you love. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 9

Getting Your House in Order My life will always have dirty dishes. If
this sink can become a place of contemplation, let me learn constancy
here. ---GUNILLA NORRIS

Because we dread it, we put it off for as long as possible until we have
to dig ourselves out. Many women approach the unrelenting, repetitive,
exhausting, and unproductive work known as housekeeping like the torture
of Sisyphus. After offending the Greek god Zeus, Sisyphus was punished
by having to roll an enormous stone to the top of a steep hill. Every
time he managed to pull off this feat, the stone would slide back down
and the poor soul would have to start over again. Women do the same
thing, Simone de Beauvoir observed in her book The Second Sex: "The
clean becomes soiled, the soiled is made clean, over and over, day after
day." That is, of course, assuming we get around to it daily. For
two-thirds of American women who also work outside their home, this
means tackling household chores between the hours of seven P.M. and
seven A.M. And you wonder why the soiled stays soiled until you can't
stand it? When I discovered---to my dismay---that order was the third
principle that needed to be gently explored and embraced on the Simple
Abundance path, I balked. Although I frequently felt frazzled and
adrift, especially when trying to find something or ignore the disarray
around me, the virtue of order seemed very old-fashioned, unimaginative,
and uninspired---as dreary and cheerless, in fact, as the word chore.
What I longed to bring into my life was something more uplifting.

But as I reflected on the simple, uncluttered, serene lives of the
Amish, the Quakers, and especially the Shakers, I became struck by their
seamless stitching together of life, work, and art through the thread of
divine order. Order shaped every part and nurtured every nuance of
Shaker life, from their daily schedule of tasks to the way they
expressed themselves authentically through their surroundings. Mother
Ann Lee, who founded the United Society of Believers in the First and
Second Appearance of Christ in 1774, instructed her followers to
remember that order was heaven's first law. "There is no dirt in
heaven," she counseled her charges. Members of the Shaker "Family" were
to keep their personal belongings and tools in such perfect order that
they could be found at a moment's notice, day or night. To accomplish
this, the Shakers elevated order to a sacred art: just to gaze at the
exquisite beauty and brilliance of Shaker built-in drawers and cupboards
is to know that in the House of Spirit a sublime pine cubbyhole awaits
with your name on it. The Shakers believed that their daily work,
including housekeeping, was a personal expression of worship. "Prayer
and housekeeping---they go together. They have always gone together. We
simply know that our daily round is how we live. When we clean and order
our homes, we are somehow also cleaning and ordering ourselves," Gunilla
Norris tells us in her modern book of hours, Being Home. How we care for
our home is a subtle but significant expression of self-esteem.
OceanofPDF.com

MAY 10

A Place for Everything: Preserving Your Sanity with a Personal Plan If a
home doesn't make sense, nothing does. ---HENRIETTA RIPPERGER

We long to make sense of the work we do in our home. To master the
sacred art and craft of doing it and to create a microcosm of serenity,
security, and sanity for ourselves and those we love. But how and where
do we begin, especially if we never were taught to put our things away
so that we might find them on another day? And if we did not learn the
rudimentary lessons ourselves, how can we possibly teach our children
the life-sustaining skills they need, from cooperation to cooking?
Getting our houses in order and endowing our children with a respect
for, and appreciation of, order is one of the most precious gifts we can
give them and ourselves. After searching a century's worth of
housekeeping advice found in domestic manuals, from Mrs. Isabella
Beeton's classic Book of Household Management, published in 1861, to
Shirley Conran's Superwoman: For Every Woman Who Hates Housework, one
thing is clear: sanity is preserved with planning. Always remember that
"plan" comes before "work" in the dictionary and with good reason. But
before planning, you're going to have to think your way through
housework, just as you'd approach an overwhelming project at work. Now
none of us would dream of plunging in without thinking when working at a
job for which we're paid a salary. Why should we do any less for a job
that compensates us with room, board, love, and contentment? By thinking
first, instead of just reacting to the chores, interruptions, and

demands that are made on us, we can reclaim control over our daily
lives. We need to learn to run our homes instead of letting the
housework run roughshod over us. First, figure out what your standard of
ideal housekeeping is. Remember, it doesn 't have to be the same as your
mother's or the Dodsons'. Close your eyes for a moment and imagine that
you are walking through your front door. In your ideal version, what
does the room look like? Your personal standard of ideal homecaring is
the minimum you can live with and still feel content. For example, I can
personally live with dust (though I do draw the line when I can write my
name on the bedroom bureau), but clutter drives me crazy. It's more
important for me to have the common rooms of our home and my bedroom
tidy than to have them pass a whiteglove test. So, given the demands on
my time, I will be content if the house can, on a consistent basis,
remain reasonably straight instead of being ready for a magazine
pictorial. Determine your livability quotient. It's the first step
toward devising a personal plan that will work for you. Next, you need
to figure out what needs to be done, who can do it, and when. The
simplest way is to break your housekeeping demands into categories:
daily duties, weekly chores, monthly jobs, and seasonal tasks. See on
paper how much you really do. You will be astounded. Now, who lives with
you and can share the load? Once you've identified the jobs for your
home and the workers available, write it down. What you're creating is a
Simple Abundance strategy that brings order and harmony to your home,
while providing you with enough time and space to savor the journey. We
have only recently begun focusing our energies and imagination on
preserving Mother Earth. (The same need exists for perserving the lives
of mortal mothers, but why wait until we are on the brink of emotional
extinction to begin this conservation effort?) To jump-start the
bringing of order into your home, here are four oldfashioned rules that
can change the quality of your daily life beginning today. Repeat this
recipe for contentment out loud every morning and evening for twenty-one
days. Let it become your personal mantra to maintain serenity. Write
these instructions on index cards and post one in every room of your
home. Teach these words of wisdom to your children, whisper them into
your partner's ear: 1. If you take it out, put it back.

2. If you open it, close it. 3. If you throw it down, pick it up. 4. If
you take it off, hang it up. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 11

The Tao of Homecaring Time to dust again. Time to caress my house, to
stroke all its surfaces. I want to think of it as a kind of lovemaking
... the chance to appreciate by touch what I live with and cherish.
---GUNILLA NORRIS

As the story goes, the Chinese sage Lao-Tzu (who was born five hundred
years before Christ) decided to leave the province where he lived
because he became disillusioned with the corrupt and decaying dynasty
that ruled it. When he arrived at the border, a guard asked the wise old
man if he would write a book before he left, instructing seekers in "the
art of living." LaoTzu willingly agreed. He called his book the Tao Te
Ching. When it was completed, he departed China, never to be seen again.
The Tao Te Ching is the sacred text of the Chinese religion known as
Taoism and one of the most widely translated books of all time. Its
followers strive to live according to the principles of the Tao
(pronounced Dow) which they believe governs the order of the Universe.
Like Zen, Tao, or the Way, is a spiritual path; it must be intimately
experienced instead of intellectually comprehended if insights are to be
discovered. One of its main themes is unity, based on yielding rather
than resisting. ("Tao is eternal without doing, and yet nothing remains
undone.") When a seeker commits to the Way she sheds her expectations,
becoming an empty vessel to be filled to the brim with both the yin and
yang, the opposite male and female energies of life---career and home,
dark and light, sorrow and joy, intimacy and solitude, aggression and
passivity.

How can the enigmatic advice of an ancient Chinese philosopher help us
get our houses in order? If our souls are so preoccupied with undoing,
how does anything ever get done? Inexplicably, it gets done by pausing.
By reflecting on the way in which our life proceeds day in, day out.
What works, what doesn't. As we pause to reflect before doing, we come
to an awareness of how the nature of all things---even the minutiae of
the domestic sphere---contributes to the harmony of the Whole. One of
Lao-Tzu's illuminating lessons is that "naming is the origin of all
particular things" and that "mystery and manifestation arise from the
same source." I have taken this wisdom to heart, especially in how I
perceive the work I do in our home. Drudgery can be transformed, through
a willing and open heart, into labors of love. Begin with the words that
describe, or name, your creative efforts. Let "chores" become "tasks."
Stop calling your daily round "housework" and begin to call it
"homecaring." Redefining our work casts a subtle but powerful spell over
the subconscious mind. And after all, caring---for yourself, your loved
ones, your pets, and your home---is truly what you are doing when you
dust, change the kitty litter, sort the laundry, drive the car pool,
prepare the meals, and work in the garden. Domestic theophanies are
visible manifestations of Spirit in the home. We find them by looking
for Mystery in the mundane, seeing the Sacred in the ordinary. For me,
this is the heart of the Way, the Tao of homecaring. Lao-Tzu urged
seekers to "regard the small as important" and "to make much of the
little." Today, try to glimpse everything you do in your home, no matter
how insignificant it may seem, as part of your authentic path to
Wholeness and it shall become so. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 12

Restoring a Sense of Harmony to Your Habitat I am told that when the
Chinese, who know everything, build a house, they consult the precepts
of an ancient science, Feng Shui, which tells them exactly how, when,
and where the work must be done, and so brings good fortune to the home
forever. ---JAN MORRIS

Thousands of years ago in ancient China, practioners of the mysterious
art of placement known as feng shui (pronounced "fung shway") advised
emperors and nobles on how to bring more harmony, health, prosperity,
and good fortune into their lives through inspired interior design.
Based on allowing the cosmic breath or essential earth energy known as
ch'i, which the Chinese believe infuses all life, to flow freely in
harmony with nature, the esoteric seers of feng shui offered advice on
everything from auspicious burial sites (for a comfortable afterlife) to
the planning of entire imperial cities. Today this profound and
pragmatic Eastern art has been transplanted to the West as more of us
become open to living new lives through ancient wisdom. American banks,
corporations, and restaurants setting up operations in Asian cities like
Hong Kong recognize the importance of hiring feng shui consultants to
advise them on every aspect of the design process, from the
architectural blueprints to the propitious placement of desks, in order
to insure success for their businesses and the well-being of their
employees. Katherine Metz, a contemporary feng shui practitioner,
believes that "all of us can make simple and affordable changes in our
homes and workplaces that will spark our natural potential to be as
alive, receptive and as focused

as possible. In these rapidly changing times, simple feng shui
adjustments can help bring clarity, peace, joy and prosperity." Some of
her suggestions on how to transcend the mundane through the mystical
include hanging a brass wind chime inside your front door for clarity;
having books in plain view as you enter your home to increase insight;
hanging a round mirror in your bedroom to bring more love, compassion,
and understanding to an intimate relationship; placing flowers in your
bedroom, kitchen, and study to cultivate good luck; and hanging a mirror
on the wall adjacent to or behind your stove to reflect the burners,
which are symbols of wealth and prosperity. If you are stuck in a rut or
an unpleasant situation (such as sloth) Metz advises moving
"twenty-seven objects in your home that have not been moved in the last
year" which will "enhance your ability to move forward in life." While
we're attempting to bring more order in our lives, this week offers us
the perfect opportunity to experiment with feng shui to bring more
harmony to our habitats: clear closets and junk drawers or move
furniture around to dust behind it. Trust me, you will literally feel
the "ch'i" begin to swirl about you as positive energy is released
throughout your surroundings. It may seem illogical and inexplicable to
rigid Western minds that good fortune can become ours by hanging mirrors
or positioning our bed and desk in a certain way. But it can't hurt to
be curious and experimental. After all, if we don't seek, we'll never
find. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 13

Honoring the Great Mother Mothering myself has become a way of listening
to my deepest needs, and of responding to them while I respond to my
inner child. ---MELINDA BURNS

There's a great flurry of activity downstairs this morning, which I am
forbidden to observe. "Big doings going on ... I can't possibly tell,"
my husband whispers as he closes our bedroom door with a collaborator's
grin. I can hear the clanging of pots and pans, drawers being opened and
closed, mixers whirling. Now it sounds as though a breakfast tray is
being prepared as the clattering of my best china reverberates through
the house. I don't normally eat breakfast. But I will today. As I write,
it's Mother's Day. Later, delicious, daughter-made strawberry muffins,
buttery golden, warm from the oven, miraculously appear. I am amazed,
proud, perplexed, teary, profoundly grateful. Who is this remarkable
young woman with the beautiful, beaming smile bearing gifts from the
heart to nourish my body and soul? I believe there has been some
spiritual intervention at work here because I have never made strawberry
muffins in my life and have no idea how Katie divined the recipe. It's a
perfect moment to quietly meditate on the cosmic Great Mother who can
inspire us all; the divine, feminine Spirit of nurturance known as The
Goddess, so revered in ancient times and being rediscovered by women
today. Many women I know share a seldom-expressed yearning to be
comforted. To be mothered. This voracious need is deep, palpable---and
often unrequited. Instead, we are the ones who usually provide comfort,
caught between the pressing needs of our children, our elderly parents,
our partners, our friends, even our colleagues.

Though we are grown, we never outgrow the need for someone special to
hold us close, stroke our hair, tuck us into bed, and reassure us that
tomorrow all will be well. Perhaps we need to reacquaint ourselves
consciously with the maternal and deeply comforting dimension of
Divinity in order to learn how to mother ourselves. The best way to
start is to create ---as an act of worship---a comfortable home that
protects, nurtures, and sustains all who seek refuge within its walls.
Gloria Steinem has written movingly of the need to reparent herself
after she began exploring, in midlife, the issue of self-esteem. Because
her parents divorced when she was ten and her mother suffered from a
debilitating depression, the legendary editor of Ms. magazine assumed
the role of family caregiver. Decades later, as a leader of the feminist
movement, she organized, traveled, lectured, campaigned, and
successfully raised money for causes, but she didn't know how to take
care of herself--- emotionally, psychologically, physically---even
though she had spent her life taking care of others. Nowhere was this
truth more apparent than in her home. She reveals in her book Revolution
from Within: A Book of SelfEsteem that her apartment was little more
than "a closet where I changed clothes and dumped papers into cardboard
boxes." Gradually she came to the belated awareness that one's home was
"a symbol of the self" and in her fifties created and began to enjoy her
first real home. Today, as you walk through your own home, think about
ways that you can start to mother yourself---every day, not just once a
year---in small but tangible ways. There should be comfortable places
from the living room to the bedroom that invite you to sit, sleep,
relax, and reflect. There should be small indulgences from the kitchen
to the bathroom that pamper and please. There should be sources of
beauty throughout that inspire, order that restores, and the quiet grace
of simplicity that soothes. The poet Ntozake Shange writes, "i found god
in myself & i loved her/i loved her fiercely." There is no more
beautiful way of honoring the love of the feminine divinity waiting to
mother us than by celebrating the temple where her Spirit dwells on
earth. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 14

A Sense of Charm Why do we love certain houses, and why do they seem to
love us? It is the warmth of our individual hearts reflected in our
surroundings. ---T. H. ROBSJOHN-GlBBlNGS

The minute we walk into a home, we know whether or not it has charm.
There's a coziness that attracts us with cheerful hospitality. The warm
resonance of a charming room beckons us to sink into comfort to our
heart's content. Simple beauty delights. Serenity, harmony, and order
soothe. Touches of whimsy amuse. Personal memory reacquaints the present
with the past. All's right with the world in such an engaging and
inviting home. Think of the homey settings in the wonderful three-hanky
movies of the 1940s, such as The Best Years of Our Lives or The
Enchanted Cottage. In the latter, a handsome, battle-scarred veteran
falls in love with a plain servant girl, and charm plays Cupid by
casting an intimate spell through lovely surroundings that transform two
lonely lives. "If you have it," the English playwright Sir James M.
Barrie wrote about charm in 1907, "you don't need to have anything else;
and if you don't have it, it doesn't much matter what else you have."
Money can purchase beautiful furnishings and decorative accessories, but
it cannot ensure that charm abides with us. I believe this is because
charm seems to be a quality of the soul that cannot be bought or sold.
But charm can be channeled from Creative Spirit. It is accessed through
our authenticity, expressed in our personal flair. "Beauty doesn't lie
in the expenditure of much money, but in the artistic disposition of
little," says a reassuring article entitled "The Charm of the
Unexpected" published in the August 1917 issue of The Mother's Magazine
during World War I, when making do with less was a necessity. Today,
realize that "the desire to make

the home dearer and sweeter to those who live in it" is still the
enduring secret of endowing our homes with charm. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 15

Progress, Not Perfection Perfectionism is self-abuse of the highest
order. ---ANNE WILSON SCHAEF

It was a beautiful Sunday afternoon in May---sunny and warm with a
refreshing breeze. Just perfect. The kind of day you dream about in the
depths of winter. That morning my daughter and I had enjoyed a pleasant
outing at the farmers' market where we purchased baby lettuces, basil,
tomato plants, nasturtiums, and marigolds. The week before we had
successfully searched for a lovely terra-cotta urn in which to plant a
French salad potager. I had discovered this marvelous idea for a
container garden in a glossy lifestyle magazine article and thought it
sounded like fun. So did Katie. We plotted, planned, and planted with
great enthusiasm and pleasure. When we had finished planting, we had
trouble getting some loose, wet potting soil off the sides of the
potager. I used a sponge and smeared it with mud; Katie doused it with a
watering can, getting better results, but it still wasn't
picture-perfect. I'm embarrassed to tell you how long we fussed with
perfection but finally, I'd had enough. "Okay, we're done. It's
beautiful." "But it doesn't look like hers," an exasperated voice
whined. "No, it doesn't. It looks like ours. Ours is great. Fine. Close
enough." "But hers is perfect. Everything she does is perfect. I want
ours to be perfect, too," a determined young lady of eleven fumed in
frustration. Time out. Serenity 102: Progress, Not Perfection. First of
all, I explained, the glamorous lifestyle gurus in the books, magazines,
and television have full-time professionals working for them, including
stylists ---stylists who wave magic paintbrushes dipped in burnt sienna
over mud smears on terra-cotta potagers before the flash pops or the
tape rolls. "It's image, illusion, make-believe. It's a million-dollar
industry. What we're

seeing isn't always the real McCoy. Now this," I pointed out with
satisfaction, "is real, mud and all. It's Real and it's wonderful."
Eventually I convinced my skeptic to wait and see (Mother Nature did not
fail me, and spring showers became our stylist). We spent the rest of
the afternoon happily turning over earth as hard as granite for an
old-fashioned fragrant cottage garden with English roses, lavender,
hollyhocks, and delphiniums. Nearby the cats were delirious over the
newly-installed catnip plot. How much of our lives is frittered
away---spoiled, spent, or sullied---by our neurotic insistence on
perfection? Perhaps our parents expected us to live up to a standard
they knew they themselves could never achieve. Certainly they wanted
more for us. But more of what? Misery? Haven't you had enough? Today,
accept that perfection is unattainable. In real life we should strive to
be our best---not the world's. Still, there will always be a misspelled
word, a stain on the carpet, a terra-cotta potager with streaks of mud.
Perfect women do not manifest on this plane of existence. Celebrities
who sell perfection are more to be pitied than censured, envied, or
emulated. Why? Because, despite their fame and bank accounts, they
rarely know a moment's peace; the whole world is watching, waiting for a
misstep. Thank you, no. I'll pass. Won't you? Perfection leaves so
little room for improvement. So little space for acceptance---or joy. On
the path we have chosen, progress is the simple pleasure to be savored.
Daily. Of course, perfect moments are sure to be ours, such as spending
a sunny afternoon in May gardening with a daughter. Life and potagers
don't have to be perfect to be pleasing. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 16

Clearing Out What Isn't Useful or Beautiful Have nothing in your homes
that you do not know to be useful and believe to be beautiful.
---WILLIAM MORRIS

In England during the 1880s, a breath of fresh air blew through stuffy
Victorian parlors when poet, craftsman, and designer William Morris
founded the influential Arts and Crafts movement. Morris and his
associates crusaded against the cheap and shoddy furniture and
decorative accessories that were then being mass-produced and crammed
into middle-class homes in a frenzy of excess. In particular, Morris
urged Victorians to rid themselves of the ugly, the useless, and the
uncomfortable in favor of simple and "honest" furnishings. The Irish
poet W. B. Yeats termed Morris's call for the aesthetic alchemy of
beauty and function in the home "the long-waited-for deliverance of the
decorative arts." On the Simple Abundance path, our authentic decorative
deliverance arrives when we begin to appreciate and put to use the
Morris rule---ridding ourselves of anything we do not believe to be
beautiful or useful---as we restore order to our homes and simplify our
lives. Begin this week with a pad and pen. Browse through the rooms of
your home meditatively. Let the Divine spirits of simplicity, order,
harmony, and beauty accompany you. Really look at your
surroundings---your furniture and decorative accessories. Give thanks
for your home exactly as it exists today. Now begin the inquiry. Ask
each possession, are you beautiful? Useful? Is it time for you to move
on? You will undoubtedly come to an

object that is neither beautiful nor useful but has sentimental
qualities. Create a new category (sorry, Mr. Morris) on your clearing
list. But use restraint. Does it really tug at your heartstrings? Would
you mourn if it disappeared? Be truthful. No one is privy to this
exercise except your authentic self and she's trying to tell you
something. Listen. (If it tugs at someone else's heartstrings send it to
his or her room.) Write all this information down. Always allow yourself
time to think on paper before you act. The next step in the process is
to make a commitment in writing, on your calendar to do one room a
month. On the appointed day, plan to spend a few hours (as you did when
you weeded out your wardrobe, remember?). Be sure you have plenty of
boxes available. Now, start to sort: if it's not beautiful, useful, or
sentimental, it goes. One pile is for items to give away to thrift shop
charities---items such as great Aunt Gladys's vase with the nymphs or
the Japanese sake set you received as a wedding present and hated on
sight. The other pile is for perfectly good objects of previous
infatuations that no longer make your heart beat faster. This pile can
be recycled as future gifts. There is an ancient metaphysical law that
says if we desire more abundance in our lives we must create a vacuum to
allow ourselves to receive the good we seek. How can more good come into
our lives if there is no room for it? The way we create the vacuum is by
giving away what we no longer need or desire but what can serve others.
We all change as we grow (that's how we know we're growing). This
includes our personal style. If you no longer love your Fiesta cereal
bowls and now want to collect Blue Willow, or if the Limoges luncheon
plates left you by your grandmother don't really suit your casual
country style of entertaining, give them away. It is a wonderfully
abundant but simple pleasure to bring a friend a hostess gift of
homemade banana bread beautifully wrapped up on a platter that never
really suited you but is one that she's admired. Deciding to simplify
our lives and bring order to our homes by sending on the objects we no
longer love to new, happier incarnations with people who will genuinely
appreciate them is the way to open ourselves up to receiving an
abundance that will perfectly suit us.

OceanofPDF.com

MAY 17

The Ruskin Spring Ritual of Restoration In order that people may be
happy in their work, these three things are needed: They must be fit for
it. They must not do too much of it. And they must have a sense of
success in it. ---JOHN RUSKIN

The sun is shining, the windows are streaked, the white lace curtains
seem more than just a tad dingy. Could this house need a spring
cleaning? But the windows and curtains can wait because the sofa and a
new book beckon. So do the junk drawers. You know, those black holes
lurking beneath the tidy surfaces harboring clutter and God only knows
what else. Lost objects. Found objects. Objects somebody in the family
might use in another lifetime. Or the unrecognizable. You name it, it's
in there. Now I don't know about you, but I had (have---life ebbs and
flows around here) junk drawers in every room of my house. It got so bad
that I never voluntarily opened them except to throw in another item
with my eyes shut. I am addicted to junk drawers. But as I've been
learning the lessons of Simple Abundance, I have faced my compulsion. I
was becoming orderly on the surface, but seething underneath was
absolute domestic anarchy. I knew it. My authentic self knew it. So did
my husband and daughter. It made me very uncomfortable. "To be buried in
lava and not turn a hair, it is then a man shows what stuff he is made
of," Samuel Beckett wrote in Malone Dies. For grown women the same
challenge comes when we rally enough courage to face up to clearing out
the junk drawers. Take a deep breath. I'll hold your hand. It's best to
approach clearing out the clutter of a lifetime in manageable
increments, following John Ruskin's sage advice. Don't do too much of it
at once; that way, you can feel successful about your efforts. Each
month,

tackle just one room or storage space in your home. Then break the room
down: the first week, clean out the junk drawers, then the closets, then
any other specific storage areas such as under the beds, the linen
closet, the medicine chest, the sewing basket. Above all, don't attempt
to do too much at once or you'll sabotage yourself. The family room game
closet hasn't been organized in five years? Don't worry, it can wait
another two months or however long it takes you to get to it. Carefully
consider the areas of your home that are causing you the most
frustration today and then prioritize them in order of annoyance.
Although I believe very firmly in sharing work around our home, I have
come to the reluctant conclusion that clearing out clutter has to be a
solitary occupation. You must do this alone. I cannot stress this point
enough. Spouses or partners and children will never let you throw
anything away. "Oh, that's where that was," they will say picking up
virtually every object you're trying to throw out (including the
fossilized Silly Putty), then leaving the stuff somewhere else in the
house for you to trip over. Forget it. If they've lived without it for
five or ten years, they can do without it forever. Trust me, you must
clear away clutter alone or you will lose your mind in the attempt. One
last clutter clearing caveat: what to do with the "I don't know what
this is and I don't know where it belongs" box. If any item can't be
identified by a member of the family, it gets tossed. Here is the only
aspect of clearing out where I invite consultation. But remember, you
must be ruthless. When in doubt, throw it away. You don't need it. You
don't want it. You forgot you even had it, so don't keep it. No, it will
not come in handy someday. Furthermore, you do not, under any
circumstance, want the contents of your junk drawers ending up being
thrown into "junk boxes" (a very real possibility for chronic hoarders)
which will then only disappear down to that subterranean landfill known
in the common vernacular as the basement. But that is, as they say,
another story for another day. Every cleared junk drawer, each closet,
each successful attempt at organizing only reinforces your feelings of
taking back control of your life. I had never really considered how
being disorganized beneath the surface had weighed upon my mind. But
once I cleared away the clutter, I felt a wonderful sense of renewal,
joy, and inner peace. Here was the essence of

Simple Abundance and it had cost me only time (to plan), courage (to
show up for work), and creative energy (to do it). Don't be surprised if
one fine spring day you suddenly feel the urge to wash the curtains and
clean the windows. The Light is beautiful and you can see clearly now.
OceanofPDF.com

MAY 18

Simplify, Simplify, Simplify Out of clutter, find simplicity. ---ALBERT
EINSTEIN

After a morning spent sifting and sorting through the beautiful, the
useful, and the useless, I glanced around our living room floor. It
resembled an archaeological dig with small stacks of artifacts all
separated according to their domestic categories. I wondered what a
late-twentieth-century anthropologist considering the juxtaposition of
junk and precious mementos (such as my daughter's last pacifier) would
tell the world about the woman whose life was now reduced to a series of
neat and pleasing bundles. Soon it became time to return everything to
where it belonged. This, believe it or not, was a source of great
contentment. As I wandered through the rooms of the house I began to
search for the common thread in the lives of the world's great spiritual
teachers and traditions: Jesus Christ, Mohammed, Buddha, Lao-Tzu, The
Hebrew prophets, The Moslem Sufis, The Catholic saints, The Hindu
rishis, The Shakers, The Quakers, The Amish. None of them had junk
drawers. That's because all embraced simplicity. Spirituality,
simplicity, and serenity seem to be a sacred trinity; three divine
qualities of the orderly soul. Henry David Thoreau believed "our life is
frittered away by detail." I disagree. I think our lives are frittered
away by lack of focus. But how can we focus our attention on what's
truly important when we're half-crazed because we can never find
anything? However, Thoreau's remedy for the frittering frets still works
today: "Simplify, simplify, simplify." This week, consider that with a
little bit of courage and creativity you can find the breathing space
you crave. You may think you're only clearing

clutter from a junk drawer or juggling commitments to find a few hours
to get your house in order. But your soul knows better. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 19

Order Within What a gift of grace to be able to take the chaos from
within and from it create some semblance of order. ---KATHERINE PATERSON

While spring is the traditional season for bringing order to our homes,
it is also the perfect opportunity for seeking order within. "Spring
cleaning can also be psychological, a time-out to confront the emotional
clutter that has accumulated in your mental closet," writer Abigail
Trafford recommends. "It's a pause for introspection---a midcourse
correction for ordinary people in ordinarily stressful lives." One way
to begin seeking order within is to come to grips with what drives you
crazy but what you've been too distracted to do anything about. Run a
video of your typical day through your mind and view the woman hanging
on at the end of her rope with compassion. What makes you cringe? It
could be anything from rushing off to work convinced that you've
forgotten something you need for the day, to never finding anything to
wear that's unwrinkled, to discovering as you're cooking dinner that
you're out of a necessary ingredient. All these situations cry out for
order, just as your fragmented soul does. There is a better way to live.
It begins when we establish order within so that order will become a
visible reality in our daily round. Start seeking order within by
book-ending your day with reflection first thing in the morning and last
thing at night. This quietude will remind you that you can make the
choice every morning to live in the world but not be caught up in the
frenzy of it, especially a frenzy of your own devising. Your bookends
can be as little as fifteen minutes long. I know I've suggested private
interludes before (and will continue doing so). You just don't think you

have the time. You may not today. But snatch time tomorrow. Start to
allow yourself a quarter of an hour before anyone else is up and after
everyone else is settled in. What to do when you first awaken or before
drifting off to sleep? Quiet your mind, lift up your heart, muse, mull
over, make discoveries. Consider, conceive, create, connect, concede
that it all starts within. Pray, read the Scriptures, sacred poetry, or
a meditation from an inspirational book. Think about the day ahead and
how it might unfold more smoothly. Invoke Divine Order, asking Spirit to
take charge of your life today and every day. Visualize yourself at the
end of a happy, stress-free, productive day, relaxing and enjoying the
well-deserved leisure of the evening. Stroll into the backyard garden,
onto a balcony, sit on the front porch or front stoop with a cup of
coffee and wait for the sun to rise. Observe how gently but surely the
natural world renews itself daily. You may not believe this, but Mother
Time does not rush; seven o'clock does not tell six o'clock, "Get a move
on, there are places to go, people to see, faxes to send!" If you have
children, have to commute ninety minutes to work, or need to reach
European clients on the telephone (as do three very good friends of
mine), what I am suggesting probably seems impossible, recommended by a
woman who obviously hasn't a clue as to how you really live. Bookending
your day by nurturing your Spirit means rousing your body earlier when
you're so exhausted from yesterday that you can barely crawl out of bed,
or spending an extra moment with yourself at night when you're ready to
fall asleep like a stone. Here's what I do many mornings and evenings: a
half-hour before I have to rise and just before I go to sleep, I lie
snuggled in bed and listen in the dark to Gregorian chants---the
sublime, ancient Latin invocations sung by Benedictine monks for the
last 1,500 years. It's a pity I don't understand every word the monks
are singing but it doesn't really matter. All I know is that the soft,
rhythmic chants reassure and soothe me on a very deep level. Sometimes I
pray with the monks, other times I like to imagine they are praying for
me. It's a gentle, centering, and comforting reminder that another,
truer Reality exists, something I'm apt to forget in the middle of a
busy day---as you probably are, too. Today, seek order within, so that
Divine Order may be manifest outwardly in your daily round.

OceanofPDF.com

MAY 20

The Art of Puttering Puttering is really a time to be alone, to dream
and to get in touch with yourself. .... To putter is to discover.
---ALEXANDRA STODDARD

In my mind there is a significant distinction between straightening,
cleaning, and "puttering." The first two homecaring tasks are the
underpinnings, providing the order necessary for ritual. Puttering is
the intersection of introspection and inspiration. It's not on our
"to-do" list, therefore it charms, centers, and cajoles stressed
spirits. But I can't begin to enjoy rearranging personal mementos or a
beautiful vase of flowers with clutter all around me and cobwebs in the
corners. (Surely I'm not the only woman in the world who has ever
glanced up at a corner of her living room and found a masterpiece worthy
of Charlotte's Web?) So I usually set aside late Saturday afternoon for
puttering after the house is a fresh canvas inviting me to create.
Unlike cleaning, which can be a group activity, puttering is a solitary
pursuit, to be approached with an unhurried pace for maximum
metaphysical benefits. The essence of puttering is rearranging, although
I also consider polishing silver, washing china and crystal, displaying
flowers, even moving furniture to be part of the puttering genus. Part
of the pleasure of puttering is free association. Think of puttering as
a domestic Rorschach test. Instead of interpreting inkblots, we muse on
the hidden meaning of personal possessions until we flow on to dreams,
choices, risks, pleasures, authentic preferences. You only think you're
rearranging favorite things on a mantel, bookcase, or tabletop when
you're really creating a fresh interior lifescape. "Creative puttering"
is actually one of my favorite things to do at home," writer and
interior designer Alexandra Stoddard

reveals. "It helps us to become aware of what's still important to us,
what continues to have meaning. This quiet, private act can ... bring
the different aspects of your life into sharp focus---and identify your
needs." Music plays an important part in my puttering ritual. I love to
listen to music while homecaring, and my selections, depending on mood
and task, range from Bach to Broadway. But for the most introspective
puttering, I'll choose a movie sound track, such as Out of Africa. As I
listen to John Barry's haunting score while rearranging family pictures
or my small collection of Irish cut glass, or while replacing winter's
dried boughs with fresh flowers, I can't help thinking of Isak Dinesen
packing up her silver, crystal goblets, and Limoges china when she
emigrated to Africa from Denmark just before World War I. She could not
imagine living anywhere without her cherished personal possessions
around her. Judith Thurman tells us, in Isak Dinesen: The Life of a
Storyteller, that "the ambition \[was\] to make her home an oasis of
civilization." This is my heart's ambition as well, even if my
wilderness is a small city in Maryland and not the plains of Kenya.
Whether your home is in the city, country, or suburbia, each in its own
way offers fertile ground upon which to sow your dreams. Puttering
scatters the seeds. In due time we shall reap an abundant harvest of
contentment. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 21

A Nest of Comforts Ah! There's nothing like staying home for real
comfort. ---JANE AUSTEN

Jane Austen's novels are known for their witty, ironic, and perceptive
slices of eighteenth-century English family life. But they also reveal,
between the lines, their author's love of cozy "nest\[s\] of comforts."
Miss Austen, who wrote at a little desk drawn close to her hearth,
describes such a haven in her novel Mansfield Park, in which her
heroine, Fanny Price, can retreat "after anything unpleasant ... and
find immediate consolation in some pursuit, or some train of thought.
Her plants, her books ... her writing desk, and her works of charity and
ingenuity, were all within her reach ... she could scarcely see an
object in the room which had not an interesting remembrance connected
with it." No matter what our decorating style---realized or aspired
to---the essential spiritual grace our homes should possess is the
solace of comfort. As we discover and express our authenticity through
our surroundings, comfort becomes our first priority. After I began the
Simple Abundance path, it shocked me to discover that there were very
few places around my home where I felt truly comfortable. The search for
authenticity is like living on a fault line; you never know when the
earth is going to move beneath your feet. One day I realized that I
spent much of my free time reading in my bedroom, unintentionally away
from my husband and daughter, not because of a need for privacy, but
because I didn't have a comfortable chair to snuggle into in the living
room. My husband had his place on the sofa, my daughter claimed the love
seat, while I often ended up in the bedroom by default, when I would
have much preferred to be sharing time with them. When I became aware of
this, we had a family discussion

about how to make ourselves feel more comfortable at home. Now we're
saving while patiently searching for what we need to create a nest of
comfort that will cradle all our bodies and souls. Today, think about
your own nest. Is it so cozy that you never want to leave? It should be.
Do you have the comforts that you crave? Do you even know what they are?
When was the last time you gave your comfort the thought it richly
deserves? Today, make a wish list: soft, snug places to sit; plump
pillows to support or encourage you to take a nap; a place to put your
feet up; proper reading lamps; plenty of bookcases; something always on
hand that's interesting, illuminating, or irresistible to read; places
to display favorite things; convenient tables for refreshments; a
well-organized and well-stocked desk from which to run your life; as
decent a sound system as you can afford and a personal music collection
that reflects your many moods; a good coffeemaker, a pretty teapot or
juice squeezer; plants and flowers to delight; backyard furniture that
beckons you to linger and a pretty garden or terrace to linger in.
Everyone's list will be different. Take the time to figure out what you
need. Think about rooms in which you have felt instantly at home
throughout your life, even if they weren't yours. What appealed to you
and made you want to stay? Comfort was probably the key. Today, consider
what you need to create a personal nest that comforts body and soul.
OceanofPDF.com

MAY 22

The Home of Your Dreams If I were asked to name the chief benefit of the
house, I should say: the house shelters daydreaming. ---GASTON BACHELARD

Did you ever see the witty and winsome 1948 movie classic, Mr. Blandings
Builds His Dream House, starring Cary Grant and Myrna Loy? This charming
cautionary tale is about a successful New York advertising executive and
his family, who live in a cramped city apartment and long for their own
home in the suburbs. They embark on an expensive adventure to build the
perfect rose-covered cottage in Connecticut. Each day the modest house
grows larger and so do their bills. It's a saga anyone who has ever
bought a house knows only too well. But at the end of all the Blandings'
tribulations their dream comes true, even if their nerves are frayed and
their bank account is overdrawn. I hope they lived happily ever after;
it turned out to be a wonderful house. It takes literally years to birth
a dream, whether it's a family, a career, a home, or a lifestyle. Dreams
also extract a price. An ancient proverb puts it this way: "Take what
you want, says the good God, but be prepared to pay for it." Dreams cost
money, sweat, frustration, tears, courage, choices, perseverance, and
extraordinary patience. But birthing a dream requires one more thing.
Love. Only love can transform a houseful of needy, selfcentered
individuals into a loving, close-knit family, a passion into a
livelihood, or a mere dwelling into a home that perfectly expresses your
authenticity. Even when money is not a consideration, love and time are
still necessary to turn a house into a home. Samuel Clemens moved into
his dream house with his beloved wife Livy and their three daughters in
1874.

It was an imposing, nineteen-room, red-brick Gothic Victorian mansion in
Hartford, Connecticut. Over the next thirty-five years Mr. Clemens
devotedly decorated, renovated, and lavished so much expense on his
house that his passion drove him into bankruptcy. (Which he resolved by
writing books as "Mark Twain.") Because of all the love he and his
family bestowed on their home, "it had a heart and a soul, and eyes to
see with; and approvals and solicitudes and deep sympathies; it was of
us, and we were in its confidence and lived in its grace and in the
peace of its benedictions. We never came home from an absence that its
face did not light up and speak out in eloquent welcome---and we could
not enter it unmoved." Is there a woman here who doesn't long to live in
such a home? A home that embraces, nurtures, sustains, and inspires?
Still, many of us think this will only happen when we've got the money
to move someplace else. Surely, it can't happen here. I mean, just look
at this place! But let's take another look. "I dwell in possibility,"
Emily Dickinson confided. We can, too. Don't look at the problems.
Search for the possibilities. It doesn't matter where you live at this
moment. You may be in a trailer, an apartment, or a house. You may even
be rooming in a motel. It may not be your dream but it does shelter your
dreams. Those dreams can transform it into the home for which you long.
Love knows how to paint, refinish, plaster, wallpaper, stencil, plant,
sew, and build, even on a budget. Love knows that whatever you lack in
your checking account can be made up by investing time, creative energy,
and emotion. We need to learn Love's decorating secrets. But before we
pick up a hammer, a paintbrush, or the real estate ads, we need to
daydream. Walk through the different rooms where you eat, sleep, and
live. Bless the walls, the roof, the windows, and the foundation. Give
thanks as you sift and sort, simplify, and bring order to the home you
have. Realize that the home of your dreams dwells within. You must find
it in the secret sanctuary of your heart today before you can cross the
threshold of tomorrow. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 23

Nurturing Your Authentic Flair An interior is the natural projection of
the soul. ---COCO CHANEL

Many of us think of discovering our authentic decorating style as a
destination when really it's a point of departure. I am---as I write---
completely reconsidering my entire house. Not to move from, but to
continue to live in and love. How it works, how it looks, who it looks
like. Today it certainly doesn't look like anyone I recognize. As you
awaken to your authenticity, you may notice that bare walls, windows,
and floors beckon invitingly like a new lover, while the stuff you've
accumulated over a lifetime doesn't seem to even notice that you're in
the room. It would be fun to eat dinner tonight with my husband and
daughter on a wooden crate by candlelight eagerly awaiting a new
interior ---the authentic projection of my soul---to be delivered
tomorrow morning. However, my bank account, probably like yours, won't
permit this fantasy and so I have to proceed slowly. We need to view
this as an opportunity instead of a stumbling block. Our real life
budgets may delay the process longer than our conscious minds might
wish---especially when flipping through glossy magazines---but it's the
perfect pace to nurture our authentic flair. To be honest with you, this
morning I'm not exactly sure of how I want to express myself through my
surroundings. Are you? I thought I knew. I've loved some things
passionately that have brought me great pleasure for twenty-five years.
But I've also lived with other things I hated so intensely I became
psychically numb to their presence. The Simple Abundance path is about
transformation. But transformation cannot occur without transition. This
is a transitional period of liminality when things are barely
perceptible

---a personal rite of passage, from sleepwalking to awakening. The
process is the reality and it cannot be rushed. So we learn to wait
patiently. To consider. Save. Reflect. Simplify. Embrace order. Get
ready. Experiment. Observe. Embark on creative window-shopping
excursions to antique and craft shows, auctions, renovator supply
companies, thrift stores, flea markets, yard, tag, and estate sales,
museums, interior design expositions, elegant decorative accessory
shops, furniture showrooms, museums, and galleries. If you see something
you like, ask if there is to be a sale in the near future. Take detailed
notes. See how other people live or have lived by taking jaunts to
decorator showcases, historic homes, and all the wonderful
house-and-garden tours that take place in the spring. Read books, clip
magazines and catalogs. Continue to prime the well with visual images,
collecting everything that you can on paper, from fabulous table
settings to beautiful curtain treatments. Mary Emmerling---a woman I
absolutely love, with an incredible authentic style that's grounded in
common sense---has a wonderful suggestion for creating a personalized
decorating notebook to help us keep track of our meditative musings. She
uses a zippered, canvas, looseleaf notebook (seven by nine inches) with
plenty of pockets for such tools as a tape measure, scissors, pens,
pencils, paper clips, sharpener, and calculator. She gives each room a
section of its own, complete with a wish list, photographs charting
changes, a floor plan, and an envelope for paint chips, fabric swatches,
and receipts. In the back of the book she keeps a year's calendar noting
sales and special events and a personalized resource guide with the
names and phone numbers of stores, showrooms, dealers, contractors, and
material suppliers. It's a dream archive that she can carry around with
her so that she can catch inspiration as it floats by instead of letting
it dissolve into the ether. If you follow some of these suggestions,
you'll be well on your way to developing and nurturing your authentic
flair. Instead of being frustrated, you'll be grateful that you've been
given the extraordinary gift of time--- time to know what you love so
you can love how you live. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 24

The Fullness of Nothing Since we cannot change reality, let us change
the eyes which see reality. ---NIKOS KAZANTZAKIS

My husband came home from work last night and appeared puzzled. "Why's
the mantel bare? And where are all the pictures?" As I poured each of us
a glass of wine, I told him I was experimenting with positive and
negative space. "Positive and negative what?" "Space, Dad," the artist
in the family explained, looking up from her homework which was spread
across the dining room table. "Artists use it to achieve harmony in
their work." "So do the Japanese ..." I added. "Fine---artists,
Japanese, whatever---but what does it mean and how does it explain where
everything's gone?" Never assume that the people in your life,
especially those closest to you, won't innocently meddle in your
internal affairs while you're on the path to authenticity. Always
remember, the predictable woman they know is more familiar than the
woman they don't know, even if she's the Real you. When an artist
prepares to draw or paint, she carefully considers the balance between
both "positive shapes" and "negative spaces." Positive shapes are the
instantly recognizable objects that are rendered on paper or canvas,
such as a bowl of fruit in a still life. The negative spaces surround
the objects and define them with a boundary. As many artists will tell
you, it is far easier to draw the negative spaces between the positive
shapes before anything else. That's because, to the eye trained to see
beauty, nothing is invisible. What looks empty to the rest of us appears
to the

artist's eye as full, a complete mystery in its own right. The space
surrounding the bowl of fruit is as important as the bowl itself if
Wholeness is to emerge. In the Japanese culture, the negative spaces in
art, philosophy, religion, design, business, and life are not thought of
as empty but rather as "full of nothing." Richard Tanner Pascale
explains in Zen and the Art of Management that the empty spaces, or the
"shroud of the unknown surrounding certain events," is referred to in
Japanese as ma, a word for which there is no English translation. To the
Western mind this concept is a little hard to grasp. But to the Oriental
mind, the empty space is pregnant with possibility, shrouded by the
unknown until the time is right for it to be revealed. As the enigmatic
Irish playwright Samuel Beckett (who was more Zen than Celtic) put it,
"Nothing is more real than nothing." Which explains why my mantel is
bare at this moment. Gradually, through Simple Abundance, I have
discovered that I've outgrown the objects that lived there for years,
and my authentic self has yet to reveal what should now take their
place, if anything. So, at least for a little while, I am enjoying the
fullness of nothing. It's difficult for many of us to accept that
emptiness---in life or in a living room---can have a positive influence.
I think we need to learn how to tolerate more empty spaces. We need
either to become more comfortable with waiting to fill what's empty with
what's authentic or become just willing to accept the exquisite fullness
of nothing. Life's landscape becomes a lot more interesting when we
realize there's an entire dimension we've never considered before simply
because we couldn't see it. There is an uncluttered elegance to my bare
mantel, a refreshing restraint in the room, that feels new and inviting.
What I'm inviting is my authenticity to express itself through my
surroundings, maybe one object at a time. Today you might like to create
some empty spaces in your home to jump-start your ability to see things
in a new light. Move some furniture out of a room. Take pictures off a
wall. Clear off tabletops. Experience the fullness of nothing for a
week. Then pretend you have just moved into a new home. Don't be
surprised if the woman you are becoming reveals that she needs more
space in which to grow. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 25

Passion: The Authentic Muse What is passion? It is surely the becoming
of a person. ---JOHN BOORMAN

Many women long to live passionate lives, to be swept away---but at a
safe distance and in small doses. That's why we are drawn to juicy
novels, three-hanky movies, soap operas, platonic flirtations, and
personality journalism that glorifies lives larger than our own.
Passion, after all, means the abandonment of reason in the reckless
pursuit of pleasure: rushing off with an Argentine polo-playing paramour
instead of picking up the afternoon car pool. Passion is wild, chaotic,
unpredictable. Permissive. Excessive. Obsessive. Glenn Close in Fatal
Attraction. Passionate women can't help but exult in their emotions,
revel in their desires, howl at the moon, act out their fantasies, boil
a pet rabbit. The rest of us have real life responsibilities that leave
little room (or so we think) for giving in to passionate impulses: runny
noses to wipe, dogs to walk, FedEx pickup deadlines to meet, Brownie
snacks to prepare, sales conferences to attend, orthodontist
appointments to make, summer camp forms to fill out, trains to catch,
supper to put on the table. There goes the day. There goes a life, and
not with a bang, but a whimper and a whine. What we don't realize is
that passion is the muse of authenticity. It's the primordial, pulsating
energy that infuses all of life, the numinous presence made known with
every beat of our hearts. Passion does not reveal herself only in
clandestine, romantic, bodice-ripping cliches. Passion's nature is also
cloaked in the deep, subtle, quiet, and committed: nursing a baby,
planting a rose garden, preparing a special meal, caring for a loved one
who is ill, remembering a friend's birthday, persevering in a dream.
Every day

offers us another opportunity to live passionate lives rather than
passive ones, if we will bear witness to passion's immutable presence in
the prosaic. If we will stop denying ourselves pleasure. If, as James
Joyce's heroine Molly Bloom whispered, we can only learn to say "... and
yes I said yes I will Yes." Passion is holy---a profound Mystery that
transcends and transforms through rapture. We need to accept that a
sacred fire burns within, whether we're comfortable with this truth or
not. Passion is part of Real Life's package because we were created by
Love, for Love, to Love. If we do not give outward expression to our
passions, we will experience selfimmolation --- the spontaneous
combustion of our souls. Did you know that both the Koran, the sacred
book of Islam, and the Jewish Talmud teach that we will be called to
account for every permissible pleasure life offered us but which we
refused to enjoy while on earth? Dorothy L. Sayers, the deeply spiritual
English writer, believed, "The only sin passion can commit is to be
joyless." Go now. Depart in peace and sin no more. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 26

Let Passion Be Your Decorator Passion is what you need to be good, an
unforgiving passion. ---DAVID EASTON

One of my favorite pastimes is reading novels that celebrate domestic
delights. The pages of Kathleen Norris, Laurie Colwin, and Rosamund
Pilcher reveal, not only passionate love affairs, but delectable
descriptions of food and furnishings that capture my imagination even
more than the plots. Another favorite literary domestic is Daphne du
Maurier. Here is her rendering of the first Mrs. de Winter's study from
her novel Rebecca: "This was a woman's room, graceful, fragile, the room
of someone who had chosen every particle of furniture with great care,
so that each chair, each vase, each small infinitesimal thing should be
in harmony with one another and with her own personality. It was as
though she who had arranged this room had said: 'This I will have, and
this, and this,' taking piece by piece from the treasures in Manderley
each object that pleased her best, ignoring the second-rate, the
mediocre, laying her hand with sure and certain instinct only upon the
best." Achieving authentic harmony through our surroundings---laying our
hands with sure and certain instinct on that which best expresses our
sense of self---begins to occur as order is gradually restored to our
lives and our homes. But even if you have not yet found the time to
clear closets and drawers of clutter, or sift and sort through your
belongings and decided what is beautiful, useful, or sentimental, don't
be discouraged. Important inner work is taking place that will soon
become visible. Probably because I am a writer, I think discovering your
authentic decorating style is very similar to the creative stages of
writing a book. A

book may look inanimate, but like a home, it lives, breathes, and
expresses your being. As a writer, the gleam of inspiration comes first;
your decorating discoveries might begin with a picture of a living room
that makes you sigh. To flesh out the initial idea, I then need to do
research; that's what you're doing on your creative excursions and with
your decorating archive. Next, I need an outline; you would develop a
plan or budget. At this point, I'm usually overwhelmed by the enormity
of the project; you may be, too. For me, this feeling only subsides
after I plunge in and start to write my rough draft; perhaps you're now
pulling up the old carpet to refinish your floors, or you've begun
stripping wallpaper or painting. Usually after I've finished the rough
draft, there's an initial sigh of relief followed by another wave of
panic. (Does this really work?) However, once I step back and begin to
edit, a sense of calm is restored. Ideas come fast as the book---or the
room--- begins to take shape. Now the real fun starts: revising. This is
the stage in which you make the room come alive with personal
flourishes, adding the decorative details and accessories that have
special meaning. I love the flourish of revising because you get to fix
what doesn't work, making what does work even better. But we're still
not finished: the first draft is always followed by another and another,
with more revising until my editor tells me it's time to stop. However,
when you're creating a visual memoir through your surroundings, it's a
never-ending story. You don't have to stop. What's more, you really
can't. You'll always be revealing a new aspect of your personality as
you discover it. You'll constantly be editing, weeding out what you
outgrow, making both subtle and significant decorating changes as the
chapters of your life allow for, or demand, rewrites. But whether we're
writing a book or creating a home, we need to bring a sense of passion
to our work. Let passion be your muse, the authentic decorator. Let her
guide and teach you to trust your instincts. Aspire to live surrounded
only by those things that you passionately love. Be patient: a magnum
opus can take a lifetime to create. The famous interior decorator Elsie
de Wolfe admitted, "I can't paint. I can't write. I can't sing. But I
can decorate and run a house, and light it, and heat it, and have it
like a living thing ..." With passion as your authentic

decorator, every room in your home can tell a riveting tale about the
extraordinary woman who graces it with her presence. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 27

An Interior Vision Inventory We shape our dwellings, and afterwards our
dwellings shape us. ---WINSTON CHURCHILL

The fantasy is that you simply start with a color, a couch, or a pine
cupboard that you absolutely adore. So far, so good. What next? Now you
effortlessly pull the room together, expressing through your dazzling
creative choices---the carpet, the curtains, the crockery, the coffee
table--- the woman who loves Art Deco or cozy English cottages. But what
if today you suddenly don't know what you want to hang over the couch,
lay on the floor, or put on the shelves? What if the couch came from
your husband's first marriage, the carpet from your mother, the coffee
table from Goodwill? What if you know what you want, but have to choose
between that pine cupboard and a much-needed new car? Then it's time for
an interior vision inventory. One of the benefits of sorting through
your belongings and identifying what's beautiful, useful, or sentimental
is that clarity emerges. You will probably be surprised by how much you
already own that is simply waiting to be reconsidered, rearranged,
reupholstered, refinished. Just don't be surprised to discover that even
if what you live with is beautiful, it might no longer suit you. A dear
friend of mine collected kilim pillows with a passion for years. But one
day it occurred to her that she hadn't been spending as much time in the
living room as in the past, even though she'd invested lots of money and
energy to decorate it and loved the look. She finally realized that the
patterns were too busy to come home to after the rigors of a long day
and that the dark colors, while dramatic, depressed her. Torn between
being practical---just letting the room stay the way it was ---and
discovering what truly pleased her now, she opted for pleasure. She

not only wanted to bring the room to life, she needed to be able to live
in it. Her new passion became peace of mind. The first step was to empty
the room, leaving only the couches, which she recovered with plain white
slipcovers. She painted the walls and bookcases white and eliminated the
pillows. But since the pillows are still beautiful, she's storing them
until another setting invites their presence. The only color in the room
comes from her beloved books. Her new personal flourish is restraint.
Now when she comes home she feels contented instead of uncomfortable,
which, after all, is what authentic decorating should be about.
Decorating shouldn't be about how a room looks in a magazine as much as
how you feel in that room. If you are to create rooms with an authentic
view, self-exploration must come before paint chips and fabric swatches.
Personal flourishes can bridge the gap while we wait for our interior
vision to find outward expression in our surroundings. Maybe you can't
afford a new sofa just yet, but could afford new throw pillows to give
it a lift. Maybe you could give a lamp a new look with a different
shade, arrange flowers in a teapot instead of a vase, find a pretty
porcelain cup to hold pens, position a picture on a small easel instead
of a wall, hook a rug of your own design, take the doors off the kitchen
cabinets, learn what you can live without. Personal flourishes can be
had for little or no money if you are willing to invest passion,
perseverance, patience, and a fresh perspective. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 28

By Love Possessed Your possessions express your personality. Few things,
including clothes, are more personal than your cherished ornaments. The
pioneer women, who crossed a wild continent clutching their treasures to
them, knew that a clock, a picture, a pair of candlesticks, meant home,
even in the wilderness. ---GOOD HOUSEKEEPING, August 1952

In July 1846, Margaret Reed reluctantly left her beloved home in
Springfield, Illinois, with her husband James, their four children, and
her ailing mother and set off for California. Margaret had stubbornly
resisted her husband's entreaties to move for months, begging him not to
abandon the charmed life of comfort and culture they enjoyed. But her
Victorian husband, who was a wealthy furniture manufacturer, sought even
more wealth, as well as adventure, and in the end, his will prevailed.
Much of James Reed's success in persuading Margaret lay in his promise
that she would travel in unsurpassed luxury and style, with all her
prized personal possessions. He kept his word. Never before had a
covered wagon been built like the Reeds' and never would one be built
like it again. Two stories high, with a sleeping loft, it was outfitted
with spring seats just like the best stagecoaches, an iron stove, velvet
curtains, and her cherished organ. It was stocked with six months'
supply of the best food and wine money could buy. As the wagon pulled
into formation with the rest of the Donner Party to head west, it was
difficult not to stare and gasp. The tragic saga of the Donner Party is
the most indelible tale of triumph and despair ever written in the
history of the American West. Twenty-five hundred miles away from home
and only two days from safety, thirty-one men, women, and children were
stranded for an entire winter in the Sierra

Nevada mountains by a succession of the worst blizzards on record. Out
of provisions and starving, some members resorted to cannibalism in
order to survive. Margaret and her children were not among them. She
kept them all alive on snow, bark, and leather broth until James, who
had left the group to ride on ahead to California seeking a rescue
party, returned. The fact that her family did not perish---physically or
spiritually---had absolutely nothing to do with the worldly goods she
had counted on, for the wagon and all it carried had to be abandoned
along the way because it was too heavy and cumbersome to travel through
the mountains. The possessions that saved Margaret and those she loved
were of Spirit---her wits, her faith, and her courage. My daughter's
godmother lives in Hollywood. In the terrible Los Angeles earthquake of
1994 she lost nearly all her personal possessions. She and her husband
were not hurt, thank heavens, nor was their home structurally damaged,
but she learned a valuable lesson about loss. So many things went at
once: her home as she knew it, her basic assumptions about safety, and
the tangible proofs of her existence, which is what our prized
belongings visibly demonstrate. In a few minutes, everything from
valuable antiques to sentimental souvenirs became pieces of jagged
glass, shards of china, and splinters of wood on the floor waiting to be
swept up and thrown in the trash. Once the initial shock wore off, she
said that the loss of her possessions actually became very liberating.
After the sharp pain came peace. All sorts of things she thought she
couldn't live without, all the things she believed were crucial to
expressing her personality became what they really are, just things. Now
as she re-creates a nest of comfort, she's surrounding herself only with
objects that she really needs or loves---the useful and the
beautiful---but fewer than before. Her eye is more discriminating now.
She has learned what she can live without and feels lighter. She admits
to enjoying her new possessions with a sense of detachment because she
knows that with another jolt they could be gone tomorrow. While I've
been on the Simple Abundance path, I've consulted a century's worth of
decorating books and women's magazines, searching for simple pleasures
to share. They all express the commonly held belief that possessions
define a person. During the Victorian period, worldly goods were viewed
as evidence of God's favor, and I think that attitude is still very

much part of the American consciousness. Certainly I believed it until I
began the journey to authenticity. But as I meditated, ruminated, mulled
over, and tried to write about how our possessions define us, the Spirit
within balked. Reared up and refused to cooperate. Shut down so that I
would shut up perpetuating such nonsense. If a writer has a block, it's
usually because she doesn't believe in what she's writing. Here's what I
believe. I believe our possessions can be very revealing, offering
insights into our personalities in intimate and illuminating ways. I
believe surrounding ourselves with objects that speak to our souls can
bring us authentic moments of pleasure. But I do not believe our
possessions define us. Instead, I believe it's what you love that
expresses the authentic woman you are, not what you own. When Jacqueline
Kennedy Onassis died, much was written about her style and strength, her
grace and beauty. If ever there was a woman who lived by her own lights
it was Jackie. Yet here was a woman who could have had virtually
anything she wanted in the world, and yet her most prized possession was
her privacy, a gift you probably don't think about very much. But what
struck even a deeper chord in me was her son's recollection of what
meant the most to her: "The love of words, the bonds of home and family,
and her spirit of adventure." Her passions defined this extraordinary
woman. Today I wish for you, as I wish for myself, that when our
authentic adventure comes to a close, we can also be remembered as being
by love possessed. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 29

Favorite Things: Enjoying Cherished Collections Each item in a
collection has its own story, its own memory---the search, the day you
bought it, who you were with, the vacation... ---TRICIA GUILD AND
ELIZABETH WILHIDE

My husband collects baseball movies and political campaign literature,
Katie adores Hollywood memorabilia, and I love teapots,
blue-and-whitepatterned china, the sparkle of Waterford crystal, and
books. This year, however, instead of objects, I have been collecting
other women's thoughts, weaving them into the fabric of my daily life.
It is probably the most marvelous collection I've ever pursued, and it
has cost me nothing but time and creative energy. What do you collect?
What favorite things have you accumulated over the years that you now
lovingly display around your home? I hope you collect something that you
love with a passion, for there are few pleasures that can compare to
browsing in little, out-of-the-way shops and flea markets, searching for
that mysterious object of desire, the value of which you alone know in
this world. The thrill of the hunt is only equaled by the discovery. You
see it---over there---its beauty beckoning you to come closer for a
better look. Quietly it whispers,' Take me home." Heart pounding, you
turn it over for its price, to see whether you can. Success! Casually,
for you would not want to give away your secret, you pay for it,
exchanging pleasantries, then slowly walk out the door smiling.
(Gloating is considered bad form.) The shopkeeper has no idea what a
treasure he gave away. What's important is that you do.

Then comes the joy of bringing it to its new home, rearranging its
companions to show off your prize. You stand back. It's perfect: the
moment and your collection. For several years I collected Victorian
motto cups. The first time I found one of these nineteenth-century china
mugs (declaring "Think of Me"), Katie and I were roaming through the
antique shops in Saratoga Springs, New York, with one of our favorite
people in all the world, my sister-in-law, Karen. It was a wonderful
summer afternoon full of good company and great cheer. Suddenly, there
it was, just sitting quietly on a table, a white china mug with burgundy
and gold-leaf flowers and embossed lettering. I had never seen one
before and was immediately charmed. I picked it up and put it down.
Walked around the store and came back to it. Put it down again. Finally
Katie convinced me that for \$ 10, how could I be without it? (There's
nothing like shopping with an accomplice.) I was so pleased with my
purchase that right then I decided I would collect these cups, and over
the next couple of years searched for them across the country. But the
ones that followed never quite matched the delight I felt when I
purchased the first. So I gradually lost interest in them. Then one
Memorial Day weekend at the beach I was rereading Anne Morrow
Lindbergh's Gift from the Sea, an annual ritual of renewal--- especially
satisfying if I can dig my toes into wet sand while I'm doing it.
Earlier that morning I'd been foraging and had passed up another cup. I
was actually a bit puzzled by this phenomenon. Mrs. Lindbergh told me:
"The collector walks with blinders on, he sees nothing but the prize. In
fact, the acquisitive instinct is incompatible with the appreciation of
beauty." This certainly explained my disappointment with the cups that
followed the first one. I was less beguiled by their individual beauty
than I was compelled to collect them. Actually, what I really wanted to
do was to re-create the wonderful memory of that summer day spent with
Karen and Katie. Now I have that first cup---that tangible
memory---sitting on my desk holding pens. Its singular beauty never
fails to please me. I've started to give away the other cups as gifts,
receiving more pleasure in sharing them than I ever did in buying them.
I still delight in bringing home treasures---but now, when something
catches my eye, I stop for a moment to remember Mrs. Lindbergh's advice:
"To ask how little, not how much, can I get along with. To say---is it

necessary?---when I am tempted to add one more accumulation to my life."
If I think I can't live without the object of desire and I can afford
it, I'll collect it. But now I pause first. Simple Abundance is not
about saying "no" to our creative impulses, whether in collecting,
dressing, or decorating. It's about knowing when to say "enough" because
we know that all we have is all we really need. "One cannot collect all
the beautiful shells on the beach. One can collect only a few, and they
are more beautiful if they are few." OceanofPDF.com

MAY 30

Finders, Keepers: The Fun of Foraging The whole thrill of junking is
that you just know the next table will have what you've been looking for
all your life. ---MARY RANDOLPH CARTER

This time of the year you can usually find me foraging on weekends.
Rambling and roaming, I rummage, following handwritten signs posted on
telephone poles. Searching for nothing in particular and everything in
general. Why should I limit myself with expectation? The sun is shining,
I've got a full tank of gas, ice-cold lemonade in a thermos, money in my
pocket. Sometimes a sidekick rides along, other times I'm footloose and
fancy free, just a thrill away from finding what I've been looking for
all my life, though Heaven only knows what that is. Maybe today I'll
find out. Now is the season of yard, garage, tag sales and weekend flea
markets. It's time to trade in mall shopping for the lure of outdoor
tables. Foraging is good for the soul. Often after we've made a major
change in our lifestyle by tightening the purse strings---whether it's
voluntary or necessary---a deprivation detox is required. The world
hasn't stopped selling, we've just stopped buying. It's easy to start
feeling a little self-pitying, especially when we are bombarded on all
sides with the kind of slick advertising that pushes all our emotional
buttons in an effort to convince us that more is what we need, not less.
You may intellectually want to divest yourself of the desire for worldly
goods, but the material girl in all of us still suffers from the
"gimmies." The best way I've discovered to hush her up is to take her
out more often to outdoor stalls and sales. I lump all outdoor shopping
under the heading of flea market finds, but there are a few distinctions
worth noting. Yard, tag, and garage sales mean someone else hopes their
trash will become your treasure. It might, but

you've often got to sort through old Tupperware to find it. Still it
can't hurt to look. Estate and moving sales offer the best assortment of
recycled furniture, household goods, even clothing. Estate sales are
often run by professional dealers, so they're more organized and usually
start on a Friday running through the weekend; check newspapers for
times and locations. Plan on getting there early for the best selection,
but at the end of the day or on Sunday afternoon you'll get the best
deals. Weekend flea markets are where professional dealers---many from
hundreds of miles away---gather to sell their wares outdoors. You can
find virtually anything, from antiques to junk, and the prices will
reflect this. "The strategy of flea market shopping is simple, yet
complex," reveals interior designer Charlotte Moss in her book A Passion
for Detail. "If you go in search of a particular object your eye will
"edit out" other very suitable objects. This method sets you up for
disappointment. However, if you go for the pleasure of it, for the mere
hunt, you are bound to see something to come home with.... Don't forget
that objects are not the only benefit to shopping a flea market. Your
curiosity will be rewarded and you may come home with some great
ideas---and the exhilaration is free!" I have four Simple Abundance
suggestions to share that can help make your outings more
pleasurable: 1. Always remember and claim that Divine abundance is your
only reality and that Divine abundance will richly manifest itself for
you in the perfect purchase at the perfect price if it is for your
highest good. 2. Always ask, "Is this the best you can do?" It's a
friendly way of bargaining and you never know. 3. Always know what
you're going to do with the item when you get it home. I know a woman
who had a yard sale to get rid of all the things she'd accumulated in a
decade of compulsive yard sale bingeing. Just because it's cheap doesn't
mean it's your bargain. 4. Always set yourself a fixed limit of what
you're going to spend for guiltfree shopping. I usually allow myself
\$10---20 per weekend in the summer for foraging. (Anything over this
amount is not a creative impulse but a choice requiring careful
consideration.) Always bring cash; it helps to control your spending,
and most outdoor sales don't take checks or credit cards anyway. The
amount you set doesn't matter as much as your psychological limit. Many
weekends I end up not buying anything at all. I

just enjoy the chase. And since, of course, you've decided to buy only
what's useful or beautiful (preferably both), you're not wasting money;
you're investing in your creativity. After all, you can experiment with
a new painting technique, such as sponging, stippling, or spattering on
a \$ 10 bureau, and if it doesn't work, you can try again. "It's not
about cost or provenance," writer and photographer Mary Randolph Carter
reminds us about the beauty of found objects. "You make a connection
with something. You want to give it a home and a new life." Foraging
gives us the ability to view the old and abandoned in a new light ---
reclaiming them from oblivion with creativity and choice, just as we do
the days of our lives---and redeeming them with love. OceanofPDF.com

MAY 31

Child's Play: Introducing a Touch of Whimsy and Wit to Your Surroundings
Oh, the fun of arriving at a house and feeling the spark that tells you
that you are going to have a good time. ---MARK HAMPTON

Many women approach decorating very seriously. But often the homes that
best express their owner's authentic sense of style are decorated with a
lighthearted touch. They possess that spark of high spirits that tells
you good times are part of this home's personal history. "I like houses
to be cozy, comfortable, and personal," Candice Bergen confesses. "Not
cluttered, but filled with interesting objects and toys and as many
jokes as I can get away with." Our sense of humor doesn't have to be
communicated through sight gags so much as expressed through the subtle
charm of the unexpected through whimsy and wit. From one family's
fascinating collection of Niagara Falls souvenir kitsch displayed on
their dining room sideboard to another's amusing salt and pepper
assortment playfully lining the shelves in their sunny kitchen, a spirit
of spontaneity can fill your home with fun. The whimsical world of Mary
Engelbreit's home---like her delightful Engelbreit designs and
illustrations that grace everything from greeting cards to wall
coverings today---is one that many of us are drawn to instinctively.
Mary's warmhearted blending of cozy nostalgia and wry wit is both
touchingly familiar and disarmingly fresh. A constant source of
inspiration to her are the classic children's storybooks that belonged
to her mother and grandmother. In Mary's own home, her personal
decorating look includes an exuberant alchemy of bright, colorful
patterns mixed with

the crisp black-and-white checked borders and bold red cherries that
have become her signature. Hand-painted touches abound on stair
railings, furniture, and floors. Across her living room hearth she's
painted her personal philosophy of life and decorating: "Be Warm Inside
and Out." The golden age of childhood captured in the children's
illustrations of yesteryear can be a rich archive of decorating
inspiration for you as well. One way to begin is to scour used-book
stores looking for children's books from the turn of the century to the
1950s. Some of my favorite illustrators who incorporate enchanting
decorating details in their work include Jessie Willcox Smith, Eloise
Wilkin, Margaret Tarrant, Harriet Bennett, and Sarah Stilwell. By
revisiting your first decorating influences once again, you might
reawaken a long-forgotten desire to hear the soft ticking of a mantel
clock or be inspired to build yourself a window seat for rainy day
retreats; refurbish an overstuffed, flea market footstool with a vintage
fabric; cover your kitchen table with a fruit-laden tablecloth; or add a
row of ball fringe to a curtain. "It don't mean a thing," Duke Ellington
reminds us, "if it ain't got that swing"---whether it be music or our
homes. Today, jazz up your decorating ideas with a sense of playfulness
drawn from rooms of enduring charm that spoke to you in the past.

Joyful Simplicities for May • On May Day, hang a basket of flowers on
your front door and your next-door neighbor's. A breathtaking May
bouquet that is the essence of Simple Abundance can be created with
small stems of pink dogwood blossoms, lilacs, and white peony tulips.
Share a bouquet with someone who works with you. Wear a small posy on
your jacket lapel. • For Mother's Day, give yourself a small token of
esteem (you know what you really want) to honor the Great Mother within.
See if it can be something from your comfort wish list. Do this whether
you have children or not. If you do have children, forgive yourself for
not living up to your own expectations (who could?), mentally toss out
last year's accumulation of guilt, and start off fresh. If your own
mother is still alive, take the time this year to write her the long
letter you've often thought about writing,

sharing all the loving things you want her to know. If your mother is
not in this world, talk to her in your heart. She'll hear you. • Learn
about the ancient Chinese art of feng shui. A good place to start: Feng
Shui: The Chinese Art of Placement and Interior Design with Feng Shui,
both by Sarah Rossbach. Move twenty-seven belongings as your begin to
bring order to your house. • Tackle just one junk drawer. • One Saturday
afternoon after cleaning, putter for an hour to your favorite music.
Rearrange your favorite collection of personal mementos and pictures.
Savor the sweet memories. Enjoy traveling back in time in your mind. •
Rent old movies from the 1930s and 1940s or flip through the cable
channels looking for old-fashioned treasures. Look for domestic details,
the trim of upholstery, the curtains, the knickknacks in the kitchen.
Consider why these charming, cozy sets draw us in to stay a while. •
Take pictures off a wall and clear tabletops and mantels for one week to
experience "the fullness of nothing." What do you want to put back? • If
you have a cherished collection, do you display it? Think of new ways to
surround yourself with the things you love. • Start regular foraging
forays to keep "the material girl" distracted. Check newspapers for
estate and moving sales, scan grocery store bulletin boards for flea
market announcements. • Books you might enjoy reading for decorating
ideas by my two favorite Marys are Mary Emmerling's Romantic Country:
Style That's Straight from the Heart (Clarkson Potter) and Mary
Engelbreit's Home Sweet Home: A Journey Through Mary's Dream Home
(Andrews McNeel Publishing). Access Mary E's online magazine Home
Companion at www.maryengelbreit.com (800-443-6279). • Dust off the
grill, make potato salad, and get out your white shoes for Memorial Day
weekend. • Be happy. • Be grateful. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE I wonder what it would be like to live in a world where it was
always June. ---L. M. MONTGOMERY

June is generous with her authentic gifts. Once again the days are sunny
and hot. The roses and peonies are in bloom, and it's time to feast on
strawberries and cream. School is over, summer camp begins, and visions
of vacations dance in our heads. Our smiles deepen, our laughter
increases, our hearts open. This month we rediscover that it is life's
enrichments rather than the riches of life that bring us true
contentment. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 1

Encountering Hestia House ordering is my prayer, and when I have
finished my prayer is answered. And bending, stooping, scrubbing,
purifies my body as prayer doesn't. ---JESSAMYN WEST

You clean a cluttered closet, slowly sorting through clothing,
considering what is to be saved, stored, or shared with others. She is
there. You gather together the fruits of the earth on the altar of your
kitchen counter, baking not a blackberry pie but a benediction, invoking
an unspoken blessing for those who will partake of your love offering.
She is there. You ready the guest room to welcome friends to your home,
dressing the bed with your best linens, laying fluffy towels on the
chair, arranging a bouquet of flowers next to the reading lamp along
with a few of your favorite books. She is there. You polish the silver,
fold the laundry, iron the tablecloth, wash the dishes, replace the
candles. She is there. Hestia, the venerable domestic spirit. We may not
have known her name, but we have felt her move through us when we
experience pleasure in our daily round. Three thousand years ago in
ancient Greece, Hestia was the goddess of the hearth, guardian of family
life and the temple. It was to Hestia that women turned for protection
and inspiration so that they might, as an act of worship, transform
their dwelling places into homes of beauty and comfort. Hestia was one
of the twelve Olympians in classical Greek mythology. But she is the
least known of all the deities, and there are no legends about her, even
though Zeus bestowed on her the privilege of sitting in the center of
their celestial home so that she might receive the best offerings from
mortals. While the other gods and goddesses were personified in
sculpture and paintings, Hestia was not rendered in human form. Instead,
her spiritual

presence was honored as an eternal flame burning on a round hearth.
Jungian analyst and author Jean Shinola Bolen tells us in her book,
Goddess in Every woman, that Hestia's sacred fire provided illumination,
warmth, and the heat necessary for food. Despite her anonymity through
the ages, "The goddess Hestia's presence in house and temple was central
to everyday life" in ancient Greece. Today, as in ancient times,
reflecting on Hestia "focuses attention inward, to the spiritual center
of a woman's personality," according to Dr. Bolen, enabling us to tap
into an inner harmony as we go about our daily round. Hestia is not
frazzled, hanging on by a thread. Instead, Hestia is "grounded in the
midst of outer chaos, disorder, or ordinary, everyday bustle."
Everything that needs to get done in the home is accomplished with ease
and grace. By knowingly seeking encounters with Hestia in our daily
life, by letting her quiet, calm, orderly presence influence our
behavior, we can come to the awakening that there is sacred Mystery in
the mundane. And just how do we do this? Sometimes I'll invoke Hestia's
help as I work around my home. Or I'll ask myself, is this how Hestia
would approach this task? Of course, if I have to ask that question, I
know it's not, but the question brings my awareness back to the
contemplative nature of homecaring. Most of all, Hestia gently reminds
me, as Dr. Bolen points out, "tending to household details is a
centering activity equivalent to meditation," if we want to make it so.
If you feel you have no time to sit down to meditate, that you have a
valid excuse for not seeking communion with Spirit because the floor has
to be swept, realize that if you approach your tasks with reverence, it
won't only be your home that will be transformed. The Goddess knows what
it takes to run a household and She has deemed it holy. So should you.
OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 2

In Praise of Modesty Style is to see beauty in modesty. ---ANDRÉE PUTMAN

Modesty isn't a very exciting virtue. A sparse or stark style can be
sophisticated and dramatic, but modesty seems dull, too often confused
with the girl dressed in muslin sitting on the side of the gymnasium
who's never asked to dance. But the French designer, AndrÉe Putman, who
has reinterpreted everything from hotel interiors to pencils, believes
"unless you have a feeling for that secret knowledge that modest things
can be more beautiful than anything expensive, you will never have
style." Perhaps as a child you were told not to toot your own horn, even
when you accomplished something amazing. Or maybe you were told to stop
dreaming of setting the world on fire, and "have more modest
aspirations, so you won't be disappointed." Maybe when you try to
express your authentic self you hear an old voice berating you for
"being a show-off." Yet at the same time, out of the corner of your eye
you could see it was the big gestures that got all the attention in
life. Glamour. Fame. Wealth. The trinity of what's considered good taste
worshiped by the world. Or at least that's the way it looks from here.
It's always the wealthy women who make it on the international
best-dressed lists, the movie stars' mansions that are glorified in
glossy layouts. It's not enough to write a finely honed first novel, it
has to be a best-seller or you'll have difficulty publishing a second
one. You can't just be a talented actress, you have to win an Academy
Award to be considered a success. Tell me, when was the last time you
knew of a bronze medalist signing a \$ 1 million endorsement deal?

Most of us can't see our name in lights on Broadway, so we give up,
sorry we even tried, our sense of self diminished. Being a modest
success just doesn't make it. We hear "modest" and think "mediocre."
Meditate on modesty for a moment. What if she isn't the self-effacing,
shy, retiring, nerdy virtue we've thought she is? What if Modesty is
really passion restrained? What if modesty is a virtue so full of her
own smoldering sense of self that she isn't distracted by the glitz? The
American writer and illustrator Oliver Herford believed that modesty was
"the gentle art of enhancing your charm by pretending not to be aware of
it." People with an authentic style know what they are, but even more
important, they know what they are not. They don't care about labels.
They care about personal expression. Frank Lloyd Wright would never have
asked Laura Ashley to decorate his house, even though both of them
showcased the beauty of modesty in their work. The trick is to go deep
enough to mine the core of your authenticity. First, find out what you
love, whether it's a coat, a couch, or a career. Worry about the
packaging and the tags later. I leave this thought with you today.
Goldilocks was a modest little lady who didn't want very much. She knew
what was "just right," what was perfect for her---be it porridge, chair
or bed---and she made confident, creative choices. Now there's the girl
I'd like to be when I grow up! OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 3

Ask, Ask, Ask Ask, and it shall be given to you; seek, and ye shall
find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. ---MATTHEW 7:7

When was the last time you felt comfortable asking anybody for anything
---for advice, for help, or even for directions? I've spent the last
twenty years asking questions as a journalist so you'd think that asking
on my own behalf would come easy. It doesn't. Nevertheless, I've
recently discovered something that's brought a sense of adventure to my
daily round. It's so simple, it's scary. It's asking for what we want.
Help. Advice. Wisdom. Guidance. Information---especially information.
Information is what led me to a delightful new coffee bar. As I write,
I'm enjoying a delicious glass of iced cafÉ lattÉ at an outdoor table,
shaded by a bright red-and-white striped umbrella, surrounded by
charming white pots of geraniums. Every few minutes I peek with pleasure
into the shopping bag at my feet to look at my new summer linen
separates. They pass the Simple Abundance test: they look great, feel
wonderful, and were on sale. After clearing closets and drawers, I was
down to one outfit I could wear on the street (you think I'm kidding?).
But everything I saw at the stores was too expensive, didn't look or
feel right. So for months I avoided buying. Then I ran into a woman I
know who possesses a sure sense of style. Her wardrobe is terrific, but
she could pull off wearing a burlap sack with panache. When I've seen
her in the past, I usually ended up sighing wistfully. This time I cut
to the chase. Where does she shop? She graciously detailed not only the
stores but the different fashion lines she prefers. Then she recommended
I visit one great

shop soon; they were having a fabulous sale. Ask to get on their mailing
list, she advised, because they'll let you in on unadvertised specials.
"It is a long time since I have asked heaven for anything, but still my
arms will not come down," Spanish poet Antonio Porchia mused, giving
voice to the profound paradox of asking. We want, we need, we desire, we
yearn, but we don't ask. Still our arms stay up in the air. Longings
cross our mind, but we don't really commit ourselves. We don't lay it on
the line. We don't ask because we're afraid somebody will say "no." Who?
It doesn't matter. It could be Spirit, our spouse, or our supervisor.
But when wishful thinking doesn't magically manifest what we want, we
feel we've been denied. So, in future, we choose not to ask, but
continue to wish, existing in a constant state of deprivation. Asking
comes with no guarantees. "I ask for things that do not come. I urge you
for things that do not happen," writer Marjorie Holmes confides in her
wonderful book of prayers, I've Got to Talk to Somebody, God. "Though my
knuckles are bloody from knocking, and my voice is hoarse from asking,"
she writes, the door remains fast and there is only the Great Silence.
In the Great Silence of unfulfillment all that you can hear are your own
sobs. I know. But I also know if we don't ask, we haven't got a prayer.
Today, start asking. You see a woman with a great haircut? Ask where she
got it. Ask for the name of a great paint color in a home accessory
shop, a fabulous recipe from a hostess, the name of a piece of music you
hear playing in the record store. Ask your husband to take the kids for
the afternoon to give you some time to yourself. Ask the kids to pick up
their toys so that you don't have to do it. Ask for a deadline
extension. Ask for the day off. Ask for a raise. Ask when the next sale
will be. Ask Spirit for a daily portion of grace. Ask Divine Wisdom for
operating instructions. Ask your guardian angel to manifest holy
assistance. While you're at it, ask for a miracle. Ask for what you need
and want. Ask to be taught the right questions. Ask to be answered. Ask
for the Divine Plan of your life to unfold through joy. Ask politely.
Ask with passion. Ask with a grateful heart and you will be heard. Just
ask. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 4

Classic Chic 102 Style has nothing to do with money. Anybody can do it
with money. The true art is to do it on a shoestring. ---TOM HOGAN

Since the world, with very few enlightened exceptions, does not
celebrate thrift shop chic, why don't we? There are five Simple
Abundance strategies that are essential to elevating secondhand skills
to new-to-you savvy (they apply to both fashion and decorating): (1)
Save. Seek. Find; (2) Understand scale and proportion; (3) Trust your
instincts; (4) Train your eye; and (S) Take your time. 1. Save. Seek.
Find. Or, as the ancient Vulcan sages put it, "Live well and prosper."
If you save while seeking what you really love, you will eventually find
it and have the money to pay for it. (This is how the Universe dresses
and decorates.) It may take longer than a week, but it will happen.
Years from now, we'll meet, probably in a thrift shop, and we'll know
each other by the gleam in our eyes. We'll acknowledge each other with
the secret slogan, "Save. Seek. Find." I just hope your hand isn't on
the mirror I've been eyeing for over my mantel! Oh, go ahead and take
it, if it's perfect for you. I know that my authentic good is on its
way. 2. Scale and proportion. The real reason that your room or outfit
doesn't look like the pictures in a magazine has less to do with your
choice of fabric, color, or style than with scale and proportion. Tom
Hogan, co-owner of the sassy, thrift-shop-chic home furnishings shop
Chartreuse in New York, believes the secret to a great-looking room (or
outfit) comes down to striving for balance. Not symmetry, so much, as
the visual weight of scale and proportion. For example, if you have one
big, heavy piece at one end of a room, you need to balance it with
another bulky shape at the other end. If

you want to mix modern and rustic for an eclectic look, go ahead, just
make sure each style is represented in the same proportion. 3. Trust
your instincts. You know what you love. Don't be guided by "friends,
fads and fashion," advises Tom Hogan. If you do, six months from now
you'll be so tired of the item, you won't want to walk into the room or
your closet. "That is money wasted." 4. Train your eye. "Your eye is
used to a certain look, so anything different is going to look funny,"
says Tom. Before you order twenty yards of a new fabric, live with a
sample draped over the furniture for a couple of weeks. If your eyes
don't adjust, you know it's not for you. In the same way, your eye may
not be used to seeing a piece of furniture, so give it a chance to fit
in. After a week you might realize that the table that doesn't work in
the living room would be perfect for the bedroom if you painted it
white. 5. Take your time. "Don't be in a hurry to pull it all together.
People make the mistake of doing it too fast and then they end up hating
it," Tom counsels. The best rooms and wardrobes seem to evolve
gradually. They don't spring from your head or a store in finished form.
And always leave room for inspiration. You may never know what "find du
jour" you'll discover tomorrow. Next time you head out the door on a
shopping expedition, just remember: authentic style has nothing to do
with money and everything to do with trusting your instincts. Class
dismissed. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 5

Your Bedroom: Cradle of Civilization All one really needs is a divinely
attractive bed. ---MRS. WINSTON GUEST

James Joyce might have been able to describe Dublin from his desk in
Paris and Willa Cather successfully evoke the prairie from New York
City, but if I have any hope of honoring the cradle of
civilization---our bedrooms ---I need to be in bed. Actually, most of
this book has been written in bed, a fact that I find astonishing---as
does my family. The English poet John Donne was obviously describing me
when he wrote, "This bed, thy centre is/These walls, thy sphere." You
look at a room in a different light when it's your personal domain. You
probably don't spend as much time in your bedroom as I do, but yours
should be your domain as well. Over the next week, I thought we would
take a walk through the rooms that most of us share in common, so that
we might reflect on the roles they play in our lives and how we can let
them provide us more abundantly with simple pleasures. As far as I am
concerned, bedrooms were created for only two reasons: comfort and joy.
Keeping that in mind, are you happy with your bedroom? You will know if
you rarely want to leave. Start with the focal point of your room, the
bed. Is it large enough for you, and do you have a good mattress that
provides you with enough support? After that you need wonderful sheets.
I prefer to sleep on cool, 100 percent cotton sheets in the spring and
summer and cozy flannel sheets in the late fall and winter. Next,
instead of blankets and quilts, I recommend using a down comforter, or
duvet, stuffed with duck or goose feathers and covered with the
equivalent of a large cotton pillowcase (removable for washing) to take
the place of a top sheet. It turns making the bed into a

dream sequence. You've never been caressed until you sleep cuddled in
down. The same goes for down-filled pillows to sleep on and assorted
pillows to prop yourself up on comfortably. Finding the perfect pillow
combination for yourself is not frivolous if you want to be happy in
life. If you are simply making do with any old foam rubber block, we
need to have a serious talk. Put the comfort level of your pillows on
your list of personal preference priorities. How does your bedroom look?
Do you experience a sense of delight when you walk in? Here's where joy
enters the scheme of things through visual charm. Your walls should be
painted a soothing color---white, blue, a dusty rose, sage green. Make
sure you select a color you won't grow tired of. You might think you
want to be cheered when you walk into your bedroom, but this is not
place for brights. Save yellow, melon, and red for your more active
rooms. I prefer the walls of my bedroom plain, with the exception of one
picture over my meditation table that complements my smoky blue walls;
it is more serene. If you do hang pictures, make sure that you love what
you're looking at. It will be the first thing you see in the morning and
the last thing at night. Your bedding should be as inviting to look at
as it is comfortable to lie on. I'm convinced that a woman should love
her bedcovers with a mad passion. This isn't just aesthetics; it
encourages you to keep your bedroom tidy because the bed looks so pretty
when it's all made up. And since the bed is made, you might as well hang
up your clothes and straighten the dresser. You can see this leads to
Sublime Order, at least in one room of your home. Now add the personal
flourishes that can make all the difference: good reading lamps, a
flowering plant, small personal mementos, treasured photographs, and a
place for books. Keep clutter under control with assorted fabric-covered
boxes that are pretty to look at. If you have room in which to put a
dressing table, how marvelous! Indulge yourself with this luxury. Even
though I write from my bedroom, one thing I never do is conduct business
there. It just doesn't feel right. If I have a business telephone call
to make or one I expect to receive, I'll take it in my office. I don't
want the world intruding into my private space. When you retreat to your
bedroom at night, turn on the answering machine. If you have a fax at
home, don't have

it here. You need one place of your own where you can stop the world
from spinning by getting off. In our bedrooms we have the ability to not
just decorate a room, but to create a sacred space for self-nurturance.
If we do, we will be heeding Emily Dickinson's wisdom: "Ample make this
bed/Make this bed with Awe." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 6

The Bath: Secret Haven of SelfAbsorption If I were a psychiatrist, I
think I would like to inspect my patients' bathrooms before
investigating any other area of their lives. ---MARK HAMPTON

This morning I was mulling over the potential pleasures the bathroom can
bring while I was waiting to get in there. We have only one bathroom in
our home, and my husband and daughter, who must both leave the house
early, have priority in the morning. However, according to a recent
national poll conducted by a large manufacturer of bathroom products, we
have not fully exploited the room's potential. The survey revealed that
for many people, the bathroom is the preferred place for telephone
conversations, eating, sleeping, smoking, lovemaking, homework, and
dancing! Not in my bathroom. My bathroom is the size of the Oxford Latin
Dictionary when it's closed. This is a hefty sized book to be sure, but
its dimensions leave much to be desired for the most popular room in the
house. The interior decorator Mark Hampton admits that of all the
remodeling and redecorating projects that one undertakes in one's life,
the prospect of redoing the bathroom is most "numbing." I agree, but not
for the reasons he gives, which have to do with considering the input of
so many people--- architects, decorators, contractors, tilesmen,
electricians, and plumbers. The exorbitant cost of hiring all these
people to perform their magic for my bathroom, and the fact that there's
not one square inch of space surrounding the three fundamental fixtures
already in there are what numb me.

Still, the importance of the bathroom is irrefutable. As Mark Hampton
rightly points out, bathrooms "provide a place for private pampering,
for a sybaritic mood that might otherwise be frowned on. Hidden from the
scrutiny of others, these rooms are secret havens of self-absorption."
Hold that thought. Secret havens of self-absorption. Attitude adjustment
in progress. Just because the bathroom is small and the budget even
smaller doesn't mean it can't be transformed into a secret haven of
self-absorption. I can do that. So can you. Here's how. One of my
favorite fantasies is to go someday to a luxury spa for a week. Like the
armchair traveler, I am collecting spa information and tucking it into
my discovery journal. This way, when Real Life presents me with the
opportunity, I can be out the door and know where I'm headed. In the
meantime, I've created a Simple Abundance spa---seven nights of
homegrown indulgence. I think of it as happy hour for the psyche. You
might find it fun as well. Every night for a week, experiment with a new
kind of bath product: aromatherapy, bath salts, gels, foam, milk, bubble
baths, and Vita baths. See which you really prefer. Many bath products
come in small sizes, so you can experiment inexpensively. Around the
holidays, they're often available as gift freebies. Keep them in your
comfort drawer until you need a spa week. After a leisurely soak in a
room illuminated only by scented candles, while listening to fabulous
music and sipping a glass of wine or sparkling fruited mineral water
(ice-cold blackberry or peach is divine), treat yourself to one beauty
treatment per night. How about a mud-pack facial; hot-oil hair
conditioning treatment; manicure and pedicure; exfoliation and waxing;
cellulite body massage; seaweed body smoother. The final night, play
with makeup and hair styling. Spa toys for your wish list can include a
handheld shower attachment with different speeds; natural sponges and
scrub mitts; an oversized terrycloth robe with hood; oversized bath
towels; a magnifying mirror so that you can really see what you're
doing; and, if you don't already have one, a bath tray to hold
everything. An inflatable pillow is lovely to rest your head upon and
with a long-necked scrub brush you can scratch your own back. The
self-sufficient spa is best.

Today, don't look at the shortcomings of your bathroom. If it's got hot
and cold running water, a handle that flushes, and a tub to lie down in,
all you have is all you need. Once you experiment with one homegrown spa
week, you'll want to make it a seasonal ritual. Seven days of
self-nurturing is heady stuff, but believe me, you can get used to it.
OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 7

The Joy of Living Rooms Some of the living-rooms we see have really no
right to the name; they are so unattractive they ought, instead, to be
called existing rooms. I like to think of the word "living-rooms" being
short for the joy-ofliving rooms. That is what they ought to be----full
of life and happiness and beauty. ---LUCY ABBOT THROOP

Last week I went over to a friend's house for lunch and when I walked
into her foyer and glanced at her living room, I was taken aback with
surprise and delight. It had been about six months since I'd last
visited, and the entire room had been transformed. Everything looked so
pulled together. I immediately told her how fabulous the room looked and
felt. After a closer look, I realized that she hadn't redecorated; she
had just added decorative details that made the room come alive: moving
some paintings around, changing the mantel, and dressing up her couches
with striking new tapestry pillows that highlighted the subtle colors of
her upholstery. What's more, she revealed that she'd found the pillows
on sale and that the entire freshening up was accomplished for under
\$50. The end result was that her living room---which had always been
elegant, beautiful, and quiet---now possessed pizzazz. The room was cozy
without being cluttered; it was visually charming and comfortable. It
was so inviting I didn't want to leave. Every corner beckoned my
attention: her cherished family photos, her stack of well-loved books,
her simply stunning arrangement of white hydrangeas picked that morning
from her garden, and her artful collection of porcelain eggs displayed
on a tiny mirror-topped side table.

But there was something more at work here. I was intrigued, so I gently
kept probing. "Well, the room is certainly lived in," she confessed with
a laugh, admitting that she now spent more time here than before. Her
creative energy was palpable, her authentic flair was visible, and her
new enthusiasms, including her second book which she was just beginning
to write, were evident. Her living room perfectly expressed her joy of
living. It always inspires me to see Simple Abundance at work. For a lot
of us the thought of decorating, like almost everything else in our
lives, seems overwhelming. In our minds we don't just tackle one corner
of a room until it pleases us, but try to revamp an entire house in a
day. The prospect is so exhausting we don't even start. Instead of
thinking of decorating as one more burden to deal with, we need to
lighten up---to view it as a continuing source of personal expression
and contentment. There are no prizes being awarded here, just finding
what brings you pleasure. When searching for ways to make your living
room come alive, first consider its many functions in your family's
daily round. Now, if your home is large enough for a family space that's
separate from your living room, I think at this moment you should stop
and give thanks. Many women would call you blessed. The biggest
stumbling block for me when I began to bring more order into the daily
fabric of our lives---and I began in the living room---was acceptance,
even though I knew this was the crucial first step. I'm embarassed to
admit how much time, energy, and emotion (precious natural resources) I
squandered hating the fact that our house wasn't more spacious. But
hating my house only bound me psychologically and blinded me creatively
to its many positive qualities. An ancient metaphysical law says that we
can never leave any situation that causes us discomfort until we learn
to love it or at least to see love at work in it. I had many lessons to
learn about order. Now I know in my heart that my small house is the
perfect teacher. What good would a larger house do me if I couldn't keep
a small one tidy? "A beautiful home is an education in itself, but it is
not made in a day; it must slowly grow," Lucy Abbot Throop, who wrote on
decorating in the early decades of this century, reassured her readers
in 1910. Today, look for the lessons your home is waiting to teach you
through love. Begin with

your living room. Make it as cozy, charming, and comfortable as you can
with the resources you now have, and it will become a joy to live in.
OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 8

In Praise of Real-Life Dining Rooms When we are authentic, when we keep
our spaces simple, simply beautiful living takes place. ---ALEXANDRA
STODDARD

We all long to feel that our presence is welcome in the world. Usually
we think of this only when we're invited into the homes of others. But
I've come to believe that what we want and need most of all is to
experience a sense of welcome in our own homes. I'm sitting at my dining
room table as I write, waiting for a batch of brownies to come out of
the oven. The handsome, round oak table on which they will cool is the
hub of our family life. From its sturdy center, soulful spokes of food,
drink, conversation, conviviality, tradition, and memory sprout, finding
outward expression in our daily round. Much more than eating takes place
here. Newspapers are read, mail is sorted, conversations are started,
homework is completed, bills are paid, cakes are iced, income tax is
computed, flowers are arranged, games are played, confidences are
shared, family and friends are gathered. Here, at this replica of the
Greek goddess Hestia's round hearth, rites of passage are commemorated,
holidays are celebrated, daily grace is offered, minds, bodies, and
spirits are nourished. We entertain in this dear little room a few times
a year. But we live and love in it every day. It's very fashionable at
the moment to recommend that families don't really need the separate
dining rooms so revered by our parents and grandparents because we lead
such different lives today. Progress comes at a price, and we need to be
practical, especially in tiny city apartments and modest suburban
condominiums. Instead, trendsetters tell us to let the real

demands of our lives take precedence over an ideal that's only an
illusion. If we're short of space, we should transform the dining room
into a library or a playroom or a den. I really don't know why this
suggestion seems so chic, especially since our dining room already
provides these functions. My library of cookbooks fills one corner, cats
and children play here, a mini television propped on a dining room chair
pulled over to the kitchen door lets me catch the evening news as I cook
dinner. Our dining room is an all-purpose room; it anchors us all in the
morning, in the evening, and in between. The passionate reality of this
room---the simply beautiful living that takes place here every day---
invokes reverence and begs for preservation. Here, generations of
families are tangibly linked as china, crystal, and silver passed from
parents to children are lovingly removed from openshelved cupboards and
placed on the table in a comforting reenactment of a timeless ritual of
hospitality, homecoming, and Wholeness. The Victorian English novelist
and Jewish scholar Grace Aquilar wrote in 1847 that "The Real is the
sole foundation of the Ideal." As I prepare this place and my heart to
gratefully receive another authentic blessing, I have often wondered if
she divined this profound awakening in her dining room. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 9

Bringing a Sense of Order to the Kitchen A confused mind cannot direct
deft hands and what is more confusing than a cluttered, disorderly place
to work? What is more uninviting, too? The grateful appearance of
order---this is the one important way women judge each other's
housekeeping. And every efficient housekeeper knows that in no room does
it count for more than in the kitchen. ---WOMAN'S HOME COMPANION, August
1924

I couldn't sleep at night if I gave you the impression that cleaning the
kitchen is my idea of a great time. The very thought reminds me of a
newspaper interview I did with two delightful, funny women who were the
authors of a popular series of homemaking books. I nearly choked when
they revealed that they didn't do their own housecleaning anymore
because their success had enabled each of them to afford a cleaning
woman. It was as if I had wandered behind a curtain and met up with the
affable old man the munchkins believed was the Wizard of Oz. Sharing
this delicious morsel with my readers would be going for the jugular,
and bloodletting has never been my sport. Besides, the practical
information they conveyed in their books made sense and was fun to read.
Still, I had a difficult time writing the feature (which by the way, the
two women and their publisher loved). So let me be the first to confess
from the heart that I have not yet found the way to turn cleaning
kitchens into a simple pleasure. Being flesh, blood, and bone, I need a
little more time to evolve. This probably explains why, when our
homecaring tasks were divided up, I opted for cooking, which I do enjoy,
while my dearly beloved volunteered to clean the kitchen on the nights
he doesn't have meetings. (One of the many reasons he is dearly

beloved.) On the nights he's out, you'll find me at the kitchen sink
attempting to learn from the Vietnamese Buddhist monk, poet, and writer
Thich Nhat Hanh the spiritual way to wash the dishes. In his book, The
Miracle of Mindfulness: A Manual on Meditation, he suggests we approach
washing the dishes as if it were the most important thing in life. We
are to consider each dirty bowl as sacred. I have not gotten to that
point of transcendence, but I try my best to approach washing the dishes
as if it were the most important thing I could be doing at that moment.
Much of our daily round takes place in the kitchen. Cooking and cleaning
can be contemplative pursuits but not if you're surrounded by clutter.
Still, I dreaded getting in there. I procrastinated for months, always
finding something more urgent that needed my rapt attention. But the
Amazing Grace of the Simple Abundance process prevailed. With the other
rooms in my house slowly becoming organized, the state of the kitchen
didn't just irritate me, it drove me stark raving mad, especially every
time I opened a cupboard door. "Back! Back! Back!" I'd yell at the
hundreds of used margarine tubs tumbling out at me. Finally, I faced the
truth: if this room were truly the heart of my home, it was no wonder I
was experiencing palpitations every time I went in there to work. Like
the clearing-out process in the living room, I sorted and organized my
kitchen as best I could according to function. We have a small, narrow
kitchen the size of a galley in a boat, and space is at a premium. When
you organize your kitchen, regardless of its size, keep in mind that
there are several different kitchen activities that take place there:
the preparation, cooking, and serving of food, clearing up after the
meal, and dishwashing. Once I got in there, I cleared and tossed clutter
without a moment's hesitation, and you will, too. As in the other rooms,
what I could not identify, I kept in a box for my husband to ponder.
This is a most illuminating encounter between a man and a woman. You'll
discover why they call men "the opposite sex" when you have your spouse
or partner identify such objects. The moment of truth occurs when he
tries to retrieve objects from the trash bag: the disgusting, chipped
Teflon frying pan from his college days that is "seasoned" just
perfectly now. The wine-making apparatus from a previous lifetime. Or
the Crock-Pot that can never be washed out properly because of the
dangling electrical cord. Just make sure

you dispose of these sentimental treasures on the sly. As I've
recommended before, clearing out clutter is, in my opinion, a solitary
occupation. The next time you're searching for the kitchen scissors,
cleaning out the refrigerator, or scouring a greasy casserole dish,
remember that the Sacred can be found in the ordinary when we seek it. I
can't promise you that it works every time, but if it works even once,
it's worth engraving on your heart. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 10

A Nook of Your Own In solitude we give passionate attention to our
lives, to our memories, to the details around us. ---VIRGINIA WOOLF

In October 1928, the British novelist and literary critic Virginia Woolf
gave two lectures on women and fiction at Cambridge University in
England. In her talks she publicly voiced for the first time what women
had quietly shared among themselves for centuries: in order for women to
create, they needed privacy, peace, and personal incomes. The following
year these lectures were published as A Room of One's Own, which was
Woolf's recommendation if women were to honor and hone their creativity
and not become "crazed with the torture" of silence. Tillie Olsen has
exquisitely explored the creative voice when it is muffled, muzzled, and
mute---"the unnatural thwarting of what struggles to come into being,
but cannot"---in her book Silences. Olsen herself was silenced for
twenty years while she raised and supported four children through menial
jobs that left her no energy to write; she was nearly fifty when she
published her acclaimed first novel, Tell Me a Riddle. Many of us today
experience creative silence. Not the hush of the heart necessary to
bring forth the unexpressed from Spirit, but the creative silence
brought about by circumstances we feel are beyond our control: lack of
time, and/or lack of space or a place to create. Perhaps we also suffer
from a lack of clarity, a failure to realize how necessary it is to
nurture our sacred creativity daily. To begin with, many of us, unless
we live alone, don't have a room entirely our own. But that does not
mean we cannot carve out a small psychic space---even a nook---to call
ours alone. I have a friend who

created a personal space in the corner of a city apartment with a floral
folding screen from the 1930s that she found at a flea market. Behind it
she angled a small desk and a chair near a sunny window for a
restorative retreat. No room for a screen, a desk, and a chair? Then
start with a bookcase all your own. The important thing is that the
bookcase be yours: a psychic space that offers passionate reminders to
attend to your private, artistic impulses, a place to encourage you to
reclaim your creativity. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 11

Creating a Plan for Personal Papers Tidied all my papers. Tore up and
ruthlessly destroyed much. This is always a great satisfaction.
---KATHERINE MANSFIELD

This morning let's mull over how much of our precious natural resources
---our time, creative energy, and emotion---we squander looking for the
orphans of disorder: the overdue bill, the misplaced party invitation
(with directions), the registration form for the swimming lessons that
begin this afternoon. If you don't have a plan for keeping track of your
personal papers, take two hours this week to establish one that will.
Unless of course, you feel like Winnie the Pooh's creator, A. A. Milne,
who believed that "One of the advantages of being disorderly is that one
is constantly making exciting discoveries." But my life is exciting
enough without tracking down recalcitrant receipts when I need to return
something to the store. So is yours. I've got a very simple version of
paper order. In fact, it almost relieves me of the need to think, which
can be very handy! Like children who like to store their toys in
separate boxes, I store my papers in the same way: different
fabric-covered boxes and square baskets sit on shelves above my desk.
One box is for unpaid bills and financial records; as soon as they
arrive in the mail they're deposited here; after they're paid, the
receipts go into a file. Other boxes keep personal correspondence
separate from business correspondence. Another box keeps my publishing
papers separate from my workshop materials, and still another box is for
my business receipts (as soon as I'm home from an errand or a trip,
receipts are deposited here until tax time). There's a box for family
papers we'll need in

the near future: lesson forms, party invitations, directions for visits
to my daughter's friends. I know approximately which box to look for
something in. Believe me, this helps. Once a month---usually the
afternoon of the last Saturday---I follow Katherine Mansfield's advice
and ruthlessly toss and refile. When I get in there monthly, it only
takes an hour, and the feeling of being in control of my personal papers
is very reassuring. Today, start a paper chase around your home,
searching for every stray piece of paper you can find. Gather them all
into one large cardboard box. Pour yourself a refreshing drink. Put on
some lively music. Go through each paper and separate them into
categories. If you don't have boxes or baskets handy for stowing them,
put them in large labeled manila envelopes until you do. Throw away
whatever you can. Think of all the time you waste when you don't know
where something is when you need it. Now reflect on all the time that
you'll be able to ransom simply because you do. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 12

Secret Passions: Scented Linen Closets And still she slept an
azure-lidded sleep/In blanched linen, smooth, and lavender'd. ---JOHN
KEATS

Close your eyes for a moment and let an azure-lidded fantasy flood your
mind's eye. You open a white door. There, on lace-edged, deep wooden
shelves, you find row after row of neat and tidy willow baskets piled
high with perfectly folded sheets; fleecy blankets; fluffy terry cloth;
crisp, starched, white damask tablecloths; pristine napkins, monogrammed
linen tea towels; pillow slips with the patina of the past edged in
cotton crochet. Around the bountiful bundles are pale French silk
ribbons tied in perfect bows. You stand transfixed before this eighth
wonder of the world, a treasure worthy of traders' tales from "silken
Samarcand to cedar'd Lebanon." The air is perfumed with an intoxicating
fragrance. A sigh of exquisite pleasure escapes your lips. It will be
yours. It will. The delightful writer Mary Cantwell mused about the
elegant lives lived in print by today's domestic gurus, who naturally
have scented linen closets. She recalled that once she, too, was tempted
to create a proper linen closet for herself, but alas, did not succumb
because "I am a lazy woman and bad at tying bows." Still, the pull of
perfection is profound. "Ordering my linens into ranks would have been a
form of defense in a world I found disorderly," Mary confides wistfully.
"There was not, is not, a thing to be done about pestilence, death and
the bad dreams that sneak up on us when we're not sleeping. But I would
have had that cupboard, that proof positive that I could make tidy my
minuscule corner of the universe. Seeing Wamsutta,

Martex and Cannon neat and cozy in their ribbons might even have
afforded me a Fantin-Latour moment." Ignace Henri Jean Theodore
Fantin-Latour was a nineteenth-century French artist famous for his
beautiful paintings of flowers. He remains a recurring source of
inspiration to contemporary hearth goddesses. Mea culpa! Even
Fantin-Latour could not render a Fantin-Latour moment out of the
cupboard in my upstairs hall. Here there are no silk ribbons. Here, on
five shelves, sheets fight for space with towels and facecloths, while
cold remedies, toilet paper, tissues, and soap battle it out with
lightbulbs, extension cords, and hair dryers, and curlers jocky for
position with Lysol and Bon Ami. But where there is life, there is hope.
And while there is hope, there is life. It will be mine. It will.
Perhaps you share the secret dream of someday living with a scented
linen closet. Here is my plan to make this dream come true this year.
Baskets can keep closet chaos confined. A clear vinyl over-the-door
hanging shoe bag can hold the medicines, first aid supplies, beauty and
personal care products now crowding our shelves. You want only a clear
shoe bag so you can see what you're looking for. But they can be
difficult to find, so start looking today. I find the best vintage table
linens at estate sales and consignment shops. At flea markets and thrift
stores, the linens are usually badly picked over and threadbare; at
antique shops they are gorgeous, but too pricey (unless, of course, you
know a fabulous place to forage; in that case, drop me a line). White
sales for sheets and towels are held in January and June; mark these
sales on your calendar. Even if you don't buy, large department store
white sales are great sources of inspiration. I spent a pleasant half
hour yesterday browsing through a Ralph Lauren bedroom and bath display
and got some great ideas. Now for the scented part. Measure the side of
the walls of your linen closet shelves. There should be three horizontal
partitions for each shelf. Cut out two identical pieces of white muslin
to fit each wall partition and add an inch of fabric on each side. Layer
one thickness of cotton batting between the layers of muslin. Sprinkle
liberally with dried lavender flowers (available at herb shops and
farmers' markets). Sew the two partition pieces

together. Tack or use a staple gun to secure each partition onto the
walls of the closet. Hang branches of dried lavender above the top
shelf. Stand back and revel in your simply abundant creation. About
ribbons: we lust for them, but unless you live alone, you should
emotionally and psychologically let go of the idea of living with sheets
tied with silk ribbons. I know. It's not that you can't find them. Great
vintage ribbons can be found at flea markets and exquisite wired ribbons
(which make perfect bows) can be located at good fabric stores and
upscale home accessory shops. But who else in your home will ever retie
a bow except you? Why break your heart? Still, the thrill of rendering
reality perfect before you die makes doing it once worth the effort.
Take a photograph. After all, as Keats knew: "A thing of beauty is a joy
forever." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 13

Secret Passions: The Fancy Pantry The array of pots rather amazed her at
first, but John was so fond of jelly, and the nice little jars would
look so well on the top shelf. ---LOUISA MAY ALCOTT

Today we shall indulge in the perfect summer fantasy: the time-honored
tradition of "putting by" elegant edibles. What would summer be without
the contemplation of the preserved, the pickled, the potted, the
candied, the brandied---the fabulous foodstuffs of fancy pantries? Like
scented linen closets, well-stocked pantries have long been a feminine
passion. Were there shelves carved out of stone in the prehistoric caves
at Gargas? Undoubtedly. Where else to store the shanks of salted wild
boar? Twenty thousand years later, Victorian women elevated the stocking
of a pantry to an esoteric art, inspired by nineteenth-century literary
domestics' luminous descriptions of deep drawers, cubbies, and bins big
enough to hold cornmeal and graham flour; of spacious shelves on which
to store turkey platters; and of row upon row of the prettily packaged
and deliciously displayed. Every woman should know the sublime pleasure
of gazing on glistening jars wearing tiny floral scarves and white
crochet caps. But how to begin? Look no further than Helen Witty's
indispensable, irreplaceable, irresistible primer, Fancy Pantry. Written
for all those who believe that genuinely delicious food is an affordable
luxury, Fancy Pantry shows you how. I can't even browse through this
delightful book without wanting to jump up and start playing in the
kitchen. No, I do not mean to suggest you should put up a hundred jars
of zucchini marmalade in a sweltering kitchen the size of a shoebox (in
between summer camp carpooling, finishing next year's projected office

budget, attending your child's baseball or Softball championship game,
and packing for a week at the beach). I am suggesting that you might
find as much delight as I do in creating your own caraway rusks, essence
of sun-dried tomatoes (which are worth a queen's ransom in fine food
shops), spiced blueberries, fruit-flavored vinegars, and my favorite,
fruit honeys, which aren't honeys at all but a beguiling cross between
syrups and preserves and are scrumptious over pancakes, desserts, or by
the spoonful. Now if after reading Helen Witty's treasure trove of
inspiration and information, you are still hesitant to start stocking
the larder with the fruits of your own labors, don't be discouraged.
Some summers I preserve more in spirit than in substance, but I always
have a fancy pantry. So, take yourself to a farmers' market and stock up
on comestibles that other enterprising women with homegrown businesses
have preserved especially for souls such as ours. Get pretty,
small-patterned fabric and cut out circles to fit on top of your jams,
jellies, and chutney, tying with ribbon, raffia, or twine. Pretty labels
are available in kitchen and stationery stores. I also like to pick up
preserves from other parts of the country when we go away on vacation.
Still, perusing Fancy Pantry might be enough to convince you to try your
hand at your own put-ups. Helen Witty believes that all "souls should
have a pantry, however modest" and I heartily agree. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 14

Decorating with the Seasons: Summer Houses The English rose greets the
summer garden with a profusion of colour and perfume and our doors and
windows are thrown open to allow the season's intoxicating atmosphere to
envelop us and our homes. ---SYDNEY A. SYKES

Mother Nature's palette is a rich resource of inspiration for decorating
your home. By bringing the seasons indoors with inexpensive personal
flourishes, you will rarely grow tired of where you live. "Change is an
excellent remedy for that tired feeling. And by 'change' I do not
necessarily mean taking a trip," Elsie King Moreland wrote in American
Home in 1934. "Changing the furniture around is to a woman what taking a
vacation is to a man.... Nothing seems to refresh me quite so much, to
give me a new 'lease on life' as seeing my piano in another corner, the
sideboard under the windows, my bed facing another wall." Traditionally
women have prepared their homes for summer by getting rid of anything
that was hot or heavy-looking. Take a look around your home. Roll up the
hooked and dhurrie rugs; stow the needlepoint pillows or cover them with
ruffled denim or white linen pillowcases. Wealthy women used to
slipcover their upholstered pieces during the summer months. Not many of
us can do that, but we can cover the furniture with white throws. Fabric
remnants are great buys (usually \$2 to \$5 a yard) and fabulous
cover-ups. So are white cotton matelasse (raised appliquÉ) bedspreads
draped over couches and chairs. Even large white damask tablecloths,
found at estate sales, can be fetching as summer frocks for furniture.
Cover side tables with white muslin; drape voluminous lengths of fine
mosquito

netting from a wooden pole; hang white lace panels, simple cafÉ
curtains, or bamboo shades at the windows. Leave your floors bare or put
down sisal or sea grass matting over wallto-wall carpeting. Clear the
mantels and tables. Decorate with seasonal flowers gathered from
roadside stands, farmers' markets, or your own garden. Simple but
abundant arrangements of one type of flower for each container are
especially eye-catching. Pack away anything that needs to be polished:
brass, pewter, copper, silver. Replace heavy stoneware pottery with
raffia, wicker, and straw baskets. Place a large basket with dried
flowers in the opening of your fireplace, if you have one. Move the
furniture away from the hearth and back against the walls for a more
open feeling. Seashells and natural decorations set the mood for a
summer house even if you don't live at the seashore. Drape fisherman's
netting over the mantel and prop up large starfishes. Add pieces of
driftwood, twig picture frames, a bird's nest (after the birds have
abandoned it), or a bird's house for charm. Red, white, and blue accents
in the form of American flags, denim, and sailcloth, are appealing in
the summer. Brightly striped bath toweling or colorful chenille
bedspreads make terrific covers for weather-faded outdoor furniture
cushions. Summertime meals seem to taste even better on red-andwhite or
blue-and-white checked tablecloths. Masses of white beeswax candles in
hurricane globes and lanterns cast a moonlit glow over summer rooms. Not
all of us can afford a month in the country or a sojourn at a beach
house, but we can transform our homes into refreshing warm-weather
retreats by taking a cue from the calendar. Like every other Simple
Abundance blessing, creating "a summer house" starts with a state of
mind. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 15

The Secret Anniversaries of the Heart The holiest of all holidays are
those Kept by ourselves in silence and apart, The secret anniversaries
of the heart ... ---HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

This is the traditional month for orange blossoms, lace, and rice, but
wedding anniversaries aren't on my mind. Today I am thinking of singular
rites of passage, the secret anniversaries of the heart. These are the
anniversaries we never talk about, kept in silence and apart. You might
remember a first kiss, while I can't forget the last time I held my
father's hand. I was speaking to a good friend this morning on the
telephone. She was enjoying the preparation of a special dinner for a
marvelous new man in her life. Last year her marriage of twenty years
ended and she says she's grateful her husband told her he was leaving in
late summer, when everything was withering on the vine. She says that
she never would have gotten over it if he had left during the holidays.
I think I know what she means, but I pray I never find out for sure. As
she reminds me, it's the "feel" of the year that can trigger a secret
anniversary of the heart. Another friend recalls the ritual of her
mother braiding her hair whenever she walks out into her backyard in the
spring and the first lilacs are in bloom. There was always a bouquet of
lilacs on her mother's dressing table. Every June when I wade into the
swimming pool of my former roommate, Dawne, I am once again standing in
the pool of my Aunt Mary and Uncle Joe, who were my parents' best
friends. Forty years have vanished: I hear children laughing, the clink
of lemonade glasses, feel the hot summer sun on my shoulders, the splash
of refreshing water on my face.

It all rushes back---the cool, leafy places in their yard, the flagstone
path, the musty smell of the wooden playhouse where my "cousins" Mary
Anne and Diane, my sister Maureen, and I used to plot adventures. The
barbecues, the picnics, the sleepovers, the adults' cocktail parties
upstairs, the children's parties in the basement recreation room, the
plays performed on the patio, the feelings of love, security, delight,
excitement, and wonder ---all the sudden joys of childhood captured
forever in the feel of June. My daughter now has her own secret
anniversaries of times spent in the homes of her Aunt Dawne and Uncle
Tom---beach vacations, Christmas dinners, Easter-egg rolls. These
cherished friends, their lovely daughters, and the good times our
families have spent together over the years are beautiful threads in the
tapestry of my life. Secret anniversaries of the heart are not
restricted by the passage of the years. "I am," Thomas Wolfe recalled in
Look Homeward Angel, "a part of all that I have touched and that has
touched me." We all are. Although I had not planned it, this afternoon I
want to send Dawne a note. And I really must write to Aunt Mary to thank
her for the precious memories. I need to share what I've held in my
heart for so many decades but have never expressed. Today would be the
perfect moment to let two wonderful women I love know how much I love
them. I had forgotten. It took a secret anniversary of the heart to
remind me that there is always time enough to remember. But there is
never time enough to commemorate what we cherish, unless we pause to
observe, when they occur, the holiest of all holidays. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 16

The Fragrant Home I wish that life should not be cheap, but sacred, I
wish the days to be as centuries, loaded, fragrant. ---RALPH WALDO
EMERSON

From the moment man, woman, and child first began to follow their noses,
scent has been an irresistible magnet drawing the heart and imagination
home. "There's no place like home," John Howard Payne wrote in 1823,
recalling the woodsy fragrance from the cheerful hearth of an old,
shingled cottage in East Hampton, Long Island, where he spent his early
childhood. Perhaps there's no place like home because no place else on
earth smells quite like home. As I write, the delicious aroma of baked
chicken smothered in teriyaki sauce fills the house. Be it ever so
humble, there's no other place I would rather be tonight. Soon my two
"returnees"---she from summer camp and he from his city office---burst
through the front door. "Welcome home!" I call from the kitchen.
"Welcome home!" they echo in our ritual greeting, dropping gym bags,
briefcases, and backpacks, shedding the day. "Something smells great!"
"When's dinner?" There's time enough for an antipasto of anticipation, a
bike ride around the block, a stroll in the garden, a glass of wine, a
homecoming. A fragrant home is a simple pleasure, but one rich in the
resonance of reassurance. Subtly layering scents throughout the rooms in
your home imparts a feeling of luxury to your living spaces. Here are
some ways to make your home smell heavenly. Regularly air your rooms
out, even in winter, by opening the windows wide and letting fresh air
circulate. In the sultry summer months, when the windows are closed to
keep in the air conditioning, wait until the evening

when it cools down. Be sure to open the windows after a summer shower
for a delightful scent. If you have animals, use a baking soda carpet
freshener every time you vacuum to eliminate objectionable odors. We
become accustomed to the smell of our pets, but it can be overpowering
to unsuspecting visitors. Add scented powder to your vacuum cleaner bag
to diffuse fragrance as you clean the carpets. Clean with pine cleansers
for an invigorating scent. Trade in aerosol furniture sprays for rich
lemon-scented polish. You'll get a better shine and scented
surroundings. Simmer apple cider, cinnamon, and cloves in water. This is
a trick realtors suggest to create a cozy, inviting atmosphere when
prospective home buyers come to call. It will evoke such an inviting
environment you might even stop wanting to move. Gently rub
environmental fragrance oils onto unfinished or unpainted wood, such as
the undersides of tables and chairs, doorjambs and windowsills, the
interiors of wooden drawers, closet rods, and shelves. These oils can
also be added to the metal or terra-cotta rings that sit on lightbulbs
(only add oil to a ring when the bulb is cold); whenever you turn on the
lights, fragrance will waft through the room. Scented candles and
incense bring romance to room settings. Hang scented padded hangers and
sachets in closets; line drawers with scented paper. Burn aromatic woods
and grasses in the fireplace. Collect driftwood at the beach and bring
it home; burn pinecones sprinkled with essential oil (balsam, lavender,
or cinnamon) and dried rosemary bundles; throw in some cedar chips,
mesquite, and piÑon with your logs. At Irish specialty shops you can
sometimes find small blocks of turf from Ireland (well worth the
search)---my favorite sentimental scent, especially in winter. Native
Americans burn sage bundles to purify their surroundings and to invoke a
blessing on the sacred space of their dwellings. You can do the same.
Set bowls of potpourri throughout your home, but use only one type so
that the fragrances won't compete. I like to use florals in the spring
and summer and spicy potpourri in fall and winter. Making your own
potpourri is an enjoyable, relaxing pastime, as is making sachets,
pomanders, fragrant pillows, and floral waters. Easy, inspiring recipes
can be found in Barbara Milo Ohrbach's delightful book, The Scented
Room. There's also nothing

like coming in from the heat, dipping a cotton handkerchief in a bottle
of cool lavender water, and patting your face and neck just as your
greatgrandmother did to refresh herself after an episode of the vapors.
"In today's world I find it not just nice but necessary to surround
myself and my family with things that are familiar, warm, and
reassuring," Barbara Milo Ohrbach believes. Our days at home can also be
heady and full of fragrant moments once we start to savor the romance of
scented rooms. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 17

Affordable Splendor There never has been a house so bad that it couldn't
be made over into something worthwhile. ---ELSIE DE WOLFE

In 1972 I moved to London to find my fortune on the stage. I didn't, so
for a while I ended up working as a secretary for \$ 100 a week. Of
necessity, I lived in a dreary, cheerless cell euphemistically known as
a "bed-sitter." It had a hot plate to cook on, a sink, a two-shelf
"fridge," and about ten feet of space. Basically it was just four badly
plastered walls and an exposed lightbulb on the ceiling. The bathroom
was down the hall, and every time I wanted to take a hot bath I had to
put a shilling into a meter to fire up the furnace for five minutes. But
my cell was located at the top of a stately old Victorian building on a
picturesque English side street overlooking a handsome park. It had
granite steps, a heavy wooden black door with a lion's head for a brass
knocker, pristine white woodwork surrounding tall, elegant windows, and
black wrought-iron window boxes overflowing with flowers. From the
outside, it looked regal, and I loved walking up to it because I felt
"to the manor born." Turning the key was another matter, for after I
shut the door and trudged up four flights of stairs, I was Cinderella
after midnight. But I was also a dreamer, and I dreamed of living in
splendor someday. One Friday afternoon on my way home from work, I
passed the window of a large department store. A huge remnant sale was
advertised and the fabrics displayed in the window were dazzling.
Curious, I went in, took one glance and visions of grandeur came into
view. Mind you, I didn't own a sewing machine; I barely knew how to sew
by hand. It didn't matter. The sight of table after table of the most
beautiful bolts of fabrics I had ever

seen was intoxicating, inspiring, irresistible. Here was splendor, and
it was affordable. At only about \$2 a yard, I splurged on an entire
bolt---thirty-five yards---of rust, hunter green, and saffron Indian
paisley print. Almost an entire week's salary spent, but it was worth
every penny. That weekend I cut, glued, stapled, draped, and hung
fabric. I covered the walls with it, created a tented ceiling, sewed
curtains by hand, covered my box spring, fashioned a bedspread, covered
pillows, and draped a canopied alcove to sleep in. By late Sunday night,
both the room and I had been transformed. I was exhilarated by my
beautiful surroundings and my creative risk-taking. Years later, when I
spotted Diana Phipps's indispensable primer on interior design
improvization, Affordable Splendor, I knew we were kindred spirits.
Diana Phipps's authentic gift is resourcefulness. She uses whatever she
has, from cardboard boxes to horsehair mattresses. She camouflages just
about everything and has never seen an old shawl, a frayed carpet, or a
pair of tattered curtains beyond redemption. The results are luxurious,
comfortable, creative settings that are the essence of thrift shop chic
via Buckingham Palace. This is no coincidence, since Diana was born a
Czechoslovakian countess and spent her childhood living in a castle.
Then came the German occupation and the Communist takeover, and her
family emigrated to the United States where they lived in freedom but
"reduced circumstances." However, her surroundings never gave her away
once she hit Woolworth's and walked out with forty yards of blue
gingham. I adore this book because Diana Phipps's spirit of decorating
is infectious. She's never listened to any expert in her life but her
authentic self, and it shows. She confesses, "By nature I am both lazy
and untidy. A professional carpenter, upholsterer or painter could, with
reason, find a great deal to criticize in my work. I know neither the
orthodox way of doing things nor the correct terminology. In fact, I
don't want to. I know what the professionals charge, the intimidating
mystery they exude and above all, how long they take." Instead, she does
it all herself and the stunning shortcuts she has devised are aimed for
people "whose purse, like mine, falls short of realizing their ideal
setting." This may sound presumptuous, but I believe we're all just as
clever as Diana. We just haven't accessed our authenticity to the extent
that she has, because she trusts her eye and creative impulses. She acts
on her instincts.

We hold back, hesitate, halt---and end by snuffing out the spark. Today
I would love to convince you that there is no room in your home that
cannot be transformed by using fabric, paints, a saw, a hammer, nails,
needle and thread, a sewing machine, glue, the amazing staple gun, and
your own imagination, time, and energy. "The most important thing about
decoration," Diana Phipps reassures us, is "the fun of it. The fun of
discovering a broken-down nothing and turning it into something.... Best
is to just charge ahead with confidence, enjoyment and a sharp pair of
scissors for cutting corners." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 18

Choosing to Blossom And the day came when the risk \[it took\] to remain
tight in the bud was more painful than the risk it took to blossom.
---ANAÏS NIN

How much time, creative energy, and emotion do we expend resisting
change because we assume growth must always be painful? Much personal
growth is uncomfortable, especially learning to set boundaries in
relationships. When we commit to nurturing our authentic selves, people
close to us are going to start noticing that changes are taking place.
This is the season when growth in the garden, which had been gradual,
now accelerates. It's that season for us as well, now that we're six
months into the journey toward Wholeness. For it can be difficult to
express your authentic needs by saying "Sorry, I can't" when everybody
else assumes you can. But it's worse to thwart the ascent of your
authenticity. The day comes---maybe it's today---when "remaining tight
in the bud" is more painful than blossoming. "Gardenmaking is creative
work, just as much as painting or writing a poem," the Victorian writer
Hanna Rion tells us. "It is a personal expression of self, an individual
conception of beauty." Gardening is also a wonderful way to gently
explore some of the personal growth issues raised by authenticity.
Mother Nature is a patient mentor. Can you find one perfect rosebud,
either in your garden or at a flower shop? Place it on your desk or
night table. The Talmud tells us that "Each blade of grass has its Angel
that bends over it and whispers, 'Grow, grow.'" So do we. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 19

Onward and Upward in the Garden Gardening is an instrument of grace.
---MAY SARTON

Gardening was one of the first gifts Simple Abundance bestowed on me
after I embarked on the authentic journey. I had never really gardened
before because it seemed like too much mind-numbing, back-breaking work.
(Notice that no one ever says playing in the garden. It's always working
in the garden.) I was already working too hard in the house and at my
writing to work in a garden as well. But several autumns ago, when
authentic longings began surging to the surface, I was seized with the
determination not to greet another spring without daffodils and tulips
in our yard. Since I knew absolutely nothing about gardening, I sought
the advice of famous women gardeners: Gertrude Jeykll, Vita
Sackville-West, Celia Thaxter, and Katharine S. White. Katharine White
was an editor at The New Yorker from its early days, in 1925, until her
retirement in 1958. She was also an avid gardener. Her husband, the
writer E. B. White, recalls in the introduction to his wife's book
Onward and Upward in the Garden, "She simply accepted the act of
gardening as the natural thing to be occupied with in one's spare time,
no matter where one was or how deeply involved in other affairs."
Katharine White also adored shopping in mail-order catalogs. "Hour after
hour, she studied, sifted, pondered, rejected, sorted in the delirium of
future blooming and fruiting," writes E. B. White. This insatiable
passion for gardening catalogs prompted her to take up writing after
decades of editing. Her first feature was a critical review of seed
catalogs and nurserymen that launched her famous garden writing series
"Onward and Upward."

To my mind, there are two types of lady gardeners. There are those
extraordinary women who not only know every flower, but know every
flower by its Latin name. These women look as beautiful as the flora
they nurture, gardening in wide-brimmed straw hats and pearls, trailing
chiffon, and wearing Ferragamo shoes. They keep meticulous gardening
journals, plot plant placements on graph paper, and never break into a
sweat when wielding a trowel and a spade. Katharine White belonged to
this gardening genus. "Grunge" accurately describes the other group. We
are always hot, smelly, and sweaty in the garden, boasting not so much a
green thumb as dirty fingernails because we forgot where we put our
gardening gloves. We speak of "that little yellow flower" and point. We
also tend to be manic about gardening, seized not only by visions of
earthly Paradise but also Kubla Khan's Xanadu. How else to explain why
it never occurred to me when I ordered fourteen rosebushes in April,
that they would all arrive on the same May morning, necessitating two
days of frenzied labor? Before rosebushes can go into the ground, very
deep holes must be dug. Still, into the ground they all went.
Miraculously, the gardener did not accompany them. Now they are the love
children of my middle-age, conceived during passionate afternoon
perusals of glossy gardening catalogs. Gardening came easily to
Katharine White, but writing was "slow and tortuous going," her husband
noted. Phrases are far easier for me than double-ditching a flower bed.
Still, I think of my adventures in the garden as a trajectory of forward
motion, an evolution of soul. Gardening has become an unexpected
instrument of grace, for I've discovered hours of inner peace on my
knees, digging in the dirt. Here is the one place I don't think about
work or worry about whatever it is that I can't control. The complete
absorption, the sacrament of the present moment I experience when
planting or weeding brings exquisite contentment. My mind is stilled and
my heart expands. Now I know why the Great Creator intended for woman to
flourish in a garden. So much for second-guessing the wisdom of Spirit.
A beautiful dusty rose named "Pleasure" beckons me. Onward and upward.
It's time to play. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 20

Secret Gardens Within your heart, keep one still, secret spot where
dreams may go. ---LOUISE DRISCOLL

In 1898, Frances Hodgson Burnett, the bestselling author of Little Lord
Fauntleroy and an international celebrity on both sides of the Atlantic,
rented a manor house in the English countryside known as Maytham Hall.
Depressed over the public outcry concerning her divorce and hounded by
the press because of her scandalous relationship with her business
manager, a handsome man young enough to be her son, Mrs. Burnett sought
a quiet refuge in which to gather her thoughts and rebuild her life. Her
favorite sanctuary was an outdoor space surrounded by brick walls which
she transformed into a rose garden, planting three hundred coral-pink
rosebushes. She referred to her rose garden as her private study. Here
she would spend the days alternating between gardening and writing,
shaded by a large floral Japanese parasol on sunny days. On chilly days
she would wrap herself in a lap rug, only retreating to the house when
she had to. Over the next nine years, Mrs. Burnett wrote three books and
a play, but it was not until 1907, when she was forced to leave Maytham
Hall because her lease had expired, that she returned to America. While
she created a new garden at her Long Island, New York home, she also
began work on what would become her most renowned accomplishment, The
Secret Garden, which was published in 1911. The Secret Garden is the
story of the redemption of two miserable children who are nurtured by
Mother Nature. As the children bring back to life an abandoned and
overgrown garden hidden behind stone walls, its revival becomes an
inspiring metaphor for their own restoration.

Toward the end of her life, Frances Hodgson Burnett recalled how working
in the garden at Maytham Hall had restored her own sense of self. The
fond memories of "a softly rainy spring in Kent when I spent nearly
three weeks kneeling on a small rubber mat on the grass edge of a
heavenly old herbaceous border bed" remained vivid in her imagination,
as well as "the plants which were to bloom in loveliness for me in the
summer." Shortly after I began exploring and experimenting with the
principles of Simple Abundance as a creative conduit for contentment, I
had a wonderful dream. I was led to an old walled garden and shown a
golden key that was lying on the path. As I turned the key, a heavy
wooden door easily swung open to reveal a dark, dismal wasteland of dead
and overgrown plants. Everything was dark. But once inside, I could see
an archway leading to the most beautiful garden I had ever seen, bathed
in warm sunlight. Yet I was unwilling to leave the desolate garden
behind to step into Paradise. Something invisible held me back, tangled
in the underbrush. Finally I struggled through the archway. When I did,
the wasteland disappeared. I was surrounded only by beauty and abundance
and experienced great joy and serenity. When I reluctantly awoke, I knew
exactly what the dream meant. The lush garden was the awareness of
abundance in my life, and the wasteland was the manifestation of my
thoughts of lack. Both abundance and lack exist simultaneously in our
lives, as parallel realities. It is always our conscious choice which
secret garden we shall tend. The invisible underbrush holding us back is
our own thoughts. When we choose not to focus on what is missing from
our lives but on the abundance that's present---love, health, family,
friends, work, and personal pursuits that bring us pleasure---the
wasteland falls away and we experience joy in the real lives we live
each day. It would be wonderful to have a real secret garden, as Frances
Hodgson Burnett did, but that's not possible for most of us. Still, we
can try to create an outdoor sanctuary. If you have a backyard, could
you place a comfortable chair and a small table in a shady nook? Hang a
hammock? Arrange some furniture at the end of the front porch or on a
patio where you might beat a retreat when you need a respite? And while
you're at it, don't forget to tend your interior secret garden, because
the seeds that will blossom in outward expression are always first

scattered within. Weed out disappointments, frustrations, diminished
ambitions, unfulfilled expectations, and anger about what has gone
before or what has not yet come. These emotional weeds only choke your
creativity. Let an unfettered imagination sow the seeds of possibility
in the rich soil of your soul. Then let passion tend the garden with
patience and perseverance. For, as Frances Hodgson Burnett discovered,
"When you have a Garden, you have a Future and when you have a Future,
you are Alive." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 21

Bloom Where You're Planted Bloom where you're planted. ---MARY
ENGELBREIT

I am a late bloomer. I married at thirty-two, became a mother at
thirty-five, published my first book at forty-three, and planted my
first real garden when I was forty-five. I feel shy about admitting all
this, as if it's a cosmic flaw, but May Sarton, who wrote, gardened, and
lived each day with a passion I envy, reassures me that "Gardening is
one of the rewards of middle age, when one is ready for an impersonal
passion, a passion that demands patience, acute awareness of a world
outside oneself, and the power to keep on growing through all the times
of drought, through the cold snows, towards those moments of pure joy
when all failures are forgotten and the plum tree flowers." The plum
tree did not flower this morning, but a regal pink lily did, in my
cottage garden. How did she get here? I planted her, obviously, but I
know as much about lilies as I do about life. There she stands before
me, majestic in her mature mystery. She is so ephemeral, so exquisite,
her beauty should grace the Taj Mahal, but here she is, blooming in
Takoma Park. There is much to recommend late blooming, but when was the
last time this subject was the cover story of a glossy women's magazine?
Yet the great Victorian gardener and writer, Gertrude Jeykll, who is
considered the first lady of modern garden design, was also a late
bloomer. Miss Jeykll spent the first half of her life as an artist, but
failing eyesight forced her to lay down the paintbrush and pick up the
spade. In her fifties she turned to gardening as her creative outlet.
Over the next three decades she designed

more than fifty stunning English gardens, and wrote fourteen books and
numerous articles. We should all bloom so abundantly. Being a late
bloomer means that you have the time and the opportunity to revise and
revamp if you experiment with life and fall short of your dreams. We
late bloomers can risk more because at this point nobody really expects
anything spectacular from us anymore. We can reinvent ourselves or give
birth to our authentic selves as we rediscover and reclaim our essence.
As I have tried and failed and tried again, I have discovered that if we
are to flourish as creative beings, if we are to grow into Wholeness, we
must bloom wherever we are planted. Right now, you might not have the
perfect career, home, or relationship. Few of us do. But if you have the
gift of today, you've got another chance to re-create your circumstances
and make them as perfect as it's possible to do with the resources you
have. Today, you get another chance to get it as right as you can make
it. What more could you desire? I have a little climbing rosebush. Her
name is Blaze. I really planted her in too small a spot, where she is
dwarfed by a profuse old lady of a peony. But I have always dreamed of
living in a house covered with climbing roses. Since I have stopped
waiting for tomorrow's pleasure, I ordered her. When she arrived,
wrapped and demure like a mail-order bride, I gave her a kiss, stuffed
her in, said a prayer, and hoped for the best. For a couple of weeks,
nothing happened, even though I misted her canes daily, whispered
encouragement and invocations to "grow and flourish abundantly."
Finally, a month after her arrival, she sprouted leaves and began her
ascent. Today she greeted me with tiny buds. Climbers don't normally
blossom their first year, but no one told this to Blaze, who chose to
bloom where she was planted. "The people who get on in this world are
the people who get up and look for the circumstances they want,"
observed the English playwright George Bernard Shaw, who believed he got
his best ideas after working in his garden. "And if they can't find
them, make them." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 22

The Gourmet Victory Garden It's difficult to think anything but pleasant
thoughts while eating a home-grown tomato. ---LEWIS GRIZZARD

The 1930s and 1940s were lean and hungry years in America. People
hungered in the 1930s because of the Depression: debt, drought, dust
storms, displacement, and heartbreaking breadlines and unemployment
lines. From 1942 to 1945, people were hungry for peace, order, safety,
security, and homecomings, as well as meat, cheese, sugar, butter,
coffee, and oil, which were strictly rationed because they were being
shipped to American troops fighting around the world. Home gardening
took on new meaning during these decades as women had to "make do" with
whatever they had. In the 1930s, women's magazines encouraged their
readers to grow "kitchen gardens" for reasons of thrift. In the 1940s,
President Franklin Roosevelt ordered "victory gardens" as part of the
war effort. Domestic propaganda exhorted women to remember that "waste
during war is sabotage," and American women answered the patriotic call
by growing more than a million tons of vegetables a year---half of what
the home front annually consumed---in backyard plots. The victory garden
is a concept whose time has come again, not so much for reasons of
thrift as for thrifty pleasure. Probably the most convincing argument
for a personal victory garden is a homegrown tomato, just now beginning
to turn pink on the vine. In a couple of weeks, the quintessential
summer repast will brighten up my midday, as it should yours, a tomato
sandwich and lemonade. Slice thick slices of red beauties, slather

mayonnaise on Wonder Bread, season with sea salt and freshly ground
pepper. My mouth is watering in anticipation as I write. Now consider
Ronde de Nice squash, cornichon French cucumbers, leaf spinach, sugar
snap peas---all growing in your plot or potager. It's time to completely
rethink growing vegetables. The victory garden in the 1990s has gone
gourmet, and it's an affordable luxury. Food is grown not just for
economy but for delight. Today's gourmet gardens are cooks' gardens.
That's because gardening and cooking are complementary creative
pastimes. If you've never thought of the marriage of these two simply
abundant pleasures before, one glance at Geraldene Holt's delectable The
Gourmet Garden will make gardeners out of gourmets and gourmets out of
gardeners. And if you're neither, you'll discover two new aspirations.
You may not have a gourmet vegetable garden this summer. Gardens need to
be plotted, planned, and planted before they yield their harvest. But
you can sow the seeds of this simple pleasure into your imagination for
next year. "The first gathering ... of salads, radishes and herbs made
me feel like a mother about her baby---how could anything so beautiful
be mine?" Alice B. Toklas reminisced. "And this emotion of wonder filled
me for each vegetable as it was gathered every year. There is nothing
that is comparable to it, as satisfactory or as thrilling, as gathering
the vegetables one has grown." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 23

Midsummer Night's Dreams Now is the high-tide of the year, And whatever
of life hath ebbed away Comes flooding back with ripply cheer Now the
heart is so full that a drop overfills it, We are happy now, because God
wills it. ---JAMES RUSSELL LOWELL

For centuries, wise women have known that a bit of midsummer madness and
magic are good for the soul. This probably explains why in Europe,
Midsummer's Eve (June 23) has traditionally been set aside as the night
for high-spirited merrymaking and lighthearted bewitchment. Midsummer's
Night is also the high holy feast of the "Stillwaters," the mock New
England sect imagined by author and illustrator Tasha Tudor. Stillwater
followers---originally Tasha Tudor's family and friends---believe that
life's simple pleasures are meant to be savored and that Nature is to be
revered. The Stillwater religion, which combines the best beliefs of the
Shakers, Quakers, and Amish, is a state of mind, according to its
creator. "Stillwater connotes something very peaceful," Eldress Tudor
explains, "Life without stress. Nowadays, people are so jeezled up. If
they took some chamomile tea and spent more time rocking on the porch in
the evening ... they might enjoy life more." On Midsummer's Eve, the
Stillwaters have a Great Party---plenty of music, dancing in the barn,
and a sumptuous summer supper. "Stillwater believers are very
hedonistic. Life is to be enjoyed, not saddled with," Tasha Tudor
insists. The first commandment of the Stillwater religion, is to "Take
joy" from each day. This is a catechism we should all embrace to

experience Heaven on earth. Unfortunately, the Stillwaters don't
proselytize door to door, so we are all on our own. Nonetheless, this
credo invites personal investigation. I love Midsummer's Day (June 24).
For me, it's a personal midcourse correction for the year. I wander out
into the backyard very early in the morning and pluck a blossom from the
garden heavy with dew. With my fingers, I'll pat the dew upon my face,
for legend has it that any woman who washes her face in the dew of
Midsummer's Day will grow more lovely with the passing year. Fairy cakes
are made for tea, midsummer's syllabub (a delightful concoction of
cider, lemon, berries, and whipped cream) is prepared for a moonlit
picnic, and personal dreams are renewed. Being Irish, I don't dismiss
the belief in love charms, magic herbs, and divination, for I know
there's more to this world than we'll ever hope to understand. But these
days I'm not so much interested in what the future holds as I am in the
present. "I believe the nicest and sweetest days are not those on which
anything very splendid or wonderful or exciting happens, but just those
that bring simple little pleasures, following one another softly, like
pearls slipping off a string," the Canadian writer Lucy Maud Montgomery
reveals through her heroine, Anne Shirley. When Midsummer arrives, it's
a time to look ahead and dream. Perhaps, if one is lucky, the days ahead
will unfold as a "neverto-be-forgotten summer---one of those summers
which come seldom into any life, but leave a rich heritage of beautiful
memories in their going---one of those summers which, in a fortunate
combination of delightful weather, delightful friends and delightful
doings, come as near to perfection as anything can come in the world."
May this potent Midsummer spell never be broken for you and those you
love. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 24

Splendor in the Vase: Living with Flowers I'd rather have roses on my
table, than diamonds on my neck. ---EMMA GOLDMAN

The famous English gardener and writer Vita Sackville-West believed that
gardening was like painting: "One has the illusion of being an artist
painting---putting a dash of color here, taking out another dash of
color there, until the whole composition is to one's liking." I am still
too much of a novice gardener to have experienced her observation
firsthand. I only discover what dash of color I've put somewhere after
it blooms. But I do feel like an artist when I arrange a beautiful
bouquet of flowers. Now is the season for splendor in the vase. Let's
make the most of it. Living with flowers is an exquisite simple
pleasure, and in the spring, summer, and fall, it's an affordable
luxury. Come the winter months, flowers are too expensive for my budget.
Like Emma Goldman, I'd choose roses on my table over diamonds any day.
This is a real possibility if you grow your own, which is why I splurged
on rosebushes this spring. In my heart and imagination blooms a fragrant
English cottage and cutting garden, but it is materializing very slowly.
Cutting gardens can take years of nurturing before they reward you with
bouquets of flowers. So I weed and water and wait. But while I'm waiting
I head to the farmers' market on the weekends and stop off at roadside
stands whenever I spot them to smell the flowers and indulge by spending
a few dollars. I've also tried to think of ways to live with flowers
year-round. One way is to begin surrounding myself with "botanicals," a
bountiful description that includes flowers, fruits, foliage, twigs, and
grasses. "Botanicals" also refers to decorative furniture, wall
coverings, textiles, and china that feature floral patterns.

People have been decorating their homes with botanicals for over 4,500
years, as evidenced by an Egyptian wall painting of geese grazing on
grass and red flowers. Interior florals can make a garden bloom indoors,
while abundant natural accents available year-round impart not only
visual charm but a sense of comforting continuity. A wonderful way to
begin exploring decorating with flowers is Cynthia Gibson's A Botanical
Touch and The Floral Home by Leslie Geddes-Brown. During the summer
months, when flowers are plentiful and inexpensive, I love to fill the
house with these heavenly tokens of Simple Abundance. But as I arrange
bouquets not only for the living room, but also the dining room, kitchen
(remember feng shui!), bathroom and desk, I know I am in good company.
"Flowers really do intoxicate me," Vita Sackville-West confesses. She's
not the only one. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 25

Getting Started Plant it with the green side up. ---MARY ANN AND
FREDERICK MCGOURTY

How does your garden grow? Does it grow at all? If you're having a hard
time realizing the garden that lives inside your heart, there's a way,
if there's a desire. Perhaps you don't have a backyard because you live
in a city apartment. That doesn't have to stop you. Some of the
prettiest gardens I've ever seen have been on front stoops. If you have
a balcony or a patio, you can create breathtaking container gardens that
bloom with roses, annuals, herbs, tomatoes, and vegetables. If you don't
have a balcony or a patio, interior window boxes can provide you with
blooming miniature gardens of seasonal plants all year long. One of the
most charming examples comes to us from the 1930s: place white lattice
in front of a window that receives plenty of light and sow morning glory
seeds in an interior window box. Train the flowers up the lattice to
form a delightful and unusual summer curtain. If you're fortunate enough
to have a bit of earth to call your own, make the most of it. Go back to
your discovery journal and see what types of flowers you're longing to
see in your backyard. If you're not sure, browse among the gardening
shelves at a library and bring home an assortment of books to peruse.
Write down the names of the flowers and where to order them if you can't
get them locally. Decide to concentrate on just one spot this year. Now
get yourself a copy of Barbara Damrosch's The Garden Primer. Any book
that begins by telling you to "keep the green side up" is my kind of
gardening book. I may drool and dream over other gardening tomes, but
The Garden Primer bears the muddy stains of my devotion because I

literally carry the hefty paperback outside whenever I'm gardening.
"Good gardening is very simple, really. You just have to learn to think
like a plant," confides Barbara, and with her indispensable guide, you
will. A wonderful way to actually start gardening is to send for spring
bulb catalogs now. Bulbs need to be planted in the fall, either in late
October or early November before the first frost, so the summer is the
right time to start stockpiling visions of grandeur. E. B. White, who
after his wife Katharine's death edited her New Yorker gardening columns
into a book, ends his remembrance of her gardening years with a glimpse
of her last autumn bulb planting and "her studied absorption in the
implausible notion that there would be yet another spring, oblivious to
the ending of her own days, which she knew perfectly well was near at
hand, sitting there with her detailed chart under those dark skies in
the dying October, calmly plotting the resurrection." I cried when I
read that passage for the first time. Now I silently thank Katharine
White every spring when my bulbs bloom. After closing her book, I headed
to our local nursery and bought a hundred daffodil and tulip bulbs for
the resurrection of my own contentment. Here's a bulb-planting tip
that's made all the difference for me. Pay little heed to the accepted
wisdom that instructs you to space the bulbs apart. I did that when we
first moved into our home and ended up with the most pathetic border
ever grown. The sight of it was so depressing I gave up the dream of a
garden for a decade. Finally, having lusted for years after the flower
beds surrounding the Library of Congress, I asked a gardener his secret
for abundant blooming. He told me to plant at least six bulbs in each
hole (create a circle of bulbs in the hole with one bulb in the center)
and space your holes close together. The result was stunning. I wish I
could convey the feeling of immense delight and contentment as I watched
those bulbs push their way through the frozen ground, reach toward the
sky and turn their beautiful faces toward the sun. Every spring morning
while Katie and I waited for the car pool to arrive, we would converse
with "the ladies," as they were known, greeting the new arrivals daily
and thanking them for their gift of beauty. Finally, I leave you today
with some comforting advice from Gertrude Jeykll, who changed the face
of gardening a century ago. "Let no one be discouraged by the thought of
how much there is to learn," Aunt Bumps (as

she was known by intimates) reassures us. "Each new step becomes a
little surer, and each new grasp a little firmer." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 26

Everywoman's Essence of Paradise All the year round she kept racks full
of plants in pots standing on green painted wooden steps. There were
rare geraniums, dwarf rosebushes, spiraeas with misty white and pink
plumes ... ---COLETTE

Many women have backyards in which to make their gardening dreams come
true, but not all of us do. If you live in the city, without a patio or
balcony, don't skip over these gardening meditations. It doesn't matter
where you live, every woman can delight in this simply abundant pastime.
A wonderful way to begin is by bringing the outdoors in with plants that
bloom all year long. But not just any plants. Please leave the spiny
spider ferns or rubber plants in the office reception area where they
belong. Instead, consider fragrant plants redolent of romance:
camellias, freesias, narcissus, hyacinths, heliotrope, jasmine, violets,
scented geraniums. I discovered the comfort of an aromatic indoor garden
when I couldn't afford fresh bouquets of flowers year round. As I got
more in touch with my authentic preferences and sought joyful
simplicities to brighten up my daily round, I realized how much I loved,
longed for, and needed to be surrounded by the visual beauty of Spirit
expressed in Nature. The newly discovered sensuist in me wanted feasts
for the eyes and sweet scents for my home. The inspiration that pushed
me out the door and toward the nursery was Tovah Martin's The Essence of
Paradise: Fragrant Plants for Indoor Gardens. Her marvelous book is a
seductive walk through the seasons, tending fragrant plants from January
through December and detailing how to find them, buy them, and care for
them.

I started by forcing bulbs and flowering branches in the winter and
spring, because one can rarely fail with them and novice gardeners need
constant verdant victories. Then, gradually, I moved on to green growing
entities that can actually be called plants. Gardeners who creatively
toil in the rich soil of imagination, like myself, often end up
surrounded by plants that look as if they had been tended by Morticia
Addams. We are not known so much for our horticultural skills as for the
triumph of our enthusiasm over our prior experience. Still, one of my
favorite creative excursions is to visit a large greenhouse monthly,
just to see what's blooming. Now that my nose knows that this beauty and
fragrance can be brought home, I'm becoming quite intoxicated with
growing an indoor scented garden. "Gardening really has no beginning and
no end. In particular, pleasures of the sense of smell really know no
seasons," Tovah Martin encourages us. "Bottled under glass, blooming at
your elbow, the indoor garden has an immediacy that gardens outside
cannot match. The aromas impart an intensity that will not be
ignored.... Deliciously distilled, delectably varied --- that is the
essence of paradise." OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 27

Rosemary for Remembrance: Sowing Herbal Hopes and Wishes Balm brings you
sympathy and Marjoram joy Sage is long life ... Sweet Woodruff augurs
well for health--- A blessing richer far than wealth. While Lavender
means deep devotion, Herb of sweet omen, Rosemary conveys Affection and
remembrance all your days. May Heaven and Earth and Man combine To keep
these blessings ever thine. ---RACHEL PAGE ELLIOTT

For centuries in Benedictine cloisters, gardening---particularly herb
gardening---has been considered an important ritual in the daily round
of religious life. But the devotion to growing herbs can be traced back
nearly six thousand years before the Christian era began. In ancient
civilizations like those of Egypt, China, and Assyria, herbalists were
revered, and their teachings about the medicinal properties of herbs
were passed down in sacred texts. During the Middle Ages, the herbal
tradition was honored and preserved by wise women and midwives, who
shared recipes and medicinals made from herbs collected in the wild and
cultivated in cottage gardens. There is probably more mystery and lore
to herbs than any other plants. Each herb has its own history,
significance, and use for either cooking or remedies. King Charlemagne
of France, the first emperor of the Holy Roman Empire, believed that
herbs were "the friend of the physician and the pride of cooks" and
ordered the planting of a royal herb garden in the

ninth century. Herbs were considered essential for a long, happy, and
healthy life. Herbs are another avenue of creative expression for the
apartment dweller, because a marvelous windowsill garden of herbs can be
grown year-round. If you don't have one, there is still time enough this
week to visit a farmers' market and pick up a few plants. Herbs adapt
beautifully to container gardens because they don't need much space and
are very gardener-friendly. A delightful kitchen herb garden of basil,
dill, parsley, sweet marjoram, thyme, and rosemary can be cultivated in
a large terracotta bowl or catino, a staple in Italian kitchens. The
fragrance will perk you up every time you walk into the room, and fresh
herbs will encourage you to be more adventurous in your cooking. A
friend of mine is an herbalist who manages to keep one foot in the
sixteenth century and the other in the twenty-first without ever missing
a beat. Jeri knows, respects, and honors the mystery, magic, and the
wonder of nature, which she refers to as "Mother." When she collects
herbs in the wild to create medicinals for herself, gathering the good
that Mother has so generously bestowed on her, she becomes a willing
participant in her own healing, her search for Wholeness. When she
chooses dill, tarragon, or rosemary to flavor a meal she's cooking, she
contributes to her own nourishment, well-being, and pleasure. Her love
of herbs is a tangible expression of self-nurturance. Jeri performs a
Native American ritual as she collects herbs. She wears a sacred pouch
that carries wheat seeds. As she gathers from the earth, she personally
returns an offering by scattering seeds. And even if the seeds don't
sprout, at least she is feeding the earth's creatures. "The Native
Americans have a chant that they invoke when they gather," Jeri says.
"The Earth is my Mother, She takes care of me. The Earth is my Mother, I
take care of Her." Today, sow some symbolic seeds, even if you don't
have a garden, as a gesture to ritualize the new life you are creating
within. Ask for the blessing of Spirit and the nurturing of the Great
Mother and know that in due time there will be an abundant harvest for
yourself and those you love. "In search of my mother's garden I found my
own," Alice Walker tells us. Today, may this be your discovery as well
as mine.

OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 28

Repotting: Giving Roots and Yourself Room to Grow Little flower---but if
I could understand What you are, root and all, and all in all I should
know what God and \[woman\] is. ---ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON

Uh-oh. Dropping leaves. Whatever can be the matter? The plant has been
watered; it basks in the light; it's neither too hot nor too cold. I
pick up the pot and look at the small drainage hole in its underbelly.
Tiny white roots are frantically pushing through in a futile attempt to
escape confinement or at least find a little more breathing space.
Pot-bound. Did you know that plants need to be repotted at least every
two years? This has not been a problem for me in the past, since plants
rarely made it that long around here. But as I become a better caretaker
of myself, I care better for everything. However, even if the roots
don't need more room to grow, the old soil should be replaced because
all the nutrients have been consumed. The interior of the pot is a
wasteland. "I don't know when I myself am too pot-bound," Gunilla Norris
confesses in her numinous devotional, Being Home, "lacking courage to be
replanted, to take the shock of the new soil, to feel into the unknown
and take root in it." We, too, need to consider repotting for growth.
But when? When we wilt even before the day begins. When we can't seem to
visualize or dream. When we can't remember the last time we laughed.
When we have absolutely nothing in the next twenty-four hours to look
forward to. When this happens, week in, week out, we need to realize
that we're pot-bound.

We need to gently loosen the soil around our souls, find something that
sparks our imagination, quickens our pulse, brings a smile or a giddy
lilt to our conversations. But repotting doesn't mean we have to leave
the marriage or quit the job. It just means we need something new. Why
is it too late to go back to college if you do it one course at a time?
Maybe this is the summer to learn to speak French or to start your own
gift basket business? Perhaps you can get the sewing machine fixed, try
making blackberry cordial, or take up fencing. What's stopping you from
writing for that grant, applying for the fellowship, pulling together
that one-woman show, attending that lecture series, publishing your own
newsletter, or just sending for that intriguing mail-order catalog? As I
work with my plants, I see that the roots are just stunted. Gently, with
my fingers, I untangle them. Leaf. Stem. Root. Mind. Body. Soul. Three
in one. Spirit's seamless thread of mystery. I have often thought that
if I could just discover where one strand left off and another began, I
could understand it all. As it is, I understand little, yet somehow I
know. I set the plant into a slightly larger pot. Not too large; we must
not overwhelm but encourage. So too, I must not take on the world but
simply each task before me. Now I add rich potting soil. Water. Slowly I
take the plant to a shady spot for a day so that it can become adjusted
to its new environment. But even at this moment, the stem seems
straighter, the leaves uplifted. "Speak to Him thou for He hears,"
Tennyson urges. "Spirit with Spirit can meet---closer is He than
breathing, and nearer than hands and feet." Root and bud bear silent
witness to the restoration. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 29

Pruning Back, Plowing Ahead My soul is a broken field, plowed by pain.
---SARA TEASDALE

Suddenly, inexplicably, life accidents strike without warning. A
longdistance runner discovers that the tingling in her muscles is
multiple sclerosis. A beautiful actress, frequently described as a
Hollywood siren, undergoes a double mastectomy. The domestic bliss of a
popular lifestyle author, so often celebrated in her books,
disintegrates in public view. The face of a stunning young model is
slashed by assailants. A gifted musician is pushed beneath a subway
train and loses a hand. If life accidents of this kind seem particularly
cruel, it's because they are ---prima facie evidence of fate's
maliciousness. More often than any of us would like to admit, life has a
way of hitting us where it hurts most. The term "life accident" was
first coined by Gail Sheehy in her book Pathfinders. In this book she
delved into the life accidents we are powerless to predict or prevent.
"To paraphrase John Lennon," says Sheehy, "life's accidents are what
happen to us while we are making other plans." But life's accidents
don't have to be fodder for the six o'clock news. The more familiar
ones--- divorce, debts, or drug addiction---can sideswipe us with equal
devastation. Unfortunately, Sheehy discovered in the course of writing
her books, "Most people do not negotiate either predictable passages,
especially the later ones, or life accidents successfully." However,
those individuals who will themselves to benefit from adversity become
what Sheehy calls "pathfinders": real-life champions who, "by refusing
to go under in the onslaught of a life accident," emerge victorious.

Life accidents prune us back. Our souls become broken fields, plowed by
pain. Because I am a novice gardener, the task of pruning seems
daunting, formidable. Eleanor Perenyi tells me in Green Thoughts: A
Writer in the Garden that "Plants know you are there, and when you
approach them knife in hand, they utter tiny shrieks; on the other hand,
if you talk to them kindly or pray over them, they reward you with
better than average growth." I am more a gardener of the praying and
cooing persuasion, which is why I always hold my breath when I prune. I
am also perplexed by the notion of cutting away what appears to be
thriving in order to promote abundant blooming in the future. To my
linear logic, this seems backward. Yes, I understand intellectually that
pruning strengthens rather than weakens, but that doesn't mean I have to
like it. As I look at the roses, however, I realize that pruning is
necessary for complete growth. So, I have come to realize, is a certain
amount of pain in our lives. Pain prunes the unessential emotions,
ambitions, and illusions, teaching us the lessons we either consciously
or unconsciously refuse to be taught by joy. Pain prunes the
insignificant details that distract us from what is really important,
sapping our days, energies, and spirits. When we don't prune in the
garden, Nature does it for us through wind, ice, hail, fire, and flood.
One way or another, the boughs will be shaped and strengthened. If we
don't prune away the stress and plow under the useless in our lives,
pain will do it for us. Make no mistake, I think pain is a wretched
gardener. Her cuts stun and sting. But after pruning, preferably
voluntary, we're able to discern what's real, what's important, and
what's essential for our happiness. Be of good cheer. Study your plants
and study your lifestyle. When the right time arrives, go into the
garden with sharp shears. Speak kindly. Pray softly. Prune back. Now
plow ahead. OceanofPDF.com

JUNE 30

Being There: Lessons from the Garden All you need is deep within you
waiting to unfold and reveal itself. All you have to do is be still and
take time to seek for what is within, and you will surely find it.
---EILEEN CADDY

Thirty years ago, Eileen and Peter Caddy, their three sons, and their
friend Dorothy Maclean followed an inner spiritual directive to move to
an area on the northernmost coast of Scotland. There, beside a garbage
dump bordered by sand dunes, they created a garden following only
spiritual guidance. Through prayer and meditation, Eileen and Dorothy
contacted the spiritual essence, or "deva" of every plant species, which
Dorothy described as "angels, great Beings whose lives infuse and create
all of Nature." Each plant imparted spiritual direction of what it
needed to flourish despite the wretched circumstances. Within a few
years, The Findhorn Community, as their settlement was known, became
internationally famous for growing an abundance of large plants,
vegetables, fruits, and herbs in the worst possible conditions---a
spiritual manifestation of an oasis in the center of a wasteland.
"Expect your every need to be met, expect the answer to every problem,
expect abundance on every level, expect to grow spiritually," Eileen
Caddy tells me as I turn over the earth, sow, weed, water, and wait.
These are the lessons she learned in her garden. Lessons I long to
learn. Study the cycles of Mother Nature, the garden whispers, for they
correspond with the cycles of your soul's growth. Quiet your mind. Rope
in the restlessness. Be here. Learn to labor. Learn to wait. Learn to
wait expectantly. Another important lesson the garden teaches is sowing
and reaping, as well as seedtime and harvest. Whatever you sow, you will
reap. If I plant

lettuce, I will not harvest tomatoes. If I sow only positive seeds in my
subconscious---thoughts of plenty and not of lack---abundance will
sprout in the garden. As for seedtime and harvest, be forewarned. The
spiritual time continuum is not the same as time experienced on the
earthly plane. A year for us is a second in the spiritual dimension.
This explains why an artist who has toiled for twenty years suddenly
becomes an overnight success. I have learned this the hard way. By
sowing and waiting. Then waiting some more. This doesn't mean that the
seeds have fallen on stony ground. I refuse to believe this, for I have
worked the soil, dug the double ditch, added the compost, peat, sand,
and lime. The soil is rich. Some crops ---raspberries, asparagus,
grapes---require an investment of years before there is a harvest. If my
harvest is to be a simply abundant lifestyle rooted not in the world but
in Spirit, I must be patient. "You are not living by human laws but by
divine laws," Eileen Caddy reminds us. "Expect miracles and see them
take place. Hold ever before you the thought of prosperity and
abundance, and know that doing so sets in motion forces that will bring
it into being.

Joyful Simplicities for June • Take a trip down memory lane by catching
lightning bugs or fireflies on the lawn at twilight. Prepare an
old-fashioned hotel for them in a clean mayonnaise jar with holes
punched in the lid and layered with grass (remember?). Be sure to let
them fly away home after a brief visit! • Enjoy a frosty pitcher of
lemonade and conversation when you come home from work. While the frozen
variety is fine for most days, why not treat yourself to an
old-fashioned nectar made from fresh lemons and sugar syrup? Here's how.
Boil two cups of granulated sugar and one cup of water with the rinds of
three lemons cut into thin strips for five minutes. Let the syrup cool
and add the juice of eight lemons. Strain and store in a covered
container in the refrigerator. Use two tablespoons of the syrup for
every glass of ice or carbonated water to make lemonade. • Be on the
lookout for a strawberry festival (the website
www.jamm.com/strawberry/festivals.html will help you search for
festivals in the U.S. and around the world) or hold your own! The
Victorians called

these homegrown events "Strawberry Regales," and the menu included every
strawberry confection imaginable. Turn this into a potluck dessert party
and invite friends to bring their favorite strawberry sensation.
Indulge! • Remember that ice cream is good for the soul. Freeze a
homemade batch, treat yourself to a cone for lunch, make friends with
the Good Humor man. • One June weekend, buy a whole watermelon and keep
it in the refrigerator for at least a day so that it gets ice-cold. Cut
it in large pieces and sit on the porch, back deck or front stoop eating
watermelon with family or friends, spitting out the seeds. Have a
contest to see who can shoot the farthest. • Hang a hammock. Lie in it.
• Celebrate the Summer Solstice on June 21 by camping out in the
backyard. Pitch a tent, bring out the sleeping bags, build a campfire in
the grill. Serve hot dogs and S'mores for dessert. (Remember S'mores?
Take two graham crackers and sandwich a thin chocolate bar with a
toasted marshmallow. Eat one. Eat somemore!) Tell ghost stories, then
sleep in the moonlight. • Hold "The Great Party" on Midsummer's Night
Eve (June 23) like Tasha Tudor's Stillwater sect. If you are a fan of
Tasha Tudor (and who isn't?), her art, cards, and books can be found at
www.cellardoorbooks.com. • Treat your authentic self to the most
fetching straw hat you can find. • Paint your toenails red. • You might
not be able to create a real secret garden, but a secret spot in which
to sit can be yours by building a tepee in the backyard with a wooden
stake and string, then planting scarlet runner beans, morning glories,
or sweet peas. When the vines appear, guide them up the strings. Retreat
to your "tepee" frequently to contemplate the meaning of life. Everyone
needs a refuge where there's no phone and no fax. • Even if you're
convinced that you can't have a garden because there's no space, Malcolm
Hillier's marvelous Book of Container Gardening will inspire you to get
in there with a spade and a pot. It's filled with fabulous suggestions
and instructions for planting window boxes, barrels, tubs, urns, and
baskets, and much more. A sensational idea for spring bulbs is to grow
two different types of tulips layered in one pot for a dazzling display
of indoor beauty.

• Plant rosemary for remembrance, and while you're at it, a little
lavender, sage, and thyme. Emelie Tolley's enchanting series of books
about herbs (written with Chris Mead) will inspire you to become your
own herbalist. Herbs: Gardens, Decorations, and Recipes will start you
off in the right direction; Cooking with Herbs, Gifts from the Herb
Garden, and The Herbal Pantry all provide delightful suggestions for
what to do with the herbs after you've cultivated and harvested them.
OceanofPDF.com

JULY Lovely July ... with the evocative murmur of honey bees on the wing
and the smell of sun tan cream. ---CYNTHIA WICKHAM

Sultry, steaming, sweltering. July. Slow down. Or stop. It's time to
shed ambition and expectation, along with commutes, clothing, cellular
phones, calendars. Now our wants seem to diminish. Is it because our
needs are met? A shady nook, a cold drink, a cool breeze---whether
indoors or out. A respite from the rigors of the day. Time off for good
behavior. Summer is not so much a season as a melody, that tune of
contentment we hum as the days begin to beautifully blur. The pursuit of
happiness becomes our personal priority this month, as the sweet strains
of the fourth Simple Abundance principle---Harmony---start to be heard
in our hearts. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 1

Constant Craving I have learned, in whatsoever state I am, therewith to
be content. ---ST. PAUL

In my twenties, I thought fame would do it. In my thirties, I became
convinced that a comma in my checking account balance was the answer.
Now that I'm in my forties, I know that all my seeking can be summed up
in one word: contentment. In my forties I realize---gratefully---that
fame comes at too high a price. Being considered an "accomplished" woman
who shepherds successful creative' projects from conception to
completion is much more appealing than being famous. And in the deepest
recesses of my soul, I know that money cannot guarantee happiness. I
realized this with certitude the summer morning I read that a famous and
wealthy author, whose books hover on the best-seller lists for months,
had lost a beloved child to a freak accident. While washing the
breakfast dishes, I glanced out the kitchen window to see Katie bouncing
a tennis ball against the back of the house--- happy, safe, alive. I
knew that famous author would trade all her worldly success in a
heartbeat to know again the blessing bestowed on me that morning. After
I prayed for her, I prayed for myself. Please let me never forget how
rich my wonderful life is right at this moment. Please let me never
forget that all I have is all I need. Please let me never forget to give
thanks. But I know that I am a much happier woman when I can pay my
bills with ease, take care of all my needs, indulge a few of my wants,
and have a comfortable cushion of savings. It would also be
wonderful---and I hope to have the experience once before I die---to see
something fabulous and just say, "I'll take it," without asking the
price.

Still, these days contentment is my constant craving. So much so that I
have begun asking each twenty-four golden hours stretching before me,
luminous in their potential for pleasure, what might be mine for the
taking. Sometimes it's as simple as making a delicious tuna fish
sandwich with celery and tarragon mayonnaise on buttermilk honey bread
for lunch---the way I do for guests and for my family but rarely take
time to do for myself. Or as easy as sitting on the beach, not with work
in my lap (even when a deadline looms), but a great book. Just as
negative addictions sneak up on us a day at a time, so do positive
cravings. Meditation, creative movement, moments of self-nurturance that
bring contentment---all can become positive habits of well-being. I find
that when I take twenty minutes to get quiet and go within, work with
the visual images in my discovery journal, take a walk, or ask how can I
make the next task more pleasurable, my wants diminish. Today, consider
the desires that really count---what you really need to be content. Then
make sure there's at least three moments today that fulfill mind,
spirit, and body with what you alone must have. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 2

The Simplest of Pleasures: One Good Thing That Is Redeem The time.
Redeem The unread vision in the higher dream ... ---T. S. ELIOT

Some days are shaped by simple pleasures, others are redeemed by them.
Today---a beautiful summer's day at the beach---was shaped by joyful
simplicities. Idylls on a screened porch, roaming in interesting shops,
an afternoon on the shore with family and friends, irresistible reading,
confidences exchanged while the waves lap at ankles, an ice-cream cone
for lunch, strolling the boardwalk, playing amusement park games,
winning a prize. Then back to the house, a refreshing outdoor shower,
cocktails and conversation, the conviviality of cooking dinner with a
dear friend, an abundance of delicious food, delightful wine, laughter,
and good cheer--- and so to bed, happily. An Irish proverb tells us
"Better one good thing that is, rather than two good things that were,
or three good things that might never come to pass." Today there was no
need to glance wistfully at the past or project anxiously into the
future because the present was fully lived and simply abundant. Today
was rich with one good thing after another until it literally overflowed
with pleasure. But not all my days are beach sojourns. Not too long ago,
an eight A.M. phone call announcing a major change in plans sent my day
careening out of control. I hung up the telephone, my heartbeat
accelerating. In one stroke, my carefully arranged coping strategy was
out the window and my

host of commitments had been made almost unmeetable. This was too much,
I thought, as I paced back and forth, muttering and moaning under my
breath. I had three choices before me, but only one real-life solution:
scream with rage at the top of my lungs, put my head in the toilet, or
take a deep breath and redeem the day with Plan B. Since I have an
understanding in my home not to do anything that might alarm children or
animals, screaming was out. The toilet bowl was out as well. If you're
really going to drown yourself, you can't do it in a bucket of water. So
I poured myself a cup of tea and recalled the Hasidic prayer, "I know
the Lord will help---but help me Lord, until You help." The reality was
that the day would be as hard as I made it. Or as pleasant. There was
nothing I could do about my circumstances but accept them. "It's always
my choice," I reminded myself. Not necessarily to like whatever life
throws at me, but to try to catch the ball. After all, success in life
is not how well we execute Plan A; it's how smoothly we cope with Plan
B. And for most of us, that's 99 percent of the time. I considered Plan
B: redeem the day with simple pleasures, some good things to look
forward to. At first, learning to smoothly shift gears to Plan B takes
some attitude adjustment, but, like driving a car, it becomes an
automatic reflex with practice. First I took my tea out into the garden
to calm down. I pulled a few weeds, picked some flowers. After arranging
them, I looked at cookbooks. Should I prepare something new for dinner
tonight or a comforting favorite? I decided to stop off at the farmers'
stand for fresh produce on my way home and see what appealed to me. Why
not pick up a good movie as a treat after supper? The peaches on my
table were perfectly ripe, so I decided to make dumplings when I got
home. In the meantime, I had an hour to work uninterrupted before I had
to leave the house and decided to make the most of it. Better a golden
hour that is, than two that were, or three that obviously will not come
to pass today. The day stretched before me---not as I had hoped. But
not, thank heaven, beyond redemption. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 3

The Hungry Soul I cannot count the good people I know who to my mind
would be even better if they bent their spirits to the study of their
own hungers. ---M. F. K. FISHER

When Eve bit into the apple, she gave us the world as we know the world
---beautiful, flawed, dangerous, full of being. She gave us smallpox and
Somalia, polio vaccine and wheat and Windsor roses," Barbara Grizzuti
Harrison tells us in the illuminating and provocative collection of
essays, Out of the Garden: Women Writers on the Bible. "Eve's act of
radical curiosity" also gave us desire, appetite, and hunger. Without
Eve, I wouldn't be wondering what to cook for dinner tonight. Nor would
you. Without Eve, I wouldn't be cooking up creative projects that often
have me stewing in my own juices until they are completed. But I also
wouldn't know the earthly pleasures that I love, as well as the intense
desire for mystical morsels that only Spirit can provide: inner peace,
joy, harmony. Most of us eat three times a day (at least) but how often
is our hunger really satisfied? A bacon, egg, and cheese biscuit does
more for me than a half grapefruit, but unfortunately, unless I'd like
to be the size of the golden arches, I feel I can't indulge that often.
Many of us constantly hold ourselves in check---about food,
relationships, careers---stuffing our desires down deep into the self,
as if sheer determination can keep the lid on longing. But I am
gradually coming to an awareness that hunger is holy. We're meant to be
hungry every day and to satisfy that hunger every day. Why else would
the first petition in the Lord's Prayer be for daily bread, even before
divine assistance?

Our souls know many different kinds of hunger: physical, psychic,
emotional, creative, and spiritual. But the Great Creator gave us the
gifts of reason, imagination, curiosity, discernment; we possess the
ability to distinguish between our hungers. Are you really hungry this
morning for a breakfast biscuit or a break? Is it passionate kisses you
desire or pasta? Or a good night's sleep? Then don't sit up watching
reruns with that third glass of wine. Turn the television off and tuck
yourself in and if you're not alone, invite someone to join you. "When I
write of hunger, I am really writing about love and the hunger for it,
and the warmth and the love of it," the great gastronome and poetic food
writer M. F. K. Fisher confessed in 1943. "And then the warmth and
richness and fine reality of hunger satisfied ... and it is all one."
Don't despise desire, daughter of Eve. Within your desire is the spark
of the Divine. Spirit desired to be loved. A woman with a lusty appetite
was created to satisfy that longing. Love. Hunger. Appetite. Desire.
Holiness. Wholeness. It is all One. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 4

Getting Real and Personal in the Pursuit of Happiness Expect nothing;
live frugally on surprise. ---ALICE WALKER

We've just come back from watching a wonderful, old-fashioned parade.
There's been an Independence Day parade in our town for one hundred and
six years; it's the oldest consecutive parade on the East Coast. We take
the pursuit of happiness very seriously around here. This year, I hope
you do, too. In 1890, philosopher-psychologist and spiritual pioneer
William James, the brother of the famous American novelist Henry James,
set off his own fireworks with the publication of a landmark exploration
on human happiness, The Principles of Psychology. Twelve years in the
writing, two volumes and fourteen hundred pages long, it boldly went
where no book had ever gone before, investigating the mind-body
connection, the impact of our emotions on behavior, and the importance
of nurturing an inner life instead of concentrating on the outer
trappings to achieve personal harmony. With this book, Dr. James became
the father of the American selfhelp movement. William James was also an
eloquent and persuasive champion of a philosophical school of thought
known as Pragmatism. He argued that the world already exists when we are
born, and we have to accept it as it is. But our ability to create our
own inner reality can determine if we view the Universe as friendly or
hostile. "Be willing to have it so," he urged, because "... Acceptance
of what has happened is the first step in overcoming the consequences of
any misfortune."

Being a pragmatist, Dr. James believed that personal happiness hinges on
a practicality: if your reality lives up to your expectations, you're
happy. If it doesn't, you're depressed. This is as real, personal, and
simple as philosophy and psychology get, and it makes perfect sense. Of
course, this means we have a creative choice to make if we want to be
happy. Do we consciously and continually strive for more accomplishments
and accumulations? Or do we lower our expectations, live with what we
have, and learn to be content? Many of us mistakenly think that lowering
our expectations means we must surrender our dreams. As one friend put
it, "Sorry, Sarah, but this sounds like giving up to me." Absolutely
not. Dreams and expectations are two very different things. Dreams call
for a leap of faith, trusting that Spirit is holding the net, so that
you can continue in the re-creation of the world with your energy, soul
gifts, and vision. Expectations are the emotional investment the ego
makes in a particular outcome: what needs to happen to make that dream
come true. The ego's expectations are never vague: Oscars, magazine
covers, the New York Times best-seller list. Your dreams must manifest
exactly as the ego imagines or someone isn't going to be very happy. And
guess who that is? The ego! Since none of us can always predict either
the future or the best outcome for our authentic path, this kind of
thinking is self-destructive. Because if we don't live up to the ego's
expectations, we've failed again. And at some point we really do give
up. The passionate pursuit of dreams sets your soul soaring;
expectations that measure the dream's success tie stones around your
soul. I don't think we should just lower our expectations; I believe if
we truly want to live a joyous and adventurous life, we should
relinquish them. Living your life as a dreamer and not as an "expector"
is a personal declaration of independence. You're able to pursue
happiness more directly when you don't get caught up in the delivery
details. Dreaming, not expecting, allows Spirit to step in and surprise
you with connection, completion, consummation, celebration. You dream.
Show up for work. Then let Spirit deliver your dream to the world. After
a lifetime of setting myself up for heartache, the way I now approach
the delicate balance of dreams versus expectations is very Jamesian:
dream, do, and detach. "When once a decision is reached and

execution is the order of the day, dismiss absolutely all responsibility
and care about the outcome," Dr. James tells me. I approach my work with
a passionate intensity, acting as if its success depends entirely on me.
But once I've done my best, I try to let go as much as possible and have
no expectations about how my work will be received by the world. I have
consciously chosen to be surprised by joy. It's a choice you can make as
well. Today, try to get real and personal about the pursuit of
happiness. Oprah Winfrey once said that God's dreams for her were much
more than she could ever have dreamed for herself. I don't think any of
our dreams begin to come close to the dreams Spirit has waiting with our
names on them. I also believe we'll only find out once we start
investing our emotions in authentic expression, and not in specific
outcomes. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 5

Cooking Companions No one who cooks cooks alone. Even at her most
solitary, a cook in the kitchen is surrounded by generations of cooks
past, the advice and menus of cooks present, the wisdom of cookbook
writers. ---LAURIE COLWIN

My mother taught me some of her recipes, but Mary Cantwell taught me how
to cook. In the early 1970s, when I started out on my own, Mary wrote a
cooking column for Mademoiselle and I learned about the glories of
macaroni and cheese and the personal triumphs of Christmas puddings. I
also learned about her various homes and two daughters, her delights,
and her disappointments, all of which were somehow seamlessly connected
to good food and good eating. We became close, Mary Cantwell and I, even
though we never met, through that intimate, mystical bond that grows
stronger over the years between writer and reader. This occurs when the
reader's grateful heart realizes to her astonishment that the writer
knows her in a way that even her family and close friends do not. Then,
in the 1980s, I became best friends---again through the printed
word---with Laurie Colwin, who captured the ups and downs of domestic
bliss with a pen and a fork. Laurie taught me that gingerbread revisited
can hold rapture, and that sweet butter, really good olive oil, and
organic chickens are affordable luxuries. Our lives were very similar:
we were close in age, each had one child, and each wrote for a living.
But most of all, we were both dedicated homebodies who did not have to
wander farther than our own four walls for adventure and fulfillment.
Both our days were structured around pages, after-school pickups, pot
roasts, and the shared belief that cooking is a high art.

And while I loved Laurie's novels and short stories, I adored her
cooking essays. (Now they are gathered in two delectable collections,
Home Cooking: A Writer in the Kitchen and More Home Cooking: A Writer
Returns to the Kitchen.) The day was always richer when I had Laurie to
read and a new recipe to try. It was as if a close pal had dropped in
for a cup of coffee, a chat, and, of course, a big piece of cake.
Another thing Laurie and I shared was an infatuation with cookbooks.
Regular cookbook adventures are a perennial pleasure, and I can't
recommend them enough. I read cookbooks the way many women read
fiction---in bed at night or while watching the potatoes boil. This
probably explains why my favorite fiction is always stronger on the
domestic details than the sex. I can imagine how two people make love,
but I want to know what they ate before and afterwards! Of course, I
haven't actually cooked from all my cookbooks. Yet. I simply love to
flip through them and stick little yellow Post-it notes scribbled with
"sounds good" on their pages for "tomorrow." Cookbooks aren't so much
about what's for dinner as they are about a world of abundant and
creative choices. With cookbooks our options are always open; we may not
be able to ride the Concorde, but we can open a book and rustle up a
Gratin de Poulet au Fromage if we're so inclined. One terrible October
morning several years ago, I came downstairs to make breakfast and get
Katie off to school. In between packing lunch and urging her to get a
move on, I glanced at the newspaper and was stunned to learn that Laurie
had died in her slumber of a heart attack at the age of 48. How could
the buddy who urged me not just to make the most of each meal, but each
day, be gone? I didn't start crying until everyone left, and have never
really stopped. I spent that morning making---and eating---an entire pan
of gingerbread, in between blowing my nose, rereading her reminiscences,
praying, and mourning the loss of an extraordinary woman and writer who
celebrated the Sacred in the ordinary. "I know that young children will
wander away from the table, and that family life is never smooth, and
that life itself is full," Laurie tells us, "not only of charm and
warmth and comfort but of sorrow and tears. But whether we are happy or
sad, we must be fed." This is why I love cookbooks, especially hers.

OceanofPDF.com

JULY 6

The Good Life The one fact that I would cry from every housetop is this:
the Good Life is waiting for us---here and now. ---B. F. SKINNER

In 1932, during the darkest days of the Great Depression, Scott and
Helen Nearing abandoned life in New York City to become
twentieth-century pioneers in the Green Mountains of Vermont. They were
socialists, pacifists, and vegetarians; they were also inventive
visionaries determined to create a completely self-sufficient lifestyle
that was solely dependent on their wits, hard work, and perseverance.
The Nearings went in search of the good life: "simplicity, freedom from
anxiety ... an opportunity to be useful and live harmoniously." Two
decades later they had succeeded and wrote a homesteading handbook,
Living the Good Life: How to Live Sanely and Simply in a Troubled World.
This book barely caused a ripple when it was published in 1954; those
were the affluent postwar years when a television in every living room,
a barbecue grill in every backyard, and a station wagon in every
suburban driveway was considered the good life. But in 1970, when the
book was published as a paperback, it became a best-seller and the bible
of alienated barefoot baby boomers in search of flower power, love,
peace, and communal nirvana. When I began the Simple Abundance journey,
I was eager to discover all the advice, encouragement, and wisdom I
could find to point me toward the good life. However, the Nearings'
grueling saga, which included wresting Utopia from the earth twice (they
moved from Vermont to Maine when the area surrounding their farm was
being developed as a ski resort), is mythological in scope. Their
daunting exploits don't just inspire, they exhaust. I certainly can't
identify with a woman who could build a stone

house by hand when she was in her seventies and her husband was in his
nineties. And as for the life they led after the house was built, "good"
doesn't begin to do it justice. Try saintly. Living the Good Life is
often described as this century's Walden, but the Nearings' asceticism
makes Thoreau, who loved his salt pork, look like a sybarite. They drank
only water, juices, and herbal brews and consumed little more than raw
fruits, vegetables, nuts and seeds "that have finished their life
cycle," and copious quantities of popcorn. There was no salt, sugar,
tea, coffee, dairy products, or eggs in their pantry, and naturally they
did not smoke or drink alcohol. Honey was used only sparingly because it
"exploited the bees," and maple syrup--- which they tapped and sold for
cash or bartered---was swallowed with a smidgen of guilt because it
sucked "the life blood of noble maple trees." Of course, this explains
why Scott lived to be 100 and why Helen, who is now 91, is still going
strong. Perhaps the secret to the "good life" is revealed in the
Nearings' simply abundant suggestions for living less stressfully, which
Helen shared in her moving memoir, Loving and Leaving the Good Life: •
Do the best you can, whatever arises. • Be at peace with yourself. •
Find a job you enjoy. • Live in simple conditions; housing, food,
clothing; get rid of clutter. • Contact nature every day; feel the earth
under your feet. • Take physical exercise through hard work; through
gardening or walking. • Don't worry; live one day at a time. • Share
something every day with someone else; if you live alone, write someone;
give something away; help someone else somehow. • Take time to wonder at
life and the world; see some humor in life where you can. • Observe the
one life in all things. • Be kind to the creatures. I've no doubt that
if we lived these suggestions every day, not just thought about them, we
would realize as the Nearings did, that the good life is truly here and
now. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 7

Cooking for Comfort It seems to me that our three basic needs, for food
and security and love, are so entwined that we cannot think of one
without the other. ---M. F. K. FISHER

For Nora Ephron, it's mashed potatoes eaten in bed, for Judith Viorst
it's a package of Mallomars. The cookbook author Marion Cunningham
chooses spaghetti with garlic and good olive oil. Southern chef Nathalie
Dupree craves greens cooked "a long time with fatback," while food
critic Mimi Sheraton finds restoration in "almost burned rye bread toast
covered with salted butter." As for me, fettucine alfredo never fails.
Comfort food: quirky, quaint, quixotic. Personal patterns of
consolation, encoded on our taste buds past all forgetting, as
unmistakable as greasy fingerprints. When the miseries strike and you're
down in the dumps, food transformed by love and memory becomes therapy.
Today let's celebrate the curative powers of the six basic food groups:
haute cuisine, lean cuisine, comfort food, soul food, nursery fare, and
chocolate. Now there are some who lump the last four into the same
category. However, pilgrims such as ourselves, in search of the sublime,
appreciate the subtle nuances of succor. Comfort food is hearty. When
hearts are heavy, they need gravitational and emotional equilibrium:
meat loaf and mashed potatoes, macaroni and cheese, chicken pot pie, red
beans and rice, creamy risotto. Food that reassures us that we will
survive. With such sustenance we can keep on going and going, especially
when we don't want to take another step. Soul food takes us back to our
roots, nursery fare tucks us into bed, and chocolate alters
consciousness. Different foods for different moods.

It's important to realize that comfort food is not haute cuisine. You
won't find it in a four-star restaurant, but you might get lucky in a
diner. Actually, the more you pay for your meal, the less likely it is
to bring you comfort. Pleasure can be bought, but comfort must be given.
Even if you give it to yourself. Comfort food is also not lean cuisine.
Perhaps you've wondered why lettuce---even radicchio drenched in
balsamic vinegar---doesn't satisfy the way lasagna does. There is a
pefectly wonderful scientific reason for this physical phenomenon.
Consider this: certain delicious foods--- carbohydrates---make us feel
calm and content because they literally change our brain chemistry by
increasing the levels of serotonin, the natural feel-good enzyme
recently celebrated on the cover of news magazines. In other words,
pasta and potatoes are Mother Nature's Prozac. Are you starting to feel
better already? Here is a Simple Abundance plan for making cooking for
comfort a joyful simplicity: start a file just for comfort food recipes.
When you prepare hearty comfort foods, double your pleasure by doubling
the recipe to freeze another meal. On your refrigerator door keep track
of what you've frozen, so that you know what's available when black
clouds hover. It's such a simple pleasure knowing that there's something
delicious and comforting in the freezer for dinner, especially when
you've been working hard all day long and no one appreciates it. "Since
we're forced to nourish ourselves, why not do it with all possible skill
... and ever-increasing enjoyment," the marvelous M. F. K. Fisher asks.
And when we sit down not only to eat, but to be cheered and comforted,
let us do so "with grace and gusto" and a grateful heart. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 8

In Search of Soul Food Soul food is just what the name implies. It is
soulfully cooked food or richly flavored food, good for your ever-loving
soul. ---SHEILA FERGUSON

In 1900, a Kentucky mountain woman walked fifty miles to seek a place
for her granddaughter at Berea College high school. "Hit's a lot worse
to be soul-hungry than to be body-hungry," she explained. Now I know why
every year I travel a thousand miles for a plate of pinto beans. Soul
food is our personal passport to the past. It is much more about
heritage than it is about hominy. It's Grandma's beaten biscuits or
Nana's borscht. Sheila Ferguson tells us in her cookbook Soul Food:
Classic Cuisine from the Deep South that it's "a legacy clearly steeped
in tradition; a way of life that has been handed down from generation to
generation." And while the expression "soul food" is usually used to
describe traditional African-American cooking, this emotionally
evocative cuisine is colorblind. Real soul food only knows the borders
of the heart. Soul food is universal culinary memories, stories, and
recipes. It's how to fry the chicken or the wonton, shape the noodles,
simmer the brisket, roll the tortilla, sweeten the iced tea. Whenever
I've gone home to visit my parents, over the last twenty-five years, the
first and last meal my mother has always prepared for me is my favorite:
soup beans, a tangible time transporter to her old Kentucky home and
mine. Soup beans are pinto beans that have simmered slowly for hours,
until they create their own soup. Ladle soup beans over mashed potatoes.
Serve with coleslaw, hot cornbread slathered with real butter, and an
icecold beer. This summer my mother is gravely ill and my sister,
brothers, and I are struggling with the traumatic reality of saying
good-bye. In a few days,

Katie and I will travel north for a family reunion of all my mother's
children and grandchildren; there will be conversation, cooking,
comfort, closure. Although I know intellectually how to prepare my
favorite meal, I don't emotionally. I don't think about my mother dying,
I think about my last helping of her soup beans. There are many ways to
grieve. When preparing soul food, we can't cook by the book but rather
by instinct, by using our senses. "You learn to hear by the crackling
sound when it's time to turn over the fried chicken, to smell when a pan
of biscuits is just about to finish baking, and to feel when a pastry's
just right to the touch," Sheila Ferguson tells us. "You taste, rather
than measure, the seasoning you treasure; and you use your eyes, not a
clock to judge when that cherry pie has bubbled sweet and nice. These
skills are hard to teach quickly. They must be felt ... and come
straight from the heart and soul." As I write, I have just come to the
heartwrenching awareness that I need at least another lifetime to learn
how to cook like my mother but that I only have today, if I'm lucky.
This summer, collect soulful recipes, or have someone you love but don't
see very often cook for you. Better still, try taking a personal cooking
lesson. You might think you know how to make jam cake with caramel
icing, but do you? OceanofPDF.com

JULY 9

Nursery Fare for Children of All Ages Animal crackers, and cocoa to
drink, That is the finest of suppers, I think; When I'm grown up and can
have what I please I think I shall always insist upon these.
---CHRISTOPHER MORLEY

The first Christmas I spent away from home was in London in 1972. A few
days before December 25, a big box arrived with gifts from home. Among
them, from my mother, was a pair of red flannel pajamas-with-feet. Where
she ever found them in my size I can't imagine, but now that I know
about these things, I'm sure she spent hours planning and searching for
my surprise. At the time, though, I didn't appreciate either the gift or
the gesture. I was twenty-five, thought I was sophisticated, and was
insulted that she still thought of me as a baby---which, of course, is
exactly what I was. My mother, who had been stationed in England during
World War II as an army nurse, knew that London could be cold, damp,
dismal, and, at its worst, numbing. Since I knew zip, I promptly
discarded the pajamas, preferring to shiver in a black silk kimono. What
I wouldn't give for those pajamas now! They would perfectly set the mood
for a nursery supper, which is what grown women, like you and me,
sometimes need in order to "make it all better," at least for a little
while. When you're cranky and cry easily, when you are so tired that
your eyes burn from keeping them open, when you need hugs and someone to
pat the top of your head and whisper "Shh ... There, there ..." and no
one is around, you need nursery fare. Nursery foods are the well-loved
recipes from childhood that conjure up the happy, innocent moments when
all was

right with the world because we knew our place in it. The times when,
dressed in our flannel pajamas, we sat down for supper before a story
and bed ... Once, at the end of a delicious sophisticated dinner party
attended by smart, successful fortysomethings, the witty banter came to
an abrupt halt when our hostess brought out dessert. In front of each
guest, she put a bowl of rice pudding, covered with warm cream and
sprinkled with cinnamon and nutmeg. After the first tentative mouthfuls
came squeals of delight and, in unison, "I haven't had this in years!"
The pleasure at that table was palpable. "Nursery food is the supreme
comfort. No wonder, because however abysmal it really was, childhood
looks so appealing the farther away it gets," say Jane and Michael
Stern, authors of a wonderful collection of yesterday's taste thrills,
Square Meals. "You remember warm farina served in a bowl decorated with
dancing bunnies, or the ritual cup of cocoa after school." Now that
we've grown up and can have what we please, we shouldn't forget that
we're never too old for nursery fare: welsh rarebit, milk toast, beef
tea, coddled eggs, French toast fingers, porridge with warm apple sauce,
baked bananas, custard with caramel sauce, junket, tapioca, and
chocolate pudding with a dollop of whipped cream. If you can't remember
when you last indulged in something smooth, comforting, and delectable,
something that made you smack your lips, then it's been too long. To
refresh your memory, the Sterns have devoted an entire chapter to
nursery food in Square Meals. The next time you're on edge, or need to
be talked down off one, stop for a moment to concoct something bland and
creamy to soothe your jaded palate and jangled nerves. And if that
doesn't work, there's always teddy and your thumb. So wash your hands
and pull up a chair. The kitchen's the cosiest place that I know; The
kettle is singing, the stove's aglow, And there in the twilight, how
jolly to see The cocoa and animals waiting for me.

Don't worry, there's enough for both of us. I'm a big girl now. I know
how to share. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 10

Kitchen Mysticism After all, it is those who have a deep and real inner
life who are best able to deal with the irritating details of outer
life. ---EVELYN UNDERHILL

Woman's normal occupations in general run counter to creative life, or
contemplative life, or saintly life," Anne Morrow Lindbergh consoles me
as I fling myself from summer camp dropoff to computer, to summer camp
pickup, to computer, to kitchen, and back to computer at eight in the
evening. This summer my life is broken up into two-hour increments,
which is not the most conducive way to create or contemplate. I have
another five weeks of this insanity. It is a subtle irony, but one not
lost on my authentic self, that while writing a book of meditations---a
work that you might imagine springs from the author's deep spiritual
reservoir of calm---I seem to be in perpetual motion. This is either a
cosmic joke or a cosmic lesson, which I can learn the easy way or the
hard way. I can't just write about Simple Abundance; I have to live it,
or I might as well be writing science fiction. I desperately need to
restore harmony in my life, to find balance again between the inner and
the outer, the visible and the invisible. The writing doesn't seem to be
coming from me as much as through me, almost in spite of me. Today the
strings on this instrument are very taut. I've got to loosen them so
that they don't snap. Maybe you feel the same way. Maybe the pitch of
pressure is too high, the tone in your voice too sharp, the decibels of
the demands on you deafening. We need to explore the fourth Simple
Abundance principle---harmony--- most deeply when life is out of tune. I
recently read a lovely book, a spiritual journey written by a gifted
woman writer, who actually went to a

monastery in order to concentrate, create with clarity, and complete her
book on time. You can imagine what part of her journey made the
strongest impression. Since I obviously cannot follow her example
without abandoning husband, child, and animals, all of whom are waiting,
at this very moment, to be fed, I'll stop and head into the kitchen. I
might not be able to say Mass or meditate today, but I can make a meal.
"The home is a sacred place where you can communicate with the four
elements of the universe: earth, water, air and fire," says writer and
kitchen mystic Laura Esquivel, author of the luminous novel Like Water
for Chocolate. "You mix it with your love and emotions to create magic.
Through cooking, you raise your spiritual level and balance yourself in
a world that is materialistic." In a world that is frequently out of
kilter, the kitchen is as mystical as a monastery. Slice red and yellow
bell peppers, tiny eggplants, and zucchini into strips. Chop red onions,
fresh basil, oregano, and Italian plum tomatoes. SautÉ slowly in good
olive oil and minced garlic until the vegetables are soft. Take a sip of
wine. Add penne pasta to boiling water for six minutes. Grate fresh
Parmigiano-Reggiano cheese. Warm store-bought rosemary and ricotta
focaccia in the oven. Toss the pasta and vegetables together. Sprinkle
with cheese. Call everyone to the table. Stop to give thanks. Offer a
toast and a thanksgiving for good health, love, companionship, delicious
food, and a moment of contentment. A day fully lived, simply abundant.
Evelyn Underhill, an English mystic and writer of the early twentieth
century, believed that women mystics with worldly responsibilities often
became "visionaries, prophetesses" because they were able to combine
"spiritual transcendence with great practical ability." Be they poets,
saints or cooks, they "remained all their lives the devout lovers of
reality" while seeking Spirit. Now that is music to my ears. Want to hum
along? OceanofPDF.com

JULY 11

Cooking as Art: Creative Discoveries in the Kitchen The discovery of a
new dish does more for the happiness of the human race than the
discovery of a star. ---JEAN ANTHELME BRILLAT-SAVARIN

Few of us have enjoyed the thrill of mounting a one-woman show of our
art. But all of us can put on an apron. Tonight, instead of thinking of
dinner as just another obligation, think of it as an opportunity for
jump-starting your creativity. Cooking is one of best ways for your
authentic self to remind your conscious self that you are an artist.
Like the union of canvas and pigment, cooking is alchemy, a work of
Wholeness-in-progress. A paring knife can be as creative as a
paintbrush. Scraping, slicing, shredding, stirring, simmering, sautÉing
are all sleights of hand that switch your conscious mind onto artistic,
automatic pilot. Once the conscious mind is distracted, the creative
mind takes over, even if you aren't aware of it. Whenever I don't know
what to do---whether it's writing or living, I seek discoveries in the
kitchen, such as trying to re-create a great dish I enjoyed somewhere
else. The worst that can happen is that the experiment's a flop and we
end up eating sandwiches before bed. The best is that my pleasant
brainstorming and the supper that results provide a new taste sensation,
reminding me that nothing need be taken for granted---especially moments
of doubt, frustration, and hunger. "If your regrets linger, if you
cannot find inspiration in solitude, then you still have much to learn
from the writers and the poets and the cooks on becoming the artist of
your own life," Jacqueline Deval reflects in her tantalizing novel
Reckless Appetite: A Culinary Romance. "... you can

never re-create the past. But you can shape your own future. And you can
make a cake." This week, try making a cake from scratch as a meditation.
Think of the most luscious cake you can imagine, the cake of your
dreams, the cake you've always wanted to eat but never had the time to
make. The cake that has always seemed too daunting. Take time, make
time, make your cake. Declare the kitchen off-limits. The artist is at
work. Slowly, carefully, and mindfully gather together the raw materials
for your creation: flour, eggs, milk, baking powder, baking soda, salt,
spices, and sugar. If something is perplexing you at the moment, see the
situation as simply an ingredient in the great recipe that's Real Life.
Each ingredient makes its own authentic contribution to the whole, yet
each ingredient changes--- the salt and the sugar become
one---transformed by the four elements of the Universe: fire in the
oven, water from the tap, earth in the grain, the air embracing all. Do
not discount the fire that burns in your soul, the water of your sweat
and tears, the earthiness of perseverance, and every breath you take as
you struggle to master the art and unravel the mystery of an authentic
life. And when your cake emerges from the oven, fragrant and full of
flavor, consider for a moment the difference between creating a
cake---or a life--- from scratch and one that's thrown together with a
ready-made mix. Convenience foods may save us time in the kitchen, but
the cook always knows, just as the artist does, what is the genuine
article and what merely passes for real. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 12

How to Cook a Wolf There's a whining at the threshold--- There's a
scratching at the floor--- To work! To work! In Heaven's name! The wolf
is at the door! ---CHARLOTTE PERKINS GILMAN

Who's afraid of the big, bad wolf? We all are. Because sooner or later
he's whining and scratching at everybody's door. Having money in the
bank isn't necessarily insurance against huffing and puffing. Recently
more than one hundred of America's wealthiest men and women who invested
in the prestigious but now insolvent insurance company, Lloyd's of
London, lost all their personal assets when their promissory notes to
pay off Lloyd's debts were called in on a moment's notice. As one former
millionaire put it, the only thing he could call his own after the fax
arrived was the shirt on his back and his gold cufflinks. And while the
American investors are now seeking relief in the courts, don't think for
a minute that some of the richest families in this country, who never
gave the lack of money much thought before, can't feel hot breath
raising the hair on the back of their necks. For the rest of us, the
wolf's arrival is less dramatic but just as traumatic. Our wolf tales
never even get mentioned in the newspapers: a sudden loss of job that
puts a mortgage in jeopardy; a family business that goes under; an
elderly parent forced to turn over his house to Medicaid to pay for
longterm care; the unexpected expense of infertility and adoption; the
bill--- payable when services are rendered---that proves veterinary
medicine is now state of the art; the roof that needs to be repaired;
the termites in the basement; the eight-year-old car that finally can't
be resuscitated.

When the wolf arrives, "Our texture of belief has great holes in it," M.
F. K. Fisher recalls. "Our pattern lacks pieces." Mary Frances Kennedy
Fisher, who was probably this country's greatest food writer, knew all
about lean times. In fact, one of her early books was How to Cook a
Wolf, which she published in 1942 during the worst of the wartime food
shortages. She wrote from personal experience. During much of her life,
M. F. K. Fisher had to keep the wolves at bay. Although she was well
known--- writing for The New Yorker as well as many other publications
over many years, she was never really well paid and continually had to
scratch out a freelancer's hand-to-mouth lifestyle to help support
herself, two daughters, and, at various times, three husbands. I say
"lifestyle," rather than "existence," because M. F. K. Fisher knew how
to live well despite her bank account. She never reduced herself to mere
existing, whatever her circumstances. Poverty is always experienced in
the soul before it is felt in the pocketbook. It seems incredible to
think of M. F. K. Fisher as lacking for money because she never lacked a
simply abundant life. Perhaps she enjoyed the good life because she
received it with a grateful heart. She traveled, lived in France and
Italy, wrote many magnificent books, knew passionate love, enjoyed a
wide circle of friends and admirers, and always savored the everyday
epiphanies of eating and drinking well. M. F. K. Fisher's authentic self
found outward expression in exuberance. For those of us who would like
to follow in her footsteps, she recommends weeding out desires, leaving
only the holy hungers, "so that you can live most agreeably in a world
full of an increasing number of disagreeable surprises." How did she do
it? By not running scared when the wolf arrived, by not giving in to her
fears that he would blow her house down. She knew that the twists and
turns of fate are usually just hot air. Instead, she learned to
outsmart, catch, and cook the wolf. By concentrating on the good at
hand--- a good glass of wine, a good tomato, a good loaf of bread. A
beautiful sunset, a lively conversation, a loving relationship. She knew
that the good life does not depend on extravagant indulgences. The good
life does not deprive. It exults. "You can still live with grace and
wisdom," she encourages us---if you rely on "your own innate sense of
what you must do

with the resources you have to keep the wolf from sniffing too hungrily
through the keyhole." OceanofPDF.com

JULY 13

Stocking the Larder Cooking---yes, and living become simpler rites this
month. I have made a list of satisfactory meals planned around only one
cooked dish. This list is hung on the door of my kitchen cabinet for
reference. When I am lacking in ambition I do not wonder what to have
for dinner. ---NELL B. NICHOLS, WOMAN'S HOME COMPANION, July 1925

One of my favorite literary domestics is Nell B. Nichols, a columnist
for Woman's Home Companion during the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s. Before
Martha Stewart, America had Nell Nichols. There was nothing she couldn't
do. But Nell's great gift was that she never made you feel inept; you
knew if you followed her blithe instructions carefully, you could also
experience domestic bliss. Nell cooked, canned, cleaned, organized from
broom closet to basement with cheerful Élan; she tried out new gadgets
like the vacuum cleaner and deemed it a "valuable friend," but she also
cherished old traditions like bleaching white linens by drying them in
the summer sunlight. Reading her columns is like being spoon-fed
black-cherry pudding: soothing, comforting, completely satisfying, yet a
bit piquant. After an hour with Nell I always want to bob my hair, slip
into a simple drop-waist cotton chemise, tie on a checked apron with a
bow, and listen to Scott Joplin on the wireless as I dye unbleached
muslin curtains "to pretty up the attic windows." During the decades
that Nell Nichols reigned as queen of the home front, "efficiency" was
the buzzword in women's magazines. Women were exhorted to consider
homemaking not only an art the way their Victorian mothers had, but as a
science---home economics. One bit of wisdom for

which I'll be eternally grateful to Nell is her plea that women "plan
more to work less in the kitchen." Two homecaring tasks that consume a
great deal of creative energy each week are grocery shopping and meal
preparation. I've created Simple Abundance strategies for stocking the
larder that can help you reclaim a sense of control when cooking. The
first is to create a master grocery list. This task will take you only
about an hour and will return an abundance of time in the future. Divide
your grocery list into different categories, such as Fresh Produce,
Dairy, Meat, Fish, Staples, Paper and Personal Care Products. These will
serve as automatic reminders. I have my master list on my computer, and
every Friday I print it out and check off what I need. If you prepare
yours on a typewriter, get a year's supply of photocopies. Keep a copy
of the master list on the refrigerator and instruct family members to
add items to the list as they use them up. We try to grocery shop only
once a week, dividing up the task. My husband shops at a food warehouse.
I pick up fresh produce---at the farmers' market in the summer and early
fall and at an organic grocery the rest of the year. I don't know if
it's true for you too, but it seems that every time I go to the
supermarket, even if it's just for a gallon of milk and a loaf of bread,
\$35 disappears. Keep your grocery bills down by making a minimum of
visits. (You'll save time, too.) Before I can make out an efficient
grocery list, I need to devise menus, including school or summer camp
lunches, so I'll know what we'll be eating that week and what I'll be
cooking. By writing out your meals, including side dishes, you'll avoid
forgetting any necessary ingredient at the market. I have approximately
fifteen different meals that we enjoy seasonally and I rotate them. This
gives me an opportunity to control, not just grocery costs, but what
we're eating. A Simple Abundance strategy is to sit down and write out
your family's favorite meals; you might even ask for suggestions. Be
sure to include side dishes, vegetables, and desserts. Then create a
master menu file. Again, I've stored mine on my computer, but you might
like to write out your repertoire of menus on index cards. A core of at
least a dozen meals enables you to create a sense of variety at
dinnertime. Nothing is drearier than eating the same thing over and over
again. But it's so easy to get into a rut! Many of

us simply don't have time during the week to experiment in the kitchen.
To keep your beloved "customers" coming back to your restaurant, try to
include two new recipes a month. Save them for weekends, when you have
more time and can enjoy the simple pleasure of cooking something new and
different. "Just one word more---please steal time every day, if you
cannot find it in any other way, to lie on the grass, or in a hammock,
under a huge tree this lovely month ... and relax. What a tonic this is
for the soul! What a rest for weary nerves! Our husbands, children,
friends---yes, and the nation--- will profit by our relaxation. The
greatest need today is for calmer homes, and no fireside can be calm
unless its guardian is at peace with the world," Nell B. Nichols
reassured our grandmothers in the summer of 1924. "Won't you agree with
me, as you lie looking up at the leafy canopy above you, that a home now
and in every other month must be a haven to the spirit as well as a
place in which the physical needs are supplied?" Yes, Nell. Yes. Thanks
for reminding us. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 14

The Celebrating Table The table is a meeting place, a gathering ground,
the source of sustenance and nourishment, festivity, safety, and
satisfaction. ---LAURIE COLWIN

Whether we're single, married, with or without children, we all have to
eat dinner. The evening meal should be the highlight of the day. If the
day has been peaceful, pleasurable, and profitable, it's time to
celebrate. If the day has been difficult and discouraging, it's time for
comfort and consolation---blessings by themselves and reason to
celebrate. Either way, the celebrating table bids. Just as there are
different food categories, there are different types of dining in:
make-do, carryout, home-style, and feasts. All of us make do sometimes,
but as a lifestyle choice, a crust of French bread and a heel of salami
can quickly lead to psychic starvation and dietary deprivation. Carryout
meals can cut corners miraculously, but are extremely expensive, and a
steady diet of restaurant food will make you feel as if you've been on
the road too long. Home-style is what I call Monday-to-Friday suppers,
which, with planning, can be easy, fast, and delicious. Weekends call
for your favorite meal one night and a culinary feast the next. There
was a time when I wouldn't begin to think about what to have for dinner
each day until four o'clock that afternoon. Today this thought makes me
shudder. Planning, shopping, and cooking in the space of an hour is
selfabuse, pure and simple. Fear not, there's a great resource for
planning your meals and weekly grocery shopping. It's the Monday to
Friday Cookbook by Michele Urvater. Michele's a professional chef who
created this cookbook because, at the end of a long day cooking for
other people, she wanted simple but savory, no-fuss suppers for her
family. She'll teach you

how to stock the pantry with staples, what to fix when schedules clash,
and how to avoid the Mother Hubbard's empty cupbord syndrome with style.
"We need time to defuse, to contemplate. Just as in sleep our brains
relax and give us dreams, so at some time in the day we need to
disconnect, reconnect, and look around us," Laurie Colwin reminds us.
"We must turn off the television and the telephone, hunker down in front
of our hearths, and leave our briefcases at the office, if for only one
night. We must march into the kitchen, en famille or with a friend, and
find some easy, heartwarming things to make from scratch, and even if it
is but once a week, we must gather at the table, alone or with friends
or with lots of friends or with one friend, and eat a meal together. We
know that without food we would die. Without fellowship life is not
worth living." Come, the celebrating table bids. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 15

Guess Who's Coming to Dinner? I learned early on that setting a table is
so much more than just laying down knives and forks. It is creating a
setting for food and conversation, setting a mood and an aura that
lingers long after what was served and who said what was forgotten.
---PERI WOLFMAN

When preparing a meal, the last thing many of us think about, except
when we're expecting company, is our table setting. For guests we'll
bring out the good china, stemware, and linens, but for ourselves, the
everyday, no matter what shape it's in, will have to do. Yes, it will be
fine, if it's all you have. But if you continually choose the chipped
over the beautiful china behind the glass doors when you don't have to,
then making do is not enough. The rituals of nourishment cry out for the
communion cups, the special plates on which to break bread, the candle
flame, the circle drawn in the dirt. Ritual protects and heals, ritual
symbolizes to all who come to your table seeking rest and renewal that
they are enclosed within a sacred space. You may think you're only
laying a place at the supper table, but when you trust and follow your
creative impulses to bring forth something beautiful, you experience the
Sacred in the ordinary. Moses looked for God in the burning bush. We
need look no further than our tables, the tables that the Hebrew
Psalmist tells us have already been prepared for us so that our cups
might runneth over. "When I think back to our family meals, it isn't the
taste or smell of the food that I recall as much as the way the scene
looked," reminisces Peri Wolfman, coauthor with her husband, Charles
Gold, of The Perfect Setting and owner of the New York tableware store
Wolfman Gold & Good. "The

ambiance of the table, the patina of the wood, the candlelight, the
colors, the sense of harmony and order." Today our style of entertaining
has become more casual than the starched linen and polished silver of
our grandmothers, yet the sense of harmony that can be conjured up with
an inviting table setting has not changed. Nor has the need. If
anything, we hunger for harmony more than we do for sustenance. But we
don't need to feast from damask everyday: a beautiful pine table set
with lovely French linen tea towels as placemats and with lap-sized
napkins, pottery plates, oversized water goblets, votive candles, and a
small bouquet of summer fruits and flowers is a simply abundant setting
that elevates eating into the exquisite pleasure of dining. When you
take extra moments to prepare an attractive table, you're really
performing an invocation, welcoming Spirit to be present in recreation
and remembrance. Choosing to dine rather than just eat is a small but
significant step toward self-nurturance, and one to savor as long as we
live. Creating an inviting table is possible more nights than you think,
especially if you approach it as another venue of artistic expression in
your daily round and confine your efforts, as Peri suggests, to "the
simple, the doable, and the affordable." Today, start using and enjoying
the beautiful things that already surround you in your home. Don't save
their loveliness only for other people to recognize and appreciate.
Using them, you will become aware that authentic aspirations---from
setting a pretty table to finding your life's calling---are legitimate
longings. Company is coming for dinner tonight. Guess who? It would be a
quantum leap in abundance consciousness, if, when your authentic self
graces your table, she finds generous portions of the love, respect, and
welcome she so richly deserves served up on the most beautiful plate you
own. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 16

A Seasonal Feast: The Joy of Anticipation Why is any day better than
another, when all the daylight in the year is from the sun? By the
Lord's decision they were distinguished, and he appointed the different
seasons and feasts; some of them he exalted and hallowed, and some of
them he made ordinary days. ---ECCLESIASTICUS (ALSO CALLED SIRACH)
33:7-9

The joy of seasonal cooking is the simplest of pleasures, but one of the
most overlooked. It brings harmony and rhythm to our days, demonstrating
with gentle wisdom that simplicity and abundance are soul mates. The joy
of seasonal foods transforms even the ordinary days at the table into
hallowed moments, calling to mind the Book of Proverbs' wisdom that "the
cheerful heart has a continual feast." Cooking with the seasons is also
thrifty. We often think that using the freshest foods possible, at the
peak of their flavor, is a luxury, but seasonal cooking is the best way
to eat well on a budget. What's more, if your frugality is so subtle and
sophisticated, your material girl can't begin to feel deprived---not
when she's enjoying a dinner of grilled vegetables with marinated goat
cheese, bruschetta (toasted Italian bread) topped with tomato,
mozzarella, and basil, and peach shortcake with blackberry sauce for
dessert. Summer is when Mother Nature shows off, proving that the
Universe is not stingy. Gardens and farmers' markets now overflow with
the goodness of the earth. Now, while the summer is offering bountiful
home economic lessons, is the perfect time to reconsider how you cook
throughout the year. One of the most wonderful cookbook for seasonal
feasts I have ever discovered is Judith Huxley's Table for Eight. Judith
Huxley was a superb

writer, cook, and a gardener, and her love of all three authentic arts
is evident on every page of this marvelous book. There are fifty-two
sensational menus---a week-by-week walk through the year celebrating the
pleasures of the table. I return to this beloved cookbook again and
again, usually on Sundays, when I prepare our family feasts. "There is
no season such delight can bring," the English poet William Browne
believed, "as summer, autumn, winter and the spring." The simply
abundant joy of seasonal foods will convince you that life can be a
continual feast at Mother Nature's table. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 17

Loaves and Fishes, Part I We have here but five loaves, and two fishes.
---MATTHEW 14:17

Do you know the story of Jesus feeding the crowd of five thousand
believers, seekers, skeptics, and the simply curious who had come to
hear him teach? At the end of the long day, when the disciples wanted to
send everybody home, Jesus told them not to be ridiculous, that the
people were tired and hungry. "But we only have five loaves of bread and
two fishes, barely enough for ourselves," the disciples argued. "How can
we feed that many?" "Give me what you have," Jesus told them. Then Jesus
looked up to Heaven, offered thanks, blessed the food, and gave it back
to the disciples to distribute. Miraculously, after everyone had
finished eating as much as they wanted, twelve baskets of leftovers
remained. I love this story because it's such a powerful illustration of
abundance consciousness, providing us the model for simply abundant
living. The gospels of Matthew and Mark report that Jesus performed this
simply abundant miracle twice. On the second occasion, four thousand
people were fed with seven loaves and a few fishes. By this time the
increasingly threatened high priests had started stirring things up.
They demanded that Jesus demonstrate more signs and wonders to prove his
divinity. He dismissed their taunts and walked away, cautioning the
disciples to "beware of the yeast of the Pharisees and Sadducees"
(referring, I imagine, to traditional religious hot air). But the
apostles took Jesus' warning literally and assumed that the bread in
that town was spoiled. So they decided not to buy any local bread and
planned to eat when they got to the next town. Hours later they found
themselves crossing a lake in a boat, with the journey taking much
longer than anyone had expected. The disciples began

complaining about not having any bread because of the yeast being
tainted. Ravenously hungry, they asked, "What will we do? How will we
eat?" Jesus, clearly frustrated at their failure to fully grasp His
message, berated them with these words: "You of little faith---why are
you talking among yourselves about having no bread? Do you still not
understand? Don't you remember the five loaves for the five thousand, or
the seven loaves for the four thousand? And how many basketfuls you
gathered? How is it you don't understand that I was not talking to you
about bread? ... Do you have eyes but fail to see, and ears but fail to
hear?" This is great stuff, because the delicious morsel hidden beneath
the story of abundance and lack is that the apostles just didn't get it.
Miracle after miracle kept occurring before their eyes, but they didn't
see what was really going on. That's because they were ordinary human
beings, even if their spiritual tutorial was being given by a Master. It
still wasn't enough, because they had not personally experienced an
inner shift in reality. The same thing happens with us. How often in our
lives, do we still not get it? The "it" could be a power struggle going
on in an important relationship; an inability to control our credit-card
spending; a career problem undermining our self-esteem; the beginnings
of addictive behavior in ourselves or our loved ones; or an unconscious
form of self-sabotage that has us bouncing from one self-inflicted
crisis to another. The "it" doesn't matter. Some such scenario is
occurring in most of our lives and will continue, again and again and
again until the moment we begin to see the pattern. Perhaps we should
start paying attention. It doesn't always have to be "dÉjÀ vu happening
all over again." When we don't get it, it's usually because we can't
interpret the outward experience as it is relayed over the interior
intercom. We can't process it in our souls. What's really happening in
our outward lives is somehow taking place in a foreign language that we
don't understand. So we either assume that the outward manifestation is
reality (which it isn't necessarily), or we keep having to repeat the
experience until it starts to make sense---rather like learning a
foreign language by total immersion. The poet Edna St. Vincent Millay
put it this way: "It's not true that life is one damn thing after
another---it's one damn thing over and over." But speaking in tongues is
a gift of Spirit. The language of the heart is longing; the language of
the mind is rationalizing; the language of emotions

is feeling. Spirit speaks them all. Today I would love for all of us to
get it at last: not to focus on what we don't have, but to be grateful
for what we do. For us to accept, give thanks, bless, and share. For us
not to hoard or hold back for fear that there won't be enough. Because
Spirit lacks for nothing. As long as you have a few loaves and fishes,
and know what to do with them, all you have is all you need.
OceanofPDF.com

JULY 18

Loaves and Fishes, Part II Hospitality is one form of worship. ---THE
TALMUD

Like other simple pleasures in our lives---decorating, gardening,
cooking ---many of us put off entertaining because we make it such a big
deal. We fix more elaborate and expensive meals for guests than we do
for ourselves, taking both extra money and extra time to plan, shop, and
cook. We make a special effort to create the perfect atmosphere,
beginning with a blitzkrieg of housecleaning and ending with a table
setting worthy of a photo shoot. The family rhythm is often disrupted
for days and includes everything from moving furniture to abandoning
regular routines. I have known women who get so rattled that they're
swearing "Never again" as they open the front door. It's no wonder that
the thought of entertaining overwhelms us. And so it often remains just
that---a thought---until a special event is thrust upon us and we must
rise to the occasion. I was heartened to discover that during the
Depression the good times didn't completely disappear. Instead, domestic
pleasures were scaled to a comfortable dimension. Parties were pared
down. Instead of multicourse meals, there was one course which became
the theme, such as drinks and finger foods, soup and sandwiches,
pancakes or spaghetti, dessert and coffee. Parties moved from the dining
room into the kitchen; at kitchen parties a new recipe would be chosen
and its preparation was part of the fun. Savory potluck dinners became
fashionable, with each couple or guest providing a course until the meal
was elevated into a feast. Potlucks are a marvelous simple pleasure
worthy of revival. When invited to a party, most people will ask if
there is something they can bring.

When everybody brings a special dish, time and cost are kept manageable
and the menu can go gourmet even if the party is down-home. In France,
the weekly feast for family and friends is based on cuisine de femme,
"the food of women," which has "taste and soul and meaning." Mireille
Johnston, who was born in Nice, celebrates this simply abundant style of
entertaining in her cookbook, The French Family Feast, a delightful
resource of delicious but not daunting menus that would adapt
beautifully to a potluck feast. One of the most important lessons of the
miracle of the loaves and fishes is that the bounty was shared. We need
to remind ourselves that good times need to be shared as well,
especially if we want more of them in our lives. Mireille Johnston tells
us that "Medieval banquets often ended with the guests swearing on a
golden pheasant their willingness to depart for the Crusades. Your
family and friends will sit at your table exalted and firmly convinced
that while the cloudy future may be in the laps of the gods, the
glorious present is happily on their plates. And they will leave
reassured by the knowledge that the energy and grace, the carefree
laughter, and stimulating smells, the power of these great simple
dishes---all of these miracles and more can be summoned up again at
will." OceanofPDF.com

JULY 19

Carving Out Time for Personal Pursuits That Bring Contentment It is the
soul's duty to be loyal to its own desires. It must abandon itself to
its master passion. ---REBECCA WEST

After putting down her pen, novelist Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings cooked up
plots as she baked pies. Isak Dinesen arranged flowers. Katharine
Hepburn whiled away the long stretches on movie sets by knitting. Queen
Victoria filled dozens of sketchbooks with charming watercolors of her
children that reveal a glimpse of the real woman who delighted in
holding a brush when not ruling an empire. "We are traditionally rather
proud of ourselves for having slipped creative work in there between the
domestic chores and obligations," writer Toni Morrison has observed.
"I'm not sure we deserve such big A-pluses for that." But the house
calls to us. The children call to us. The work calls to us. When, then,
does the painting or the poem call to us? Probably every day. But we're
too busy listening to everybody else instead of to our authentic selves.
Maybe it's because we've convinced ourselves that we really don't have
the time for personal pursuits that bring us contentment if they take
longer than fifteen minutes. Perhaps we don't hear the whispers of
authentic longing because we don't want to hear. If we hear, we might
have to acknowledge, even respond. We're afraid to hear the promptings
of the woman who wants to learn how to draw, dance, raise orchids,
re-upholster a chair, cook Szechuan. We might have to take a class or
buy a book, a pad and pencils, a leotard, a plant, a fabric, or hoisin
sauce.

No time to be passionate, we have to be practical. Essential,
uncompromised longings will have to wait until there's more time: when
the children are back in school, when Mom's feeling better, when things
let up at the office. How about an answer we haven't heard before? How
about, "My authentic passions will have to wait until I'm ready to admit
that pursuing them is essential for my happiness?" How about, "I haven't
learned yet how to put myself on the list of priorities?" Notice I
didn't suggest putting yourself first; I just want to get you on the
list. The Victorian writer Mary Ann Evans knew how to be practical about
her passion for writing. She assumed a man's pen name, George Eliot, so
that her novels Middlemarch, Silas Marner, and The Mill on the Floss
would be published in an age that discounted the authentic longings of
women. This is what she says about master passions: "It seems to me we
can never give up longing and wishing while we are thoroughly alive.
There are certain things we feel to be beautiful and good and we must
hunger after them." Space and time to nurture our creativity may be one
of our authentic hungers. Perhaps we think that only food, drink, work,
sex, shopping, or pills can reduce the gnawing to a dull throb. But
maybe if we took an hour a day to paint, to plot, or to throw pots we
wouldn't be in pain---physical or psychic. Just maybe. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 20

True North It is good to have an end to journey towards; but it is the
journey that matters in the end. ---URSULA K. LEGUIN

I used to believe that happiness could only be found after arriving at
my heart's destination. Explorers call it true north. For me true north
was enough success to ensure that there was plenty of money to control
my own creative destiny, to allow me the luxury to pursue my passions.
Now that I have spent far longer on the road from Here to There than I
could have ever imagined twenty-five years ago when the adventure began,
I have come to an awakening. I've always controlled my own creative
destiny, though not always its course. I simply didn't have the common
sense to realize it until now. But more to the point, I've learned that
the spirit of our journey is as important, perhaps even more important,
than the arrival at our destination. In order for us to realize genuine
happiness, we must be willing to court contentment every step of the
way. For after all, the journey is really all that most of us will ever
know. Day in, day out. The journey is real life. One day in 1923, the
artist Georgia O'Keeffe came to the same conclusion. "I found myself
saying to myself ... I can't live where I want to ... I can't go where I
want to ... I can't do what I want to. I can't even say what I want to.
I decided I was a very stupid fool not to at least paint as I wanted to
... that seemed to be the only thing I could do that didn't concern
anybody but myself." We may not all be able to paint like Georgia
O'Keeffe, who found splendor in bare bones and desert sands as well as
flowers, but we can certainly learn slowly to follow her example, to
carve out time for

rewarding reveries that acquaint us with our authentic selves and give
us glimpses of true north. For it's during our expectant hours---those
hours that might once have been called "idle"---that we are most
pregnant with our own potential. The English poet Rupert Brooke, who
celebrated quiet joys so eloquently, spoke of those few lucky souls who
could "store up reservoirs of calm and content ... and draw on them at
later moments when the source isn't there but the need is very great."
This skill---the soulcraft of devoutly caring for our authentic
selves--- rarely comes naturally or easily. But with practice, with
patience, with perseverance, it does come. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 21

The Importance of Solitude If women were convinced that a day off or an
hour of solitude was a reasonable ambition, they would find a way of
attaining it. As it is, they feel so unjustified in their demand that
they rarely make the attempt. ---ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH

I am convinced that when the end of the world comes it will arrive not
as two clashing armies on the brink but as a "last straw": the fax that
unravels six months' work in a single sentence, the telephone call that
sends us reeling across the room, the seemingly innocent request to
perform yet another task. Can we attend one more meeting? Write an
additional memo before we leave the office? Bake another batch of
cookies? Drive an extra car pool trip this week? Suddenly, without
warning, women will rush screaming into the night, leaving men and
children shaking their heads in amazement wondering if it was something
they said. Always remember, Greta Garbo never declared she wanted to be
alone. She said: "I want to be left alone." There is a significant
difference. I believe that it's essential for busy women, by which I
mean all of us, to pause a moment---this moment---to reconsider the
entire subject of solitude. Too many of us approach time alone as if it
were a frivolous, expendable luxury rather than a creative necessity.
Why should this be so? Could it be that by shortchanging ourselves, the
only thing impoverished is our inner life? And after all, if the lack
doesn't show on the surface, if we can pull it off one more time with
smoke and mirrors, why, then, of course it doesn't count. Or does it?
"Certain springs are tapped only when we are alone. The artist knows he
must be alone to create; the writer, to work out his thoughts; the
musician to compose; the saint, to pray. But women need solitude in
order to find again

the true essence of themselves," Anne Morrow Lindbergh urges us to
remember. "The problem is not entirely in finding the room of one's own,
the time alone, difficult and necessary as this is. The problem is more
how to still the soul in the midst of its activities. In fact the
problem is how to feed the soul." OceanofPDF.com

JULY 22

Neglect Not the Gifts Within You She endured. And survived. Marginally,
perhaps, but it is not required of us that we live well. ---ANNE CAMERON

Oh, yes it is! We may come back to enjoy another life---and I'm open to
that possibility---but until I know for sure, I don't want to waste the
one I'm living right now. I've endured. And survived. And I've lived
marginally, but living well is all it's cracked up to be. Over the
years, particularly as I have gradually tried to honor Spirit's
unfolding in my life by not neglecting the gifts within me, I have
meditated long and hard about this inner directive, this craving for
solitude. For I love the company of my husband and child; I'm excited by
brainstorming and creating fabulous projects with a professional team; I
adore spending time with close friends. But what I have discovered while
composing my authentic concerto is that some of the notes require
pauses. I yearn for what May Sarton called "open time, with no
obligations except toward the inner world and what is going on there."
To maintain inner harmony it is essential for me to ransom at least an
hour's worth of solitude out of every twentyfour and to defend this
soul-sustaining respite against all intruders and distractions.
Deliberately seeking solitude---quality time spent away from family and
friends---may seem selfish. It is not. Solitude is as necessary for our
creative spirits to develop and flourish as are sleep and food for our
bodies to survive. "It is a difficult lesson to learn today---to leave
one's friends and family and deliberately practice the art of solitude
for an hour or a day or a week," Anne Morrow Lindbergh admits. "And yet,
once it is done, I find

there is a quality to being alone that is incredibly precious. Life
rushes back into the void, richer, more vivid, fuller than before." I
believe that Anne Morrow Lindbergh, who endured more than any of us
could even bear to think about, demonstrated with her courageous and
creative life that it is not enough for us simply to endure or survive.
We must surmount, learn to excel at playing our notes. We must move to a
higher octave or a lower one, whichever is necessary to finding the
delicate balance between our deepest personal passions and our
commitment to family, friends, lovers, and work. As for me, I have
discovered that the surest way to hear the soft strains of harmony is in
the Silence. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 23

Snatch Stolen Moments of Solitude She was not accustomed to taste the
joys of solitude except in company. ---EDITH WHARTON

What is needed, then, is a plan. Through trial and error over the last
decade I have tried spending quality time alone in the early morning and
late at night when the rest of the house is asleep. Both solutions have
proved impractical because I'm too tired to function at those hours,
never mind be reflective or creative. I suspect I'm not alone in my need
for sleep. During the school year I seize my solitary hour immediately
after my husband leaves for his office and Katie heads off to school. I
realize, of course, that I'm very fortunate because I do my work at home
and can use the hour I would otherwise spend commuting to the office for
my solitary sojourns. In the summer and on school vacations, I grab an
hour whenever I can find it, usually in the evening, or when no one else
is looking. (It's called being creative and determined.) If you work in
an office, perhaps you can use your lunch hour for solo excursions a few
times a week. No one need be privy to this information except you. Is
there a beautiful old library, museum, cathedral, or public garden that
you can visit for time alone during the middle of the day? Why not
investigate the possibilities? Perhaps, however, your work requires you
to conduct business at lunchtime; this is the situation for several of
my close friends. Pencil in a half hour in your appointment book for
yourself before and after official working hours to close your door and
collect your thoughts. One friend thought this was impossible until she
began doing it; now her snatched hour is inviolate.

If this seems impossible, then it's vitally important for you to have
some quality time alone at home, at least two nights during the week, no
matter how busy you are. Schedule "home" on your calendar and commit to
it. Now what if you're home and you're not alone? Claim an hour in the
evening, after supper, after the kids are put to bed or while they do
their homework, even if you spend half the time soaking in the privacy
of the bathtub. Be inventive, even sneaky, if you must. Why not retire
an hour earlier than your partner during the week to read and relax in
bed by yourself? One of my friends has a high-powered and exciting, but
extremely stressful, career as a network television executive and must
burn the midnight oil every night during the week. Her solitude solution
comes on the weekend when she stays in bed all day on Saturday to
recharge, joining her husband for dinner in the evening. If you're
juggling family, home responsibilities, and an outside job, claim two
hours on Sunday afternoon as your own. Give yourself permission to
embrace the sacredness of seclusion. Or perhaps you're home with young
children who aren't yet in school. Plan your solitary pleasures when
they take their naps. This is not the time for housecleaning. Use it for
your own renewal. And don't be discouraged if your children have
outgrown the need for naps (although I don't believe any of us ever do).
Change your strategy. Call the hour immediately following lunch "Quiet
Time." Take your children to their rooms gently but firmly, offering
them a few special toys that they only get to play with at this time.
Tell them you will see them in an hour and then retreat to your own
special place. If you spend half your life carpooling, devise personal
strategies to help you cope. After the morning run, find yourself a
quiet cafÉ where you can enjoy a solitary cup of cappuccino. In the
afternoon, plan on arriving at school at least a half hour early, with
an inviting book to keep you company. Always keep a pad and pen handy to
jot down random glimmers of inspiration, which will come once you commit
to carving out soulcaring times, even if you have to find them sitting
in a parked car. Some of my best work has come while waiting for small
people. Be open to the unexpected. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 24

Paying a High Price \[Certain\] high-achieving women are imploded with
demands, both external and internal, and lack the skills to filter them.
These women complain that the first thing they sacrifice is their
private time or private pleasures. ---HARRIET B. BRAIKER, PH.D.

Those of us who don't spend regular time alone to rest and recoup are
likely to suffer from what psychologists call "privacy deprivation
syndrome." Symptoms include increasing resentment, mood swings, chronic
fatigue, and depression. Sound familiar? Sound grim? It is! Sufferers
struggle through their days in a vacuum of unfulfilled exasperation,
only to drop into bed too emotionally depleted to sleep well at night.
The littlest thing can set them off, bringing tears and tantrums---and
not only from the children in the family. Soon work and personal
relationships begin to suffer. Why? Because the never-refreshed are
really not that much fun to be around. The cycle may continue unabated
until physical illness sets in. Remember the flu you had last year for
five weeks? The two weeks you were laid up with lower-back pain last
summer? The sinus infection you couldn't shake last month? We don't have
to make ourselves sick before we can call a psychic time out.
Unfortunately for many women, it is only when we do get sick that we
allow ourselves a dispensation for time and space alone. This may be how
real life is for you right now, but it doesn't have to stay that way. If
you find yourself secretly looking forward to regular rendezvous with a
hot water bottle and NyQuil, then privacy deprivation syndrome is
exacting a high price. Let me reassure you there is a better path.

OceanofPDF.com

JULY 25

Opening a Door That Separates Two Worlds There are voices which we hear
in solitude, but they grow faint and inaudible as we enter into the
world. ---RALPH WALDO EMERSON

It's impossible to experience solitude regularly for any extended length
of time without personal passions and authentic longings surging to the
surface of your awareness. Once you have embarked on the search for your
own authentic style, followed the wisdom of your own heart and have seen
the results begin to blossom in your life, you realize that solitude
cracks open the door that separates two worlds: the life we lead today
and the life we yearn for so deeply. We can all find ways to regenerate
once we realize how essential solitude is to our experience of inner
harmony. Tillie Olsen wrote in her story, "Tell Me a Riddle," of a woman
who "would not exchange her solitude for anything. Never again be forced
to move to the rhythm of others." While most of us probably find
ourselves moving to the rhythm of others more than we would like, once
we learn to respect and cherish our need for solitude, opportunities
will arrive in which we can learn to nourish our imaginations and
nurture our souls. Begin slowly but resolutely. Take comfort in knowing
that even stolen moments of solitude---quarter-hour
increments---eventually can add up to a lifetime of serenity. Be
patient. Don't expect too much too soon, especially when rearranging
your schedule means dealing with your family's expectations of what
you're supposed to do and when you're supposed to do it. Be patient.

And for those days---maybe even today---when you don't have a moment to
yourself, take to heart the advice of photographer Minor White who
discovered that "No matter how slow the film, Spirit always stands still
long enough for the photographer It has chosen." OceanofPDF.com

JULY 26

Discovering What You'd Like to Do, If You Ever Had the Time Develop
interest in life as you see it; in people, things, literature, music
---the world is so rich, simply throbbing with rich treasures, beautiful
souls and interesting people. Forget yourself ---HENRY MILLER

In the beginning spending regular time alone just to collect your
thoughts will seem like indulgence enough. Spending time alone to
nurture your authentic vision, to express yourself creatively, to enjoy
a personal pursuit that brings you contentment and pleasure will
seem---well, impossible. Incredulous. Impractical. Inconceivable. Out of
the question. "Right. In another life," is the usual response, along
with audible sighs and the rolling of eyes when I broach the subject in
my workshops. Then wistful looks appear. "You mean to have fun?" the
women want to know. "Yes. Have fun." "You mean, by myself?" "Yes, by
yourself. Fun. What would you like to do if you ever had the time?"
"Fun?" You can see where this leads. Most women I meet have a hard time
holding up their end of the conversation when fun is the topic. Let the
discourse be on diaper rash or Einstein's Theory of Relativity and we
can hold our own. But fun for its own sake? The plain truth is that
somewhere between family and careers during the last twenty years, most
of us have misplaced an essential part of ourselves. Once we begin
embarking on

solitary sojourns to get reacquainted with our authentic selves, we
usually discover that something is missing. It's called zest.
Exuberance. Joi de vivre, as the French would say, or "the love of
life." The great delight that comes when the pieces of our particular
puzzle finally fit. The heartfelt happiness we derive when something
brings us keen pleasure. Something uniquely our own. They used to call
this magical something a hobby. But what to do? The writer Brenda Ueland
tells us that our imaginations need "moodling---long, inefficient, happy
idling, dawdling and puttering" to flourish. Perhaps we also need a
little personal sleuthing to uncover what solitary pleasures might be
fun. It's been so long since we've consciously set aside time solely for
rewarding reveries that many of us can't fathom what to do (except, of
course, take a nap) when we have a couple of golden hours in which to
answer to no one but ourselves. We lose what little leisure time we have
available through attrition. Today, give in to your need for "moodling."
And while you're dawdling and puttering, consider what rewarding
reveries you've put aside that brought you pleasure in the past. "How I
think about my work is indistinguishable from the way I think about my
needlepoint or cooking: here is the project I'm involved in. It is play.
In this sense all my life is spent in play---sewing or needlepoint, or
picking flowers or writing, or buying groceries," says writer Diane
Johnson. Once you commit to bringing more of a sense of play into your
daily round with authentic personal pursuits, life will begin to take on
a harmonious lilt. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 27

Solitary Pleasures Alone, alone, Oh! We have been warned about solitary
vices. Have solitary pleasures ever been adequately praised? Do many
people know they exist? ---JESSAMYN WEST

Remember, once upon a time, when we all knew how to play? We're going to
have to travel back to when we were younger to look for clues. Did you
love to play alone when you were ten? What were your favorite
extracurricular activities in high school and during college? Nothing in
our past lives is wasted. Nothing that once made us feel happy and
fulfilled is ever lost. There's a golden thread that runs through each
of our lives. We just need to rediscover this thread before the joy of
living completely unravels. Why not have a brainstorming session on
paper to excavate your buried bliss? Write out a quick list often
solitary pleasures. Don't give this a lot of thought, but don't be
dismayed if it takes you a few minutes to come up with something. Need
some help? Well, what was your favorite childhood game? Your favorite
sport? Your favorite movie as a kid? Your favorite book? Comic strip?
Your favorite singer or musical group? What was the best time you ever
had as a youngster? As a teenager? As an adult? Can you remember? Can
you re-create the memory? If you could instantly acquire three
additional skills, what would they be ---playing the piano? figure
skating? taking really great photographs? What three outrageous things
would you try if no one knew about it---belly dancing? clowning? hot-air
ballooning? What three daring things sound intriguing, even if you'd
probably never attempt them---stand-up comedy?

mountain climbing? scuba diving? What three all-expenses-paid vacations
appeal to you---an archeological dig in Egypt? a ride on the Orient
Express? a visit to the Paris haute couture collections? Do you like to
work with your hands---needlecraft? bookbinding? gardening? Or does the
visual appeal to you---framing pictures? working in stained glass?
creating shadow boxes? Get the idea? There's a fabulous world out there
just waiting to be explored. We simply have to be willing to experiment.
A hobby affords us a marvelous opportunity to awaken our natural
talents. It does require a little bit of effort. First of all we have to
figure out what we'd like to do to shake the doldrums. Then we have to
carve out time to do it. Alice James, the sister of Henry and William
James, believed that in life, "Truly nothing is to be expected but the
unexpected." By seeking and finding a solitary pleasure that would make
you jump out of the bed each morning to pursue it, you'll discover just
how right she was. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 28

The PliÉ of Pleasure What is your hobby? Every woman ought to have some
pet interest in life, outside of the everyday routine which composes her
regular occupations. What is yours? ---THE MOTHER'S MAGAZINE, January
1915

There is a vitality, a life force, an energy, a quickening, that is
translated through you into action and because there is only one of you
in all time this expression is unique," modern dancer Martha Graham
advises us. "And if you block it, it will never exist through any other
medium and will be lost." Where are you blocked? A hobby is a wonderful
way to start freeing ourselves creatively. That's because no one expects
us to be perfect at a hobby. Hobbies allow us to experiment, to dabble
with the paint, the poem, the pot, the pliÉ. When ballet dancers speak
of doing pliÉs, they mean bending their knees. Doing pliÉs at the
beginning of rehearsal warms up the leg muscles before the dance begins.
Pursuing a hobby warms up our talents and illuminates our natural
inclinations. We get to try on imaginary lives and see how they fit. Now
that you've done some moodling and have discovered some personal
pastimes that bring you pleasure, today choose one to pursue. If you
need materials such as yarn or paint, make a list of the necessary
supplies. Give yourself a week to assemble what you need to get going,
and one week from today plan an hour to begin. By doing this, you commit
to bringing more fun into your life, and what was once inconceivable
will soon become impossible to live without. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 29

The Home as a Hobby Only a very exceptionally gifted mind could cope
singly with all the problems which present themselves in the perfecting
of a home. ---ARNOLD BENNETT

One of my new hobbies is our home. I began to think of our home as a
hobby after discovering a delightful series of magazine essays written
in 1924 by English novelist, essayist, and playwright Arnold Bennett.
Although he is largely forgotten now, Arnold Bennett was once as famous
as H. G. Wells and George Bernard Shaw. Bennett's niche was as
"everyman," a middle-class neurotic who elevated his neurosis to
neargenius by brooding, with wit and wisdom, on the meaning of life, its
conundrums, and simple pleasures. One of his best-loved books was How to
Live on Twenty-Four Hours a Day, an art we all should aspire to master.
In "The Home as a Hobby," Mr. Bennett writes, "The home exists. The home
is accepted. Life can be, and is, lived in it. That vase does not suit
that mantelpiece. That carpet will not go with that wallpaper ... The
foot of the bed interferes with the swinging of the bedroom door. The
whole of the dining-room furniture is seen to have been a mistake. The
hall has a poverty-stricken aspect. The two principal pictures in the
drawing-room are too high on the wall. A hundred things are just a
little wrong and a few things dreadfully wrong! But no matter. The
apparatus somehow works. The desire after perfection has failed. The
home has become immutable. There the home is! It will do. It must do."
But for the true artist with Real Life as his or her canvas, a golden
opportunity awaits, says Bennett. "Nobody has the right to be bored in a
half-made home. A home which is not a fair expression of us at our best,
a home which lacks what it might have, a home which is in any part more

ugly or in any part more uncomfortable than it absolutely need be ... a
home which cannot be run without waste, a home which by any detail gets
on the nerves of its inhabitants and so impairs the harmony of their
existence---something ought to be done about such a home ... Why not
make the perfecting of the home a hobby?" An interesting proposition.
Most of us don't think of fixing up our homes as a pleasurable pursuit
because we usually approach it as a feat requiring more physical,
psychic, creative, and financial resources than would be necessary to
scale the most formidable mountain in the world. This morning, for
instance, I would rather go over Niagara Falls in a barrel than tackle
our basement. But I would also love to carve out a little space for an
art studio where I would have the space to dabble in my textile designs.
To accomplish this, I have to redeem some space from chaos. If I
approach our house as a hobby instead of a chore, maybe I'll find the
time to stain the front door, refinish a dresser, varnish the hardwood
floor, create a nook of my own. "Your home may be a small one---most
people's homes are---but you will never have finished perfecting it,"
Arnold Bennett tells us. "The subject is vast and knows no bounds." You
know, he just may be right. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 30

Habits That Steal Precious Moments Lost, yesterday, somewhere between
sunrise and sunset, two golden hours, each set with sixty diamond
minutes. No reward is offered, for they are gone forever. ---HORACE MANN

Nothing dies harder than a bad habit. Usually we know whenever we're
doing something that's not good for us because the small voice that
resides in the center of our heads can be a pretty vigilant nag. "Please
don't," it will whisper when we light up that cigarette, pour an extra
glass of wine, or stand in front of the refrigerator inhaling cold
spaghetti because we're nervous. The trouble is, of course, that until
now, we haven't been willing to listen. Before changing any behavior,
it's helpful to know why you want to get rid of habits that don't
nurture or contribute to your sense of well-being. If you change, what
will be your positive payback? A healthier lifestyle, more energy and
vitality, the joy and serenity of emotional sobriety, a slimmer body?
Going within opens up the eyes of your awareness in gentle ways. You
start to treat yourself more kindly. As you become more intimate with
your authentic self and see glimmers of the woman you truly are inside,
you shore up the courage to take the first tentative steps necessary to
help her evolve and emerge outwardly. Soon we'll begin hearing whispers
that encourage and comfort, not berate us. Then one thirsty evening,
instead of automatically reaching for wine while we fix dinner, we'll
enjoy a refreshing glass of sparkling mineral water, especially if it's
served with lemon in a pretty cut-glass goblet. Instead of the
unconscious snacking every time we enter the kitchen, we'll start eating
only when we're sitting down and only what's on our

plates, especially if we take the time to prepare delicious meals that
satisfy the eye as well as our appetites. Instead of impulsively
reaching for a cigarette to bring solace when we're nervous, we'll pick
up needlecraft, or even the crossword puzzle. Too often we're unaware of
the ways in which we rob ourselves of precious moments that could be
spent nurturing our creativity. These are unconscious habits that the
Surgeon General doesn't warn us about but that our authentic selves
will. For as long as we continue to cling to bad habits that may not be
life-threatening but certainly aren't life-enhancing, we only steal from
our potential. OceanofPDF.com

JULY 31

Desire, Ask, Believe, Receive Difficult times have helped me to
understand better than before how infinitely rich and beautiful life is
in every way and that so many things that one goes worrying about are of
no importance whatsoever. ---ISAK DINESEN

Are you a worrier? We all are to a certain extent, but some of us are
more pessimistic than others, and when we worry, it's always the worst
possible thing that comes first to mind. Worrying is a great thief of
time. I have a good friend who can soar from distress to disaster in
five seconds, and it has caused her no end of sorrow. Now that she
recognizes the pattern and can stop herself in midflight with a gentle
reminder, she experiences much more inner harmony even under difficult
circumstances. Often when we stew, we think that we're doing something
positive about the problem; at least we're thinking about it. Instead,
we've set off an escalating spiral that can ruin an entire day---for
ourselves and those in our vicinity. If you find yourself fretting over
an issue, instead of working yourself into a frenzy, stop. Now think
about everything that's humming along nicely. Can you have a
conversation with Spirit? If you don't feel comfortable calling your
communion with a Higher Power "prayer," call it a "communication with a
good friend." "I learned that simply to ask a blessing upon one's
circumstances, whatever they are, is somehow to improve them, and to tap
some mysterious source of energy and joy," writer Marjorie Holmes
confides. "I came upon one of the most ancient and universal
truths---that to affirm and to claim God's help even before it is given,
is to receive it." Lift up your worries and ask for grace to get through
the rest of the day. There is an abundance of amazing grace available to
all of us if we simply learn to ask for it. "Desire, Ask, Believe,
Receive," the

mystic Stella Terrill Mann advises. Begin praying or conversing in that
order and you'll understand why she does. After praying about your
worries, is there a friend you can share your problem with? If not, sit
down quietly and write out what's troubling you. Now write out the worst
case scenario. What are your greatest fears? If that happened, what
would you do? How would you cope? Once you have a solution beyond an "I
don't know" response, write it down. One of the reasons we worry is
because we feel powerless to control our futures. When we figure out
what we'd do if the worst did happen, the sense of hopelessness
diminishes. "I have spent most of my life worrying about things that
have never happened," Mark Twain admitted at the end of his life. We all
do this. Worrying about the future robs you of the present moment. Try
to observe how much worrying you do. And if the nagging worry follows
you relentlessly throughout the day, follow Scarlett O'Hara's example.
Tell yourself, "I'm not going to think about this right now, I'll think
about this tomorrow. After all, tomorrow is another day."

Joyful Simplicities for July • Make the pursuit of happiness real and
personal: hang and wave the flag; find a local parade and then share
loaves and fishes with family and friends at an old-fashioned potluck
picnic. Watch the fireworks in the evening or set off your own authentic
sparks. Declare your personal independence: choose to live authentically
as a dreamer, not an "expector." • If you have a beach sojourn this
month, try to enjoy it at different times: an early morning browse to
collect shells before the crowds come, a late afternoon visit to fly
kites after they've left. Save one evening for a moonlight walk. If
you're not alone, hold hands. • Stand at the water's edge or sit on a
towel to gaze out across the water. Just let the rhythm of the waves
wash over you. Experience and savor the suspension of time. If you've
not yet read Anne Morrow Lindberg's Gift from the Sea, this is the
perfect month to do so. Read with a yellow highlighter and mark the
passages that speak to your soul. Date them in the margin.

• While at the shore, get a yard of fisherman's netting in a shell shop
or five-and-dime. Hang it in a window or drape it over a tabletop and
create a seashore vignette. Bring home a bottle of sand; place the sand
on a tray. If you're in a meditative mood, do your shell searching on
the shore. However, the most exotically decorative seashells are usually
to be found at shell shops---unless do your beachcombing at Fiji.
Landlubbers can surf the web for netting at www.cascadenets.com and
www.seashells.com for shells. • When was the last time you stargazed?
One clear summer's evening lie on a big blanket in your backyard with a
good bottle of wine or sparkling cider, cheese, biscuits, and fresh
fruit. Look up into the night sky. Realize that you've got a Friend up
there. Stargazing is one of the oldest human pastimes and there's good
reason for it. Gazing at the stars reminds us that there's more than
we'll ever realize and that every day is another chance to follow the
clues. Find a star to wish upon. • During a summer thunderstorm, sit in
the middle of your bed in the dark and watch out the window or from a
screened-in porch. Experience the beauty and power of Nature unleashed.
Now think about harnessing that Power in your life by asking for the
Light to be switched on. • Whether you know the Bible or not, a
marvelous way to rediscover it is through the eyes of other women. A
wonderful collection of essays by women writers exploring their favorite
Bible stories is Out of the Garden: Women Writers on the Bible, edited
by Christina Buchmann and Celina Spiegel. Twenty-eight great women
writers---including Cynthia Ozick, Ursula K. LeGuin, Patricia Hampl, Fay
Weldon, and Louise Erdrich--- reflect thoughtfully, playfully, and
provocatively on Old Testament stories, characters, and poetry that mean
the most to them. To savor the experience even more, munch on the
biggest, reddest, and juiciest apple you can find while you read. As the
editors observe: "Unlike the Garden of Eden, the Bible is a source women
can return to, and as with all great works of literature, it is a book
that changes as we change. For curiosity we were thrown out of the
Garden, and with curiosity we return." • While waiting for the potatoes
to boil, or lying in a hammock, dip into books with culinary themes,
such as the romantic and bittersweet novel, Like Water for Chocolate by
Laura Esquivel or Jacqueline Deval's Reckless Appetite: A Culinary
Romance. There's a continual feast of cooking mysteries simmering on
library and bookstore shelves. Especially fulfilling:

Diane Mott Davidson's delicious series featuring a caterer turned sleuth
in Catering to 'Nobody, Dying for Chocolate, and Cereal Murders. •
Arranging a dinner around a film might seem old hat, but not if you pair
the cuisine with the film. Enjoy Mexican enchiladas with chocolate molÉ
sauce while watching the senuous Like Water for Chocolate; order Chinese
carryout to accompany the delectable Eat, Drink, Man, Woman; make French
cuisine defemme to counterpoint the sumptuous Babette's Feast. (Since
all the passionate hungers are explored in these foreign films, they're
definitely for viewing after the children are in bed.) • To make your
cake-baking meditation as inspirational as possible, you might want to
take a look at The Cake Bible by Rose Levy Beranbaum with its
over-two-hundred suggestions for meditations you'll never forget.
Remember, no matter what life throws at us, we can always bake a cake.
OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST Summer's lease hath all too short a date. ---WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE

Aficionados of August revel in relinquishment. When it's one hundred
degrees in the shade, it's too hot to be anything but receptive and
reflective. Let a seasonally sanctioned sojourn of slow joys refill the
authentic reservoir of creative energy. This month on the Simple
Abundance path we commit to discovering, acknowledging, appreciating,
owning, and honoring our authentic gifts, transforming not only our own
lives, but the lives of those we love. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 1

The Harmonic Convergence of an Authentic Life But if you have nothing at
all to create, then perhaps you create yourself. ---CARL JUNG

Do you remember what you were doing the weekend of August 16---17, 1987?
I don't. If you do, perhaps you were among the more than 144,000 people
who journeyed to "power points" around the world, such as Egypt's Great
Pyramids; Peru's Machu Picchu; Japan's Mount Fuji; the Temples of Delphi
in Greece; Mount Shasta, California; Sedona, Arizona; the Black Hills of
South Dakota; and New York's Central Park to hold hands, hum, and
"resonate in harmony" in the New Age global event known as the Harmonic
Convergence. What made this weekend so significant was a rare
astronomical occurrence known as "a grand trine" (when all nine planets
were in their astrological fire signs and positioned exactly one hundred
twenty-three degrees apart from each other). It had been 23,412 years
since the last one. Now add an esoteric interpretation of ancient Mayan
and Aztec calendars and a Hopi legend about a gathering of enlightened
teachers meant to awaken humanity, and it's not surprising that
thousands of New Agers decided that circumstances were as perfect as
they'd ever be to direct the earth, through meditation, toward a
peaceful spiritual awakening instead of a cataclysmic one in the next
millennium. It seems to have worked. Each week another visionary book is
published encouraging spiritual evolution as "the road less traveled"
becomes the inspirational superhighway. But there are so many voices
offering clues,

glimmers, and insights on how to achieve harmony through the Divine
grand trine of mind, body, and Spirit. How do you discern your own
truth? And there are so many spiritual paths. Which one should you
follow? "In undertaking a spiritual life, what matters is simple,"
American Buddhist master and teacher Jack Kornfield reassures us in his
wonderful book A Path with Heart: A Guide Through the Perils and
Promises of Spiritual Life. "We must make certain that our path is
connected with our heart.... When we ask, 'Am I following a path with
heart?' we discover that no one can define for us exactly what our path
should be. Instead, we must allow the mystery and beauty of this
question to resonate within our being. Then somewhere within us an
answer will come and understanding will arise. If we are still and
listen deeply, even for a moment, we will know if we are following a
path with heart." For me, bearing witness to my authentic self is the
most joyous and fulfilling spiritual path I have ever followed. It is
truly "a path with heart." It began when I acknowledged that creativity
is holy. Perhaps this August you might like to convene a personal
harmonic convergence through rediscovering, recovering, and celebrating
your creativity, the sacred conduit to access your authentic self. It's
never too late to reclaim your individual gifts, resuscitate a dream,
create an authentic life. Consider this: what if "original sin" is
denying instead of celebrating your originality? Each of us possesses an
exquisite, extraordinary gift: the opportunity to give expression to
Divinity on earth through our everyday lives. When we choose to honor
this priceless gift, we participate in the re-creation of the world.
When we follow our authentic path with love, embracing our creative
impulses, we live truth even if what we think we're doing is just
planting a flower bed, cooking a meal, nurturing a child, editing a
book, producing a television show, sewing a curtain, writing a brief,
painting a picture, teaching a craft, composing a song, or closing a
deal. As the Vietnamese Buddhist monk, poet, and writer Thich Nhat Hanh
reminds us, "Our own life is the instrument with which we experiment
with truth." OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 2

The Gentlest Lessons Teach Us the Most What a wonderful life I've had! I
only wish I'd realized it sooner. ---COLETTE

All of us know about learning life's lessons through pain, struggle, and
loss. But few of us realize that it is often the gentlest lessons that
teach us most. Seven years ago our family went to a political convention
held at a beach resort. While my husband attended workshops, Katie and I
played on the beach. One afternoon there was a surprise activity for the
children: a ride on an elephant around the hotel parking lot. Katie was
delirious with excitement. That night, as my husband and I tucked her
into bed, I said, "Life is always full of wonderful surprises if we're
open to them. Some mornings you wake up not knowing what will happen
during the day and you get to ride an elephant!" A couple of days later
we returned home and awaiting me was an invitation to join a group of
American journalists on an all-expenses-paid, weeklong junket to Ireland
to cover Dublin's celebration of its millennium. The group was departing
in ten days. Now there are many things that I am, but spontaneous is not
one of them. After I had come up with every conceivable reason to turn
down a free trip to my favorite country in the world---my passport was
out of date, who would look after Katie, I'd have to juggle my work
schedule, I'd just returned from a vacation---my husband said quietly,
"So you're not going to ride the elephant?" I smiled at him, gently
learned the important lesson about being open to receive, and enjoyed
one of the most delightful weeks of my life. If we are willing to learn
our lessons gently, they patiently await us in countless ways. Today,
try listening to the wisdom of children; accepting

the loving kindness of a friend; reaching out to those in need; asking a
colleague for advice; acting on your intuition; laughing at your foibles
and frailties and accepting them with love; observing how your pets live
so contentedly in the present moment; rediscovering the surprising
healing power of spontaneity; focusing on the good in any situation you
are now encountering; expecting the best of every day; and realizing
what a wonderful life you're living---sooner rather than later. Of
course, the unexpected often catches us by surprise. But if we are open
to and grateful for gentle lessons, new teachers will appear in our
path. Serendipity can instruct us as much as sorrow. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 3

A Net for Catching Days A schedule defends from chaos and whim. It is a
net for catching days.... A schedule is a mock-up of reason and
order---willed, faked, and so brought into being. ---ANNIE DILLARD

A friend of mine has a theory that it's not so much all we actually have
to do in any one week that kills us, it's thinking about all we have to
do. Alice came to this awareness the week she forgot to attend the
annual mothers' volunteering session for her daughter's Girl Scout
troop. Being an extremely organized person, she assumed she'd remember
it. No need to write it down. But she forgot because on that crucial day
she experienced scheduling system failure, when all available RAMs of
memory in the brain's circuitry become overloaded. The next morning,
when a sinking feeling in the pit of her stomach awakened her, it was
too late. All the easy jobs were gone, only one job remained. Which is
how Alice became this year's Girl Scout cookie sales manager. Here's a
Simple Abundance strategy---even for the organizationally
challenged---to bring more harmony into your life. It will free up those
vital memory RAMs so you don't end up tracking the sale of samoas versus
chocolate thin mints. Unless, of course, you want to, in which case
perhaps you'd like to get in touch with Alice. Take twenty minutes each
Sunday and sit down with your calendar, a pad, pen, and yellow
highlighter to map out the next six days with a thorough "To Do" list,
then take a preliminary look at the following three weeks. In order to
cast a net that really catches days, you need to consider all the tasks
you do in one week, both professional and private. This is not for the

fainthearted, but it's crucial. Be of good courage. Here's what we
really do each week.

THE UNIVERSAL "TO DO" LIST Work: (Meetings, prospecting,
marketing/publicity, desk tasks, planning, billing, reading,
researching, writing, traveling) Errands: (Banking, cleaners, library,
gas station, video store, post office) Children: (School, health,
lessons, sports, scouts, car pool, clubs, play dates, parties)
Appointments: (Health, fitness, beauty, automotive, animals) Shopping:
(Food, clothing, drugstore items, home, gifts) Correspondence: (Bills,
letters, cards, and packages) Telephone/Fax: Home: (Cleaning, laundry,
decorating, improvements, cooking, repairs, entertaining, gardening)
Family: Friends: Church/Community: Personal: (Inspiration,
introspection, rest, recuperation, relaxation, grooming, creative
excursions, educational, pleasurable pursuits) After doing most of the
above, it would seem there'd be no time left for the last and most
important category: personal. The way to solve this reallife dilemma is
to move Personal from last to first, making it a top priority as you
plan. Start by taking your yellow marker and blocking out an hour each
day on the calendar; on your list write out your initials six times as a

subliminal code for self-nurturance. The subversive beauty of this
method is that once a task is committed to a list, whether it be errands
or personal, you don't have to give it another conscious thought because
the left side of your brain---the location of logic---loves lists. It
goes on automatic pilot when making lists, sorting and shifting until a
schedule appears that can accommodate everything. Sometimes it's even
manageable. If you ever hope to get it done, write it down. Scan your
list morning and night. When you've completed a task, ceremoniously
cross it off with a red marker---I prefer a red calligraphy pen. It
imparts a great sense of satisfaction to see the list fill up in red
during the week. If you feel you spend too many days accomplishing
little or nothing, keep a "What I've Done" list for a week. You may
discover that you do a lot more than you realize---or give yourself
credit for. You'll probably also discover that golden moments were
unconsciously squandered because there was no net to catch them. Moments
to grow, to dream, to nurture your authentic vision. Writer Annie
Dillard believes, "How we spend our days is, of course, how we spend our
lives." And we all know truth when we hear it. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 4

Preserving Prime Time There are days when any electrical appliance in
the house, including the vacuum cleaner, seems to offer more
entertainment possibilities than the TV set. ---HARRIET VAN HORNE

Do you watch too much television? It is, on the surface, an innocent
addiction, because there are no obvious side effects. We know what
happens when our children watch too much television. They become
passive, disinterested in other activities, and easily bored. Their
attention span is drastically shortened and their dissatisfaction with
life is frequently expressed to anyone who will listen. Their mothers
exhibit similar symptoms when they watch too much television. If you are
staying at home with your children, ask yourself if you really need the
television on during the day. If you work outside the home and find
yourself regularly sitting down in front of the television in the
evening without even considering what else you might be doing, isn't it
about time you did? Alice Walker is always "amazed that people will
actually choose to sit in front of the television and just be savaged by
stuff that belittles their intelligence." Anyone who watches television
more than five hours a week should agree with her. I was a television
critic for several years and I could not believe the stuff I had to
watch. At least I was paid! But there is much on television that is
entertaining and informative. In that case, if there's a program you'd
really like to see, why not tape it and watch it another time? It's
really a matter of making conscious choices. Over the last few years, I
have practically weaned myself from television and was simply amazed at
the time I've found for more pleasurable and rewarding pursuits.

This week, become aware of how much television you watch so that you can
start preserving prime time. Writer Barbara Ehrenreich believes
television's lure is that it reveals what we crave the most in the
deepest recesses of our hearts: "a rich, new, participatory life."
Perhaps you might begin living the authentic life you crave once you
stop letting the one you have go down the tube. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 5

The Gift of Sacred Idleness Work is not always required ... there is
such a thing as sacred idleness, the cultivation of which is now
fearfully neglected. ---GEORGE MACDONALD

It was a gorgeous summer's morning---sunny, but not too hot or humid.
The kind of day that should make you feel grateful to be alive. But I
was too exhausted to acknowledge the gift. All night I'd tossed and
turned, drifting in and out of consciousness but not really sleep. With
a work deadline looming, the end of summer camp but another month to go
before school resumed, and the need to visit my sick mother, I had new
appreciation for what the English poet Stevie Smith meant when she
confessed that she was "not waving but drowning." Letting the cats into
the backyard, I stepped outside for a brief moment. A refreshing breeze
rustled the green branches. Sun-dappled patterns of light and shadow
created a lovely mosaic on the grass that I'd never noticed before. A
natural concerto---birds singing, cicadas chirping, bees buzzing---
resonated in the early morning stillness. The hush of harmony hovered
around me. I didn't want to leave. Reluctantly I went inside to get a
start before Katie woke up. But the sight of my books and papers
sprawled on the floor near my bed where I'd wearily flung them late the
night before, gave outward expression to my inner chaos and overwhelmed
me. I burst into tears. After I'd had a good cry, the gentle, reassuring
voice I have come to know as Spirit suggested that I return to the
backyard. Oddly enough, instead of protesting, I did. I spread an old
cotton bedspread on the ground, borrowed pillows from the living room
love seat and propped them up against a tall oak tree to create a chaise
lounge on the earth. Then I carried

out a tea tray and my work basket, assuming I was settling outside to
write. But when I sat down, all I could bring myself to do was sit
quietly and breathe slowly. I didn't want to meditate, have an authentic
conversation with anyone, think, create, be clever, or be a conduit. So
I just sat there, sipped tea, looked up at the blue sky through the
leafy canopy overhead and observed a butterfly's graceful path through
the garden. My surroundings were ordinary, but this morning, so
beautiful---so familiar, yet so different. Within a few minutes my dark
mood began to lift. Soon the cats joined me, curious at this unusual
detour in the day's rhythm. A little while later, Katie wandered out,
still drowsy with sleep, carrying a blanket and pillow to nest and read
with us. She asked what I was doing. I told her, for want of a better
explanation, that I was conducting research: letting Mother Nature
nurture so that I could write a meditation. I invited her to join me.
Because Mom seemed so calm and receptive, she decided to seize the day
and asked me to sort through the boxes of her baby memorabilia. Who knew
how long this unusual opportunity would last? Well, it lasted for eight
lovely, languid, summer hours and included an alfresco lunch as well as
a nap. In between laughter, family stories, confidence sharing, animal
watching, and dreaming aloud, I did absolutely nothing at all except
live and love. At the end of this simply abundant day of bliss, I
realized that I'd been given a restorative gift: sacred idleness. An
unexpected, melodic day of undoing to balance the discordant days of
doing too much. Like grace, this blessing had come out of the blue; it
was completely impractical but absolutely necessary, and it was savored
with thanksgiving. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 6

Letting Mother Nature Nurture Meaning, moods, the whole scale of our
inner experience, finds in nature "the correspondences" through which we
may know our boundless selves. ---KATHLEEN RAINE

A friend of mine is a naturalist writer who, ironically enough, lives in
the inner city. Behind Pat"s Victorian brownstone is an alley that abuts
a rough neighborhood where prostitutes, drug dealers, the homeless, and
the mentally abandoned painfully coexist with determined urban pioneers.
As would most of us in her circumstances, Pat admits that it's hard to
relate compassionately to people who urinate on her steps, throw liquor
bottles at pets, mug, and murder. Repeated efforts to clean up her alley
have been unsuccessful and discouraging. But this year, Pat---who
possesses an intuitive ability to turn a wasteland into an
oasis---created a beautiful English butterfly garden next to her steps
leading to the alley. Her tiny garden---a four-foot triangle---is
abundant with gorgeous flowers and plants that attract hundreds of
exquisite butterflies. The garden has also attracted her street
neighbors, who will often come to spend a few quiet moments glimpsing
the only nature available to them. Now the alley is kept spotless as a
pathway to the garden by those who used to trash it; not even a gum
wrapper can be found. When Pat looks out her window and watches the
people she felt so estranged from before, she feels good about bringing
some beauty into their lives. It's a gentle but powerful reminder of
"biophilia"---Spirit's silent wake-up call that all of life is a sacred
continuum. Biophilia is the exciting new psychological theory championed
by Pulitzer Prize-winning conservation biologist Edward O. Wilson, who

believes our biophilial urges---the "love of living things"---plants,
wildlife and the great outdoors is genetic, encoded in human beings to
ensure balance, harmony, and preservation. "Attraction to natural
environments is not simply a cultural phenomenon," Dr. Wilson explains.
"There is evidence it is a deeper, biological urge." Some of this
evidence is rooted in our ancient ancestors' lifestyle. As early humans
evolved over two million years, they existed in bands of hunters and
food gatherers; only those who became one with the natural world
survived. Dr. Wilson points out, "The glimpse of one small animal hidden
in the grass could make the difference between eating and going hungry."
If we are to thrive today, becoming one with nature is just as essential
as it was millions of years ago. In fact, many therapists who specialize
in "ecopsychology" believe that deepening our emotional ties to nature
is as vital to our well-being as the close personal bonds we pursue with
family and friends. When we follow our instincts to leave the city for a
weekend in the country, garden in the early morning, opt for a picnic in
the park instead of a restaurant lunch, hang up a bird feeder, visit the
zoo, or adopt a stray animal, we are responding positively to
physiological and psychological urges to connect for survival. We might
not consciously understand it, but we need to reinforce our strand in
the web of life. When we honor this holy hunger by getting in tune with
nature, we experience personal harmony. Today you may not be able to
spend a day completely outdoors, but you can soothe away stress by
letting Mother Nature nurture. Take off your shoes. Feel the earth
beneath your feet. Bend over a blossom and breathe in the fragrance. Lie
under a tree and look up at the sky through the branches. Give it a few
moments. Now how do you feel? Mother does know best. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 7

Creature Comforts Our perfect companions never have fewer than four
feet. ---COLETTE

The most important life lesson I have ever learned---the transformative
power of unconditional love---was taught to me by a four-legged mystical
master. Jack was a feral cat who showed up in our backyard nine summers
ago. Even though he was obviously starving, for the first week he simply
watched, sizing me up as he cased the joint. I set food for him outside
the kitchen door, but it was at least a month before he would eat in my
presence. Gradually, I was permitted to pet him and he would reward me
with a deep, resonant purr of contentment. One chilly morning, as autumn
turned to winter, he decided to finalize my adoption and came indoors to
live with me and be my love. Soon after our passionate affair began,
Jack developed an eye infection; I took him to our vet and discovered
that he had feline leukemia. The diagnosis was devastating. But my
veterinarian practiced holistic as well as conventional medicine and
suggested along with antibiotics, a course of homeopathic remedies,
massage and meditation (rhythmically stroking him for ten minutes to
induce deep relaxation) which bolstered both our immune systems. Eight
comforting years of constant companionship passed. Jack became known as
the "miracle" cat because he lived longer after having been diagnosed
with feline leukemia than any other cat the clinic treated. In fact,
Jack appeared so healthy that occasionally his doctor would test him to
see if he'd not had a spontaneous remission. But last summer our time
together became finite and Jack began to fail rapidly. Every
cutting-edge veterinary procedure was attempted in order to

buy us just a little more time. Finally, the moment of profound loss
that no prayer could put off arrived. "Only his love for you is keeping
him alive," my vet said softly. "Your love for him must now let him go."
Gently I wrapped my soul mate in my old bathrobe and cradled him in my
arms. As I kissed Jack farewell, he licked away my tears and purred
until his last heartbeat. It was one of the holiest moments I have ever
known. Jack's buried in our backyard, where he once played. A little
brass marker offers the Scottish poet Robert Burns's remembrance to the
"harried orphan who found tender refuge in our hungry hearts." It's a
sentiment that applies not only to the cats we have loved, lost, and
mourned, but to those who share our lives today: Pussy, Mikey, Morris,
and Griffin, a feral cat who now permits me to pet him while he eats
outside my kitchen door. Physicians and psychologists say that loving,
caring for, and spending time with animals enhances our well-being.
Anyone who has ever been adored by a dog or adopted by a cat probably
can't convey in words the emotional bond that grows between them. That's
because dogs love us unconditionally and cats are big on redemption. Our
sins and shortcomings don't bother them as long as we delight in their
presence. If you don't have animals living with you, this doesn't mean
you can't make a connection: visit the zoo at different seasons, offer
to pet-sit for a friend, walk a neighbor's dog, put out dried corn and
nuts for the squirrels in your backyard, or toss bread to the ducks on a
pond, the pigeons in the park, the seagulls at the beach. If you do have
pets, don't just feed, walk, and ignore them. You invited them into your
life, so open your heart. Pets need to be stroked, cuddled, caressed,
indulged, pampered, and played with; dote on them and they'll return the
kind of devotion most of us can only dream about receiving from human
beings. Talk to them and you'll discover a trusted confidante who'll
never betray your secrets. Laugh at their silly antics---a sure
stressbuster--- and learn how to live by observing them. Dogs make
friends easily, are loyal, and aren't moody. Cats are spontaneous,
content to live in the present moment. They're small, shedding,
scratching, inscrutable Zen masters sent to teach us the paradox of
undoing in a hectic world where things always have to be done. As the
ball of fur presently curled up on my desk clearly demonstrates, the
more naps you take, the more awakenings you experience.

Today, be grateful for the gift of sharing your earthly span with
creatures who comfort. Animals are our spiritual companions, living
proof of a simply abundant source of Love. None of us need feel alone.
And if there is a gift, then surely, there must be a Giver.
OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 8

The Pleasurable Pull of the Past: Antiquing It is not that I belong to
the past, but the past that belongs to me. ---MARY ANTIN

Like many women, I adore antiquing. Perhaps it is because I have learned
more about life---how to live it, how to change it for the better, and
how to cherish it---in antique shops than anywhere else. Above all, the
powerful and pleasurable pull of the past has awakened my passion for
social history. Among the artifacts of days gone by, I have discovered
that history is really your story and my story. Stories that heal our
souls. Historian Harvey Green makes a fascinating point in his
illuminating book The Light of the Home: An Intimate View of the Lives
of Women in Victorian America. "What was once used to feed a family,
nurse a child, clean and polish a teapot, or carry on the social graces
and customs of another era has a different function in the present.
These objects from the past suggest some sort of life that seems like
ours but is foreign." Certainly I felt a foreigner in another woman's
world twelve summers ago when, in a Maine antique shop, I purchased a
trunk full of pristine Victorian women's and children's magazines.
Serendipity is the fairy-tale faculty of finding valuable things not
consciously sought. These magazines, full of the pleasures of "rainy-day
occupations" and family pastimes for "cozy home-circle evenings," became
my passports to the past. Little did I realize at the time that my
personal time machine would take me back to the future, altering the
trajectory of my career and life in wondrous ways. I became fascinated
with the Victorian era, researching nineteenth-century

domestic life in depth, which led to a newspaper column, workshops, and
the writing of two books. The best adventures I have had antiquing occur
when my plan is just to browse. I rarely go intending to buy but rather
to be surprised. This openness to receiving riches from the past often
results in delightful lessons about trusting your instincts,
experimenting with different styles, listening to your heart, honoring
your creative impulses, stepping out in faith, and above all, realizing
there is no lack. How can there be lack in our lives when even the
commonplace, through the passage of time, becomes precious? If you ever
need to jump-start your own abundant consciousness, spend an entire day
at an antique flea market. Even if money were no object, you couldn't
bring home everything you see. There's only so much we need or really
want. We just keep forgetting this. Isabelle Eberhardt wrote in 1900
that to think about "what was good and beautiful" in the past amounts to
a "seasoning of the present." Remember this the next time you feel the
need for an official excuse to time-travel pleasantly on a summer's
afternoon. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 9

Eighth Day of Creation: Honoring Our Personal Gifts Explore daily the
will of God. ---CARL JUNG

Martin Buber, the great Jewish philosopher, told a story about a Hasidic
tzaddick, or enlightened master, named Rabbi Zusya, who often pondered
whether he was living an authentic life: "If they ask me in the next
world, 'Why were you not Moses?' I will know the answer. But if they ask
me, 'Why were you not Zusya?' I will have nothing to say." How well
we'll hold up our end of this revealing conversation is what begins to
interest us now, as the fourth Simple Abundance principle---
harmony---starts to stir within our souls. Discerning our personal gifts
is essential if we are to experience harmony in our lives. "Because our
gifts carry us out into the world and make us participants in life, the
uncovering of them is one of the most important tasks confronting any
one of us," Elizabeth O'Connor writes in the Eighth Day of Creation:
Gifts and Creativity. "When we talk about being true to
ourselves---being the persons we are intended to be---we are talking
about gifts. We cannot be ourselves unless we are true to our gifts."
However, it's difficult to be true to our gifts if we don't know what
they are. And while masters, mystics, saints, sages, poets, and
philosophers have borne witness to the authentic path down through the
ages, many of us have tuned out. Why? I believe it's because the lesson
of authenticity is often prefaced with the four most terrifying words
known to the human race: the will of God. Divine Will is frequently
associated with suffering, so it's no wonder many of us
choose---consciously or not---to slip into a spiritual

abyss of unknowing. Trust God? Been there, done that. Thanks, but no.
Prefer to go it alone. But even in the black hole of doubt, we want to
believe that a Force greater than our own power or understanding is with
us. And it is. The Force is with your authentic self. As Obi Wan Kenobi
tells Luke Sky walker in Star Wars, "The Force is an energy field
created by all living things. It surrounds us, it penetrates us, it
binds galaxies together." The Force binds your dreams and desires with
your personal gifts so they can find outward expression. "Follow your
feelings, trust your feelings," the Jedi knight urges us all, because it
is within the Force that we live and move and have our being. The Force
is Love. Love wants, wishes, and wills nothing less than your
unconditional happiness, harmony, Wholeness. Commit to discovering,
acknowledging, appreciating, owning, and honoring your personal gifts.
And may the Force be with you. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 10

Calling Forth Our Gifts Do not weep; do not wax indignant. Understand.
---BARUCH SPINOZA

You long to call forth your gifts. To explore your talents. To discover
and recover your creativity. But where do you begin? You begin by
offering an open heart and a willingness to serve. "The artist is a
servant who is willing to be a birthgiver," writer Madeleine L'Engle
tells us in Walking on Water: Reflections on Faith and Art. "I believe
that each work of art, whether it is a work of great genius, or
something very small, comes to the artist and says, 'Here I am. Enflesh
me. Give birth to me.' And the artist either says, 'My soul doth magnify
the Lord,' and willingly becomes the bearer of the work, or refuses."
Whether or not we serve is entirely our choice. God's first gift to us
is free will, which distinguishes mortals from the angels, who---after
having seen the glory---joyfully exchanged free will for the passion of
serving. Being higher than the angels, we can have the best of both
worlds: free will and the passion of serving. Perhaps one day we'll
realize it's not the will of God we need fear as much as being left to
our own deceits and devices. We can always choose to say "No" to the
next Withering Heights, The Piano, or Barney. "Sorry, find someone
else." And Spirit will. To be fair, sometimes we don't literally use
those words. Sometimes we say, "Sorry, I just can't get my act together
right now. Come back later." So the Great Creator moves on until a
willing artist with an open heart offers to become the creative conduit.

This scenario goes a long way toward explaining why you are heartbroken,
bewildered, and furious when, after diddling around for years, someone
else takes out a patent on an infant carrier that resembles the one you
designed for your first baby; distributes her greeting card line for
single parents while yours is half-finished on the drawing board;
trademarks the name of your fan-tasy store; nationally syndicates the
same column topic you've been writing in your head the last five years
but never got around to marketing; or wins the Pillsbury Bake-Off with a
chocolate decadence cookie recipe just like the one you've been
perfecting through years of family taste trials. Now I don't mean that
someone else has literally ripped off your exact book, design, name, or
recipe. What I'm talking about occurs when someone else introduces into
the world a creative idea so similar to yours it makes you swoon. You
feel crushed, but you're also freaked. How on earth could this be
possible unless somebody read your mind? Well, it wasn't your mind that
was tapped. It was Divine Mind. Remember, before anything exists on
earth, it exists fully formed in Spirit. The Great Creator does not play
favorites; each of us came into being to carry on the re-creation of the
world through our gifts. And while you are offered many dizzying
opportunities in a lifetime, Spirit only comes once for each Work
seeking creative expression through you, then moves on. The bottom line
is that the Work must be brought forth. If you don't do it, someone else
will. So when that great idea flashes across your mind surrounded by
Light, pay attention! Once it exists in your mind, realize that other
brainwaves soon will be able to pick up the creative energy pattern if
they are receptive. Think of your mind as a satellite dish. Creative
celestial messages are continuously being transmitted. The frequency is
jammed---privy to your soul only---for an infinitesimal, proprietary
moment. Just long enough for you to lift up your heart, accept the
assignment, and give thanks. Is the idea absolutely fabulous? Can you
see it completely finished in your mind's eye? Does it take your breath
away? Novelist Gail Godwin tells us that "Some things ... arrive in
their own mysterious hour, on their own terms and not yours, to be
seized or relinquished forever." So for God's sake---and your own---just
say "Yes."

OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 11

Second Thoughts Whatever you can do or dream you can, begin it; Boldness
has genius, power and magic in it. ---JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE

Today you realize how blessed you are. In secret you nurture the nascent
dream---the Work entrusted to you for safekeeping---in the sanctuary of
your soul. In quiet moments you overflow with excitement at the golden
possibilities that stretch endlessly before you. Because happiness is
the most difficult emotion to bear alone, you confide your dream to your
partner, best friend, lover, sister, mother, children. Their lack of
enthusiasm hits you at point-blank range. The "for your own good" litany
pours forth: you're too old, too overextended to try something new right
now, too broke, too inexperienced. You don't have the resources, the
talent, the contacts, or one chance in a million to bring this dream to
fruition. Oh, really? Consider the track record of your naysayers. How
many dreams have they successfully brought into the world? I thought so.
Please be careful about confiding your sacred dreams, especially in the
first trimester after creative conception---the period that SÖren
Kierkegaard called the "dreaming consciousness" prior to creation. A
disgruntled dreamer is a risky mentor. Never seek somebody's advice if
you even suspect you know what they'll say. You cannot afford to hear
the negative tape again. Second thoughts have aborted more dreams than
all the difficult circumstances, overwhelming obstacles, and dangerous
detours fate ever could throw at you. Undermining your authenticity by
succumbing to someone else's second thoughts is a sinister, subtle, and
seductive form of self-abuse. Few of us are immune to the opinions of
others. We need to learn how to dispassionately assess advice, ponder
the source, weigh the

opinion. If the information is insightful and is something you hadn't
considered, retain it. If it's discouraging, let it go. End your
conversation politely but firmly. Better yet, in the future, don't even
start it. William Hutchinson Murray, the leader of the Scottish
Himalayan Expedition team that scaled Mount Everest in 1951, urges the
dreamer in you to take a leap of faith: "Concerning all acts of
initiative (and creation), there is one elementary truth, the ignorance
of which kills countless ideas and splendid plans; that the moment one
definitely commits oneself, then Providence moves too. All sorts of
things occur to help one that would never otherwise have occurred. A
whole stream of events issue from the decision, raising in one's favor
all manner of unforeseen incidents and meetings and material assistance
which no man could have dreamed would have come his way." OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 12

The Great Collaboration We can't take any credit for our talents. It's
how we use them that counts. ---MADELEINE L'ENGLE Don't worry that your
talent won't be adequate to the task. Spirit always chooses us as
servants of work perfectly suited to our personal gifts, even if we beg
to differ. A low opinion of our abilities is a handy cop-out when facing
creative challenges, but the Great Creator is on to us by now. Actually,
feeling inadequate to the task we're asked to do seems to be a spiritual
prerequisite. Anyway, our degree of talent is a moot point, because the
Work always knows more than we do---a fact for which we can all be
eternally grateful. Agreeing to serve really means just showing up to
make the calls, mix the paint, pick up the pen, pluck the strings, shape
the pot, and get out of the way. We do not create in a vacuum. Art is a
Divine Collaboration, a sacred covenant between the artist and the Great
Creator. Inspired artists, the ones who write the books you can't put
down, pen the poems you must memorize, paint the pictures you can't walk
away from, and compose the music you must listen to over and over again,
are the first ones to admit it. The great Italian composer, Giacomo
Puccini, confessed that his opera, Madame Butterfly, "was dictated to me
by God; I was merely instrumental in putting it on paper and
communicating it to the public." Harriet Beecher Stowe swore that it was
"Another Hand" writing through her at the kitchen table---in between
caring for six children, cooking, and sewing---because she never knew
what was going to come next in Uncle Tom's Cabin. George Frederick
Handel believed he was hallucinating for twenty frenzied days as he
composed The Messiah: "I did think I did see all Heaven before me, and
the great God Himself." Painters from Piet Mondrian to Robert Motherwell

have viewed their role as channels. Motherwell knew that to let the
brush take over was the surest way to render the vision on canvas: "It
will stumble on what one couldn't do by oneself." And once you begin to
nurture Divinity's dream---with your creativity, craft, courage,
discipline, devotion, discernment, energy, enthusiasm, emotion,
intelligence, imagination, inventiveness, passion, perseverance,
patience, skill, sweat, savvy, tenacity, tears, and tantrums---you will
grow into your talent. What's more, you'll be astonished at what the
Great Artistic Alliance accomplishes. The world needs your gift as much
as you need to bestow it. May Sarton warns us that "The gift turned
inward, unable to be given, becomes a heavy burden, even sometimes a
kind of poison. It is as though the flow of life were backed up." As
long as you remember that you're not creating alone, the Flow cannot be
stopped. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 13

The Artist's Way: Tuning to the Higher Harmonic Become willing to see
the hand of God and accept it as friend's offer to help you with what
you are doing. ---JULIA CAMERON

Many of us wish we were more creative. Many of us sense we are creative,
but unable to effectively tap that creativity. Our dreams elude us. Our
lives feel somehow flat. Often, we have great ideas, wonderful dreams,
but are unable to actualize them for ourselves," Julia Cameron concedes
in her peerless The Artist's Way: A Spiritual Path to Higher Creativity.
"Sometimes we have specific creative longings we would love to be able
to fulfill--- learning to play the piano, painting, taking an acting
class, or writing. Sometimes our goal is more diffuse. We hunger for
what might be called creative living---an expanded sense of creativity
in our business lives, in sharing with our children, our spouse, our
friends." Many of us have unconsciously erected seemingly insurmountable
barriers to protect ourselves from failing or succeeding. We may think
we're protecting ourselves by ignoring or denying our creative impulses,
but really all we're doing is burying our authentic selves alive. As you
slowly learn to remove the rubble of the opinions and judgments of
others (including your own internal censor) and exchange a limiting,
toxic interpretation of a miserly, mean-spirited God for what Julia
calls the "good, orderly direction" of a loving and supportive Great
Creator, not only will you encounter the inner artist, but you'll come
to respect your art as a personal form of worship. "Once you accept that
it is natural to create, you can begin to accept a second idea---that
the Creator will hand you whatever you need for the

project," Julia reassures us. "The minute you are willing to accept the
help of this collaborator, you will see useful bits of help everywhere
in your life. Be alert: there is a higher harmonic, adding to and
augmenting your inner creative voice." Spirit speaks to you constantly
throughout the day. You may experience a hunch, perk up at the
suggestion of a friend, or follow an urge to try something new on a
whim. Train your heart to listen. Today, adjust your spiritual
satellite. Tune in to the higher harmonic frequency for help as you
continue your authentic, artistic pilgrimage to Wholeness.
OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 14

The Courage to Create No tears in the writer, no tears in the reader. No
surprise for the writer, no surprise for the reader. ---ROBERT FROST

Perhaps one of the reasons we fear excavating our authentic selves or
encountering the inner artist is because creativity seems too risky. We
hear the word "artist" and we associate the calling with dramatic,
self-inflicted doom: Edna St. Vincent Millay's solitary sips, Dorothy
Parker's binges, Judy Garland's sleeping pills, Billie Holiday's heroin,
Anne Sexton's final nap in a car filled with carbon monoxide. The number
of suffering souls sacrificed on the altar of art by self-abasement goes
a long way toward explaining why many women, especially with children,
hesitate to call themselves artists. It's safer to dabble. No one really
expects a dilettante to deliver the goods. Creating costs too much,
especially if you believe creating only comes by the crucifixion
technique. Why should this be so? Rollo May, who wrote The Courage to
Create, explains that "Down through the ages, authentically creative
figures have consistently found themselves in ... a struggle." But is it
the struggle to create or to stay blocked because we fear where the
creative life will lead? "Write the truest sentence you know," Ernest
Hemingway encourages the writer in you. Paint the truest image you can
render. Wait all day with camera poised to capture the five-second
sliver of light. Express the rage and range of raw emotion through your
dialogue. Convey passion's power with the curve of your dancer's body
honed through discipline and denial. Set the angel free when you carve.
Make the heavens weep when you compose.

But in order to be true to a creative work, the artist must journey to
the center of the self. Past the conscious sentries in the brain, beyond
the barbed wire barricades of the heart, into the trenches of "truth or
dare." You can't write a true sentence or live authentically if you
don't trust yourself. You can't trust yourself without courage. Perhaps
this is why Annie Dillard compares the altered state of consciousness
needed to create to a Zulu warrior's frenzied rite of banging drums or
an Aztec maiden's purification ritual before she is sacrificed to the
gods. "But how, if you are neither Zulu warrior nor Aztec maiden, do you
prepare yourself, all alone, to enter an extraordinary state on an
ordinary morning," she wonders for herself and all of us. By showing up.
Day in, day out. By not judging how it's going. If it's going at all,
that's enough. You can't afford to think about how the work will be
received when you're finished. That's not your job. Remember, we're
learning to surrender the delivery details of our dreams. Our job, then,
is just to do it. It can't be published, produced, performed, or
purchased if it doesn't exist. Consider this: what if the woman who
wrestles with God but doesn't live to tell the tale is the one who
refuses to create---a work of art, an authentic life? What if the fatal
wound, the one from which we never recover, is regret? Today it's time
for authentic "truth or dare." Dare yourself to believe in your
creativity, wherever it may lead you. Trust that where it leads is
exactly where you're supposed to be. The word courage comes from the
French word for the heart, coeur. Your authentic self knows where you're
headed. Don't wrestle with Spirit. Collaborate with It. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 15

Sometimes Ignorance Is Bliss Ignorance gives one a large range of
probabilities. ---GEORGE ELIOT

Trust me, you don't want to know. Ignorance is a protective blessing. Do
you really want to know that your play about a woman determined to chart
her own destiny (considered so promising at the new playwrights'
reading) will be savaged when it receives a full-scale production
because the theater critic's wife just left him? Do you want to know
that eight months after your newspaper column is picked up for national
syndication, the syndicate will be sold and your column will be dropped?
Do you want to know that you won't get the grant, that it will be your
third novel that gets published first, that your television acting debut
will end up on the cutting-room floor, or that none of your pots will
sell at next week's crafts fair? I don't think so. "Ever tried? Ever
failed? No matter," Samuel Beckett insists. "Try again. Fail again. Fail
better." Would you revise the play, market the column, apply for the
grant, attend the audition, rent the kiln, if you knew that failure
always precedes success? Failure is a crucial part of the creative
process. Authentic success arrives only after we have mastered failing
better. Other things we don't need to know: just how much we've taken on
when we accepted the artistic assignment. "I must frankly own, that if I
had known, beforehand, that this book would have cost me the labour
which it has, I should never have been courageous enough to commence
it," Isabella Beeton confessed about her Book of Household Management,
written in 1861---a book that has yet to go out of print. There's a
reason Isabella Beeton was kept in the dark, as we all are when
creating. If we ever had an inkling of the intense labor required to
bring the

Work into the world, we'd be out of here. When the visitation comes,
it's the razzle-dazzle of golden possibilities that seduces us.
Ignorance is part of Infinite Intelligence's inviting come-hither. Why
else are heavenly encounters accompanied by brilliant, blinding Light?
Because we're not supposed to see too far ahead. We're not supposed to
know. Don't forget that the forbidden fruit in the Garden of Eden was
from the Tree of Knowledge. In the military and high-tech industries,
there is a qualifying code assigned to information: "Need to know." If
you can do your job effectively without knowing the big picture, you're
kept in the dark. All we need to know is that the Spirit knows what we
don't. If we get out of the way, we'll be shown the next step, including
how not to sell ourselves short as we gracefully grow into our gifts.
OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 16

You Can't Be Original---You Can Be Authentic To believe jour own
thought, to believe that what is true for you in your private heart is
true for all men---that is genius. ---RALPH WALDO EMERSON

One of the reasons many of us have trouble getting our Work out into the
world is that unconsciously we're competing instead of creating, which
always short-circuits the flow of inspiration. A friend of mine is a
gifted playwright. She denies herself the pleasure of seeing anything on
the stage other than revivals of classics, preferably Greek. It's too
painful for her to watch contemporary work because she is addicted to
comparisons. Why do we make ourselves sick competing against strangers?
I believe it's just another sophisticated, seditious form of
self-sabotage. If we don't measure up, why even try? The fault line of
comparison runs so deep in the lives of many of us it's heartbreaking. I
know women who quake at the thought of school bake sales because their
brownies don't sell as fast as those of another mother, and the psychic
phobia over Halloween costumes is the last frontier in feminine
psychology. Five years ago when I published my first book, which updated
Victorian family traditions, there were few popular books on the
Victorian era available. But the late nineteenth century was just about
to be rediscovered, and within two years there were so many books in the
stores the market was completely saturated. Today it would be extremely
difficult to find a commercial publisher for a Victorian book even if
you channeled Queen Victoria as a spirit guide. This doesn't mean if you
are writing one that you

should stop. The cycle of creation is cyclical. There's a reason the
past is prologue. Sometimes you're ahead of your time. Mozart was known
to qualify his genius by declaring he was composing for future
generations. There are literally millions of aspiring and working
artists writing books, publishing poems, selling scripts, directing
movies, auditioning for roles, designing clothes, entering juried craft
exhibitions, starting home-based businesses, looking for an agent,
praying for a lucky break. Don't panic. It is impossible for you to be
an original. But you can be authentic. "God has lots of movie ideas,
novel ideas, poems, songs, paintings, acting jobs," Julia Cameron
reassures us. "By listening to the creator within, we are led to our
right path." You aren't the only one starting a mailorder catalog this
year, but that doesn't mean that you don't know exactly what niche yours
will fill perfectly. Why do you think you were offered the spiritual and
creative opportunity? Once you accept an artistic assignment from the
Great Creator, it's yours. Nobody can take it away from you, unless, of
course, you relinquish it. Nobody can duplicate your work because
there's no one in the world like you. They can imitate, but they can't
duplicate. Your work is born of your sensibilities, temperament,
experience, emotion, passion, perseverance, attention to detail,
idiosyncrasies, and eccentricities. When you're authentic, so is your
art. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 17

Taking On Quite a Task To live fully, outwardly and inwardly, not to
ignore external reality for the sake of the inner life, or the
reverse---that's quite a task. ---ETTY HILLESUM

I had a difficult time after my first book was published because it was
impossible for me to believe that I had actually written a successful
book, especially since I had created a character who had a life of her
own. Fictional though she was, my character, Mrs. Sharp, was the
storybook mother we all longed to have, and if we have children of our
own, the mother we all try to be. It was frequently pointed out to me
that this "perfect" Victorian mother was my alter ego, but I
passionately denied it. To my way of thinking, Mrs. Sharp was everything
I clearly was not: serene, incurably optimistic, and deeply spiritual.
Her life was harmonious because she successfully managed the delicate
balance of living in the world yet remaining apart from it. She lived
each day to the fullest with a deep appreciation of the past, an
enriched sense of the present, and a joyous anticipation of the future.
Her home was a haven of hospitality, reflecting in its beauty, order,
comfort, and good taste her authentic style. She was a compassionate
confidante and true friend, who empathized, encouraged, and inspired. I
absolutely adored Mrs. Sharp and so did many other women. How could I
claim to be this extraordinary woman's alter ego? The closest thing I
could claim was that I was her amanuensis, someone who takes down
dictation. Good or bad, the book was Mrs. Sharp's. But by distancing
myself from the creation of the book, I became unable to bask in the
accomplishment of bringing it into the world, although it represented
five years of work and struggle. I accepted compliments, praise, even
gratitude for having written it, as graciously as a bewildered
go-between

could muster. Having achieved a long-sought goal, I wondered why I felt
so empty, unfulfilled, and confused. A couple of years later I was
having a heart-to-heart with my sister. Throughout our conversation,
unconsciously I kept referring to Mrs. Sharp. "Stop this," Maureen said
gently but firmly. "Stop referring to Mrs. Sharp as if she's a separate
person. You're Mrs. Sharp, even if you don't believe it. She is who you
are deep within. You have got to start owning your talent or you'll lose
it." Maureen believed the source of my discontent was that I was
refusing to accept responsibility for my talent. I wouldn't "own" my
talent, as in "claim it." Nor would I "own up," as in "admit to," the
truth that I was an artist even if I lived in a suburban home and not a
New York loft. The most credit I would give myself was that I was a
diligent wordsmith who worked very hard at putting one word after
another until she had sentences, paragraphs, pages, columns, features,
finished books. I had bludgeoned my true identity as an artist with the
blunt instrument of disbelief, then buried my authentic self with
denial. But why didn't I own my talent? This is a question I have been
asking myself for years. Perhaps it was because if I failed, I would
have to own any failure as much as any success, and I didn't want to
"fail better" anymore. I wanted to live a creative life and I thought my
creativity could only be owned if the world acknowledged that I
possessed it. I had many lessons to learn before acknowledging that
Spirit had used my personal gifts to give outward expression to
something that would not have existed if I had refused to take up my
pen. And, having accepted the Great Creator's assignment and run with
it, I had both the right and obligation to own---and to share---the work
that resulted. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 18

Owning Your Talent Each time I write a book, every time I face that
yellow pad, the challenge is so great. I have written eleven books, but
each time I think, "Uh, oh, they're going to find out now. I've run a
game on everybody and they're going to find me out." ---MAYA ANGELOU

I ran into an old friend, a radio producer, at a party. "I hear you're
on your third book," he baited me. "How long do you think you can keep
this sting going?" "It's a great scam." I laughed. "As long as I can."
Perhaps because I so often feel like a fraud, authenticity decided I'd
be the perfect host. "Explore me," she whispered. "Peer behind the
curtain. Look under the rock. See who's really there." Believe me, I had
no inkling when I started Simple Abundance that I was embarking on a
safari to discover my authentic self. To give you an idea of how little
I knew in the beginning, I thought I was conceiving a lifestyle book on
downshifting. Many artists feel they'll be "found out," sooner or
later---and probably sooner. For when we create, although we know that a
Higher Power works with us and through us, the Work comes into the world
with our name on it. This is the artist's struggle. If we don't create,
we snuff out the Divine Spark. If we do create, we feel we're showing a
false face to the world because we know we didn't do it alone, even if
nobody else does. But the struggle and the scam stop once we cease
denying our talent and become willing to own it---humbly, gratefully,
and respectfully---and then share it with the world. As long as we're
not exploiting our gifts only for our own good, we're covered. In a New
Testament parable, a rich man is about to go on a journey, so he
entrusts to three of his servants "talents" of

money. The first servant is given five talents, the second, two, and the
last, one. The first servant immediately puts his talents to work and
doubles his owner's investment, as does the servant with two talents.
The servant with one talent, however, is afraid of the responsibility,
so he buries his talent in the ground. When the rich man returns, his
servants are called for an accounting of their work. Both servants who
have increased their talents receive praise for their efforts. They have
done wonderfully, so they're invited to share in their master's
happiness. Now the third servant arrives to explain that because the
rich man is such a hard taskmaster, he thought it better to play it safe
by burying his talent so that nothing would happen to it. The master is
so enraged that the fool didn't possess the common sense to deposit the
money in the bank, where at least it could have collected interest, that
he angrily seizes it back and gives it to the most successful servant.
The master then says, "For everyone who has will be given more and he
shall have an abundance." The cautious servant is thrown out into the
darkness where he begins weeping, wailing, and gnashing his teeth---and
with good reason. It hurts like hell when the world won't invest in you.
But it's excruciating, almost more than you can bear, when you don't
believe and invest in yourself. This is a parable about creative risk.
We feel sorry for the servant who buried his talent because, as
Elizabeth O' Connor points out, "his cautious, protective measures seem
very reasonable."The master comes off as a thug, throwing the poor soul
into darkness without comfort or pity just because he's played it safe.
Since most of us do play it safe in life, this story makes us very
nervous. It's meant to. Many of us squander precious natural
resources---time, creative energy, emotion---comparing the size of our
talents to those of others. Today, ask Spirit to call forth your
authentic gifts, so that you might know them, acknowledge them, and own
them. Do you want to live more abundantly? Have you buried your talents?
How can we live richer, deeper, and more passionately if we aren't
willing to invest in ourselves? Many of us have played it safe for too
long and wonder why we are miserable. Playing it safe is the riskiest
choice we can ever make.

OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 19

Spinning Straw into Gold Stories are medicine. ... They have such power;
they do not require that we do, be, act anything---we need only listen.
The remedies for repair or reclamation of any lost psychic drive are
contained in stories. ---CLARISSA PINKOLA ESTES, PH.D.

Next to knowing what to do with a few loaves and fishes, knowing how to
spin straw into gold is probably the most important talent a woman can
possess. It can make the difference between living a life of lack and
living one of Simple Abundance. Gratefully, this gift was bestowed on
all of us. But, like any other talent, the gift of alchemy must be
called forth, treasured, owned, respected, and nurtured. As the story
goes, a poor miller who is given to bragging meets a king who is known
for his interest in accumulating riches. Wanting to impress him, the
miller tells the king that his daughter possesses a rare talent---the
ability to spin straw into gold. Skeptical but intrigued, the king
orders the maiden to his castle, where he shows her a large room filled
with straw. He then commands her to transform the straw into gold by the
morning or lose her life. Because this is an impossible task, the young
woman succumbs to anguished weeping. What can save her? Suddenly, a
strange little man appears in the room. "I can spin straw into gold.
What will you give me in return?" he says. Stunned, the miller's
daughter takes off a necklace that had been her mother's and gives it to
him. At once the little man sets to work. The last thing the maiden
remembers before she falls into a deep slumber is the soft droning of
the spinning wheel. At dawn the king finds the miller's daughter still
asleep, surrounded by hundreds of spools of golden thread and not one
wisp of straw.

The king is delirious with joy at what she's accomplished. And though
she wants to explain that it isn't she who's performed this incredible
feat, she cannot bring herself to admit her incompetence. If she did,
what would become of her? But her silence only increases her dilemma,
for the greedy king leads her to an even larger room filled with straw,
and again, she hears the royal command to spin it into gold if she
values her life. The second night passes like the first. This time the
maiden offers the strange little man her ring in exchange for his magic.
The following morning the king is again ecstatic to find the room
overflowing with golden spools. But the miller's daughter still conceals
the real story. By the time the king leads her to a third straw-filled
room, this one the size of a great hall, she realizes she has made a
terrible mistake. Why has she not confessed her secret collaboration?
But it's already too late, for the king has promised to make her his
bride if she will spin the straw into gold once more. This time, when
the mysterious little man arrives during the night, he finds the
miller's daughter nearly beside herself because she has nothing left to
offer him. "Never mind," he says. "I will help you one more time in
exchange for your firstborn child." "How can I possibly make so terrible
a promise?" she asks herself. Then she reasons that, since no one will
ever know about her secret accomplice, she won't have to keep her end of
the bargain. And so, with her consent, the little man spins the straw
into gold for the third time. The next day, the king makes the miller's
daughter his queen, and, in her happiness, she soon forgets her promise.
A year passes and the queen gives birth to a handsome baby boy. However,
soon afterward, the little magician suddenly reappears in her bedchamber
and demands the baby. The queen pleads for her child, offering the
little man all the wealth of the royal kingdom, but he refuses. Overcome
with grief, she falls to the floor weeping. Her clandestine
collaborator, moved to pity, grants the queen three days to discover his
name, which he has always kept a secret. "If, by the end of that time,
you can name my name, you may keep your child." Eventually, with the
help of a clever, faithful servant, the queen discovers that the little
magician is called Rumpelstiltskin. She is able to keep her child, her
crown, and her contentment.

"Stories are embedded with instructions which guide us about the
complexities of life," Jungian analyst and cantadora storyteller,
Clarissa Pinkola Estes, reminds us in her powerful evocation of the
female psyche, Women Who Run with the Wolves. Today, contemplate the
psychic path taken in this story. When reflecting on dreams or fairy
stories, it's important to remember that all the characters are inner
aspects of ourselves. You are not only the miller's daughter, but the
miller, the king, the faithful servant, the baby, and Rumpelstiltskin.
Even more important, you are the straw and the gold. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 20

The Golden Storehouse of the Subconscious Mind Infinite riches are all
around you if you will open jour mental eyes and behold the treasure
house of infinity within you. There is a gold mine within you from which
you can extract everything you need to live life gloriously, joyously,
and abundantly. ---JOSEPH MURPHY

Did you figure out who Rumpelstiltskin really was? He was the miller's
daughter's subconscious mind. "You can bring into your life more power,
more wealth, more health, more happiness and more joy by learning to
contact and release the hidden power of your subconscious mind," than
any wizard could ever conjure, Joseph Murphy tells us in his classic
work on metaphysical principles, The Power of Your Subconscious Mind.
Just as there are two sides of the brain, there are two spheres to our
minds. The conscious mind is where reason resides and the subconscious,
or deeper mind, is where our emotions and creativity dwell. "The main
point to remember is once the subconscious mind accepts an idea, it
begins to execute it," Dr. Murphy explains. "It works by association of
ideas and uses every bit of knowledge that you have gathered in your
lifetime to bring about its purpose. It draws on the infinite power,
energy, and wisdom within you. It lines up all the laws of nature to get
its way. Sometimes it seems to bring about an immediate solution to your
difficulties, but at other times it may take days, weeks or longer....
Its ways are past finding out." In the fable Rumpelstiltskin, the cycle
of creation begins with the command given to the subconscious mind. For
dreams to be called forth to

the physical plane, a declaration must be made: "My daughter can spin
straw into gold." Sometimes the task we agree to take on seems virtually
impossible. We think we don't have the time, talent, resources, or
support to achieve it. But we are intrigued by the possibilities, just
as the king is captivated by the thought of more wealth. Our authentic
longings embolden us to obey the command: spin the straw into gold or
suffer the consequences. Let the dream die and with it will die the
authentic life for which we long. So we try to spin our straw, using all
the skills of our rational mind---our reasoning, our experience, our
craft. But when we rely solely on reason to manifest dreams, all we end
up with is straw. However, we have a strange creative collaborator who
knows how to spin straw into gold. It is Rumpelstiltskin, our
subconscious mind. Instead of a necklace or a ring, we surrender pride
and control of the dream. Instead of our firstborn child, we surrender
our ego; we admit we cannot do it alone. We must give the order to our
subconscious to work it out, then slip into a creative slumber in order
that the subconscious mind can go to work on our behalf. When you are
creating and you find yourself stuck, let go and turn it over to the
Deeper Wisdom dwelling beyond your reasoning. When you are perplexed,
you need to ask the subconscious to take over, preferably at night. In
the morning, the answer should be forthcoming. But if it's not, continue
asking questions before you go to sleep. How do I proceed? How do I spin
my straw into gold? Tell your subconscious mind to awaken you with the
answer. By the third morning---three is a very mystical number--- the
answers should start to be revealed. Amazingly, when we harness the
incredible power of the subconscious in our lives, we can accomplish
whatever we set out to do, no matter what obstacles we have to overcome.
Hold the vision of the completed dream in your mind. See your heart's
desire. Feel the thrill of accomplishment. Offer grateful thanks in
advance. Don't ask how it will come to pass, just know that it will. Now
go to work. Today, prepare to evolve from a poor miller's daughter into
a queen. In your heart, mind, and soul, be willing to turn it over to
Infinite Intelligence. Get out of the way, name the source of your
Power, and begin to spin straw into gold.

OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 21

The Comfort Found in Good Old Books We read books to find out who we
are. What other people, real or imaginary, do and think and feel is an
essential guide to our understanding of what we ourselves are and may
become. ---URSULA K. LEGUIN

Have you read a good book lately? I certainly hope so. But there are
many additional ways to enjoy books as a personal pursuit besides
reading them: belonging to a book club, rediscovering the old favorites
you loved as a child, and searching for that next irresistible volume in
which to lose yourself. Unfortunately, the good books that provide
comfort, consolation, chuckles, and the companionship we all crave
cannot be conjured up instantly. Since the choice of what we curl up
with is often crucial for our solace and sanity, we need to learn how to
nurture the talent of selection. Book browsing is a meditative art.
Every woman should have three wellpaved avenues for page-turning
adventures: a proper bookstore stocked by bibliophiles, a choice
secondhand haunt, and a civilized lending library. Books are as
essential as breathing. In my experience, when going down for the third
time, it was often word-to-word resuscitation that saved the day. We
have much to be grateful for: proper bookstores are not as rare as they
once were because the art form is enjoying a revival, and libraries
abound. But probably you'll have to do a bit of sleuthing to uncover a
really good secondhand haunt. Visiting a special secondhand-book store
can trigger a religious experience for me. Here I glimpse Eternity as
time stands still: hours become minutes and I am suspended in the
Hereafter. The dogeared, gilded-paged, embossed, and foxed with age
receive me with the knowing of an old flame. But instead of arms, I am
enveloped by the fragrance of leather mingled with a slight, sweet,
musty scent. Occasionally,

stumbling down a dusky corridor, I will be embraced by the Light, as a
sunbeam sliver or an angel's wing leads me to exactly the book I need
but wasn't consciously aware of. Frankly, this has happened so many
times it's no longer paranormal but standard operating procedure. If
you'd like to become more aware of hidden helpers as you begin to call
forth your talents, a visit to a great secondhand-book shop is a
fabulous way to begin. My favorite book exploration invocation is:
"Divine Guidance is my only reality and Divine Guidance richly manifests
for me in the perfect book at the perfect price. As I seek, I shall find
and I give thanks." Some secondhand stores are ramshackle affairs with
vague subject categories stacked helter skelter. Certainly they are
worth wandering into, because you never know what you will find, and we
must always be open to receiving abundantly. But the choice secondhand
stores have entire rooms devoted to subject categories like cooking,
crafts, gardening, arts, women's fiction, classics, social history,
mysteries, and inspirational books. You'll find them alphabetized
according to author and book series, and occasionally still in their
original jackets. Here's where I find my treasures, the lost domestic
tomes from the turn of the century to the 1950s, the ghosts of all
things once bright and beautiful. Here's where I also find old magazines
and booklets that were given away as free bonuses from manufacturers
which are a wealth of inspiration and information. Virginia Woolf
believed that "a perfect treat must include a visit to the second-hand
bookshop." Put finding a fabulous one on your list of personal
priorities. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 22

The Poetry Prescription Poetry affords us a respite in which we may
gather renewed strength for the old struggle to adapt ourselves to
reality. ---ROBERT HAVEN SCHAUFFLER

One of the gems I unearthed in a choice secondhand-book haunt was the
October 1925 issue of Good Housekeeping. In it was a novel remedy for
weariness called "The Poetry Cure." It suggested that when we are
frazzled, ruminating on a line or a stanza of poetry can induce a sense
of serenity. This suggestion led me to a marvelous form of meditation,
especially if I think I don't have twenty minutes to sit down or take a
walk---a situation which happens more often than I care to admit. Many
of us resist the power of poetry to illuminate our path because we have
such bad memories of dissecting stanzas in high school English. Some of
us also have an inferiority complex about poetry, viewing it as a
mantric art that only the well-educated, literate, and erudite can
appreciate. But poets are the first to disagree; they know poetry is
real and personal. Rita Dove, America's youngest and first African
American poet laureate, says that "Poetry connects you to yourself, to
the self that doesn't know how to talk or negotiate." When we allow
poetry to slip slowly beneath the sinews of our conscious mind,
connection to our authentic selves becomes simpler; an emotion or an
experience is captured in evocative word melodies that bestow harmony on
everyday encounters. Rita Dove believes that poetry has the ability to
restore "a sense of mystery, a sense of wonder" to our daily round. Once
I heard her read on the radio a poem she had written about waiting to
board an airplane flight to go home. I was cooking, but in that instant
I was waiting to board my own flight. It was an exquisite

reminder that our specific lives can mirror the universal experience.
Nowhere is this more passionately expressed than in poetry. To begin
exploring this simply abundant art, bring home a book of poetry from the
library this week. Listening to the varied voices of women poets---Rita
Dove, Anne Sexton, Louise Bogan, Diane Wakoski, Emily Dickinson, Maya
Angelou, Adrienne Rich, Audre Lorde, Muriel Rukeyser, Judith Viorst,
Elizabeth Barrett Browning, Maxine Kumin, Diane Ackerman, Shirley
Kaufman, May Sarton, Cherrie Moraga, Marianne Moore---can help you find
your own. Read one poem a day. Write a favorite verse from it on a card
and commit it to memory. Poetry possesses many secrets just waiting to
be revealed to patient seekers of truth. I love to meditate on a line
just before drifting off to sleep. Explore writing your own poems. Don't
tell me you're too old or that none of us is interested in what you have
to say. Few literary debuts were as stunning as the publication of Amy
Clampitt's first full-length book of poetry, The Kingfisher, in 1983,
when she was 63. Although she had been a poet all her life, she didn't
find her authentic voice until she was in her fifties. If you have lived
all your life hearing another voice in your heart, maybe it's time to
channel her. Make a poem of one day's dialogue with your authentic self.
Attend poetry readings at bookstores, cafÉs, libraries, college
campuses. Trust that you will discover, as did the Russian-born writer
Anzia Yezierska, that "The real thing creates its own poetry."
OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 23

Music as Therapy I think I should have no other mortal wants, if I could
always have plenty of music. It seems to infuse strength into my limbs
and ideas into my brain. Life seems to go on without effort, when I am
filled with music. ---GEORGE ELIOT

You already know that music can be an exquisite source of pleasure and
entertainment. But did you also know that it can be a powerful form of
prayer, meditation, and healing? Actually, musical therapy is an ancient
tradition. Since the dawn of humanity, spiritual healers known as
shamans have used drums, bells, and rattles to drive disease from the
body, depression from the mind, despair from the soul. Because music can
reach beyond the barriers of our conscious mind, neurolgist Oliver
Sacks, author of Awakenings, believes it can become a key to unlocking a
sense of self. Even Alzheimer patients who have lost their inner
bearings often respond to music when all else has failed. Finding the
personal music that calls to us authentically can be empowering as you
learn to nurture your creativity. Music loosens the grip of our
conscious mind during the process of creation. I listen to classical
music when I'm researching and to soaring movie themes while I'm
writing. Anai's Nin believed that music was "a stimulant of the highest
order, far more potent than wine" when creating. Novelist Amy Tan
listens to the same music each day as she writes, because it helps her
pick up her narrative thread where she left off. This technique also
works with other creative projects---painting, sculpting, pottery,
handicrafts---which are started and stopped over a space of time. If you
need to focus your concentration, listening to Mozart can increase your
clarity---which is why

it's the recommended accompaniment for exam cramming as well as creative
brainstorming. Given the fact that Mozart was a genius, it's not
surprising that his arrangement of musical notes affects our brain
patterns positively. Piano nocturnes---romantic, resonant, ruminative
compositions for solo piano---are a virtual musical pharmacy. No woman
should be without a soothing tape or compact disc to play when stressed.
I have even used piano noctures to calm our cats when they're confined
indoors because of injury, illness, or inclement weather. Instead of
smoking or sipping the next time you're extremely nervous, try Camille
Saint-Saëns, Robert Schumann, Erik Satie, or Stephen Sondheim's
contemporary nocturnes in the musical A Little Night Music. When your
hormones are playing havoc with your humor, try Haydn. Bach's preludes
and fugues are an exquisite balm for the blues. Gabriel FaurÉ is a
personal favorite when I'm frazzled, and Frederic Chopin's exquisite
nocturnes can restore a ravished soul even if a broken heart can't be
mended. On another note, ten minutes of boogie-woogie can shake the
deepest doldrums because rhythm reduces anxiety. If I have to work at
night I find light jazz energizing, but for cooking I adore listening to
songs of passionate hunger---traditional Irish music or opera. Soft rock
or show tunes keep me moving while I clean, and I love to listen to
country music when I car-pool. When you crave more than the sounds of
silence, there is music for every mood. Acknowledging your mood swings
and honoring their reality with music to accompany the experience is
soulcraft. Gradually build a personal collection of musical selections
to help you calm down, collect your thoughts, channel your creative
energy and call forth your gifts. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 24

Eye of the Beholder The work of art which I do not make, none other will
ever make. ---SIMONE WEIL

When we think of famous women artists, three painters usually come to
mind: Mary Cassatt, Georgia O'Keeffe, and Grandma Moses. But there are
many, many more women artists who deserve to be just as famous and whose
paintings, sculptures, photographs, designs, and illustrations are
waiting to be explored and savored. The American impressionist painter
Lilla Cabot Perry is a favorite of mine. She was also the artist friend
of the great French impressionist Claude Monet and introduced his work
to America. Monet so loved Lilla's work that he hung one of her
paintings in his bedroom at Giverny so that he might see it first thing
every morning. Like Mary Cassatt, whose days consisted of "housekeeping,
painting and oyster frying," Lilla Cabot Perry was a Victorian "working
mother," a century before that ridiculously redundant phrase entered
American conversation. In an age when women were expected to choose home
and family over career, many women found an authentic way to turn their
everyday experience into art. Their determination is a wellspring of
inspiration. Lilla was thirty when she painted her first picture---a
portrait of her baby, Margaret. She thought painting might offer her the
creative expression she craved after it became necessary to abandon
poetry because "it was too absorbing an occupation for a mother of three
small children." But painting allowed her to merge motherhood and art,
for her work celebrated what she knew and loved best: her children.
Eventually her painting became as much a part of the family's daily
round as eating and

sleeping, as she cleverly enticed her little models to stand still by
paying them each a nickel an hour. Later Lilla admitted her passion for
selfexpression reminded her of "a cooking stove which has too much coal
in it and it has to have one of the holes open to keep it from becoming
red-hot. It did not matter whether it was the poetry hole or the
painting hole, but the lid had to come off." What artist's lid have you
taken off to keep from exploding in fiery frustration? As Lilla says, it
doesn't matter whether it's painting or poetry. All that matters is that
your creative passion does not get driven inward to become
self-immolation. Today, consider all the different and rewarding paths
of personal expression open to you by way of your eyes. Have you ever
taken a watercolor, oil, or still-life drawing course just for fun? If
an easel doesn't entice, what about the lure of a slanted artist's
table: textile, product, fashion, graphic, greeting-card, or book
illustration and design. Don't overlook printmaking, collage, sculpture,
and photography. Imogen Cunningham, another artist/mother, was also one
of the most celebrated photographers of the twentieth century, capturing
50,000 images over seven decades by keeping "one hand in the dishpan,
the other in the darkroom" and never going anywhere without her camera.
Pursuing authenticity and raising a family needn't be mutually exclusive
unless we insist on making them so. Even if you think that a "shutter"
only hangs on a window or are convinced that you can't even draw a
straight line, don't dismiss the visual arts until you've explored the
possibility of letting your eyes and hands collaborate with your heart.
The painter Gwendolen John confessed, "My religion is my art; for me,
it's everything in life."The visual arts may not be your religion, but
they can surely deepen your awareness of Divinity. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 25

The Smell of the Greasepaint, the Roar of the Crowd I seem to wish to
have some importance in the play of time.... What is deep, as love is
deep, I'll have Deeply. What is good, as love is good, I'll have well.
Then if time and space have any purpose, I shall belong to it. ---JENNET
JOURDEMAYNE (CHRISTOPHER FRY)

Obviously, I was not destined to become a famous actress. It was the
first road taken but it wasn't my authentic path. Although I adored
acting--- the art, the craft, the lifestyle---I reached the point where
I could no longer handle the pain of rejection when I didn't get a
part---which happened most of the time. Casting has absolutely nothing
to do with how talented an actress you are and everything to do with how
you look. If your physical appearance doesn't match the director's
interior preconception of what the character looks like, you may not
even be able to read for the part. Holly Hunter stalked Australian film
director Jane Campion for over a year while Jane was searching the world
for an actress to play Ada, her mute, mid-nineteenth-century Scottish
heroine in The Piano. Campion didn't initially believe that Holly was
right for the part, probably because she couldn't get the indelible
image of Holly's previous incarnations as a southern floozy out of her
mind. But Holly possessed soul knowledge; she knew this part had been
the reason for all those piano lessons as a child and she knew this part
was the role she was born to bring to life. The tremendous obstacles she
had to overcome in order to get the role must

have made winning an Oscar for her soul-stirring performance all the
more sweet. I know it did for me, as I watched her accept it. Rejection,
self-doubt, financial insecurity, and public criticism are all part of
an actress's daily round. We forget this when we watch those glorious
women all dressed up for the Academy Awards. Another actress in The
Piano, eleven-year-old Anna Paquin, won an Oscar for her role as Ada's
obstinate daughter. Anna's only previous acting experience had been as
skunk in a school ballet, but she beat out five thousand other little
girls in an open audition. Now this is the stuff that dreams are made
of: sagas on which entire lives can turn. Why then, was I surprised when
Katie---who's a very gifted visual artist---informed me she would not be
returning to the art school she had attended for the past three summers,
but would be signing up for a young actors' workshop run by a
professional theater company? Oh God, the twig is bent early. The moment
we walked into the darkened theater and I saw the bare stage and
spotlights, it all rushed back: the smell of the greasepaint, the roar
of the crowd, the chills, thrills, magic, mystery, and wonder. An empty
theater pulsates with palpable creative energy. Katie's face was flushed
with excitement, her eyes were ablaze, and she radiated joy. I wondered
if I had ever seen her like that before; surely I would have remembered,
wouldn't I? Wistfully, I exited the stage door that had just opened for
her. Over the summer we worked together on her monologue, as character
motivation, line reads, rehearsals, and costumes became part of my
everyday life again in a recycled sort of way. I shared memorization and
makeup tricks, the power of pacing and pausing, and stories from my
illustrious stage past. When she got anxious, nervous, and hysterical, I
reassured her that tension is an important part of the creative process
and tried to show her how to work with it instead of fighting it. Being
a traditionalist, I wanted her first opening night to be unforgettable,
rich in stage lore and luck. Aunt Dona sent her a telegram from
Hollywood (which certainly created a buzz backstage), her dad bought her
a beautiful bouquet of flowers, and I told her to "break a leg," the
stage invocation for success. Katie's theatrical debut was terrific ---
her intensity, energy, and passion caught me completely off guard. I was
very surprised and so proud I thought I'd burst. The next day, when I
excitedly shared all the details with Dona, she laughed, "Well, what
were you expecting? She's your daughter."

Then my old friend gave me a memory gift. She vividly recalled another
passionate young actress wearing a red wool vest, matching gauchos, and
black riding boots who confidently walked into an open audition for
Christopher Fry's play The Lady's Not for Burning as if she knew
something the director did not. "She had fire in her eyes and possessed
more theatricality just walking to the stage than most people have on
it. At that moment I knew I'd found my Jennet Jourdemayne." Jennet,
Fry's highspirited heroine, was my first leading role. No matter how
brilliant we are, a life in the performing arts is not always possible.
But a life enhanced by the performing arts is. We don't have to join
Actors' Equity to explore the world of theater, dance, or opera as a
passionate, personal pursuit. Either side of the footlights can
illuminate your path toward authenticity. As the English poet Francis
Bacon reminds us, in life's theater only God and the angels are
permitted to be onlookers. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 26

Reel Life Lessons Good movies make you care, make you believe in
possibilities again. ---PAULINE KAEL

Instead of meditating today, let's just watch a movie. Sneak away in the
middle of the day, hunker down in the dark with a box or bowl of popcorn
to ponder the meaning of life. It doesn't matter whether we choose a
home video or a bargain matinee at the mall, truth can pleasurably be
discerned one frame at a time. "Studying movies for their mystical
message empowers us. We gain insight and greater self-awareness," Marsha
Sinetar suggests in her fascinating book Reel Power: Spiritual Growth
Through Film. "So much of life today is centered on problems, recovery,
and the painful struggles of trying to meet the unrelenting demands of
twenty-first century living. Unfortunately, by dwelling only on
problems, and thus failing to see ourselves and our dilemmas in a
heroic, promising light, we limit ourselves. Movies elevate our sights,
enlarge imagination. Film, like poetry, is one of our heart's most
subtle agents. It reminds us of what we know, helps us stretch and
change, provides us with a sensory catalyst for creative, cutting-edge
change." Reel power is "the ability to dig out, and use, whatever is
spiritually valuable in a movie." Films are celluloid fairy tales for a
culture that no longer sits around the campfire listening to the wisdom
of its elders. I use movies to replenish my creative well---usually
videos, which we watch on the weekend. I crave period films with lush
sets and costumes for my visual fix, rely on comedies for relief from
stress, and seek out black-and-white mysteries and romantic classics
from the 1930s and 1940s for sheer escape. I collect movies about
angels, reincarnation, the afterlife, and everlasting love. I won't
watch scary movies or films with senseless violence---nor should you,
because once an

image is imprinted on your consciousness it's there forever. I think we
all need the uplift provided by films that inspire, encourage, affirm,
and celebrate the human spirit. Meditatively matching your mood to a
movie is very restorative and rewarding. This week go to a large video
store and browse. Take your time. Scan all the different categories and
write down the names of movies that appeal to you. Then, on those
occasions when you can't get a new video release, refer back to your
list so that you always have something worth watching at least once a
week. But occasionally it's great fun---an affordable luxury---to
experience the first-run magic of the big screen. "Movies mirror us and
invite us to go beyond the obvious. Their themes and images can
powerfully equip us to see ourselves as we are at our worst, and at our
best, or to help us invent new scripts about who we hope to be," Marsha
Sinetar believes. "Everything placed in our path can help us.... Certain
films---like certain lovely people, glorious works of art or music, and
special instances of prayer---seem a grace expressly given for our
edification." OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 27

Meditative Handwork Hands to work, hearts to God. ---SHAKER AXIOM

Many women, especially if they have children, simply can't find twenty
uninterrupted minutes every day to meditate. But those of us who can
carve out those precious minutes to sit down and be still often find our
minds racing on without us. The truth is that traditional meditation
methods take time, practice, and discipline before they yield
restorative rewards; after a few attempts in which nothing happens, many
of us get discouraged and give up. Because this is real life, I've tried
to find other ways to induce a meditative state, even in the midst of
chaos. One of the best methods is through meditative handwork. When
other people see that our hands are busy, they often give us a few
moments' peace before making their next request. What they don't know
(and we shall never reveal) is that when our hands are busy, our minds
can rest. The creative artistry of handicrafts has been a part of
women's domestic daily round for centuries. Handwork in all its many
varieties was high art for Victorian women. This intimate and intricate
soulcraft gave exquisite outward expression to countless authentic
artists who were often straitjacketed by the expectations of a rigid
society. It's only in the last thirty years that what was once esteemed
has been demeaned, as handicrafts have been demoted from being every
woman's accomplishment to the personal pursuits of a chosen few. I know
the argument well: women today don't have the time for crafts the way
our foremothers did. Victorian women had more time on their hands
because they didn't work outside the home. As far as I'm aware,
Victorian women had twenty-four hours each day to spend, savor, save, or

squander. And while they weren't commuting to a job outside their homes,
they were beating rugs, washing dirty cotton diapers by hand, hanging
the laundry to dry on a line, cooking without electricity and
refrigeration, baking from scratch, tending the sick without modern
medicines, and nurturing families larger than most of us do today. The
sense of time certainly has speeded up in the last century, but not the
amount of it available. In fact, Victorian women probably had less time
than we do; they didn't live as long as women today, and without
electricity they weren't able to blur the distinction between day and
night the way we do. Frankly, women have always had too much to do. It's
just that Victorian women often coped better than we do; they realized
the restorative power of rhythm, routine, rest, recreation, and ritual.
They preserved their energy by alternating household and childcare tasks
with centering pastimes that provided creative fulfillment and relief
from tension. No matter what your personal inclinations, there are so
many different kinds of handicrafts available that every woman can find
one that appeals if she's willing to explore. Consider weaving,
basketry, bead craft, needle craft (embroidery, needlepoint, tatting,
cross-stitching, lace making, smocking), sewing, knitting, crocheting,
quilting, leather craft, rug hooking, pottery, stained glass, ribbon
craft, paper craft (decoupage, collage, marbling, papercutting),
bookbinding, framing, and carpentry. A friend of mine took up carpentry
several years ago because she wanted to make some hanging bookshelves.
She started with Shaker reproduction kits available from a catalog. Now
she wields a lathe as if it were a sewing needle and sells beautiful
pieces of art. Start small. You don't even have to sign up for a class
if you don't think you have the time. Many marvelous and reasonably
priced kits are available at craft shops and through mail order. The
important thing is to keep trying one thing new each season until you
find something you love. Whatever handicraft you choose to pursue, be
sure to keep your favorite project in clear view. If you store your
unfinished needlepoint canvas in the closet, that's where it'll remain.
Find an attractive basket to hold everything in one place, so the next
time you find a few minutes you don't waste them by looking for your
supplies. The Austrian novelist Marie von Ebner-Eschenback wrote in 1905
that "Nothing is so often irretrievably missed as a daily opportunity."
For many

of us the daily opportunity missed is the pursuit of pleasure. The next
time the fabric of real life seems to unravel before your eyes, get busy
with your hands, so that your mind can serenely sort out where to pick
up the next stitch. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 28

Home Art Home is the heart of life.... Home is where we feel at ease,
where we belong, where we can create surroundings that reflect our
tastes and pleasures.... Making a home is a form of creativity open to
everyone. ---TERENCE CONRAN

Even if you feel you haven't the eyes to excel in the visual arts, the
personality for the performing arts, or the patience for hand arts, you
can still explore the delights and pleasures of making your home an
authentic art. There are many decorating and artistic skills involved
when the home becomes a hobby. Craft can become art when we refinish
furniture, paint a wall a personalized hue, apply faux finishes to flea
market finds, rewire an old lamp, upholster a chair, sew a slipcover,
lay tile, stencil a favorite line of poetry on a kitchen wall, trim a
pillow, lay a flower bed. Artist Judyth van Amringe lives with daring,
one-of-a-kind conversation pieces---lamps, chairs, pillows,
tables---which she calls "home art." Learning to create your own
authentic home furnishings can also wake up your identity as an artist.
"Put your preconceptions of what should and shouldn't go together
away---do exactly the opposite of what your old sense would tell you and
you will find yourself in a whole new creative landscape," she urges us
in Home Art: Creating Romance and Magic with Everyday Objects. Home art
begins with recycling. "We all know how much appalling waste goes on all
around us every day. My credo is to reuse as much stuff as possible
always---whether it's mine, my neighbor's, something from a tag sale, a
flea market, the street---because if you make something wonderful out of
a castoff you are saving its energy and making

a little less clutter. Here is the challenge: to turn a piece around,
rework it, make it totally your own, your style, your signature."
Judyth's signature and style is bolder than most---a flamenco television
cozy isn't a look we might feel comfortable with in our living rooms.
But her belief that we should live surrounded by the very personal as
well as quirky things we adore is authentic wisdom and definitely worth
meditating upon. With a little elbow grease, ingenuity and the sweat
equity of time, the marvelous can materialize right before our eyes.
Today, be willing to be adventurous with just one small project: create
a new lampshade, hang a whimsical curtain treatment, decoupage a tea
tray, gild that tag sale picture frame and turn it into a mirror. I know
there's some home art project you've been thinking about tackling for a
long time. I know because I have several. Throw out your preconceptions,
follow your heart, honor your creative impulses, trust your eye.
Feathering your own nest is a perfect way for you to spread your wings
as an artist. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 29

Artists of the Everyday: Loving, Knowing, Doing Love is the spirit that
motivates the artist's journey. The love may be sublime, raw, obsessive,
passionate, awful, or thrilling, but whatever its quality, it's a
powerful motive in the artist's life. ---ERIC MAISEL

The other day a friend and I were talking about the difficulty that most
of us have in grasping the concept that we are artists---that life is
our canvas. She confessed that she herself could barely bake a cake and
didn't think of herself as a particularly creative person. I adamantly
disagree. I believe with all my heart that the ability to bring forth
art from real life is a gift every woman possesses. Whether we choose to
nurture this perfectly natural endowment is quite another matter.
Admittedly, the concept is almost impossible to register when we're
exhausted, overwhelmed, and frazzled. But it's certainly worth
meditating on as we savor the last days of summer. You may not draw,
paint, sculpt, knit, sing, dance, or act, but baking a cake could be as
much a work of art as choreographing a ballet, if you approach it with
as much dedication. So is coaxing a tired, hungry toddler (with infinite
patience and persuasion) to do whatever it is you need him to do at a
given moment. So is graciously entertaining unexpected company with
what's on hand and turning it into a memorable feast with candlelight,
wine, laughter, and lively conversation. So is helping a friend through
a personal crisis, comforting an aging parent, or planning a preteen's
birthday party. Whatever you're about to do today can be transformed
into art, if your heart is open and you're willing to be the Great
Creator's conduit. Women are artists of the everyday. The world does not
acknowledge or

applaud everyday art, so we must. We are the keepers of a sacred truth.
We must cherish this wisdom and pass it on to those we love. As an
artist I have come to know that there are three very different layers to
creation: the labor, the craft, and the elevation. St. Francis of Assisi
explains the creative process this way: the woman who works with her
hands only is a laborer; the woman who works with her hands and her head
is a craftswoman; the woman who works with her hands, her head, and her
heart is an artist. Labor in creation is showing up to do the Work.
Craft is how you go about doing it. Are you there in mind, body, and
spirit? Are you taking your time or are you rushing? Are you
concentrating on whatever it is you are doing or thinking about twenty
other things that need to be done? Do you just throw the flour, eggs,
butter, sugar, and salt into a bowl all at once, stir the lumpy mess
with a flick of your wrist, stick it in the oven, and hope for the best?
Or do you sift the flour three times, beat the eggs, cream the butter
and sugar together before you combine them? Do you spend fifteen minutes
stirring the batter? Do you preheat the oven, grease and flour the pan?
Do you hum while you're doing it, enjoying the process of creating, as
well as the anticipation of the product? If you do, Love is present.
Love is the spiritual energy that induces elevation---the transcendent
moment in creation when craft becomes art. It takes a lifetime to create
the work of art for which we were born: an authentic life. But it only
takes five minutes to center yourself before you begin each new task
today. Five minutes to acknowledge in your soul that you are an artist
of the everyday. Five minutes to give thanks for your personal gifts.
Five minutes to offer your love, creative energies, and enormous talents
to the person, idea, or project awaiting your attention. Say it aloud: I
am a brilliant, gifted artist of the everyday. My art is a blessing for
me and mine. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 30

If Not Now, Then When? Procrastination is the thief of time. ---EDWARD
YOUNG

I have a friend who's organizing a new women's movement called If Not
Now, Then When? We're all invited to become charter members. The
movement's mission is to drive a stake into the heart of the
procrastination that perpetually robs us of personal pleasure. Another
friend is an antique jewelry dealer who travels to England frequently on
business. She's also a politician's wife and the mother of two children.
Still, she's signed up for Italian and yoga and is thinking about a
watercolor class. We have to make time for ourselves, she insists, and I
agree (if not now, then when?). She asks if I would like to join her new
nineteenth-century book club. The club will meet one Sunday afternoon a
month over tea and sherry. Everyone will bring a savory or a sweet so
that there's more than just food for our minds available. I think the
club sounds marvelous. I'll get back to her after I finish writing this
book on creating an authentic life. "Life, as it is called, is for most
of us one long postponement," Henry Miller wrote wistfully in 1947. What
pleasure are you postponing? I just postponed joining a fabulous book
club. I'm going to call my busy friend back. It's faint, but I can still
feel a pulse. OceanofPDF.com

AUGUST 31

This Too, Is God One must also accept that one has "uncreative" moments.
The more honestly one can accept that, the quicker these moments will
pass. One must have the courage to call a halt, to feel empty and
discouraged. ---ETTY HILLESUM

Whether you're a poet, parent, or performance artist, one morning you'll
wake up, put the coffee on, begin to prime the well to continue in the
recreation of your authentic life, only to discover that the well has
run dry. It might seem disconcerting to end this month of meditations on
a downbeat, but accepting uncreative days as part of the creative cycle
is crucial to your serenity. Uncreative days are real life. Every artist
knows them, although few of us care to acknowledge this except in
confidential whispers. But as you make authenticity your art you will
know them, too. Uncreative days are the part of the yin/yang of artistic
yearning. Once in the middle of a creative drought I sat in a New York
coffee shop with my agent and confessed softly, as if I was admitting a
great personal failing or the discovery of a terminal illness, that for
months I had been unable to dream. I couldn't fantasize, visualize, or
even make a wish. Since I'm Irish, the inability to dream is the
emotional equivalent of a chemical imbalance in the soul. I needed her
advice because Chris has a knack for knowing how to finesse things. We'd
just come from a meeting with an advertising agency where she'd made a
deal for my creative consulting services that astounded me, especially
since at that moment I was convinced there was nothing going on inside
worth more than two nickels. "What do I do?" "You don't do anything,"
she told me. Zilch. Nada. Zip. Wait it out. Accept the fallow period as
graciously as you can, and get ready for a

quantum leap in creativity or consciousness. It is so difficult to come
to a halt, especially when we want to get on with our careers,
relationships, health, creativity. But when you're too parched to pray,
beyond tears, or too drained to give a damn, it's time to cease and
desist. Not all our hours are billable. No, this does not mean you can
quit. You still have to go through the motions, keep showing up for
work: on the page, at the drawing board, stove, sewing machine,
computer. Continue to prepare the canvas, moisten the clay. Pretend
you're a creative temp, here to fill in until your authentic self
arrives. In the meantime, defer making any life-altering creative
decisions until you receive operating instructions. Your only assignment
is to replenish the well. Search for the underground spring through
creative excursions. Keep in touch with your authentic self with the
daily dialogue. Resurrect any old creative projects that might have
fallen into the sinkhole of second thoughts or back of the closet. Give
them another glance. When I'm deeply discouraged, I retreat to my
illustrated discovery journal searching for visual clues to indicate the
next turn in the path. Often the derailment of too many dreams can bring
on a drought, but whenever there's a dry period, there's still plenty of
Light. We're just blinded by dark dust storms. Arid despair can often
result from nurturance deprivation: not eating well, not sleeping
enough, working too hard and too long without anything to look forward
to. If you're creatively barren, give yourself a break. Dona Cooper, one
of the most creative and productive women I know, frequently reminds me,
especially when my plans don't proceed at the speed of light, that "This
too, is God." And it is. Four months after I stopped trying so hard, the
creative incarnation of Simple Abundance occurred. The hardest thing
we'll ever do as artists of the everyday is learn to call an occasional
halt. Today, if you're feeling uncreative, don't despair. Start getting
excited and save your strength. You're being prepared for a quantum leap
in authenticity. In the natural world, droughts depart as suddenly and
as mysteriously as they arrive. This too, is God.

Joyful Simplicities for August

• Rediscover the books you loved as a child. Head off to a good library
(the older the better) and wander into the children's section (with or
without your own little ones). Sit in the childsized chairs and recall
moments of contentment curled up with a good book. What was it? Little
Women? Black Beauty? Anne of Green Gables? The Bobbsey Twins? The Little
House books of Laura Ingalls Wilder? The vintage adventures of the ace
girl detective Nancy Drew? (Remember Nancy's little red roadster,
twinsets, Bess, George, and Ned, and such baffling cases as Secret in
the Old Attic and The Mystery at the Moss-Covered Mansion? Solve them
once more with feeling.) • Gloria Steinem tells us it's never too late
to have a happy childhood and I believe her. The childhood I would have
chosen is captured in Maud Hart Lovelace's wonderful "Betsy-Tacy"
series. If you want pure and simple escapism run away to Deep Valley,
Minnesota, at the turn of the century to enjoy escapades with Betsy Ray
and her friends, Tacy Kelly and Tib Muller. There are ten books in the
series, beginning when Betsy and Tacy are five in 1892, and ending with
Betsy's wedding after World War I. What I like most about reading
children's books from the past (now that I'm old enough to appreciate
the subtle nuances), are the charming domestic details of these cozy
worlds---the kinds of cooking, decorating, entertainments, and pastimes
that filled their lives. • Consider joining or starting a book club.
Sharing a good book is as rewarding as reading one. Explore plot twists
and character development over food and drink with a congenial group of
people once a month. A wonderful resource is the free online directory
for book clubs and reading groups, www.readerscircle.org. • Start your
search for a choice secondhand bookshop in your area. But until you do,
check out the amazing websites www.abebooks.com, www.bookavenue.com, and
www.alibris.com. • Artists need to support one another in their sacred
endeavors. I cannot praise Julia Cameron's compassionate and compelling
The Artist's Way highly enough. It's the first book I recommend to my
workshop participants and the one I packed in my daughter's suitcase
when she left for California to pursue a film career. Julia's
twelve-week course in discovering and recovering your creative self is
an intimate tutorial with a gifted and

generous mentor. Her many other books are equally inspiring and
encouraging. • Reading specialty publications is a fascinating way to
explore a new pursuit. Glance through American Artist, Dance, Theatre
Crafts, Opera News, or American Craft for a glimmer of exciting parallel
realities. • Treat yourself to a deluxe box of Crayola crayons with all
the colors, or a wonderful set of colored pencils. Create a poster that
reads "If Not Now, Then When?" and hang it where you'll see it every
day. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER September, the harvest month ... Summer is over and autumn has
arrived. ---CYNTHIA WICKHAM

September's song is a two-part harmony, as summer's lighthearted
serenade ends and a deeper melody begins. For eight months we've plowed
and sowed the soulful seeds of gratitude, simplicity, order, and harmony
into our lives. Now an authentic harvest of contentment waits to be
gathered in, as the fifth Simple Abundance principle---Beauty---beckons
us to partake in her bounty. Begin to reap the rich harvest that Love
hath sown. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 1

Turning Over a New Leaf Autumn to winter, winter to spring, Spring into
summer, summer into fall--- So rolls the changing year, and so we
change; Motion so swift, we know not that we move. ---DINAH MULOCK CRAIK

Since ancient times, September has been viewed as the beginning of the
new year, a time for reflection and resolution. Jews observe the High
Holiday of Yom Kippur, the day of public and private atonement, a sacred
withdrawal from the world for twenty-four hours in order to become right
with God and others, so that real life might be renewed with passion and
purpose. Change in the natural world is subtle but relentless; seasons
seem to give way gently to one another, even if the monthly motion is so
swift we don't realize we're moving. But when the leaves start turning
colors, it's time for turning over a personal new leaf so that our lives
might be restored. "What we need in autumn is an emotional or spiritual
shot in the arm," Katharine Elizabeth Fite wrote in Good Housekeeping in
1949, urging the beginning of a new tradition for women: personal and
positive resolutions in September. "Why do you suppose so many of us
waste the autumn? Why don't we make the effort that would provide
something new in our lives?" January's negative resolutions "are made
when we are worn out in spirit, body, and pocketbook, and have no real
urge to do anything but rest." It seems to me that January resolutions
are about will; September resolutions are about authentic wants. What do
you want more or less of in your life, so that you can love the life
you're leading? It could be as simple as seeing friends more often,
setting aside time to have adventures with

your children while they still want your companionship, rekindling
romance in your daily round, calling a solitary hour a day your own, or
just taking more walks in the dazzling sunshine. The beauty of autumnal
resolutions is that no one else knows we're making them. Autumnal
resolutions don't require horns, confetti, and champagne. September
resolutions ask only that we be open to positive change. I can try to do
that. So can you. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 2

The Work of Understanding Somewhere there is an ancient enmity between
our daily life and the great work. Help me in saying it, to understand
it. ---RAINER MARIA RILKE

Many of us believe that if Adam and Eve hadn't blown it in Paradise, we
wouldn't have had to work for a living and we'd be on easy street in
Eden. Unfortunately, that biblical interpretation is fanciful. For if
you read Adam and Eve's story more carefully, you'll discover that God
always intended for human beings to work and for work to be a joy.
Consider Adam's soulful occupations: to name all living things after
studying them and to tend a beautiful garden. In the beginning, work was
meant as a gift. But then came the Fall and Adam's work became Eve's
labor. Consider the daughters of Eve's daily round. There are private
works: nurturing children, homecaring, preparing meals, chauffeuring,
financial management, horticulture, tending animals, and for some of us,
husbandry. Then there are public works: employment, school and church
activities, youth groups, community and charitable volunteering.
Fifty-eight million American women have the responsibilities of worldly
employment; almost half of all employed women have children under the
age of eighteen. Seventy percent of mothers with little ones three and
under aren't able to care for them during the day, because they're
taking care of the business of reality. In real life we must take care
of reality, so that we can afford to take care of what's Real. If you're
employed outside of your home, you're paid money for your efforts. But
the greatest portion of a woman's work is gratis and largely unsung.
Because we spend so much of our earthly span working, one way or
another, this deserves profound contemplation and I'm not just referring

to coping with the hassles of commutes, day care, sick children, snow
days, teacher conferences, and deadlines. Juggling swords, flaming
torches, and conflicting commitments deserves its own meditation. But so
does the numinous nature of work. Each of us was created to give outward
expression to Divinity through our personal gifts. Sharing our gifts
with the world is our Great Work, no matter what our job description
might be or how our resume reads. I don't think many women today can
honestly say that their work life--- private and public---is in balance
with their personal life, whether or not they have children. Matthew
Fox, the radical philosopher and former Catholic priest, believes "to
live well is to work well." I wholeheartedly agree. But just how do
women in the 1990s accomplish that? I wish I could serve up a quick and
easy solution to such a complicated, emotionally charged dilemma. For we
can't work well or live well if we don't live authentically. Like Rilke,
we need to acknowledge aloud the ancient enmity between Real Life and
work. It exists. It tears us to pieces every day. We need to help each
other understand it, because we will never understand it on our own. We
can start by holding one another's hands, by listening to one another's
concerns, by reassuring one another, today, that everything will be all
right. Somehow, together, we will figure it out. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 3

Scrambled or Fried? At work, you think of the children you have left at
home. At home, you think of the work you 've left unfinished. Such a
struggle is unleashed within yourself. Your heart is rent. ---GOLDA MEIR

More women than you realize have a secret fantasy that has absolutely
nothing to do with erotica. But in its own way, it focuses on the
forbidden. I call this fantasy, "Scrambled or Fried?" One more perfectly
normal day of incessant demands, neglected children, and unfinished work
and you feel you can't take it anymore. An overwhelming impulse to
disappear without a trace comes over you. Methodically, you withdraw all
the cash you can from your bank account (credit cards can be traced),
pack a small suitcase, head for the bus terminal and begin life all over
again as a waitress in a diner somewhere out West. In this fantasy some
women take their children with them, especially if the kids are small;
other women don't, but usually their kids are teenagers. Of course,
you're not going to do it, but contemplating a plan of escape is an
imaginary mechanism to let off steam from life's pressure cooker. No
more overdue bills, arguments over cooking, cleaning, carrying out the
garbage, charge accounts, or custody; no more clashes between children
and career, no more exhausting caretaking of an elderly parent, no more
responsibility than you can handle in any twenty-four-hour period. When
you think you can't take it anymore, a life that revolves around asking
customers if they want their eggs scrambled or fried holds a certain
appeal. Recently, a thirty-nine-year-old woman, the mother of five
children between the ages of eight and sixteen, vanished off the face of
the earth not far from where we live. Earlier in the day she had been a
chaperone on an

elementary school field trip. After the class returned to school, she
put her daughter on a bus for a basketball game and told her that she
would walk the short distance home since it was such a beautiful day.
She never arrived. Around dinnertime, her frantic family called the
police and a massive search began, complete with prayer vigils. Of
course, everyone feared the worst, because for this particular woman to
disappear without a trace was completely out of character. She had
everything: a Wellesley education, a beautiful family, a lovely home, an
extremely comfortable lifestyle, and a perfect marriage to a diplomat.
Three days later the woman who had everything, but obviously not enough
of what she really needed, turned up unharmed (thank heavens), confused
by her own conduct, and dazed by all the commotion. Here's what
happened. As she started for home, she sought a solitary spot to sort
some things out. On the spur of the moment she walked a few miles to her
favorite place, Washington's National Cathedral, an exquisite sanctuary.
In the silence she could hear herself think. After a few hours she could
not bring herself to leave its peace to return to the chaos engulfing
her at home, so she slept for two days in a small chapel. As of this
writing, she's still not returned home and no one really knows when or
if she will. This much we do know: for whatever reason, her heart was
rent. Her center could not hold. Her life was not, after all, as perfect
as it appeared. Real lives seldom are, even if the surface has a pretty
sheen. I only wish I'd been able to say to her, "Disappear if you must,
but phone home and let the children know that you're okay." When I heard
on the radio that she hadn't been abducted but had voluntarily vanished,
I felt a tremendous sense of relief and said as much to my husband. His
response was that this woman was obviously mentally unstable.
Unbalanced. There was no other explanation for her bizarre behavior. I
agreed that the weight of her life was too heavy to carry alone, but as
I had a meditation to write (on coping with stress), I chose not to
challenge his interpretation. A long conversational detour would have
been necessary to point out that under her particular circumstances,
which of course we did not know, her disappearing act might have been
extremely sane. Desperate, no doubt. Heartrending, no question. But not
necessarily crazy.

When our waitress fantasy surfaces, we're physically, emotionally,
psychologically, and spiritually exhausted by the struggle within and
without that pulls us in a hundred different directions. We're seriously
wounded by the ancient enmity between daily life and the Great Work.
Band-Aids don't work anymore. Actually, the fantasy of running away can
be very therapeutic because it waves a psychic red flag that tells us
real life has become unmanageable. Changes need to occur, creative
choices need to be made, conversations need to be started and finished.
If the fantasy persists to the point of action, asking for help is much
better than buying a one-way bus ticket. "If you knew how often I say to
myself: to hell with everything, to hell with everybody, I've done my
share, let the others do theirs now, enough, enough, enough," Golda
Meir, the only woman prime minister of Israel, once confessed candidly.
You won't have to run away if you can learn to just say: enough, enough,
enough. And mean it. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 4

Answering a Higher Call Your work is to discover jour work and then with
all jour heart to give yourself to it. ---BUDDHA

When I attended Catholic high school during the early sixties, the word
"vocation"---from the Latin vocare meaning "to call"---was synomous with
entering a religious community. Like most sixteen-year-old girls, I
wanted to be swept off my feet by a handsome man, get married, have
children, and live happily ever after. Becoming a bride of Christ held
little allure, perhaps because a gruesome crucifix watched over the
classroom. (I swear the eyes moved.) However, I must admit I found
incredibly romantic the notion of women being called out from the world
because they were chosen by God. I also thought the nuns'
black-and-white habits rather dashing. But this does not a calling make.
Twenty years later I was happily married, living in the Maryland suburbs
and the mother of a beautiful daughter I cherished. But needing some
time out, I went on a retreat to an Episcopal convent. The moment I
drove into its grounds it seemed as if a spell had come over me; by the
time I walked down the hushed stone hallway to enter the chapel, I felt
as if I had arrived home. It was very unsettling. After a silent
weekend, spent praying and working beside the cloistered women who had
answered God's call so dramatically, I felt compelled to reconcile the
irreconcilable. I sought out a confessor, a lovely nun about my age, and
admitted in the golden autumn sunlight of the convent garden that I now
believed I had been blessed with a calling, but that I had said "no" to
God. My sorrow was not because I had chosen not to take a certain path
in

life, but because I hadn't even had the courage to consider the road
less traveled. Now it was too late. She in turn confided that she
sometimes wondered if she could have served God better in the world as a
wife and mother. "But when our hearts are open, Providence makes
straight our path," she reassured me. Then she asked quietly: "Why do
you assume that you have not already answered God's call? God needs
mothers. God needs writers. There must be some special work that only
you can bring into the world for God." She shared St. Teresa of Avila's
urging for those seeking their calling: "Christ has no body now on earth
but yours; yours are the only hands with which he can do his work, yours
are the only feet with which he can go about the world, yours are the
only eyes through which his compassion can shine forth upon a troubled
world. Christ has no body on earth now but yours." With a hopeful heart,
I returned home to my husband, child, and work in the world. Now, a
decade later, it has not escaped my attention that I am living my
unsought vocation. Dusk is falling as I write, the house is hushed. Ed
and Katie are at a double-feature matinee, allowing me to work in peace.
In the background, beautiful medieval hymns of prayer, praise, and
thanksgiving are being offered to Heaven through my compact disc player.
As I draw closer to finishing this book, my home has become a cloister,
my passion my calling, my work personal worship. I'm even wearing black.
God is in the subtle nuances. Today realize that Spirit has no hands,
head, or heart like yours. No other woman on earth can do what you alone
are called to do, can give to the world what you alone were sent to give
through your authentic gifts. The call may be so faint you can barely
make out the message, but if you listen, you will hear it.
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 5

Job, Career, or Calling? The pitcher cries for water to carry and a
person for work that is Real. ---MARGE PIERCY

There is a significant difference between a job, a career, and a
calling. Jobs are what we do to keep bodies, souls, and families
together. But as Studs Terkel wisely points out in his oral history
Working, daily meaning is as important as daily bread, and recognition
as necessary as cash. For when we work, we are searching "for a sort of
life rather than a Monday through Friday sort of dying." One of the
people Studs Terkel interviewed was Nora Watson, who then worked as a
staff writer for a health-care magazine: "I think most of us are looking
for a calling, not a job. Most of us, like the assembly line worker,
have jobs that are too small for our spirit. Jobs are not big enough for
people." But jobs are crucial; we need to "earn a living," which becomes
more difficult each day in the uncertain economic climate of the 1990s.
A career can be a calling, but not necessarily. Usually a career occurs
when we stick to an occupational path---accounting, advertising,
nursing, publishing---because we do what we do quite well and get paid
for doing it. Sometimes careers resemble long-standing marriages in
which passion is exchanged for comfort, security, and predictability in
an uncertain world. Of course, there is nothing wrong with this choice;
for many women it is absolutely the right one---though some may wonder
what psychic price is being exacted for playing it safe. It is certainly
true that every day we don't strive to live authentically we do pay a
price, with compounded interest. Many of us eventually move from jobs to
careers, but often we hesitate to answer an authentic calling,
especially in midlife, because we're torn--- between the financial
realities of raising children and caring for aging

parents, between a proven track record and the unknown, between a
regular paycheck and uncertainty, between circumstance and creative
choice. But it's a mistake to accept as our reality the illusion that
many are called to fulfillment but few are chosen. What Spirit has done
for other women, can be done for you---when you're ready. The truth is,
we're all chosen; most of us just forget to rsvp. Novelist Mary Morris
tells us that "Pursuing what you want to do and achieving your goal is
not like finding the burning bush or discovering a gold mine. There are
usually no epiphanies, no sudden reversals of fortune. Fulfillment comes
in fits and starts.... Fulfillment comes in many guises, and it can come
to us in our lives at any time.... But only we can make sure we will be
fulfilled. If we feel empty, no amount of water can fill our well. It
has to come from within, from the underground springs and streams."
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 6

Working from the Heart Work is love made visible. ---KAHLIL GIBRAN

Most of us do not consider our work a personal form of worship. Work is
worldly. Worship is withdrawing from the world to honor Spirit. But
could there be a more beautiful way to honor the Great Creator than by
contributing to the re-creation of the world through our gifts? This is
what we're called to do each day through our work. Yet it is very
difficult to get even a glimmer of the holy when we are harassed,
unappreciated, overwhelmed, frazzled, and burned-out. Marianne
Williamson believes that the workplace is "but a front for a temple, a
healing place where people \[can\] be lifted above the insanity of a
frightened world." Once, when she was working as a cocktail waitress---
years before she answered her calling to become a spiritual guide and
writer ---she realized that people only thought they were coming to a
bar for a drink. Really the bar was a church in disguise and she could
minister to people with warmth, conversation, and compassion. "No matter
what we do, we can make it our ministry," she writes in her illuminating
A Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of a Course in Miracles.
"No matter what form our job or activity takes, the content is the same
as everyone else's; we are here to minister to human hearts. If we talk
to anyone, or see anyone, or even think of anyone, then we have the
opportunity to bring more love into the universe. From a waitress to the
head of a movie studio, from an elevator operator to the president of a
nation, there is no one whose job is unimportant to God." It's easier to
imagine that our work could be our worship if we could perceive the
sacred in how we spend at least eight hours of the day. Perhaps

the secret to coming to this awareness, no matter what our present
circumstances, is to discover the work we would love to do. But until we
do, we need to learn to love the work we're presently doing. Today you
can begin to transform your workplace and your working style by
considering how much you have to be grateful for. If you have a job,
even one you dislike, it's a safety net as you take a leap of faith
toward your authenticity; if you're out of work, the path already has
been cleared for you to answer your authentic calling. Invoke Spirit as
your personal career counselor. The mystical poet Kahlil Gibran tells
us, "When you work, you fulfill a part of earth's fondest dream assigned
to you when that dream is born." Fulfilling your part of the earth's
fondest dream occurs when you work from the heart. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 7

Wishcraft: Getting from Here to There Oh, the secret life of man and
woman---dreaming how much better we would be than we are if we were
somebody else or even ourselves, and feeling that our estate has been
unexploited to its fullest. ---ZELDA FITZGERALD

I can't be the only grown woman in the world who dissolves into tears
whenever Jiminy Cricket stares out of kindly old Geppetto's window, sees
the first star of the evening, and begins to sing, "When you wish upon a
star ..." in the movie Pinocchio. Perhaps I cry, as might you, because
we wish on stars and hope with all our hearts that our dreams will come
true. But turning a wooden puppet into a real boy or a precious dream
into reality requires something more in the 1990s than just waving a
magic wand. How about a wise, compassionate, and savvy fairy godmother
who's never heard a dream she thought was frivolous or one that couldn't
be wrestled from fate with mystical moxie? Barbara Sher is that fairy
godmother, one with an attitude. She knows all about "life makeovers,"
as she calls pursuing our authentic dreams. She went from being a
divorced mother on welfare to being a pyschotherapist and career
consultant---as dramatic a life makeover as one could imagine. As a
therapist she began to suspect that many of her depressed patients
didn't really need long-term therapy as much as they needed a reason to
get out of bed every morning. Since Barbara had transformed her own
life, she figured she knew as much as anybody about making dreams come
true, so she began offering life-direction seminars. The success of the
workshops led to her first book Wishcraft: How to Get What You Really
Want (written with Annie Gottlieb). Here you can find practical advice
to help shape vague yearnings into authentic adventures so that "you
have a life you love,

so that you wake up every morning excited about the day ahead and
delighted to be doing what you're doing, even if you're sometimes a
little nervous and scared." I was a freelance writer who dreamed of
writing and publishing books when I took one of her seminars in the
early 1980s. One of the first things Barbara teaches is that in order
"to create the life you want, you don't need mantras, self-hypnosis, a
character-building program, or a new toothpaste. You do need practical
techniques for problem-solving, planning, and getting your hands on
materials, skills, information and contacts.... You need commonsense
strategies for coping with human feelings and foibles that aren't going
to go away, like fear, depression and laziness.... And you need ways of
riding out the temporary emotional storms your life changes can cause in
your closest relationships---while still getting the extra emotional
support you need for risk-taking." The world needs dreamers and the
world needs doers. But above all, the world needs dreamers who do. Don't
just entrust your hopes and wishes to the stars. Today, begin learning
the craft that will enable you to reach for them. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 8

Getting from Here to There: When You Haven't a Clue What to Do Life is
either a daring adventure or nothing. To keep our faces toward change
and behave like free spirits in the presence of fate is strength
undefeatable. ---HELEN KELLER

Some of us hear our passion calling when we're very young, but most of
us do not because we're too busy listening to what other people,
especially our parents, are telling us. So we embark on a vocational
path, trying on different lives for size until we find one we can wear
even if it doesn't necessarily fit. Perhaps you're conflicted about
continuing the journey you started twenty-five years ago but have
outgrown. You know you're not heading in the direction you want to go,
but at least your daily motions are familiar. And familiar feels safe.
In today's uncertain world, feeling safe and secure seems the emotional
definition of sanity. Perhaps you're skilled in one occupation but not
thrilled about using those skills anymore. Some other work does secretly
thrill you. But the stakes seem too high. Perhaps you're dismayed, even
embarrassed, by the thought that you don't know what Great Work waits
for you. Not knowing what you want to do can be very disconcerting. You
want to go forward but find yourself standing still, overwhelmed by the
options or the risks. This doesn't surprise Barbara Sher. In the ten
years since Wishcraft was published, she's heard many people claim that
they wanted to live passionately, but that they were stymied and unable
to use her Wishcraft strategy because they didn't have the foggiest idea
what excited

them. This made her extremely curious, so she started meeting with
groups of people who didn't know what they wanted out of life. As they
shared their stories, she discovered a common thread of discontent;
everyone was unconsciously engaged in an internal battle for control of
direction. But however directionless they felt, their lives were filled
with authentic clues. They just didn't know how to look for them. Some
of the reasons Barbara heard for not pursuing a passionate life
included: • "I'd have to quit my job to get what I really want and I
can't do that --- I'd starve." • "Every time I try to go after what I
want, I drop the ball and I don't know why." • "I want to do so many
things, I'll never be able to pick only one." • "How can I walk away
from success? And what will I live on if I do?" • "I want something I
shouldn't want---it's trivial or unworthy." • "I don't have Idea One
what to do now." • "I've tried so many things and nothing does it for
me." • "It's not my fault I'm not doing what I want---the world won't
give me a break." •"I'm trying to go after something, but my heart's not
really in it, and I don't know why." After helping these people realize
that they really did know what they wanted to do, she knew there was
another book to write: I Could Do Anything If I Only Knew What It Was
(written with Barbara Smith). Whether we realize it or not, there's a
good reason behind everything we do or don't do, every choice we make or
avoid. We can't go forward if we don't know what's holding us back.
Knowing the truth does set you free. If you suspect that one of those
frustrated, angry, discouraged, or timid voices sounds awfully familiar,
you'll find wisdom and reassurance in Barbara Sher's suggestions for
discovering your authentic dream. The price we pay for authenticity may
seem high, but who among us can truly afford to continue living as a
spendthrift of the self ?

OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 9

The Courage to Answer the Call You gain strength, courage and confidence
by every experience in which you really stop to look fear in the
face.... You must do the thing you cannot do. ---ELEANOR ROOSEVELT

No coward soul is mine/No trembler in the world's stormtroubled sphere,"
Emily Brontë wrote just before her death in 1848. She was only thirty.
At her end, which is really only the beginning for many of us, came the
inner awareness that she had lived courageously. She had lived
authentically. Of course, she had known dark moments, but in the
darkness she'd come to trust that a Power greater than her own would
never leave nor forsake her. This Love was so transformative she wrote
to her sister, Charlotte, that It "Changes, sustains, dissolves, creates
and rears" as It leads. This steadfast Love endowed her with courage and
confidence as her great novel Wuthering Heights was rejected by one
publisher after another. Make no mistake, when you start on the path to
authenticity, Love will change you, transforming your life in countless
ways. Your family and friends might not notice the changes in the
beginning because they're so small. But you will, and you'll know that
miracles are taking place. Love will sustain you when passion's path
takes unexpected twists and turns. Love will dissolve your fears by
creating opportunities you couldn't have imagined before you began the
search to discover and recover your authentic self. And when doubt,
despair, and denial threaten to dismantle your dreams, Love will rear up
in your defense. The next time you feel frightened and fragile, stand
very still. If you do, you might feel the tip of an angel's wing brush
against your shoulder.

No coward's soul is yours. I know this, even if today you don't. I know
this because you wouldn't have come this far on the Simple Abundance
journey if you were a coward. Reluctantly (actually kicking and
screaming), I have come to the realization that feeling afraid is
Spirit's signal to ask for grace and Power. So take a deep breath, seek
your quiet center, and push on. One of the hardest lessons we ever have
to master is accepting that all fear comes from within however major are
the real life's circumstances assaulting us. The closer we get to giving
our dream to the world, the fiercer the struggle becomes to bring it
forth. Why should this be so? Because we will be inexorably changed, and
life can never return to the way it once was. Of course we're scared; we
wouldn't be sane if we weren't. But how many exquisite, glorious dreams
sent to heal the world has Heaven mourned because the dreamer, weary and
discouraged, relied only on her own strength and could do no more? Today
if you feel afraid, take comfort in remembering that courage is fear
that has said her prayers. "I've dreamt in my life dreams that have
stayed with me ever after, and changed my ideas," Emily Brontë
confessed. "They've gone through and through me, like wine through
water, and altered the color of my mind." Dreams are gifts of Spirit
meant to alter us. Trust that the same Power that gifted you with your
dream knows how to help you make it come true. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 10

Setting Your Own Pace One sad thing about this world is that the acts
that take the most out of you are usually the ones that other people
will never know about. ---ANNE TYLER

Novelist Anne Tyler tells a wonderful cautionary tale about pursuing
your authentic calling. Arriving to pick up her children at school one
afternoon, she was met by another mother who casually asked, "Have you
found work yet? Or are you still just writing?" Simply because you do it
doesn't mean the rest of the world will think it's wonderful or even
worthwhile. The sooner you realize that other people won't necessarily
bless or appreciate your efforts to follow your calling, the happier
you'll be. A lot of people--- including your partner and
children---might wonder aloud for years if you're ever going to become
sensible again. No, you're not. So shrug off their skepticism with a
smile and go back to mining your acre of diamonds. Eventually they'll
come around, either as cheerleaders or as astonished spectators. In the
meantime, do your best to pay as little attention as possible to doom,
doubt, and derision. You've only got so much psychic energy. If it's
squandered on converting the heathens, you won't have any left to do the
work waiting for you. Remember, the prophetess is rarely recognized in
her own household. Next, if you're trying to bring forth a dream while
caring for a family and holding down a job, you must set your own pace.
You know your commitments better than anyone else. We've all got to live
with them as well as work around them. Authentic fulfillment through
your work is a marathon, not a sprint. Long-distance runners prepare for
marathons with a lot of shorter runs, increasing their length and speed
as they become stronger. In order to hear your calling and answer it,
you must generously

give yourself the gift of time. Certainly, no one else in the world will
do it. If you have children living with you or are employed full time
during the day, you should have a three-year plan to secure that dream
job, publish that book, organize a one woman show, win that grant, send
out your mail-order catalog. It took me three years and thirty
rejections to launch a nationally syndicated newspaper column. The
bottom line is not how fast you make your dream come true, but how
steadily you pursue it. Anne Tyler reveals in a collection of essays,
The Writer on Her Work, how difficult it is to create around family
life. Writing is her frame of reference, as it is mine, but the same
principle applies to any passion. One March a character arrived in her
consciousness as she was painting the downstairs hall. She knew if she
"sat down and organized this character on paper, a novel would grow up
around him. But it was March and the children's spring vacation began
the next day, so I waited." By July she was finally able to start. Even
with the inevitable creative delays that daily life brings, there is
tremendous gain in the struggle to answer your calling with children
growing up all around you. "It seems to me that since I've had children,
I've grown richer and deeper," Anne Tyler confesses. "They may have
slowed down my writing for a while, but when I did write, I had more of
a self to speak from." OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 11

A Psalm for Life Let us, then, be up and doing With a heart for any
fate; Still achieving, still pursuing, Learn to labor and to wait.
---HENRY WADSWORTH LONGFELLOW

Here, in four lines, is the essence of mystical moxie: the secret to
achieving what you want out of your life. Written more than a hundred
years ago, this wisdom is as relevant today as when it was penned. This
psalm to life is one of my favorite poetry meditations, especially when
I'm discouraged because I'm not seeing results as quickly as I'd like
to. I know that if you mull over Longfellow's advice, you'll receive an
emotional and spiritual boost today. "Let us, then, be up and doing ..."
Dreams are not enough. They must be backed up with effort. Success is as
simple and as profound as that. Always remember that striving and
struggle precede success, even in the dictionary. We must be doing
something about bringing our dreams into the world every day, even if we
only have fifteen minutes out of every twentyfour hours to concentrate
on our calling. Is there a phone call you can make? A letter you can
send? One page that you can write? A mailing list you can get yourself
on? Five pages of a book you can read? An organization in your dream
field that you can volunteer your way into? You'll be amazed at the
power of fifteen focused minutes. "With a heart for any fate ..."
Opening our hearts to the possibility of failing is easier said than
done. That's why we have to surrender expectations, delivery details,
and the world's reception to Spirit. Become

open to Divine fine-tuning or finishing touches. Birthing a dream is a
collaborative effort. "Still achieving, still pursuing ..." As long as
you're actively pursuing your dream with a practical plan, you're still
achieving, even if it feels as though you're going nowhere fast. It's
been my experience that the very moment I feel like giving up, I'm only
one step from a breakthrough. Hang on long enough and circumstances will
change, too. Trust in yourself, your dream and Spirit. "Learn to labor
and to wait." This is the most difficult of Longfellow's suggestions.
Most of the time we wait much longer for a dream to manifest itself in
our lives than we ever imagined we would have to at its conception.
That's because our concept of time and Spirit's are not the same. Be
extra kind to yourself while waiting, making it as pleasurable as
possible. Remember, the longer it takes for a dream to make itself
manifest, the more comfortable you'll feel owning your talent.
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 12

Uncommon Women and Others Our aspirations are our possibilities.
---SAMUEL JOHNSON

When we're twenty-five," Rita declares, "we'll be pretty incredible."
Rita is one of seven Mount Holyoke seniors featured in Wendy
Wasserstein's play Uncommon Women and Others. The young women are about
to leave their privileged and sheltered college existence to seek fame
and fortune in the real world. They will discover that fulfillment is a
lifelong process, even for uncommon women. At the end of the play, six
years later, their lives have changed in unexpected ways, but Rita still
has high hopes: "When we're forty-five, we can be pretty amazing."
Uncommon Women and Others' first professional reading was during the
summer of 1977 at the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford,
Connecticut---an elite, idyllic, three-week summer camp for the
country's most promising young playwrights and theater critics. Each
year ten new plays are selected from the thousands submitted in hopes of
receiving a high-gloss polishing by the professional actors, actresses,
directors, and script doctors who are assigned to each young playwright.
After two weeks of preparation, showcase evenings are performed in the
handsome white wooden barn and attended by representatives of regional
theaters around the country and off-Broadway. Everyone who visits the
beautiful farm overlooking the Long Island Sound is searching for the
next season's hit. Of course they're supposed to be focusing on promise,
but it's the next Sure Thing that always has the famous and near-famous
buzzing in the O'Neill Center's cafeteria line. Although it didn't
receive the most attention during the session, Wasserstein's play turned
out to be the jewel in the O'Neill's crown that

summer, launching a major career for her as well as for some of the
actresses who appeared in the New York production: Glenn Close, Swoozie
Kurtz, and Jill Eikenberry. In 1988, Wasserstein's promise was confirmed
when she won both the Tony Award and the Pulitzer Prize for her play The
Heidi Chronicles. Like the self-absorbed Uncommon characters, most of
the playwrights, actors, directors, and critics at the O'Neill Center
were very full of themselves---puffed up with their reputations or
potential. However, I remember Wendy Wasserstein as a rather shy, funny,
and self-deprecating young woman who stood apart from the glitterati.
She seemed much more focused on the work at hand---which was getting her
play into shape for a professional production---rather than on making
contacts. Of course, it was precisely because she concentrated on
calling forth her authentic gifts that the play was eventually such a
success and the theater world began lining up to contact her. One of the
most wonderful truths you will discover on the path to authenticity is
that your aspirations are your possibilities. "Each year I resolve to
believe there will be possibilities," Wendy Wasserstein confides now.
"Every year I resolve to be a little less the me I know and leave a
little room for the me I could be. Every year I make a note not to feel
left behind by my friends and family who have managed to change far more
than I." This passion for authenticity is what makes Wendy Wasserstein
not only an uncommon woman but an extraordinary one. And it can for you
as well. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 13

Thoughts on Success A tragic irony of life is that we so often achieve
success or financial independence after the reason for which we sought
it has passed. ---ELLEN GLASGOW

Few women believe they are successful because they don't feel
successful. In the deepest recesses of our hearts, we feel like
failures---counterfeits, frauds. But even if we know we are successful,
we rarely admit it. The world does not like braggarts. And we want the
world---every last person in it---to like us. We suffer from a potent
combination of public and private conditioning over a lifetime.
Webster's Dictionary defines success as "the attaining of a desired
end," as well as "the attainment of wealth, favor or eminence." When we
succeed, we "prosper, thrive, flourish." When we don't, we want to sink
to the center of the earth until the shame subsides. Success and failure
are a black-andwhite issue. It's good or bad. It's a lucky break or
tough luck. Actually it's none of these things. Failure and success are
the yin and yang of achievement, the two forces in the Universe over
which we have absolutely no control. We keep forgetting that all we can
control is our response to failure and success. During the Victorian
era, success, power, and wealth were considered physical manifestations
of Providence's divine approval. They still are. William James
considered the pursuit of success "our national disease" and cautioned
that the "exclusive worship of the bitch goddess" could kill you if you
weren't careful. Few Victorians believed him. A century later, even
though we can see the bodies dropping all around us, we still don't
believe him. We must never forget that what the world giveth, the world
can taketh away---and frequently does.

Most of us were not taught that there are two kinds of success: worldly
and authentic. But in order to live happy and fulfilled lives, we need
to know the difference between what's Real and what's not, because
success is part of Life University's required curriculum. There is
absolutely nothing wrong with the pursuit of worldly success and
financial independence; I'm pursuing it as I write this meditation. But
Simple Abundance has taught me, as I know it will teach you, that
authentic success is living by your own lights, not the glare of popping
flashbulbs. And they can't take that away from us. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 14

Giving Yourself Credit It was the first operatic mountain I climbed, and
the view from it was astounding, exhilarating, stupefying. ---LEONTYNE
PRICE

One of the reasons women often don't feel successful is we never give
ourselves credit. Should we slip for a moment and bask in the glow of
accomplishment, we immediately feel the need to downplay our
achievement, especially in front of our family and friends. Before we
know it, we're practically denying we ever attained anything. But many
successful people do revel in their achievements, covering the walls of
their offices and homes with their photographs, and magazine covers,
displaying golden statuettes and awards on their mantels or in specially
built cabinets. They've succeeded, and not only does the world applaud
them, they congratulate themselves. Do you remember the song we used to
sing as children on lengthy family car trips? "The bear went over the
mountain, the bear went over the mountain, the bear went over the
mountain, and what do you think he saw? He saw another mountain, he saw
another mountain, he saw another mountain, and what do you think he did?
He climbed that other mountain, he climbed that other mountain...." And
so on, until our parents wanted to shoot him, strangle us, or maybe
both! Many women suffer from the climbing-bear syndrome. We scale one
mountain after another, overcome every obstacle, smash the glass
ceiling. But is the promotion savored? Do we celebrate graduating from
night school, closing the deal, delivering the goods? No! We shrug off
our personal triumphs as if they were flukes, then wonder why we feel so
unfulfilled.

If we trace this unnurturing behavior back to its source, many of us
will find ourselves standing quietly, waiting patiently for the parental
approval that never came, no matter what we achieved. Decades later,
because we have been conditioned to believe that nothing we do is ever
good enough, we continue this destructive cycle of withholding approval
from ourselves. Once, over a five-year period, I wrote and narrated a
twelve-part series for public radio, launched a nationally syndicated
newspaper column, wrote and published two books, and gave numerous
lectures and workshops. On the surface I looked successful. Looking
back, I now recognize this frenzy to "succeed" was the climbing-bear
syndrome. But I had also succumbed to the self-destructive illusion of
believing that the next creative project would be the one that would
bring me the recognition I'd been hungering for all my life. The big
break would finally arrive, the brass ring would at last be within my
reach, or my ship would come in. Since I hadn't received recognition or
approval from my parents and certainly didn't give it to myself, the
only possible source was the outside world. Surely the world would
notice, in a meaningful way, my next project. I experienced this
awakening one day when I was rewriting my rÉsumÉ for a new venture. As I
listed my accomplishments, I wondered "Who is this woman? Do I know her?
Do I have multiple personalities?" For if detectives arrived at my door
to search for her, they wouldn't have found a shred of physical
evidence. So I started searching for clues, rescuing proof that
mountains had been climbed from cardboard boxes buried in the basement.
I took some of my favorite memorabilia---my book covers, the
announcement of my column---to the framers. When I hung them up in our
living room, I stood back and looked at them the way a stranger might.
Wow! It was astounding, exhilarating, stupefying. Then I began to
congratulate myself out loud for jobs well done. Now I seize moments of
achievement by making them concrete. Having the physical evidence of
accomplishment has gone a long way toward making me feel successful.
I've also had mementos of my husband's political career framed, and I
honor Katie's accomplishments with her own gallery in the family's
public spaces. Although it may crown you Queen for a Day, the world
cannot confer the recognition that will make you feel fulfilled. Only
you can. So chill a bottle of champagne and toast yourself upon the
completion of a creative

project, personal accomplishment, professional achievement. Can we
really afford to wait for the world's approval? "I am doomed to an
eternity of compulsive work," Bette Davis confessed in her memoir, The
Lonely Life. "No set goal achieved satisfies. Success only breeds a new
goal. The golden apple devoured has seeds. It is endless."
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 15

Authentic Success We must all pay with the current coin of life For the
honey that we taste. ---RACHEL BLUMSTEIN

Authentic success is different for each of us. No single definition fits
all because we come in all sizes. One autumn afternoon years ago, while
wandering through an abandoned cemetery, I discovered a wonderful
definition of authentic success inscribed on the headstone of a woman
who died in 1820: "The only pain she ever caused was when she left us."
Authentic success is having time enough to pursue personal pursuits that
bring you pleasure, time enough to make the loving gestures for your
family you long to do, time enough to care for your home, tend your
garden, nurture your soul. Authentic success is never having to tell
yourself or those you love, "maybe next year." Authentic success is
knowing that if today were your last day on earth, you could leave
without regret. Authentic success is feeling focused and serene when you
work, not fragmented. It's knowing that you've done the best that you
possibly can, no matter what circumstances you faced; it's knowing in
your soul that the best you can do is all you can do, and that the best
you can do is always enough. Authentic success is accepting your
limitations, making peace with your past, and reveling in your passions
so that your future may unfold according to a Divine Plan. It's
discovering and calling forth your gifts and offering them to the world
to help heal its ravaged heart. It's making a difference in other lives
and believing that if you can do that for just one person each day,
through a smile, a shared laugh, a caress, a kind word, or a helping
hand, blessed are you among women.

Authentic success is not just money in the bank but a contented heart
and peace of mind. It's earning what you feel you deserve for the work
you do and knowing that you're worth it. Authentic success is paying
your bills with ease, taking care of all your needs and the needs of
those you love, indulging some wants, and having enough left over to
save and share. Authentic success is not about accumulating but letting
go, because all you have is all you truly need. Authentic success is
feeling good about who you are, appreciating where you've been,
celebrating your achievements, and honoring the distance you've already
come. Authentic success is reaching the point where being is as
important as doing. It's the steady pursuit of a dream. It's realizing
that no matter how much time it takes for a dream to come true in the
physical world, no day is ever wasted. It's valuing inner, as well as
outer, labor---both your own and others'. It's elevating labor to a
craft and craft to an art by bestowing Love on every task you undertake.
Authentic success is knowing how simply abundant your life is exactly as
it is today. Authentic success is being so grateful for the many
blessings bestowed on you and yours that you can share your portion with
others. Authentic success is living each day with a heart overflowing.
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 16

The Fear of Success The conflict between what one is and who one is
expected to be touches all of us. And sometimes, rather than reach for
what one could be, we choose the comfort of the failed role, preferring
to be the victim of circumstance, the person who didn't have a chance.
---MERLE SHAIN

Many women fear success much more than failure. Failure we can handle,
failure feels familiar. But success means we must leave our comfort
zone, the well-padded perimeter of predictability. Whether or not we
like or admit it, a woman's success is secondary to her relationships.
We fear success because we fear the impact it will have (and it most
assuredly will), not only on our own lives, but on the lives of those we
love. Even the financial rewards of success don't entirely belong to us,
unless we're single and without children or elderly parents to care for.
If we're not, the checks may have our name on them, but they go to pay
grocery bills, tuition, winter coats, car repairs, braces, summer camp,
vacations, home improvements, social security supplements. Millions of
women are also responsible for mortgages or rent, utilities, food,
health insurance and much, much more. Why should it come as a surprise
that personal indulgences become figments of feminine imagination? As
for relationships, if you're single and reach a certain level of success
(not to mention a certain age), you worry about meeting a man who won't
be intimidated by your achievements or your income. If you're married,
you worry about how your success will affect your relationship with your
husband. It is one of life's paradoxes that the higher a woman ascends
in the world, the more the earth rumbles beneath her on the home front.
This is because success questions the validity of the unspoken covenant
we make

when we say "I do." (Unfortunately, many of the emotional and economic
assumptions we have when we utter these words are based on where we are
at the time, not on where we're headed.) If she has children, a woman's
ascent is thwarted by an even stronger gravitational pull than the
discomfort of her partner. Nothing weighs more than maternal guilt. Men
(with some exceptions) rarely work around the needs of their children;
women rarely work any other way. The novelist Fay Weldon was once asked
why she wrote longer sentences in her later novels. She answered that it
was because as her children grew older, she had fewer interruptions. So
we fear success with good reason. We've got a lot at stake. Success
brings change, and change is uncomfortable. But by attempting to achieve
one challenge at a time, we redefine success for ourselves and those we
love. As we become more comfortable with our accomplishments, we learn
that success doesn't have to pull, tug, or chafe if we wear our real
size. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 17

Having Your Cake and Eating It, Too Life itself is the proper binge.
---JULIA CHILD

Authentic success and worldly success are not mutally exclusive.
Granted, it is easier to achieve them one at a time, but pursuing both
is not the impossible dream once you realize the important distinctions
between the two. We need not choose between them. We must only discern
which of the two helps us care for our soul and the souls of those we
love, and pursue that one first. The Bible tells us we cannot serve two
masters---God and money. But what about having your cake and eating it,
too? On this, the scripture is silent. Actually, it's quite possible to
eat and have, provided you bake two cakes at the same time. Any cook
knows that doubling the amount of your batter is no big deal. But going
into the kitchen to make a second cake after you've baked and iced your
first and washed the dirty dishes requires a tremendous amount of
psychic and physical energy. That's why you need to double your dreams
when you conceive them; doubling the size of your dream creates space
for a lifestyle based on authentic success, but it can be iced with as
much worldly success as you are willing to pay for with the coin of
life. Some of us like sweets more than others. "Success is important
only to the extent that it puts one in a position to do more things one
likes to do," Sarah Caldwell tells us. I love baking cakes. How about
you? OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 18

The Gift of Failure Flops are part of life's menu and I'm never a girl
to miss out on a course. ---ROSALIND RUSSELL

In the eyes of the world, Clare Booth Luce was one of the most
successful women in the twentieth century. She was a playwright and
author, a twoterm Congresswoman, and Ambassador to Italy. She was also a
mother and the wife of publishing magnate Henry Luce, cofounder of Life
and Time magazines. But this extraordinary woman confessed that she
often thought "if I were to write my autobiography, my title would be
The Autobiography of a Failure." Now I ask you, if Clare Booth Luce felt
this way about herself and her brilliant career, what hope is there for
the rest of us? Gratefully, there is a great deal of hope as long as we
stay on the path to authenticity. Clare Booth Luce felt like a failure
because she believed she had lived inauthentically, having not followed
her true calling. "I would say my worst failure, paradoxically, was a
rather long-drawn-out series of relative successes, none of which were
in theater. In other words, my failure was not to return to the real
vocation I had, which was writing. I don't remember from childhood ever
wanting to do or be anything except a writer." To begin with, she never
wanted to run for Congress, it was entirely her husband's idea; Henry
Luce was a powerful man because he knew how to wield power for his own
benefit. Clare Booth's theatrical career was thriving (she had written
five plays) when she married Luce in 1935, and her play The Women became
a smash hit on Broadway the following year. But her husband believed
that theater was an avocation, nothing more than

"night work." So, when Clare Booth added Luce to her name, she
reluctantly sublimated her passion. After two terms in Congress, she
tried to resign from political life to resume her writing. Then, in
rapid succession, came a series of staggering losses: the deaths of her
mother, brother, and of her only child, a daughter, in an accident. For
Clare Booth Luce, life came to an abrupt halt, and it was a long time
before she felt able to continue as an active participant. After a
while, she began to tell herself, "Maybe you're not a writer. Maybe
you'll never be a writer again." And although she did eventually write
articles and books, she never went back to her first love, the theater.
She mourned the path she had abandoned for the rest of her life. Clare
Booth Luce s loss was a hidden one, Carole Hyatt and Linda Gottlieb tell
us in their inspirational and practical primer on surmounting failure,
When Smart People Fail: Rebuilding Yourself for Success. "Hidden
failures suffer less from a sharp sense of loss than a chronic sense of
disappointment. But they suffer nonetheless, longing somehow to change,
often as scared and ashamed as those who have been fired. How many
people, laid off jobs through no fault of their own, nevertheless feel
they have somehow failed? How many of us feel stuck in jobs we hate, are
terrified to risk change, and despise ourselves for doing less than our
best? Often at the very moment the world is praising us, we know in some
corner of our minds that we have failed our own best hopes." Each one of
us is terrified of failing. But whether we risk it all or play it safe,
we cannot avoid failure---public or hidden---all our lives. "Real
strength comes from knowing we can survive," Carole Hyatt and Linda
Gottlieb reassure us. Failure stretches us beyond our conscious capacity
so that we can grow into our authentic selves. This is failure's
generous gift. In life the worst thing that can happen isn't failing.
It's never having tried. "Seen in that light, smart people can never
fail." OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 19

Affinities Oh, it's delightful to have ambitions.... And there never
seems to be any end to them---that's the best of it. Just as soon as you
attain to one ambition you see another one glittering higher up still.
It does make life so interesting. ---ANNE SHIRLEY (L. M. MONTGOMERY)

Ambition is achievement's soul mate. Action is the matchmaker that
brings these affinities together so that sparks can begin to fly and we
can set the world on fire. We think highly of achievement. He's a fine
fellow---honorable, desirable, the perfect gentleman. But ambition is
considered more of a tramp than a lady, a vixen rather than a virtue. If
her passion and power aren't creatively and constructively channeled,
she could turn on the one who invoked her presence. Just as electricity
can be life enhancing or destructive, so can ambition. What ambition
really needs is a new press agent. The only time we ever hear about her
is when she's blamed for somebody's downfall. But ambition only becomes
dangerous when, blinded by her charms, we become easy marks for greed.
When the soul is impoverished, the ego is easily seduced. Greed is a
very effective pimp for the dark side. It's no wonder that many women
flee from authenticity. It's too dangerous to admit, even to ourselves,
that we possess not only aspirations but ambitions. But what if ambition
is a gift of Spirit? What if ambition is part of the authentic package,
generously bestowed on us all when we were given our personal gifts? If
sex can be both sacred and profane, if power blesses as well as
destroys, why should the nature of ambition be any different? What

if we are supposed to be ambitious? What if our refusal to channel our
ambitions for our highest good, the highest good of those we love and
the rest of the world, is the real corruption of Power? Think of all
that could be accomplished if women cherished their ambitions and
brought them into the Light where they belong. Think of how our lives
could be transformed if we respected ambition and gave grateful thanks
for being entrusted with such a miraculous gift. One thing is certain.
We cannot achieve without ambition. Action--- ambition in motion---is
what produces achievement. "All serious daring starts from within,"
EudoraWelty reminds us. Today the most serious daring you might engage
in is an unusual creative brainstorming session. Invite ambition to sit
down with your authentic self. Tell her what you'd like to achieve.
Listen to her suggestions. Then take a closer look. Those horns you
think you see might actually be a slightly off-center halo.
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 20

The Enemy Within We have met the enemy and he is us. ---POGO (WALT
KELLY)

It's hard to accept that you can be your own worst enemy. In fact, this
realization is so painful that we go to great lengths to prove
otherwise. It's always fate, circumstances, or lousy luck that messes up
our best-laid plans. When all you encounter is disappointment after
disappointment as you pursue your dreams, it's natural to start feeling
sorry for yourself. But if you constantly think the chips are stacked
against you or that the cards are marked, pray today for the courage to
check out the dealer at your game of chance. Does she seem a bit
familiar? She should, because she's your authentic self's evil twin: the
ego. The ego has everything to lose once your authentic self grows
strong enough to act consciously on your behalf, guiding your creative
choices, decisions, ambitions, and actions for your Highest Good. What
was standard operating procedure before---denial, sublimation,
repression---is recognized for what it is: subtle self-abuse. When you
become authentic, you become greater than you ever thought you could be,
and this greatness allows you to heal yourself, your family, and your
world. Your authentic self is your ego's worst nightmare, and the ego
will do everything in its power to eliminate her rival's influence from
your daily round. The way the ego goes about this is to bring out the
heavy guns: fear and intimidation. Fear has derailed more dreams than we
can ever know. Physical distress ---a racing heart, pounding head,
nervous stomach---is the first assault when we edge to the perimeter of
our comfort zone. It's a natural, primordial instinct, a remnant of the
fight-or-flight syndrome. But although it may feel excruciating, making
a telephone call, speaking up during a business

meeting, or dropping off your portfolio with a prospective employer is
not the same as fighting off the charge of a woolly mammoth. We don't
have to run scared. We do have to learn to recognize the physical
manifestations of fear and acknowledge them. The next time you're
physically sick at the thought of leaving your comfort zone, calmly
reassure your conscious self that the feeling of fear is passing through
you and will dissipate as long as you keep on moving forward. Many
actresses are so scared that they feel nauseous just before walking on
stage, but they've learned how to transform fear into the creative
energy of forward motion. They burst through to the other side of stage
fright to applause. Intimidation works differently from naked fear.
She's a shapechanger, capable of adopting different guises to control
you. The moment you step bravely out from the bounds of your comfort
zone, she's likely to rise up inside you like a lion tamer, complete
with whip and chair. "Get back!" she'll scream. "Who do you think you
are? You'll make a fool of yourself! You're risking your marriage!
You're neglecting your children! Get back to your cage immediately!"
When these scare tactics are no longer effective, intimidation often
takes another shape, as the voice of reason: "Look, I don't want to
alarm you but...You know you've taken on quite a lot, I wouldn't if I
were you ..." The worst thing about intimidation is that she knows all
our buttons and just when to push them. But if she doesn't succeed with
scare tactics, she'll kill your dreams with kindness. She's your best
friend: she'll enable you to dig your own creative grave by handing you
the shovel. She's the only one who knows how tired you really are, so
she'll encourage you to take a nap instead of writing prospecting
letters. She understands that you just don't have much time for
relaxation, so what's the harm of a catching a soap opera in the early
afternoon instead of working on your rÉsumÉ before the kids come home
from school? Relax, she tells you, "You've got plenty of time. ... If it
doesn't get taken care of today, there's always tomorrow ..." If none of
the above works because now you're older, wiser, and more experienced,
she'll begin a whispering campaign, sounding very similar to your
intuitive voice. How will you know the difference? If the suggestion you
hear doesn't bring you a sense of peace, it is not the voice of jour
authentic self. It's the ego in one of her many guises. Tell her to shut
up.

Then turn on some beautiful music that uplifts, inspires, and drowns her
out. Today, just begin observing your behavior pattern. Every
woman---even the megastars whose lives seem so glamorous---experiences
ambivalence about success. One significant quality found in the women we
admire is that they have identified their personal patterns of
self-sabotage and learned to let their own best friend---their authentic
self---outsmart the enemy within. And so can you. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 21

The Spiral Path My joy, my grief, my hope, my love, Did all within this
circle move! ---EDMUND WALLER

I am often asked if I am now living authentically after following the
Simple Abundance path for the last four years. Some moments, some hours,
some days feel wholly right, completely authentic. And more frequently
than not, I can attest that my conversations with family, friends,
colleagues, even aquaintances and strangers are authentic encounters. So
are my choices, even the difficult ones, and my joys, my griefs, my
hopes, my loves. But every minute of every day is not yet authentic. I
think it takes an entire lifetime to live authentically. It is the
striving to be authentic that makes you so, not the end result. When you
think you've arrived, you realize you've come all this way just to
prepare yourself to begin again. The biggest surprise on the soulful
journey to authenticity, whether as a philosophy or a spiritual path, is
that the path is a spiral. We go up, but we go in circles. Each time
around, the view gets a little bit wider. The psychologist Carl Jung
believed that our spiritual experience of "the Self," which I call the
authentic self, could only be truly realized by "circumambulating." The
ancients revered the power of the circle. In the African tradition, as
well as in Disney movies, our earthly span is called "the circle of
life." Black Elk, the leader of the Oglala Sioux, taught that "The power
of the world always works in circles." Buddhist and Hindu pilgrims
circle the base of Tibet's Mount Kailas as an act of worship. Muslims
circle the Kabah in Mecca. For thousands of years the creation of
mandalas---circular, geometric designs---has been part of both Eastern
and Western spiritual

traditions. Seekers create personal mandalas in order to invoke the
sacred through the visual. Circles are found at sacred sites throughout
the world. There is a circular maze at the base of Chartres Cathedral in
France. The gigantic prehistoric sculptures at Stonehenge, England, form
a circle. The communion host offered at Catholic mass is a round wafer.
If we search for circles, we will find them everywhere. Plato believed
the soul was a circle. If it is, and the authentic self is the Soul made
visible, how could our awakening to authenticity be straight and not
circular? I am reminded of just how much of a spiral the authentic
journey is when I get stuck in a set of circumstances from which escape
seems impossible. When this occurs, I ask myself, "What's the lesson
here, so that I can move on?" I usually discover that I've stopped using
the principles of Simple Abundance as my stepping-stones to Wholeness.
I've been too busy to write in my gratitude journal; I've begun dropping
in my tracks because I've been unable to say "no"; I'm cranky because my
house is cluttered and I can't find anything; I'm frazzled because I've
let myself forget that moments of solitude and meditation are necessary
to center myself. I've been this route many times. I know that if I'm
not experiencing harmony in my daily round, I'm not participating in the
process. So I start again. Begin at the beginning. Make gratitude an
active rather than a passive prayer, consciously bring simplicity and
order to my daily round, honor moments of being rather than of doing.
It's not enough to know or write about Simple Abundance; it must be
lived to realize its beauty and joy. When I do resume living by my own
lights, I usually discover that I'm able to move on. But even if I can't
change my outside circumstances, Simple Abundance enables me to change
how I react to them. "The life we want is not merely the one we have
chosen and made," poet Wendell Berry tells us. "It is the one we must be
choosing and making." OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 22

Real Life Has a Steep Learning Curve I would like to learn, or remember,
how to live. ---ANNIE DILLARD

Now the revelations come very quickly and from all quarters because
you're ready to start making connections. In the Old Testament, God uses
donkeys, rocks, and burning bushes to deliver Divine messages, so don't
question the validity of what you hear or how you hear it if the truth
resonates within. You might be reading a story, watching a video, or
chatting casually with a friendly grocery clerk. Don't cut yourself off
from sources of inspiration. One of the quantum leaps that comes about
on the Simple Abundance path is the sudden awareness that you've spent
your entire life going backward instead of forward. You may have
believed that seeking a spiritual path was all about submission,
sacrifice, and suffering and that only the worldly path could provide
freedom, fulfillment, and good fortune. Then, one morning---maybe even
this morning---you make a connection. And when you do, you realize that
you have to unlearn practically everything you've taken for
granted---chapter and verse. Don't panic. This really isn't as hard as
it sounds. Has the other path worked? Have any of the world's gifts
given you authentic happiness? Has the perfect job, relationship, house,
money, or anything else you thought would do it for you, fulfilled you
for longer than a week? So trust your experiences and impulses; you've
had them for a reason. Real Life has a steep learning curve, but once
you respond from personal knowledge instead of by rote, it's easier than
you might have thought. What's more, Real Life actually becomes fun.

Here's what I think happens. Just before we come to earth to begin this
life, we are given a photograph of our futures---the Divine Plan---to
get us excited about the great adventure ahead. As the photo pops out of
the celestial camera, we're in such a hurry to get on with it, we grab
the negative instead of the photograph. Now we've got the pattern of a
fabulous life, but the perspective is reversed. What's white looks
black. What's black appears white. We've got the big picture, but it's
backward. So we cry when we should be laughing, are envious when we
should feel inspired, experience deprivation instead of abundance, do it
the hard way instead of the easy way, pull back instead of reaching out.
And worst of all, we close our hearts so we won't get hurt, when opening
them is the only way we'll ever know joy. How many times have we waited
for Spirit to move for us, when in fact, Spirit is waiting to work with
us? Today, take the negative of your Divine Plan and let Love develop it
so that you can begin living the life for which you were created. It's
time to move forward. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 23

For Thine Is the Kingdom, and the Power, and the Glory When I look into
future, it's so bright it burns my eyes. ---OPRAH WINFREY

Several years ago I read a profile of Oprah Winfrey in The New York
Times magazine. In it she expressed her belief that the concept of God
never giving us more than we can handle refers to much more than just
the stoic bearing of pain and suffering. God's giving also includes the
goodies--- wealth, worldly success, power. If you think you're not
strong enough to bear the Glory, rest assured, it will be withheld until
you believe you can and ask for it. Today, meditate on this possibility.
I know I've been thinking about it for years and it's just beginning to
register. We know that Power is available to each of us, every moment of
every day, but we have to ask that the spiritual switch be turned on.
Next, we've got to be ready to bear the Glory. We prepare ourselves by
gradually growing into our talents, one creative challenge at a time.
With each accomplishment that is personally acknowledged and celebrated,
our selfconfidence increases, and we begin to trust our abilities.
Furthermore, we realize we weren't intended to do this alone. That takes
care of the Power and the Glory. Now what about the Kingdom? Spiritual
seekers are told to search for the Kingdom of Heaven before anything
else. Could the Kingdom of Heaven be an authentic life? I believe so.
Because once you find your authentic path and follow it, all the other
puzzle pieces start to fall into place: the money, the job, the
relationship.

Joseph Campbell tells us to "follow our bliss" if we want life to be
rich, deep, and meaningful. Follow your bliss and doors will open.
Follow your bliss, and you'll get on the track created especially for
you at the beginning of time. Could your bliss and an authentic life be
one and the same? What if, whatever it is that makes you ecstatic,
brings you joy, sends you soaring, satisfies your hunger, fulfills your
yearning, ignites your passion, makes you reach out to others, and gives
you peace---in other words, your bliss--- is also the Kingdom of Heaven?
"Thy kingdom come, thy will be done, on earth as it is in heaven ..."
"Only connect!" E. M. Forster urges us. "Only connect the prose and the
passion, and both will be exalted, and human love will be seen at its
height. Live in fragments no longer. Only connect, and the ... isolation
that is life ... will die." "Only connect." Then and only then can the
Kingdom and the Power and the Glory be yours. Forever and ever. Amen.
OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 24

Do What You Love and the Money Will Follow---or So They Say Do what you
love, and the money will follow. ---MARSHA SINETAR

I love the optimism of this quotation, and I believe it's true. If
you've not read her, Marsha Sinetar can make a believer out of you as
well. I think you'll find her book (by the same title) a practical and
inspirational primer on getting your passion to pay off. Sinetar is
actually not the first to advise us along these lines. Countless sages,
poets, and philosophers have done so, though each has put it
differently. One of Buddha's main steps for achieving enlightenment, for
example, is discovering your right livelihood. And at the other end of
the spectrum, John D. Rockefeller believed that the power to make money
was a gift from God, which is simply another way of saying, "Do what you
love and the money will follow." But still we ask: Does it really? Yes.
But not the way you're used to getting it. In the first place, the money
usually doesn't come all at once, especially in the beginning. In the
second place, the money will come from unexpected sources. But it will
come, and here's why. When you start following your authentic path,
you're finally using the gifts Spirit expects you to use. You're
actively searching for the Kingdom of Heaven here on earth. You're
holding up your end of the bargain. Spirit's part of the pact is to make
sure you have everything you need to make you truly happy. This includes
money. Spirit knows that the rate of exchange used here on earth is
cash, not clamshells or

sheep. But the rate of exchange in Heaven is wonder. Doing what you love
is not about money, it's about wonder. As soon as you understand you're
supposed to be asking for wonder instead of money, you'll start
experiencing abundance. Trust me, doing what you love does eventually
lead to the ATM. But you might have a few detours before you get there.
Which brings us to the third and final caveat: We must not tell Spirit
how the money should be delivered, when it should arrive, or in what
denomination. This is not a ransom. Spirit's been delivering the goods
for a long time now. Spirit doesn't need our input, although it's been
my experience that friendly suggestions and reminders every now and then
about exactly what bills need to be paid doesn't seem out of line.
Essentially what happens when you begin to do what you love is that you
get a new employer: Spirit. Spirit always pays us in proportion to how
hard we work. It's probably the first time that many of us will find
ourselves being compensated fairly. But the paycheck doesn't arrive
every Friday or even once a month. I don't want to scare you, but
sometimes it can even take years. Still, it does arrive. And the first
time you get paid for doing what you love to do will be one of the most
thrilling moments of your life. It's worth the wait. It's glorious. It's
bliss. It's nothing less than experiencing Heaven on earth. As the
English novelist Enid Bagnold reminds us, "There may be wonder in money,
but, dear God, there is money in wonder." OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 25

If One Woman Has Done It, So Can You--- And If Not, Why Not You? I've
always believed that one woman's success can only help another woman's
success. ---GLORIA VANDERBILT

If there's something you want to do with your life and another woman has
done it before you, there's no reason you can't achieve it too. And if
no woman has ever done what you dream of doing, there's no reason you
can't be the first. Someone has to be. Who are the women you most
admire? Why? Find out everything you can about their lives because they
have secrets to share with you. In 1908, Napoleon Hill was a college
student and a fledgling freelance writer. He obtained an interview with
Andrew Carnegie, who was then the world's richest man. Hill wanted to
write a profile that would reveal Carnegie's secrets for accumulating
his vast fortune. Carnegie was so impressed with the young man that the
initial three-hour interview stretched into three days. During this time
Carnegie asked Hill if he would be willing to devote the next twenty
years to one of the millionaire's pet projects: interviewing other
successful entrepreneurs and distilling their success secrets into a
formula that average men and women could use to achieve their dreams.
Carnegie offered Hill no financial incentive but he did promise him
introductions to such famous men as Thomas Edison, Henry Ford, Harvey
Firestone, and Luther Burbank. Hill jumped at the chance. The result was
an immensely successful writing career that eventually led in 1937 to
the publication of Hill's philosophy of personal achievement,

Think and Grow Rich. Coming as it did in the midst of the Great
Depression, the book's uplifting message, "Whatever the mind can
conceive and believe ... it can achieve," captured the country's
imagination. Hill's book eventually became one of the most influential
ever published, selling over ten million copies. It spawned the
self-actualization publishing genre. One of the secrets that Hill
discovered was that many successful dreamers enjoy personal reveries
with their role models. Hill suggests creating an imaginary council with
a group of "Invisible Counselors," composed of the people you most
admire. At night before you go to sleep, close your eyes and conduct
success strategy sessions in which you seek the advice of your heroines.
While the meetings are "purely imaginary," Hill believes they make us
more "receptive to ideas, thoughts, and knowledge" which reaches us
through our sixth sense, intuition. If your role models are alive and
achieving, think of them as clearing the brush for you. Follow their
tracks. Research everything you can about their personal journeys. Do
they make personal appearances, give lectures or workshops you can
attend? Join women's business associations, network at conferences, ask
for advice and occasionally look down at the floor. Someone has laid
down a path for you to follow. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 26

The Tao of Success Nothing in the world can take the place of
Persistence. Talent will not; nothing is more commonplace than
unsuccessful men with talent. Genius will not; unrewarded genius is
almost a proverb. Education alone will not; the world is foil of
educated derelicts. Persistence and Determination alone are omnipotent.
---CALVIN COOLIDGE

This is the Tao of success---the Way---and like every other truth, it's
at once very simple and very difficult. Not the understanding as much as
the doing, because the Tao of success is Patience and Persistence.
Patience is the art of waiting. Like all high arts, it takes time to
master, which shouldn't be surprising, since patience is the knowledge
of time. How to use time to your advantage, how to be at the right place
at the right time, how to pick your moments, how to bite your tongue.
Patience is discovering the mysterious pattern of cycles that cradle the
Universe and ensure that everything that has happened once will recur.
Perseverance in life is being steadfast; persistence is being stubborn.
Persistence is grittier than perseverance. Perseverance is achievement's
perspiration; persistence is its sweat. Persistence is knocking on
Heaven's doors so often and so loudly on behalf of your dreams that
eventually you'll be given what you want, just to shut you up. For
example, think of an eleven-year-old child who wants to get her ears
pierced sooner than her sixteenth birthday, the age her old-fashioned
mother thinks is appropriate. The first request, even if it comes in a
burst of emotion, doesn't succeed. Nor does the second, the third, or
even the fourth. But the child who goes at you, morning, afternoon, and
night, week after week, month after month;

this child's voice is water to the rock of your reason. This stubborn
but patient child wears you down, which is why you end up at the mall on
her twelfth birthday, shaking your head as you pay to adorn her earlobes
with tiny gold balls. The potent alchemy of patience and persistence,
which together become endurance, must have been what the Lebanese poet
Hoda al-Namai was meditating on when she wrote: I have not withdrawn
into despair, I did not go mad in gathering honey, I did not go mad, I
did not go mad, I did not go mad. If you are determined to gather life's
honey, to stick your hand into the hive again and again and again, to be
stung so many times that you become numb to the pain, to persevere and
persist till those who know and love you become unable to think of you
as a fairly normal woman, you will not be called mad. You will be called
authentic. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 27

Only the Heart Knows Only the heart knows how to find what is precious.
---FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY

When Anna Quindlen, the Pulitizer Prize-winning columnist for The New
York Times, stepped off journalism's fast track to devote her time,
emotion, and creative energy to writing novels and raising her three
children full time, her peers were aghast, and her woman readers were
astonished. Half her readers---women who had decided to put family
before career--- applauded her choice. The other half---women who were
trying desperately to raise happy kids and work full time---felt
betrayed. Anna Quindlen was not just Supermom, but the archetype for
women who wanted to have it all. Her personal decision resurrected the
old debate between mothers with careers versus mothers who work at home.
If she couldn't take the juggling any longer, what hope was there for
the rest of us? But Anna Quindlen's creative choice wasn't about career
versus family. It was about worldly success versus authentic success.
She dreamed of writing novels instead of newspaper columns. She wanted
to be there when her children came home from school. She wanted to live
by her own lights. She wanted to listen to her heart. And she had the
financial means to do so. Only the heart knows what's working in our
lives. The heart is our authentic compass. If we consult her, the heart
can tell us if we're headed in the right direction. But the heart also
tells us when we've made a wrong turn or when it's time for a U-turn.
For a lot of us, this is information we don't want to know. Knowing
might mean choice, and choice often means change. I don't doubt that
there are ten million women who would love to make the choice that Anna
Quindlen did, but they're not in the financial position

to do so. But just because you can't do it today or tomorrow doesn't
mean you can't ever do it. Dreams deferred come true every day. Delay
doesn't mean denial. The heart does not charge for consultations,
conversations, creative brainstorming sessions, or carrying a dream from
conception to delivery, no matter how long it takes. "Dreams pass into
the reality of action," Anaïs Nin reassures us. "From the action stems
the dream again; and this interdependence produces the highest form of
living." OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 28

A Time for Everything There is a time for everything, And a season for
every activity under heaven. ---ECCLESIASTES 3:1

Yes, but they are not the same time. You cannot raise happy, secure,
emotionally well-adjusted children, revel in a fabulous marriage, and
work a sixty-hour week. You want to, I know. So do I. But we can't. It
is physically, emotionally, psychologically, and spiritually impossible.
We have tried. We have failed. We cannot circumvent the laws of Heaven
and Earth just because it would be convenient. Just because it would fit
nicely into our plans. We have tried. We have failed. When we cannot do
it all at the same time, we are meant to do only some of it. In order to
find out what that "some" is to be, we need to ask: What is it I truly
want right now? What is it I truly need? How do I get it? How much does
it cost in life's currency? This might be the season for you to wipe a
runny nose. That doesn't mean the season of running your own business
won't occur. This might be the season of living out of a suitcase. That
doesn't mean the season of restoring a colonial farmhouse will never
come. Making deals doesn't mean that someday you won't be making school
lunches. The seasons of life are not meant to be frenetic, just full.
"You probably can have it all," Anna Quindlen muses. "Just not all at
the same time. And ... you might have to make certain compromises when
your children are small. But your children are going to be small for a
very short period of time ... it will go by in a blink of an eye, and
you will only be 40,

50, or 60 with another 15 or 25 years ahead of you." A quarter of a
century to do what you want to do, the way you want to do it. Blessed is
the woman who knows her own limits. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 29

Self-Nurturing on the Job When we truly care for ourselves, it becomes
possible to care Jar more profoundly about other people. The more alert
and sensitive we are to our own needs, the more loving and generous we
can be toward others. ---EDA LESHAN

Rituals of self-nurturance are the mortar that holds the day together,
especially when you're spending eight to ten hours away from home. Think
of a favorite cup and indulgent brews that can be warmed in the
microwave (an assortment of coffees, teas, hot cocoa, and cider). Set
aside ten minutes at your desk with your cup and a closed door before
the day officially begins; it can center you as you thoughtfully review
what needs to be done. Ten minutes of quiet at the end of the day,
straightening the piles on your desk, looking over tomorrow's agenda,
can help bring an orderly closure to your day before you shift gears.
Ten minutes in the morning, ten minutes at night. No matter how busy we
are, we all can invest twenty minutes to preserve the precious resources
of time, creative energy, and emotion. Create a pleasing and pretty
workspace. Aim for creating a comfortable nest instead of a sterile
environment. Bring in a wonderful desk lamp, baskets and wooden boxes to
hold paper and projects, a flowering plant in the winter, and a small
bouquet of seasonal flowers in spring, summer, and fall. Find yourself a
personal talisman---an object with special meaning--- that reminds you
that you're headed in the right direction. Keep an ample supply of your
favorite pens and pencils in cups on your desk; be on the lookout for
notepads or cards that suit your idiosyncrasies and delight your senses.
My trademark is using note cards three by five inches in size that are a
cross between a business and a note card. Little civilizing details can
make a tremendous difference. Search for a handsome pillow for your
chair.

Add dashes of color wherever you can---your paperclips and folders, for
example. Hang a bulletin board near your desk for clippings, cards,
cartoons, inspiration, and reminders. If you have a private office and
can hang pictures, keep the walls blank until you find something you'll
never tire of looking at. Now create a comfort drawer. Fill it with
everything you ever wanted at work and didn't have: a small sewing kit;
safety pins; tampons; an extra pair of hose and reading glasses; pain
relief; Band-Aids and a small tube of antiseptic ointment; small packets
of tissues. Tuck in breath mints, a chocolate bar, and a couple of blank
greeting cards for quick notes to distant friends. Remember your toy box
at home? Create a small one at work for those moments when you don't
want to be or simply can't be a grown-up anymore, usually in the late
afternoon: three-dimensional puzzles, tarot cards, a yo-yo, paddleball,
pick-up sticks, Chinese health balls, Silly Putty, a miniature
kaleidoscope, or a gravity-defying bouncing ball that is the replica of
the planet Jupiter. You get the idea. Outfit a pretty cosmetic bag to
keep in your desk with dental items, deodorant, scented hand cream,
emery boards, eyedrops, comb, brush, a small spray of your favorite
cologne, in order to freshen up midday or if you can't go home before
going out in the evening. If you work in an enlightened office or have a
private one, music, especially classical selections, can be a powerful
tool for productivity. Aromatherapy can work wonders in an office
setting; get a sculptural scent diffuser (the size of a small vase). The
top of the diffuser holds a half cup of water and about five drops of
essential oils, which are heated by a votive, candle. The warm fragrant
water will discreetly put moisture back into the air around your desk
(very important in heated offices), and the scent is very soothing or
invigorating depending upon your needs. The only drawback to using
aromatherapy in the workplace is that more people might be drawn to your
desk because the environment is so pleasant. Stretch twice a day,
especially if you work at a computer for long periods of time. Read
Dr. Seuss aloud, especially Oh the Places You'll Go. Remember
feng-shui---the art of placement? Don't scoff. Does it hurt to position
your desk advantageously so that your chi, or energy, is flowing

and not blocked? No. Can it help? Yes! There must be a reason it's been
practiced for the last three thousand years. Every week or so, bring in
something good to eat (it doesn't have to be fattening) in a pretty tin
or basket to share. Treating yourself well on the job is not impossible.
It can serve as a source of inspiration to bring out your best. When
starting a new project, ask yourself, is there anything I can do to make
this task more pleasurable? If there is, do it. The therapeutic value of
treats in the workplace is probably the last thing employers think about
as a benefit, but it shouldn't be. Working happier accomplishes much
more than working harder. OceanofPDF.com

SEPTEMBER 30

Traveling on Business Is there anything as horrible as starting on a
trip? Once you're off that's all right, but the last moments are
earthquake and convulsion, and the feeling that you are a snail being
pulled off your rock. ---ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH

About this time every year, the earth starts to quake beneath the feet
of two good friends of mine who work in publishing and are compelled to
attend the international booksellers' convention held in Germany each
autumn. Some women race dogsled teams in the Iditarod, a 1,150-mile
marathon across frozen Alaskan tundra; some sell books in Frankfurt. The
grueling tactics of the two competitive events seem about even in terms
of the psychic and physical endurance required to live to tell the tale.
Fear and loathing is not too strong a description of the visceral
reaction many of us experience when a business trip looms. Actually, the
anticipation of the trip is often more horrendous than the reality, even
if it consists of seven days of smiling while attempting to strike deals
in forty different languages. But no matter what faces you on a business
trip, if you intuitively plan for yourself the way you would for a child
about to go away on her first weeklong camping trip---preparing both for
the unexpected and for maximum comfort---you'll not only cope, but have
a very good chance of enjoying the change of scene. Here are some
soothing strategies for easing hectic moments so that your trip might be
pleasant and productive. You've heard it before, but pack as lightly as
possible, leaving room in your suitcase for your favorite sleeping
pillow. This can make the difference between a good night's sleep and
tossing fitfully in a strange bed. It doesn't help to look haggard and
feel exhausted at the beginning of the trip.

Your airplane carry-on bag should be large enough to hold a complete
outfit appropriate for business, as well as your cosmetics, toiletries,
and vital business papers in a portfolio if you're not carrying a
briefcase. Should your luggage be lost or delayed, you can manage, at
least for a day. No matter what the season or where you're traveling,
pack at least a few warm items that can be layered: seasonless knits in
coordinating colors, a dressy sweater, and socks. The coldest I've ever
been was during a numbing week of Irish downpours in August; it snowed
on a trip to Paris during May; and San Francisco in June can make your
teeth chatter. Pack a portable umbrella, gloves, scarf, and hat. Wear a
raincoat with a warm removable lining. Create a comfort bag for
traveling. Mine includes a small tape recorder and earphones with
favorite tapes; small packets of nuts, crackers, and cheese; my favorite
tea in bags; a couple of small plastic bottles of mineral water and
individual-serving-size bottles of wine; sachets or a small scented
candle (hotel rooms can be very stuffy and often you can't open the
windows); and a special bath indulgence. Many hotels have gyms and
swimming pools; don't forget your aerobic shoes, workout clothes, and
swim suit, so that you can unwind in the evening. If you're attending an
all-day conference or convention and won't be back at your hotel until
night, tuck the following lifesavers into your briefcase or backpack:
headache relief, a small bottle of water or juice and nibbles in case
you miss lunch; and a travel-size toothbrush, toothpaste, mouth wash,
and a string of dental floss. Remember to pace yourself as much as
possible. If your day is spent in back-to-back meetings, try to squeeze
in mini-breaks; you need fresh air as much as you do a cup of coffee and
trips to the ladies' room. When your days are crammed with appointments,
one quiet night on your own is essential. Build breathing space into
your schedule, especially if you think you can't possibly do it. Get up
an hour earlier than you really have to. Lie in bed quietly to collect
your thoughts, and then luxuriate with breakfast in bed. It may be the
only peaceful hour of your day. If you have a breakfast meeting
scheduled, at least have your first wake-up cup in private. If you have
evening engagements, try to return to your hotel beforehand to revive.

Lie down for twenty minutes, take a quick shower, put on fresh makeup,
and change for dinner. You'll feel a surge of new energy and enthusiasm.
Try to arrive at your hotel the day before meetings begin so that you
can settle in; pack up your room the night before you go home so that
you don't have a mad-dash departure. If something has started to annoy
you but isn't quite a nag---a sensitive tooth or a twinge when you go to
the bathroom---check it out before you leave. There is absolutely
nothing worse than needing an emergency root canal or having a urinary
infection flare up while traveling. Always travel with different
absorbing kinds of reading: serious, light, trash, and inspirational.
You can't predict what your mood will be on the way there, coming back,
or in-between. I collect novels throughout the year and save them for
trips; treat yourself to magazines you don't normally read at home. Pack
at least one collapsible bag to fill up with anything you might want to
bring back. I'm always on the lookout for unusual small gifts when on
trips. Whether you're in a new city or returning to an old favorite,
carve out a couple of hours for a solo creative excursion: shopping,
visiting a museum, taking a walk in a beautiful park or public garden,
savoring a drink in an inviting cafe. Above all, enjoy your trip as much
as possible---the solitude of your hotel room, the luxury of room
service, not having to worrying about cooking or carpooling, the novelty
of different newspapers and scenery. Be grateful for the opportunities
to meet new people, see new places, enlarge your horizons. Realize that
your work is important and makes such a contribution to the simply
abundant lives of others, as well to as your own, that the world is
waiting to hear from you. "Through travel I first became aware of the
outside world," Eudora Welty confides. "It was through travel that I
found my own introspective way into becoming a part of it."

Joyful Simplicities for September • L' ÉtÉ c'est fini, as the French
say, so end summer on a high note. Make a really big deal out of the
last cookout of the summer. Serve your

favorite summer recipes with a final flourish. Linger in the twilight,
watch the sun go down, and bid summer a fond adieu. • On Labor Day
weekend take fifteen minutes to write down all the things you wanted to
do over the summer but never got around to. Put your list in an
envelope. When you get your next year's calendar, paperclip the envelope
to the first day of June and open it then. Try to block in some time on
your calendar to make postponed pleasures a priority when summer
returns. • Stock up on your own school supplies. They're on sale this
month. Get your own pads, notebooks, scissors, tape, and crayons. Get
pencils imprinted with your name on them at Lillian Vernon or Miles
Kimball. It's inexpensive and fun. Take a creative excursion to find
exactly the kind of pen you prefer writing with. Once you've identified
your brand, stock up on them at discount office supply stores. • Make
taffy apples. • Enjoy fresh apple cider and pear nectar. • Experiment
with different types of popcorn. • Pack away your swimsuit. Bring out
your woolens. Do you have a favorite sweater that you absolutely adore?
If not, why not? • Celebrate the autumn equinox with a festive dinner of
homestyle cooking. Do this especially if you live alone and rarely cook
a decent meal for yourself. Bring home a small pot of mums for your
dining table. Draw hearthside and light the candles, pour the wine or
cider, and enjoy the simple pleasures of comfort food. Have you ever
tried an English "fidget pie," a traditional harvest meal? It's composed
of potatoes, onions, apples, and ham pieces in a vegetable stock
seasoned with a little brown sugar, salt, and pepper. Pour into a pastry
shell, cover with a top crust and bake as you would any filled pie. •
Gradually assemble your treats for the office. • Observe the autumnal
festival of Michaelmas on September 29, which is the feast day of
St. Michael the Archangel. This ancient English harvest festival dates
back to the sixth century. Legend has it that on this day the devil was
driven out of Heaven by St. Michael and landed in a patch of blackberry
brambles. It's traditional to have blackberry treats---pies, tarts, or
jam on scones---for tea on this day.

• Start making your Christmas list this month so that you won't be
frantic in December. • If you have children, this is the time to have
them decide on their Halloween costumes. Don't despair. They don't
divide the children into two groups at school: those wearing
store-bought costumes and those wearing homemade ones! Order the costume
from a catalog this month or online (www.costumeuniverse.com) or
assemble all your supplies. Soon everything will be picked over, and
there's nothing so disappointing for children (or so frustrating for
you) as discovering you can't find exactly what you need. If you do
construct homemade costumes, always keep in mind exactly whose costume
it is you're making. Some of us get carried away and end up creating
costumes designed more to impress other women than to please our
children. • Take a walk under the huntress moon. • Look at farmers'
markets for dried flowers to create your own bouquet. Prepared bouquets
can be wonderful, but they're expensive. Creating your own bouquet on a
September Sunday afternoon is a relaxing restorative that reminds you
all winter long that beauty is simply abundant if you look for it.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER The fields are harvested and bare, And Winter whistles through
the square. October dresses in flame and gold Like a woman afraid of
growing old. ---ANNE MARY LAWLER

Now Indian summer arrives, a change of season that's more a sense memory
than a date on the calendar. Finally, the heat is passing. Gradually
familiar surroundings don a rustic palate of jewel tones that dazzle
with their beauty. Let October seduce you with her charms. "Beguile us
in the way you know," poet Robert Frost entreated this season of
abundance. "Release one leaf at the break of day." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 1

Recognizing Burnout Before You're Charred My candle burns at both ends
ends; It will not last the night. ---EDNA ST. VINCENT MILLAY

Burnt offerings. Burned to a crisp. Burned beyond recognition. Burned
alive. Burned out. Setting the world on fire comes with risks.
Unfortunately we usually don't realize this until smoke gets in our
eyes. Burnout is a condition caused by unbalance: too much work or
responsibility, too little time to do it, over too long a period. We've
been cruising in the fast lane but we've been running on fumes rather
than on fuel. Often we think that burnout is something that just happens
to other women---to workaholics and perfectionists. But careaholics are
also at risk ---women who care deeply about their children, work,
relationships, parents, siblings, friends, communities, issues. This
sounds like every woman I know. Perhaps we would pay more attention to
burnout if it were as dramatic as a heart attack. But a smoldering flame
can be just as deadly as a flash fire. Sometimes burnout manifests
itself as a sense of complete exhaustion at the end of a project that
has taken months of challenging and intense work. Taking a week off to
rest, then resuming work at a slower pace is usually enough to bring
about a speedy recovery. But first-degree burnout---the soul

snuffer---comes from living unbalanced for years; when what was supposed
to be a temporary situation becomes a lifestyle. Burnout often begins
with illness---anything from a bout of flu you can't shake to chronic
fatigue syndrome---and is usually accompanied by depression. Sometimes
burnout is hard to distinguish from a creative dry spell, especially if
you're good at denial, which most women are. It's burnout when you go to
bed exhausted every night and wake up tired every morning---when no
amount of sleep refreshes you, month after weary month. It's burnout
when everything becomes too much effort: combing your hair, going out to
dinner, visiting friends for the weekend, even going on vacation. It's
burnout when you can't believe, under any circumstances, that you'll
ever want to make love again. It's burnout when you find yourself cranky
all the time, bursting into tears or going into fits of rage at the
slightest provocation. It's burnout when you dread the next phone call.
It's burnout when you feel trapped and hopeless, unable to dream,
experience pleasure, or find contentment. It's burnout when neither big
thrills nor little moments have the power to move you---when nothing
satisfies you because you haven't a clue what's wrong or how to fix it.
Because everything's wrong. Because something is terribly out of whack:
you. It's burnout when you feel there is not one other person on the
face of the earth who can help you. And you're right. When you're
suffering from burnout, you are the only person on earth who can help
because you're the only one who can make the lifestyle changes that need
to be made: to call a halt, to take a slower path, to make a detour.
When you have no strength left, you have no choice but to rely on the
strength of a saner Power to restore you to Wholeness. In the pursuit of
our souls, Spirit takes no prisoners. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 2

The Ultimate Seduction It is your work in life that is the ultimate
seduction. ---PABLO PICASSO

Like a phantom lover, work charms, cajoles, comforts, and caresses. Our
work---especially if it's our grand passion---can be so seductive that
we can find ourselves completely caught up in its rapture, unable to
resist. However, work doesn't have to be a grand passion for us to be
swept away; an infatuation can just as conveniently distract us from
whatever is disappointing, disagreeable, or disturbing elsewhere in our
lives. When you simply can't deal with real life, a fax that needs to be
answered immediately can be a fine friend. The ultimate seduction is
often accompanied by the ultimate addictions: workaholism and
perfectionism. What makes these two reckless behavior patterns so
dangerous is that they're sanctioned, supported, and sustained by a
society still shackled to the Puritan work ethic. The Puritans frowned
on anything enjoyable, believing that God's favor could be achieved only
by grueling struggle, stringent self-discipline, and backbreaking work.
But Spirit can't use us to heal the world if we can't heal ourselves. I
and many of my friends are workaholics. Even kryptonite can't stop us.
For years, we've all vehemently denied it. Now, in conversations, we're
able to admit "tendencies toward," much the way an alcoholic admits to
being a social drinker. These tendencies include working long hours
during the week; bringing work home with you on weekends and vacations;
turning on the computer after the kids are in bed; sneaking in work, one
way or another, seven days a week; referring to the perusal of contracts
as "reading"; canceling dates with friends and family to finish up "one
more thing"; postponing pleasure until a deadline is met; carrying a
cellular

phone; installing a fax at the beach condo; starting one project before
finishing another; letting work interrupt precious private or family
time; taking eighteen-hour round trips to Los Angeles; and squeezing the
only "vacations" into business trips. Tendencies? If you hear yourself
frequently muttering under your breath, "This is insane," the time has
come to quietly scrutinize your working style. Authentic success doesn't
come wrapped in a shroud. Start small. Be sneaky. Think baby steps. The
same savvy that got you into this mess can help you escape. Take the
work home but don't open the briefcase. Turn on the answering machine
during dinner and in the evening. Take a day off every two weeks. A
woman I know has reached the point of taking one Sunday off a month,
whether she needs it or not. Secretly she believes it's her most
astonishing accomplishment. When we succumb to workaholism, what's
really happening is that we've lost faith in Spirit's willingness to
help us achieve success. We've separated the secular from the spiritual.
Asking for grace doesn't seem as practical as working round the clock.
When was the last time Spirit accompanied you to work? When was the last
time you asked It to? OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 3

Little Miss Perfect Perfectionism is the voice of the oppressor, the
enemy of the people. It will keep you cramped and insane jour whole
life. ---ANNE LAMOTT

The road to hell is paved by perfectionists working with grains of sand.
Uh-oh ... missed a spot ... Like workaholism, aspiring to be Little Miss
Perfect is an addiction of low self-worth. When we were young, nothing
we did was ever good enough, so we just kept on doing until doing was
all we could do. When doing more and more didn't make a difference, we
thought if we did our work perfectly, we'd hit the mark. When we did,
suddenly voices other than our own sang our praises. It sounded like the
Heavenly hosts. Champagne or chocolate couldn't begin to compare with
the ecstasy of genuine compliments. We're creatures who live by our
senses, and since the response we got for perfection felt
wonderful---even if for only ten seconds ---we wanted to repeat the
experience. So we committed to doing everything perfectly, setting in
motion a cycle of self-destruction that frequently felt as comfortable
as a straitjacket. Still, the pursuit of perfection is the opiate of
choice for millions of women. I could tell you to stop reading the
magazines, watching the videos, and going to the movies that
continuously reinforce our belief that perfection is possible, but
you're not going to listen to me. Instead, next time you see a gorgeous
woman on the cover of a magazine, a room to die for, or a meal that
would take a professional chef a week to prepare, begin to chant,
"You're not real. You're not real. You're not real. I refuse to grant
you the power to make me miserable." (This spell breaker is even more
effective if chanted aloud in a grocery checkout line.)The woman, the
room, and the

meal that are depicted to inspire (but that really diminish us) are
illusions conjured up by professionals paid handsomely to manipulate
reality. Once a close friend gave me a priceless gift. She convinced me
that my sanity is much more important than the subtle nuances that I
adore. The subtle nuances are the essence of perfection. The subtle
nuances trigger the "Ah" response. But a life spent seeking the subtle
nuances leaves little time to enjoy the big picture. Now, as a
recovering perfectionist, I try to leave the subtle nuances to Spirit,
who shows off better than I do. Today, I would like to give you that
gift: Your sanity is much more important than the subtle nuances. Get
yourself a small hourglass filled with sand. Place it prominently where
you can see it---in the kitchen or on your desk. Turn it over once a
day. Watch how fast the grains of sand flow. Those are the minutes of
your life. Live them. Pave with them. Everyday it's your call. A point
worth pondering: Upon completing the Universe, the Great Creator
pronounced it "very good." Not "perfect." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 4

Homework There are some things you learn best in calm, and some in
storm. ---WILLA CATHER

And some things you learn best at home, such as your authentic working
style. Working from home is becoming an attractive economic alternative
as women try to bring more harmony into their daily round. Many women
are leaving the downsized corporate world to start home-based
businesses; three out of every four sole proprietorships are now owned
by women. Other women are negotiating computer commuting as a benefit,
so that they might be more available to their families during the week,
especially on those occasions sent to try mothers' souls: sick days,
snow days, and school breaks. Still more women are discovering that
working from home, at least part of the week, is more productive than
working at the office because, with fewer interruptions, it provides a
more serene environment in which to concentrate. Working from home is
great, but it's not exactly as you might imagine it to be, especially if
your current workplace is still at another location. Yes, it's fabulous
to be able to work in pajamas or sweats, handy to throw a load of
laundry into the washing machine while sending a fax, convenient to
start spaghetti sauce simmering in the early afternoon while conducting
telephone conferences. But if you're not careful, it's very easy to blur
the distinction between the two spheres---home and work---until you have
only "homework," which is horrendous. Homework is rolling out of bed and
waking up on-line, only to fall asleep at the computer sixteen hours
later. Homework is a soulless, repetitive cycle of brutality brought on
by the ease and convenience of technology. Does the Bataan Death March
mean anything to you?

I've been working from home for nearly twenty years, and now I can't
imagine another working style. But like any life choice, you have to be
suited to it. A dear friend fantasized about working from home for
years; after a couple of months she resumed working at her office most
of the time because the isolation was numbing. You also have to be
extremely focused to work from home, because you must work. When the
family heads out the door in the mornings, you must head into your
office and not give homecaring another thought until your business for
the day is complete. This response is not automatic; it requires
rigorous discipline not to "pick up" the house before settling down to
work. I recommend a blindfold when walking through the house during the
day. Once you realize how comfortable, even pleasurable, it can be to
work at home, it's easy to become reckless, taking on more than you can
handle reasonably. That's because your work week is no longer structured
around five days and eight to ten hours; the office is always open.
Since you don't have a commute, you start working an hour earlier and
continue an hour later than if you were working in an office. Since the
office is right down the hall, it's easy to just pop in there after the
kids are settled for the night to "finish up." Weekends are all too
perfect for "catching up" on last week's leftovers or for "getting a
head start" on next week's load. Eventually the days have no distinction
and your working style is a sinkhole. Gradually your homework begins to
resemble the slave labor of immigrants who were paid pennies for the
piecework they produced in their tenement homes. But even if you're
earning more money than before, if you no longer have a life at home you
must learn to set limits. Working from home can be a genuine step toward
self-determination, once we honor the sense of balance we originally
sought away from the office. "If people are highly successful in their
profession they lose their senses," Virginia Woolf, who worked at home,
cautions us. "Sight goes. They have no time to look at pictures. Sound
goes. They have no time to listen to music. Speech goes. They have no
time for conversation. They lose their sense of proportion---the
relations between one thing and another. Humanity goes." Heed her words.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 5

Mediation as Meditation Most important for us is a good spiritual
relationship between employees and management. ---TATSUHIKO ANDOH

One morning your predictable conscious self surprises you. The alarm
rings. She shuts it off and rolls over. Doesn't get out of bed. Shows no
intention of getting dressed. She's on strike. Grievances have been
ignored for years, maybe a lifetime. Working conditions are intolerable.
Annie Dillard tells us what happens next: "\[Y\]our worker---your one
and only, your prized, coddled, and driven worker---is not going-out on
that job. Will not budge, not even for you, boss. Has been at it long
enough to know when the air smells wrong; can sense a tremor through
boot soles. Nonsense, you say; it is perfectly safe. But the worker will
not go. Will not even look at the site. Just developed heart trouble.
Would rather starve." Maybe you haven't burned or bummed out, run away,
landed in the hospital, or had a complete nervous breakdown. Yet. Maybe
your family is still intact. At least they were still all accounted for
at dinner last night. Maybe your friends are still speaking to you. Who
knows? It's been six months since any of them saw you. Today you're a
very lucky woman. Don't push it. Life with you has been as much fun as
serving time in a Siberian labor camp. You were a walkout waiting to
happen. Management---the ego---can fend for herself until a new contract
is agreed on. There are labor laws but none to protect against
selfexploitation. The picket line will not be crossed until there are.
The time has come for mediation as meditation. Get a soothing cup of
comfort and think about your ideal working day. If you could work in any
style or setting, what would it be? What are your ideal working hours?

Imagine your ideal workplace surroundings. What do you see? Now compare
the ideal with the real. Is there any common ground? Can you introduce
one ideal element into your present working environment? Few women can
wave their hands and start an authentic life over from scratch. But all
of us can begin working with what we've got. Working with our real life
circumstances is how we render reality perfected. Perfection is
unattainable. "Perfected" is possible. Today, begin a little creative
collective bargaining between choice and circumstances. "A work force is
willing to go through many painful things if it believes in the
long-term goals," labor economist Richard Belous reminds us. Creating an
authentic working style is a long-term goal worth the wait.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 6

Downshifting: Living in Lower Gear Things do not change; we change.
---HENRY DAVID THOREAU

Henry David Thoreau didn't set out to become the patron saint of
simplicity. Actually, he sought a job as highway surveyor with the city
of Concord, Massachusetts, in order to support his meager earnings as a
writer. For years he had been the de facto keeper of passable paths
around the town and the public had testified to the quality of his work.
Nonetheless, the town officers declined to pay him a salary for his
efforts. Packing his pens, bottles of ink, and paper, the would-be
municipal employee borrowed an axe and headed for Walden Pond to conduct
an experiment with life. A century and a half later, Thoreau's
experiment, reinterpreted for the 1990s, is called "downshifting," a
word coined by business writer Amy Saltzman. It describes the emergence
of a new breed of workplace trendsetters who are no longer willing to
allow their work to ride roughshod over their lives. Like Thoreau, these
career professionals are choosing not to keep pace with their fast-track
peers. By setting career limits, they're slowing down in order to devote
more time and creative energy to their families, communities, and
personal needs. Saltzman documented the different ways in which these
enlightened pathfinders have found authentic success in her thought
provoking book Downshifting: Reinventing Success on a Slower Track.
Saltzman began tracking the downshifting trend in the late 1980s while
working in New York as a senior editor at Success magazine. At the same
time she was wrestling with maintaining some control over her own life
while meeting the "intellectual and creative challenges of helping a
young publication take hold in a competitive field." But she explains in
her book:

"I found myself feeling increasingly ill at ease with the message of a
magazine that typically defined success in narrow, self-interested
terms." Then a chance encounter with a friend who was working as an
editor for another magazine solidified Saltzman's misgivings about the
fast track. As her friend assumed a "Gotta run, I'll call you, we'll do
lunch" pose before dashing off down Madison Avenue, she inquired how
Saltzman was doing. Saltzman told her friend that "things were fine,
work was interesting, although I wasn't allowing it to take over my
life; I was doing volunteer work a few evenings a week, reading a lot
and working on a short story that I didn't think would ever get
published but was enjoying it anyway." This laissez-faire attitude
baffled her friend, Saltzman recalls, because she was "unable to grasp
the idea that I wasn't particularly busy at work and enjoying it." But
Saltzman had made "a conscious decision to take life a little slower."
In fact, she'd deliberately not gone after a promotion because she knew
the job would eat up too many evenings and weekends. "Besides, while it
might have looked impressive, I wasn't sure the position suited me at
that point in my life. The decision, however, had not been made lightly
and had continued to nag at me. When I saw my friend, I realized why. If
we weren't always moving ahead and aiming for something higher and more
impressive, if we didn't have that look of constantly being busy and in
motion, we were somehow boring or even losers." But no matter what her
life might have looked like to an outsider, the reality of Saltzman's
decision to take things more slowly was that her "life felt fuller, more
interesting and more worthwhile than I could ever remember." By slowing
down, Amy Saltzman discovered that "the fast track shackles us to a set
of standards and rules that prohibit us from leading truly successful,
happy lives." When we begin to search for our authentic working style,
we can make that discovery our own. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 7

Learning to Create Boundaries Before I built a wall I'd ask to know What
I was walling in or walling out. ---ROBERT FROST

Limits are the barbed wire of real life. Boundaries are split-rail
fences. When you push past limits, personal or professional, there's a
good chance of being pricked as you hurtle up and over. But boundaries
set apart the Sacred with simple grace. There's always enough room to
maneuver between the rails if you're willing to bend. We want our lives
to feel limitless, so we must learn the art of creating boundaries that
protect, nurture, and sustain all we cherish. For most women, creating
boundaries is excruciating, so we don't do it until we're pushed to the
outer edge of tolerance. To create boundaries we must learn to say, thus
far and no further. This means speaking up. Expressing our needs.
Indicating our preferences. These moments are tense and can easily
escalate into confrontations complete with tears, misunderstandings, and
hurt feelings. This is why many women stay quiet, rendered virtually
mute by unexpressed rage and unable to articulate any needs at all. But
even if we are mute, we're not powerless to draw a line in the sand. A
talented friend of mine who has several books to her credit has long
been married to an intelligent, charming, but critical man. Because her
husband is more educated than she, she's always asked him to read her
work and make suggestions about it. Unfortunately, he's often been
rather harsh in his efforts to help and didn't realize how much of a
sting his words inflicted. Sometimes he would even leave her work lying
around before looking at it ---long enough to convey, if not disdain,
then certainly disrespect. After each such episode, it would take his
wife days to pick up her pen again.

Finally, she stopped showing her work to him, creating an unspoken
boundary to protect her dreams. When she finally published her
breakthrough novel, her husband was astonished at all the praise she was
receiving and seemed embarrassed that he didn't understand what people
were raving about. One night, she told me, she discovered him reading
her bestseller. "This is good. This is very good," he told her in a
surprised voice. "But why didn't you ask me to read it first?" "Because
you had no idea I was capable of this," she replied, with relish,
finding her authentic voice at last. Speaking the language of "no" is a
good place to start creating boundaries. "'No' can be a beautiful word,
every bit as beautiful as 'yes,'" writers John Robbins and Ann Mortifee
declare. "Whenever we deny our need to say 'no,' our self-respect
diminishes," they tell us in In Search of Balance: Discovering Harmony
in a Changing World. "It is not only our right at certain times to say
'no'; it is our deepest responsibility. For it is a gift to ourselves
when we say 'no' to those old habits that dissipate our energy, 'no' to
what robs us of our inner joy, 'no' to what distracts us from our
purpose. And it is a gift to others to say 'no' when their expectations
do not ring true for us, for in so doing we free them to discover more
fully the truth of their own path. Saying 'no' can be liberating when it
expresses our commitment to take a stand for what we believe we truly
need." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 8

A Passion for Beauty Beauty is an ecstasy; it is as simple as hunger.
---W. SOMERSET MAUGHAM

One baby step forward. Three giant steps back. I'd been experimenting
with the first four Simple Abundance principles for almost a year and
thought I had overcome the "buy me" syndrome. I enjoyed window shopping
and did not feel diminished because I couldn't purchase something that
captured my eye. Then I discovered a \$45 lifestyle book crammed with
pictures of things I love. Lush arrangements of flowers. Groupings of
silver picture frames. Rose chintz. I flipped through visions I wanted
to live in. Angrily I returned it to the bookstore shelf, furious that I
couldn't afford the book and fed up that I was not living the lifestyle
I thought I wanted. All I had may very well have been all I needed, but
it certainly wasn't all I wanted. After several hours of churning, I
stopped. Something was going on within; this emotional response was
occurring for a reason. I meditated on what had pushed my buttons. Was
it that I had been living too stringently on a budget? Was I depressed
about my lack of money for decorating trifles that I could once have
purchased without a thought? Or was something deeper happening? The more
I thought about it, the more I realized that I hadn't been paying enough
attention to my passion for beauty. My deprivation was caused by not
appreciating, savoring, or celebrating the beauty that already existed
in my life---so much so that my soul had erupted into a volcano of
protest. When something calls to us on a deep enough level to engage our
emotions, our conscious attention is sought. Beauty was calling to me,
not objects. After I realized this, I headed for a farmers' market for
flowers. But instead of one bouquet, I treated myself to two.

When I set my lush arrangement of flowers in the living room, my
authentic craving for beauty was satisfied very inexpensively and the
wants immediately quieted down. Don't feel you have to deny or ignore
your feelings when you want something beautiful but can't afford it. The
desire offers clues to satisfy this holy hunger. Explore why you behold
something as beautiful; use your impressions to jump-start your
imagination. Beauty surrounds us. It is everywhere if we search for it,
if we're open to having more of it in our lives. "Here we are, sitting
in a shower of gold," the Australian novelist Christia Stead wrote in
1938, with "nothing to hold up but a pitchfork." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 9

Coping with Stress In this world without quiet corners, there can he no
easy escapes ... from hullabaloo, from terrible, unquiet fuss. ---SALMAN
RUSHDIE

Is there a woman alive who doesn't suffer from stress? If there is, seek
her out, ask her to share her wisdom. When you find her, I'd be willing
to bet she'll offer the following suggestions: Cultivate gratitude.
Carve out an hour a day for solitude. Begin and end the day with prayer,
meditation, reflection. Keep it simple. Keep your house picked up. Don't
overschedule. Strive for realistic deadlines. Never make a promise you
can't keep. Allow an extra half hour for everything you do. Create quiet
surroundings at home and at work. Go to bed at nine o'clock twice a
week. Always carry something interesting to read. Breathe---deeply and
often. Move---walk, dance, run, find a sport you enjoy. Drink pure
spring water. Lots of it. Eat only when hungry. If it's not delicious,
don't eat it. Be instead of do. Set aside one day a week for rest and
renewal. Laugh more often.

Luxuriate in your senses. Always opt for comfort. If you don't love it,
live without it. Let Mother Nature nurture. Don't answer the telephone
during dinner. Stop trying to please everybody. Start pleasing yourself.
Stay away from negative people. Don't squander precious resources: time,
creative energy, emotion. Nurture friendships. Don't be afraid of your
passion. Approach problems as challenges. Honor your aspirations. Set
achievable goals. Surrender expectations. Savor beauty. Create
boundaries. For every "yes," let there be a "no." Don't worry; be happy.
Remember, happiness is a living emotion. Exchange security for serenity.
Care for your soul. Cherish your dreams. Express love every day. Search
for your authentic self until you find her. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 10

Poise Wreckers No quality is more attractive than poise---that deep
sense of being at ease with yourself and the world. ---GOOD
HOUSEKEEPING, September 1947

One of the most miserable days in my life graciously bestowed on me a
priceless gift: the awareness that everyday poise is acquired or lost
before we leave our homes. Early in my writing career I was summoned to
New York for an important meeting with a woman who, it was whispered,
made Medea seem beatific. I decided I should prepare for this encounter
by appearing just as formidable. Since deep within I was paralyzed with
fear, I attempted to over-compensate for it with outward trappings. In a
frenzy, I bought an expensive outfit that screamed "woman of substance,"
although it most assuredly didn't look like me. I also dramatically
changed my hairstyle and makeup. Because I felt so strange with my
sophisticated new getup, I stayed up far too late the night before my
trip fussing with everything instead of relaxing, packing leisurely, and
getting some much-needed sleep. I was exhausted when I finally dropped
into bed, so I just left my makeup, personal care necessities, and
accessories strewn on top of the dresser. In order to arrive in New York
in time for the meeting, I had to get up at 4:30 A.M. It had never
occurred to me that I would be virtually dressing in the dark, so as not
to wake up Ed and Katie. It was difficult and frustrating feeling my way
to find what I needed. I ended up rushing out in a state of utter panic
to catch my train. The meeting had not even begun before I became hot
and sweaty. This was right after I felt the left sleeve of my blouse rip
beneath my suit jacket.

Since I'd never worn this outfit before, I didn't realize how tight the
arms were or how much the skirt rode up on my hips when I sat down. The
deep red nail polish that had looked so elegant in the salon the day
before had chipped en route; naturally, I had no way of touching up my
nails, so I tried to hide my hands. Several cups of coffee on the train,
combined with raw nerves, had made my mouth dry, but I hadn't thought to
carry breath freshener in my purse or ask for a glass of water before
the meeting started. I was so self-conscious during the meeting that I
had difficulty focusing and certainly didn't have the confidence to
offer my opinion, even though I felt very strongly about some of the
decisions being made on my publishing project. Two excruciating hours
later, the conference-from-hell was over. As the elevator doors closed,
I swore I would never again leave another business meeting hot and
sweaty, much the way Scarlett O'Hara swore with raised fist that she'd
never again go hungry. Of course, I realize I'm probably the only woman
in the world to endure such humiliation at her own hands. But into each
of our lives come important meetings, public appearances, and special
occasions. Here are some practical antidotes for public awkwardness:
Never dress to impress others: dress to express your authentic sense of
style. The only way we become truly at ease with ourselves is by knowing
who we are. Never wear an outfit that you've never worn before to an
important event; if your clothes need constant adjustment---pulling down
a too-short skirt, hitching up a shoulder strap---you'll be unable to
relax, focus, and function. If you buy something new, give it a trial
run. Never drastically change your hair and makeup just before meeting
new people for the first time. If you want a new look, put it together
thoughtfully and gradually, so that you'll be at ease with the final
effect. If your dressing table is cluttered and your closet jumbled,
you're bound to feel less than confident and serene when you're trying
to put together a look that presents you at your best. To achieve order
within, begin with outward order. If your hair needs washing, your
breath isn't fresh, or your makeup is stale, if your nails are rough or
chipped or your antiperspirant is fading, you'll self-consciously avoid
close encounters, giving others the wrong impression. Poise and personal
grooming are soul mates. Women known for their sense of style and poise
are impeccably groomed.

Poise is often overlooked when we think of putting together our
authentic look. And why is developing poise so important? Because when
we're not obsessively focusing on ourselves or our shortcomings, our
smiles become warmer, our laughter more spontaneous, and our
thoughtfulness blossoms. Outer poise mirrors inner poise. Moments spent
in quiet contemplation to nurture our inner poise should be an essential
part of every woman's daily beauty ritual. Self-possession costs us only
time and self-nurturance. When we feel at ease with ourselves, we feel
at ease in the world. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 11

It's Always Something It's always something. ---ROSEANNE ROSEANNADANNA
(GILDA RADNER)

And of course, it is. Sometimes it's a damn nuisance. Sometimes it's
soul shattering. But it's always something. It's real life. After Gilda
Radner left Saturday Night Live where she created some unforgettable,
funny women characters---Roseanne Roseannadanna, Emily Litella---she set
out to create a life for herself. For a decade she had been a successful
workaholic as life whizzed by. Falling in love with Gene Wilder helped
her realize the pleasure of lowering gears. By the time they married in
1984, she wanted to pursue her dream of becoming a writer. Always
observant and knowing rich material when she found it, she began a book
called Portrait of the Artist as a Housewife, a collection of stories,
poems, and vignettes celebrating domesticity and the humor inherent in
toaster ovens and plumbers. It would have been hilarious. But real life
grabbed her attention with a diagnosis of ovarian cancer, and a grittier
book emerged, It's Always Something, a defiantly irreverent, moving
memoir. Like other women who struggle with life-threatening illness,
Gilda mourned "my lost joy, my happiness, my exhilaration with life."
The day before her diagnosis, life stretched before her, luminous in its
limitless possibilities. The moment after being told she had cancer,
life's dimensions shrank to twenty-four-hour stretches. In a moving
essay contained in Minding the Body: Women Writers on Body and Soul,
Judith Hooper rightly admonishes us: "We go around thinking that real
life is about adding a rec room to the basement, but this is not about
real life. Cancer is real life. When you accept cancer, it is as if new
systems within the organism automatically open---like the oxygen

masks and flotation systems that automatically drop in your lap on a 747
in an emergency. When you walk this earth on borrowed time, each day on
the calendar is a beloved friend you know for only a short time." You
begin to live. Why must we find a lump in our breast before this occurs?
Do you know? Because I certainly don't. But I do know a wonderful woman
who was very active at her children's school for many years, largely
because after she had volunteered a generous amount of personal time, no
one else came forward to take her place. The hours she put into her PTA
related work were the equivalent of a full-time but unpaid second job.
When she made the terrible discovery that she had breast cancer, she
admitted to close friends that in a strange way, she was relieved.
Cancer meant she could start saying "No," create boundaries, and finally
put down the school committee burden without guilt. Now she could ransom
back her life. After all, no one expects a woman fighting breast cancer
to do anything but take care of herself. Of course, she was right. When
I heard this story I wanted to scream and cry. it was almost too much to
take in. Yes, it's always something. But it doesn't always have to have
your name on it. I pray we never find a lump, but I pray just as
fervently that we never squander or surrender another precious day for
whatever reason. And if you've already found a lump, I pray that you'll
grow Whole and old in joy, peace, and grace, gifting us for many years
with your wisdom. Heaven knows, we need it. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 12

A Tale of Two Times It was the best of times, it was the worst of times.
---CHARLES DICKENS

Once upon a time. Up until this time. For the time being. Time and time
again. All in good time. Time's up! Since the dawn of Time, we've tried
to understand her nature. Why? In order to control her. But time is a
holy mystery, an extravagant gift meant to be experienced, not
understood. Certainly not controlled. Why do you think we're crazed half
the time? Time's mystery is difficult for most women to appreciate
because we've so little of it. Although we've all been allotted
twenty-four hours each day, it doesn't seem to go very far. So if we
experience anything at all, it's dread, because we keep running out of
time. Again and again. And it doesn't matter what kind of time it
is---Greenwich, daylight saving, standard, eastern, mountain, central,
or pacific. All that matters is we never seem to have enough of it.
Which is why all the women I know constantly feel timeworn. For
centuries those with time on their hands---saints, poets, mystics,
masters, sages, and philosophers---have pondered time's enigma. They've
discovered her duality. As the sculptor and poet Henry Van Dyke
explains: "Time is/ Too slow for those who Wait/Too swift for those who
Fear/Too long for those who grieve/Too short for those who Rejoice ..."
Slow and swift are time's parallel realities, the yin and yang of
existence.

In order to know a semblance of serenity during the days of our lives,
we also need to discover Time's twin nature, which the ancient Greeks
called chronos and kairos. Chronos is clocks, deadlines, watches,
calendars, agendas, planners, schedules, beepers. Chronos is time at her
worst. Chronos keeps track. Chronos is a delusion of grandeur. Chronos
is running the Marine Corps marathon in heels. In chronos we think only
of ourselves. Chronos is the world's time. Kairos is transcendence,
infinity, reverence, joy, passion, love, the Sacred. Kairos is intimacy
with the Real. Kairos is time at her best. Kairos lets go. In kairos we
escape the dungeon of self. Kairos is a Schubert waltz in
nineteenth-century Vienna with your soul mate. Kairos is Spirit's time.
We exist in chronos. We long for kairos. That's our duality. Chronos
requires speed so that it won't be wasted. Kairos requires space so that
it might be savored. We do in chronos. In kairos we're allowed to be. We
think we've never known kairos, but we have: when making love, when
meditating or praying, when lost in music's rapture or literature's
reverie, when planting bulbs or pulling weeds, when watching over a
sleeping child, when reading the Sunday comics together in bed, when
delighting in a sunset, when exulting in our passions. We know joy in
kairos, glimpse beauty in kairos, remember what it means to be alive in
kairos, reconnect with our Divinity in kairos. So how do we exchange
chronos for kairos? By slowing down. By concentrating on one thing at a
time. By going about whatever we are doing as if it were the only thing
worth doing at that moment. By pretending we have all the time in the
world, so that our subconscious will kick in and make it so. By making
time. By taking time. It only takes a moment to cross over from chronos
into kairos, but it does take a moment. All that kairos asks is our
willingness to stop running long enough to hear the music of the
spheres. Today, be willing to join in the dance. Now you're in kairos.

OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 13

Absolutely Fabulous I have a little shadow that goes in and out with me,
And what can he the use of \[her\] is more than I can see. ---ROBERT
LOUIS STEVENSON

For many years I've had difficulty identifying, imagining, and
personalizing my "shadow," Carl Jung's name for the darker self lurking
deep within. Jung believed that our shadows are the composite of all the
shameful emotions, nasty impulses, and negative aspects of our
personalities that we attempt to bury in order to show an acceptable
face to the world. Think of the raving lunatic the family keeps locked
in a tower in gothic novels, or Robert Louis Stevenson's Dr. Jekyll and
Mr. Hyde, and you get the idea. Unfortunately, not knowing is what hurts
us, especially when sublimating our shadow. In Guilt Is the Teacher,
Love Is the Lesson, Joan Borysenko describes the fermentation of our
"ghostly double" as "getting up a head of steam, getting wilder and
wilder inside us, informing our behaviors without our consciously
knowing they are there" until they express themselves "quite suddenly
and explosively in accidents, impulsive behavior, illness, lapses of
judgment. ... In other words, an unexplored shadow leaves us stuck
without understanding why, assaulted by strange impulses, and powerless
to change." To be honest, even though I understood Jung's concept of the
shadow, I had no real desire to get to know her better. Then another of
life's lessons opened up my eyes. What I discovered shocked me, but
didn't send me shrieking in terror. It made me laugh. Have you ever seen
the wicked British sitcom Absolutely Fabulous? It's the Fawlty Towers of
the fashion world and revolves around two

fortysomething debauchees---Edina and Patsy---whose only redeeming
social value is their loyalty to each other. Edina---known as "Edie" by
her intimates---is a dizzy, pudgy fashion publicist, whose greatest
ambition is to "look completely happening." She has two ex-husbands, one
long-suffering, sensible, and disapproving teenage daughter, and a
mother who can't figure out where she went wrong. There isn't a New Age
fad Edie hasn't embraced in a futile effort to find enlightenment,
including chanting, colonic irrigation, and isolation chambers. Patsy is
an anorexic, alcoholic, nymphomaniac fashion editor with a blond beehive
the size of Trump Tower---an homage to her icon, Ivana. Edie's never
seen in anything but designer hallucinations; Patsy's never seen without
a cigarette dangling from her red lips or a glass of champagne in her
hand. To Edie and Patsy, everyone is either "sweetie," "darling," or
"sweetie darling"; anything pleasurable is "absolutely fabulous,"
including their opinions of each other. They're vile, vain, vapid,
vacuous. Shallow, selfish. Dumb and dumber. Hilarious. They're certainly
not role models, but most assuredly, they're the stuff of our shadows.
The first time I watched Edie and Patsy cavorting around London, I fell
off the couch in tears, hooting, howling, and holding my sides. Edie was
my evil twin, my shadow. I recognized her instantly. Edie gives new
meaning to the awareness of "there but for the grace of God." But I love
her despite all her flaws, or maybe because of them. I suspect there are
many women who identify with some part of Edie and Patsy. Or Thelma and
Louise. All these women are out of control, so watch out. But we can't
afford to be; there are people who need care and there are jobs waiting
to be done. But if we could shed every responsibility and inhibition for
a half a day, perhaps we'd resemble one of these dolls. And while that's
amusing, it's not pretty. Still, whenever I am stressed to the max, I'll
relax with a glass of wine and watch my Ab Fab videos. I always come
back to real life chuckling and, in a strange way, renewed. Edie happily
goes back into the dark, having basked in my undivided attention, and I
contentedly return to writing, carpooling, and making meat loaf and
mashed potatoes for supper. Our shadows are only to be feared if we
repress them, if we refuse to give them the recognition they need. In
her book Women Who Run with the Wolves, Clarissa Pinkola Estes suggests
"opening the door to the shadow

realm a little and letting out various elements a few at a time,
relating to them, finding use for them, ..." so that we can "reduce
\[the risk of\] being surprised by shadow sneak attacks and unexpected
explosions" like a "Roman candle gone berserk." Edie, self-medicating
with booze, cigarettes, drugs, shopping, and sex to mask her pain,
blindly embraces self-awareness trends because she's afraid to follow
the wisdom of her heart. She's consumed with her appearance to avoid
recognizing deeper concerns; she's a slave to fashion because she
doesn't trust her instincts. But as Dr. Estes reassures us, the shadow
"can contain the divine, the luscious, beautiful and powerful aspects of
personhood" such as "the woman who can speak well of herself without
denigration, who can face herself without cringing, who works to perfect
her craft." Edie's craft, like our own, is discovering her authenticity.
But in our search, sweetie darling, we must not ignore what Dr. Estes
calls "these discarded, devalued, and unacceptable aspects of soul and
self," even if they make us feel uncomfortable. Especially---sweetie
darling---if we long for our lives to be rich, deep, and absolutely
fabulous. Kiss, kiss. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 14

The Ultimate Result of All Ambition To be happy at home is the ultimate
result of all ambition. ---SAMUEL JOHNSON

The wisdom contained in this one sentence is worth meditating on for the
rest of our lives; it's probably the reason Dr. Johnson earned his final
resting place with the "Immortals" in Westminster Abbey. Why are you
working so hard? To be happy at home. But you're never at home---in
mind, body, or spirit---because you're always working. So why are you
working so hard? To be happy at home. This is not a Zen koan. Life is a
paradox, but we don't have to make it any harder than it is already.
We've been on this path for ten months, but if you're on the cusp of
grasping this insight, you're miles ahead of most of us. Hold this
thought: the ultimate result of all ambition is to be happy at home.
Engrave this truth on your consciousness. Lay the track deeply, so that
even when you're on your own version of automatic pilot, you'll be
homeward bound. Write it on the palm of your hand; sneak a peek at it
three times a day. Mutter it under your breath before attending a budget
review that starts a half hour before the children need to be picked up;
before agreeing to entertain out-of-town clients on your anniversary;
before answering faxes on Sunday or leaving voice mail messages at
midnight. What is the ultimate result of all ambition? You know.
Inscribe it on your heart. Needlepoint it on a pillow. Say it out loud
when you get up and just before retiring. Make it your mantra---that
personal phrase that brings all things into focus. Doing so will help
remind you that the greatest adventure of our lives is finding our way
back home.

OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 15

The Quality of the Day To affect the quality of the day, that is the
highest of arts. ---HENRY DAVID THOREAU

We know now that there are many aspects to real life in which our
opinion is neither sought nor required. Sometimes, despite our best
efforts and positive thinking, health, fortune, and/or peace elude us.
But the one thing we do have absolute control over is the quality of our
days. Even when we're grief stricken, racked with pain, sick from worry,
deeply depressed, squeezed by circumstances---how we greet, meet, and
complete each day is our choosing. We hate to hear this. Of course, when
we're sick, worried, grieving, depressed, or frantic, we're not very
interested in the day's quality; we just want the misery to end. But
wishing the day away is also a creative choice, even if it's not a
deliberate one. Artists of the everyday excel in elevating the simple to
the level of the Sacred. You can use whatever you have on hand---a meal,
a conversation, humor, affection---to create comfort and
contentment---to put a positive spin, if not on the overall quality of
the day, then on critical moments of it. For some time now I have been
conducting a top-secret experiment with life, as Thoreau suggests we do.
I wanted to see just how much influence I really had on the day's
character. So the first words I speak in the morning are: "Thank you for
the gift of this wonderful day." Here are the initial findings, but you
will not like them. Nor did I. • All days are wonderful in direct
proportion to the creative energy invested in them. No investment, no
return.

• Even lousy days possess hidden wonder. Sometimes all you need is a
moment of attitude adjustment to shift your perception of an entire
afternoon and move forward into a pleasant evening. • Weather does not
seem to affect the experiment. Gray, cold, and rainy days spent in an
office are just as susceptible to the warming influence of enthusiasm as
are sunny days spent lying in a hammock sipping sangria. • Days that are
expected to be wonderful before they begin turn out to be so much more
frequently than days greeted with grumbling. • The results of this
experiment suggest that it doesn't matter whether a day is good or bad.
What matters is what we do with it. We knew that. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 16

Ceremonials for Common Days How, but in custom and ceremony, Are
innocence and beauty born? ---W. B. YEATS

Ceremony and custom give birth to beauty, restoring a sense of wonder to
our daily round. Most of us are far too jaded for our own good. We've
seen it all. Nothing surprises us anymore. Which is precisely our
problem. We only think we've seen it all. What we haven't begun to see
is the abundance that surrounds us, the beauty that gift wraps the
extravagance of each day. The best way to renew our sense of the Sacred
is through personal rituals. I treasure a little book called Ceremonials
of Common Days written in 1923 by Abbie Graham. I found it languishing
on a dark, dusty secondhand bookshelf and ransomed it for a dollar. Now
my hand-printed oracle, with its blackboard cover of yellow and green
woodcut flowers, sits on my desk. The gold lettering on its spine
reminds me that perception comes only when we pace ourselves. Nothing is
too insignificant in the eyes of the authentic self. Nothing is beneath
notice. There are numerous holidays (from the Old English "holy day")
throughout the year, falling just when we need cheering up. We respond
to them as if company's come to call, bringing out our special dishes,
linens, crystal, flowers, and candles. We actually do most of our living
among the common days, taking them for granted just the way we do the
people we love. Yet myriad occasions during the course of each day cry
out for consecration. A liturgy of commonplace moments ripe for personal
ritual might include sipping the first cup of coffee; putting on one's
public face; eating

at one's desk; window shopping; making a long-desired purchase; crossing
the threshold at night; changing into comfortable clothes; hearing the
sound of a loved one's homecoming footsteps; sitting down to a simple
meal; being paid; traveling on business; sharing a laugh, or a
confidence, or both; indulging in rainy day reveries; curling up to
watch videos at home; sleeping late and having breakfast in bed;
starting a good book; losing five pounds; having a good cry; and so to
bed. There is no shortage of common day ceremonies waiting to be
enjoyed, only weary imaginations in need of inspirational transfusions.
"To make a day, it took an Evening and a Morning---at least to make the
first day. But that was when the world was new and there was in it only
light and darkness, day and night, and God," Abbie Graham calls to our
remembrance. "The world has grown more complicated since that creative
era. To make a day now it takes bells and whistles and clocks and desks
and committees and meetings and money and a serial of daily newspaper
editions, and hungry people, and people who are too tired, and luncheon
engagements and telephones, and noise and shouting and much hurrying.
All these things and many others it takes now, in addition to an evening
and a morning. "Perhaps these ingredients are necessary for the
concoction of a day; but when I come to observe the Ceremonial of
Evenings and Mornings, they do not seem to be the reason why light and
darkness were separated and day and night created. Whatever be my
philosophy, I, too, must work to make enough money to pay my share
toward the bells and whistles and the trains and the luncheon
engagements and the privilege of hurrying. "But as I watch the stars of
evening, and in the morning open my window toward the east, I shall
observe the Ceremonial of quietness of heart, of simplicity, and poise
of spirit, that I may keep my soul and the souls of others free from
entanglements in the machinery of a day." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 17

The Habit of Being So many worlds, so much to do So little done, such
things to be. ---ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON

During her lifetime (1925--1964), neither the camera nor the critics
were very kind to Flannery O'Connor. She was as unphotogenic as she was
unapologetic. The camera's harsh lens couldn't capture the intelligence,
passion, imagination, exuberance, wit, and grace her family and friends
knew and loved. For much of her adult life, the camera only recorded a
body and face ravaged by illness. Her critics didn't appreciate her
finely honed sense of the grotesque---that Southern specialty---with all
its satire, black humor, and pathos, nor her obsession with religion.
She was a cartographer of the human soul, and her searing words gave
expression to the yearning of misfits. The characters in her novels and
short stories were forlorn and flawed, searching for redemption whether
they knew it or not. Redemption was a major theme in Flannery's work as
well as the thread that held her life together. "There are some of us
who have to pay for our faith every step of the way and who have to work
out dramatically what it would be like without it," she wrote, "and if
being without it would ultimately be possible or not." Her rural Georgia
surroundings, coupled with her affliction with lupus at twenty-five (the
disease that killed her father when she was a child), contributed to a
deep sense of isolation, for she was unable to care for herself and
lived, until her death at thirty-nine, with her mother. What her close
friends remember best about Flannery was her determination to revere and
savor the gift of every day. Her close friend (and editor of her
letters), Sally Fitzgerald, calls it "the habit of being," a

deep joie de vivre that animated her daily round. Flannery's passion for
life, Sally Fitzgerald tells us, was "rooted in her talent and the
possibilities of her work, which she correctly saw as compensating her
fully for any deprivations she had to accept, and as offering a scope
for living that most of us never dream of encompassing." Her mornings
were sacred, reserved for her writing, but the rest of the day was
devoted to being Flannery. The habit of being---the exultation in the
present moment---is an exquisite concept, one that could enrich our
lives beyond measure. We're all habitual creatures, but usually we
practice the habits of doing: getting up, making breakfast, getting
children off to school and getting ourselves to work. Then there are our
habits of brooding: projecting into the future, dwelling on the past,
nursing old wounds, holding imaginary conversations, indulging in
comparisons, conducting endless mental calculations about money, gnawing
on regrets, second-guessing inspiration, ruminating on problems at work,
anticipating the worst. The habits of brooding are rooted in the past or
the future, and they can rob the present moment of all harmony, beauty,
and joy. But what if, as curators of our own contentment, we
deliberately cultivated the habit of being: a heightened awareness of
Real Life's abundance? The habit of being is a grateful appreciation for
the good surrounding us, no matter what our circumstances might be
today. What if you knew there was always going to be a simple pleasure
to look forward to every few hours? What if you made sure there was? How
do you think you would greet the day? Flannery O'Connor generously
offered struggling writers advice. To one she wrote: "Wouldn't it be
better for you to discover a meaning in what you write than to impose
one? Nothing you write will lack meaning because the meaning is in you."
I believe this passion for discovering meaning extends to the art of the
everyday as well. Once you commit to cultivating the habit of being,
nothing in your daily round will lack meaning because you'll discover
that the meaning is within you. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 18

A Lesson from Loss Loss as muse. Loss as character. Loss as life.
---ANNA QUINDLEN

It was just another manic Monday for Nancy, Cheryl, Valerie, Kathleen,
Gilda, Elizabeth, and Patricia. Just another business trip, another
swing on the flying trapeze. Children were kissed and sent off to
school; babies were left with sitters; spouses were reminded about
soccer practice, the casserole in the freezer, the laundry that needed
to be picked up. Their day was frazzled or pleasant, successful or
disappointing. Does it really matter? At the end of it, perhaps there
was an opportunity to grab some small treat in the gift shop before
boarding American Eagle commuter Flight 4148 to Chicago's O'Hare
Airport. Waiting for them were loved ones eager to report on the day's
happenings, cabs to catch, connections to make. Instead, there were news
bulletins, phone calls, disbelief, devastation, shock, pain, grief,
hearts broken, dreams dashed. Nancy (forty-eight), Cheryl (forty-four),
Valerie (forty-four), Kathleen (forty-seven), Gilda (forty-three),
Elizabeth (thirty-seven), and Patricia (forty-two) never made it home.
For, as the plane was descending, the inconceivable occurred. All the
women perished in a fiery crash, along with sixty-one other souls. In
their final moments, did they realize they weren't going to make it?
What were their last thoughts? It certainly wasn't the deal made or lost
or how hassled their day had been. Surely their last thoughts were Real.
Maybe the faces of those they loved pushed away the fear. Maybe there
was no time for regrets. I hope so. I pray so. If we are alive, we
cannot escape loss. Loss is a part of real life. "Have you ever thought,
when something dreadful happens, a moment ago things

were not like this; let it be then not now, anything but now?" the
English novelist Mary Stewart asks. "And you try and try to remake then,
but you know you can't. So you try to hold the moment quite still and
not let it move on and show itself." Today might be tough for you. You
might not want the next moment to show itself, to reveal the twists and
turns of life's mystery. But at least you have it. You still have life.
A choice as to how you will live this precious day. Don't wish it away.
Don't waste it. For the love of all that's holy, redeem one hour. Hold
it close. Cherish it. Above all, be grateful for it. Let your
thanksgiving rise above the din of disappointment---opportunities lost,
mistakes made, the clamor of all that has not yet come. And if today is
so horrendous that the gift doesn't seem worth acknowledging; if you
can't find one moment to enjoy, one simple pleasure to savor, one friend
to call, one person to love, one thing to share, one smile to offer; if
life is so difficult you don't want to bother living it to the fullest,
then don't live today for yourself. Live it for Nancy, Cheryl, Valerie,
Kathleen, Gilda, Elizabeth, and Patricia. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 19

Compliments Nowadays we are all of us so hard up that the only pleasant
things to pay are compliments. ---OSCAR WILDE

All women need more compliments in their lives. We need to give more of
them to our families, friends, and strangers. We need to hear more of
them, even if we have to give them to ourselves. But most of all, we
need to bask in them. In our heart of hearts, most of us feel that we
deserve more compliments than we receive. But maybe one of the reasons
we don't hear as many compliments as we'd like is because whenever one
has our name on it, we return it to the sender. "Oh, this old thing?" "I
got it on sale." "It's from a flea market." "Do you really think so?"
"It was nothing." Remember, if we send good things away or aren't open
to receiving them, at some point the Universe may no longer bother with
us. And who would blame it? No one enjoys hanging around an ingrate, and
that's exactly what we are when we discount the marvelous about
ourselves. It's interesting that the first dictionary definition of a
compliment is "an expression of esteem." Perhaps we have a difficult
time accepting compliments because deep down we don't believe we deserve
them. When we aren't willing to receive praise, it's because our
self-esteem is flagging.

Today, be receptive. Start with the assumption that you're beautiful,
dazzling, absolutely fabulous. Ask Spirit to reveal how gorgeous and
brilliant you really are. Every time someone pays you a compliment,
accept it as if an angel had just whispered Spirit's appreciation. Smile
and say, "Thank you. How nice of you to notice." Become abundant with
your compliments to others. We're all so fragile, especially when we put
on a brave face. A sincere compliment can penetrate beneath even the
most sophisticated masks to soothe troubled souls. The woman you think
needs compliments the least is probably the one who needs them most.
Cultivate the habit of giving at least one compliment a day to another
human being, as well as to yourself. You'll feel good when you do, and
soon it will become one of your habits of being. Just as words can hurt,
words can heal. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 20

Complaints If you have not slept, or if you have slept, or if you have
headache, or sciatica, or leprosy, or thunder-stroke, I beseech you, by
all angels, to hold your peace, and not pollute the morning. ---RALPH
WALDO EMERSON

Complaints we know. Complaints we're good at. Most of us have already
mastered the art of the complaint in all its many variations: gripe,
groan, moan, kvetch, bitch, whine. Probably the only woman on the face
of the earth who doesn't carry on the way we do is Mother Teresa. One of
the reasons we love our close friends so dearly is that they allow us to
complain knowing that we'll return the favor. But if we really love
them, don't you think it's about time we started sparing them? Some of
us spend half our lives griping. It's time to get a grip. When we bitch
and moan we're not much fun to listen to; just because you can't see the
eyes at the other end of the receiver doesn't mean they're not rolling
or shut. Try new outlets to channel hostility: moan on your dialogue
pages, shout in the shower, blow off steam as you walk, or scream in
your car as you wait in traffic. Spirit's big enough to take it.
Besides, it's all been heard before. There's nothing new under the sun.
I'm not suggesting that we suppress our negative feelings. But the petty
stuff we're often foaming at the mouth about isn't worth the breath it
steals. Our words are powerful, so powerful that they can change our
reality---the quality of our days and nights. Moaning rarely makes
either us or those around us feel better. In fact, it often makes
everyone feel worse. Learning to shrug is the beginning of wisdom.
Alternatively, learn to be creative about your complaining. Barbara Sher
believes "in the efficacy of complaining the way some people believe in
the

efficacy of prayer." In fact, she encourages "hard time sessions." In
her book Wishcraft, Sher suggests that the next time you feel as though
you'll explode, announce beforehand that you need a hard time session.
Tell anyone in close range that you're mad, nervous, fed up, and not
going to take it anymore. Tell them for the next five minutes you're
going to lose it. Tell them not to pay any attention and not to take it
personally. Then run amok. You'll probably end up feeling much better
without having to offer apologies or wipe away tears. You may even end
up laughing. Today, if you must complain, at least be creative about it.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 21

Comparisons Let me remember that each life must follow its own course,
and that what happens to other people has absolutely nothing to do with
what happens to me. ---MARJORIE HOLMES

Comparisons are irresistible but insidious, odious, and very often our
selftorture of choice. Today, let's meditate on not coveting our
neighbor's husband, figure, home, clothes, income, or career. Not to
mention her accomplishments, achievements, awards, recognition, and
fame. Usually it's only one woman whose bounteous blessings push our
buttons of raging insecurity; we really don't care if most of the world
has more than we have, we only care that "she" has and we have not.
Often the subject of our hostility is not personally known to us,though
the life she leads in print is. Secretly we stalk the newspapers and
magazines accumulating evidence of her good fortune. Or she could be one
of your friends (deepest sympathy) which is horrendous, because you must
hear firsthand accounts of all you're missing at the moment. Whoever she
is, she's the devil in disguise, because you insist on measuring your
life, success, bank account, and self-worth against hers. Obviously, I
couldn't ruminate on coveting, jealousy, envy, and making oneself
utterly miserable with comparisons unless I was vaguely familiar with
this sin against authenticity. (All right, intimately familiar.) Would
you believe my favorite poem (and probably that of every other writer in
the world) is Clive James's funny, spiteful ode, "The Book of My Enemy
Has Been Remaindered"?

This is not good. This is not enlightenment. We're grown women. We're
bigger than this. Aren't we? Well, even if we aren't, comparisons hurt
us in profound ways. They undermine our confidence. Shut down our flow
of creative energy. Shortcircuit our access to Power. Deplete our
self-esteem. Suck the life force from our marrow. Coveting destroys what
is Sacred within. Instead of comparing yourself to another woman, why
not just take a wet leather lash and beat yourself senseless? It's
easier to recover from physical abuse than self-inflicted psychic
brutality. The next time you're tempted to compare your life to
another's, pause for a moment. Remind yourself, over and over, that
there is no competition on the spiritual plane. The blessings your
nemesis has received also can be yours as soon as you are really ready
to receive with an open heart all the good fortune created just for you.
And when will that be? As soon as you can bless the woman you secretly
curse; as soon as you can give thanks for her happiness and success as
much as your own because it demonstrates the abundance of Real Life.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 22

Compromises Compromise, if not the spice of life, is its solidity.
---PHYLLIS MCGINLEY

Whether you're single, married, with children or without, it's not
possible to get through the day without agreeing to at least one
compromise. There are little compromises, like car pool schedules and
homecaring jobs, and there are bigger ones like working conditions and
coexisting with teenagers. Tolerable compromises are those we enter into
fully---with complete knowledge in advance of exactly what we're
surrendering. The other kind of compromises---the ones many of us make
day in day out--- are the strong, silent type. They're strong because
we're stuck with them and silent because they're unconscious or
unspoken. Compromises are the art of the bottom line. We can bend only
so far and then we break. Knowing just how far you can bend is the first
step in making sane agreements, but this isn't as easy as it sounds. The
more complicated life becomes, the simpler your bottom line must be. How
about this. What must you have from this situation? What do you
absolutely need? If you need it, you must have it. It's non-negotiable.
If you didn't need it to survive, it---whatever "it" is---wouldn't be a
need. Then it would be a want. Unfortunately "wants" are the currency of
compromise. I want, you want, we all want, which is why we bargain. Keep
in mind that your want might be another's legitimate need. The best
compromises, like a workable lifestyle, cover all your needs while
satisfying a few of your wants. If you dread it, don't agree to it. If
you do end up doing it despite your dread, you'll depise the whole deal,
including the woman who agreed to it: you.

Be affable. Try to see the other person's point of view. Be flexible. Be
as generous as you can without gagging. Ask that the highest good for
all parties be achieved. Trust your instincts. Pay attention to physical
clues, especially your gut; it's there not only to aid in digestion, but
to serve as a reliable aid in discerning what's best for you. Above all,
follow Janis Joplin's advice: "Don't compromise yourself. You are all
you've got." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 23

Money and the Meaning of Life The problem of money dogs our steps
throughout the whole of our lives, exerting a pressure that, in its way,
is as powerful and insistent as any other problem of human existence.
And it haunts the spiritual search as well. ---JACOB NEEDLEMAN

Take a deep breath. Relax. Be open. For the next week, we're going to
think about money. The love of it. The lack of it. How we accumulate,
spend, save, and squander it, lust for it, worship it, worry about it,
work for it. Like success, money is an emotionally volatile issue for
most women. It's probably the most complicated relationship we
have---and the one that most controls our lives because we let it. "Our
lives are hell not because money is so important to us, but because it
is not important enough," insists Jacob Needleman, author of the
illuminating meditation Money and the Meaning of Life. If money were
more important to us, we would seek to understand its impact and how it
influences every aspect of our lives. In October 1967 Jacob Needleman, a
mild-mannered college professor of philosophy and comparative religion,
wandered into a San Francisco boutique that sold spiritual memorabilia.
A beautiful Jewish prayer shawl caught his eye, and he decided to buy
it. But the shop manager refused to let him pay for it with a personal
check. Totally out of character, the professor threw a tantrum. It
didn't work, but it did start him thinking about the role that money
plays in our lives. "Think of our relationship to nature, to ideas, to
pleasure," he challenges us. "Think of our sense of self-identity and
self-respect; think of where we live and with what things we surround
ourselves; think of all our impulses

to help others or serve a larger cause; where we go, how we travel, with
whom we associate---or just think of what you were doing yesterday, or
what you will be doing tomorrow, or in an hour. The money factor is
there, wrapped around or lodged inside everything. Think of what you
want or what you dream of, for now, or next year, or for the rest of
your life. It will take money, a certain, definite amount." It would
have taken only \$35 for Professor Needleman to obtain the coveted
prayer shawl if he'd had the cash in his pocket. Because he did not,
that object of desire, over a quarter of a century later, remains a
vivid memory. "It \[was\] a beauty---fine, delicately knotted fringes;
rich deep pure white silk." It was not to be his. But "in such personal,
apparently trivial events, the likes of which are experienced daily by
all of us, we may see what really lies behind our attitudes toward
money." One of the things we probably don't realize is how hypocritical
we are about money. We want it but we don't want to appear as if we do;
we fear and desire it in the same heartbeat. Professor Needleman
believes that money is a force we must face in the late twentieth
century in much the same way that sex was an issue for previous
generations. What is undeniable is that money is the raw material from
which we build our lives, whether we like it or not. One of our
difficulties is that too often we confuse spiritual yearnings with
material wants. For instance, you long for serenity. You assume that
serenity is a resident comma in your checking account balance. And while
being able to pay your bills easily---a practical definition of
serenity---often comes with a fatter paycheck, the comma requires an
expenditure of more time, creative energy, and emotion. The
redistribution of your life force means subtracting it from the
seemingly "disposable" segments of your life ---family time, personal
pursuits, spiritual growth, rest, and recreation---and moving it to your
work allotment. More work, more pay, more stress. More stress, less
serenity, no matter how much money you're earning. In becoming experts
at quantity instead of quality, we rob our souls of Real Life's
richness. In order to find balance between the two spheres that pull us
in opposite directions---material and spiritual---Jacob Needleman
suggests we consider the practical advice in the ancient admonishment
"Render unto Caesar that which is Caesar's and unto God that which is
God's."

"The entire problem of life in contemporary culture can be defined as
the challenge to understand that saying of Jesus," Needleman writes. "It
is not so simple; in fact, it is immensely difficult. It requires that
we begin to understand what in ourselves belongs to the transcendent
realm and what to the material realm. And then to give to each what is
due to each---no more and no less. This is what it means to be human.
Meaning can come from no other source than this." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 24

Worrying about Money Concern should drive us into action and not into a
depression. ---KAREN HORNEY

Worrying about money never paid a bill. If it did, at least there'd be a
legitimate reason for indulging in worry. Actually, worrying about money
repels, rather than attracts, prosperity---not exactly what we had in
mind. Worrying about money sends toxic signals: fear, lack, deprivation.
When your subconscious mind continually receives negative impulses, it
duplicates in your daily round whatever it was instructed to manifest,
such as fear, lack, deprivation. Don't panic. Every little thought
you've ever had doesn't instantly materialize. Thank God. The results of
our thinking can take years to appear in our lives, but as a woman
thinketh, so doth she experience. Here's a perfect example. Many people
assume that the reason that Amy Dacyczyn, the best-selling author of The
Tightwad Gazette (and a newsletter of the same name), raked in her first
\$ 1 million, paid off her mortgage, and hired financial planners, is
because her parsimonious philosophy was timely. Well, that's one
explanation. A metaphysical one could be that Amy loves money. For over
a decade before she started her newsletter, which led to her book, she
reveled in her passion every day. This love of money was characterized
by a zealous frugality and fanatical economizing. It still is. Here is a
woman who does not spend a penny unless it's pried loose from her hand.
Now Love is the most powerful positive emotion in existence. Love
attracts. Amy's positive cash fixation was expressed in continuous
thought. As she sowed, so she reaped. Eventually money began arriving at
her doorstep in royalty and subscription checks.

Now thinking about money every minute of every day until the millennium
isn't how I choose to live. But what are the alternatives to worry?
First, calculate whether you have enough money for all your needs today.
If you do, stop focusing on lack this minute. You probably have all the
money you need to take care of today's needs and more. It doesn't matter
how much more. Anytime you have more than you need, you have abundance.
Catch yourself the next time you start dwelling on what you don't have;
switch tracks by noticing and appreciating all you do have. As this
becomes a personal habit, you'll find yourself coping well with any
amount of money you have, rather than worrying about it. Worry is a
future-tense emotion. Worry is a projection of a possible--- not
necessarily probable---scenario. Will there be enough? Where will it
come from? How long will it last? My favorite anti-worrying-about-money
suggestion comes from Sanaya Roman and Duane Packer, the authors of
Creating Money: Keys to Abundance. Instead of worrying, consider what
actions you could take to create money. "Ask yourself, 'How can I create
money today?' There is an enormous difference in the energy you send out
to the universe when you focus on creating money rather than needing
money; the first is magnetic to money and the latter is not."
Transforming every "What will I do?" into "What can I do?" fuels your
fiscal creativity, restoring a sense of peace as you pursue prosperity.
'"Constant worry about money blocks your creativity and clear thinking,"
Roman and Packer remind us. "When you have very little money, you are
learning many lessons that will make it easier to handle money when it
comes. To break through this level, you may need to keep your life
simple and uncomplicated in terms of money, expenses, demands and needs.
Think of yourself as the rose bush that is cut back in the winter so
that it may grow strong in the spring." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 25

On Paying Bills Here are the bills again. I always dread them a little.
They are familiar presences: first in the mail box, then in the bill
drawer, now on the desk. Services Rendered. My life is dependent on
services rendered. ---GUNILLA NORRIS

I've paid bills when I could comfortably write the checks, and I've paid
bills when it gave me palpitations to do so. Believe me, solvency feels
better. Which is one reason why many of us put off paying bills until
the next paycheck, or next month, setting in motion a cycle of misery.
Bill paying becomes a painful issue, releasing toxic emotions that keep
us locked in lack. Of course we're not trying to stiff anybody. All
we're trying to do is make ends meet, which seems to get harder each
week. And then, when the ends don't meet, we panic. A few bucks in our
hands makes more sense than in an envelope on its way to a faceless
institution. But thinking this way only worsens our financial situation.
If money doesn't make the world go round, "services rendered" certainly
does. We can pay for those services more serenely, even when we're
strapped, by remembering that all financial transactions really boil
down to an exchange of energy. Someone provides us with energy in the
form of heat, light, food, gas, clothing, shelter, the ability to speak
to others over airwaves, or watch movies from the comfort of our
couches. We reciprocate by paying for those services through energy in
the form of money. If we pay with a check or a computer transaction, no
cash is even exchanged. Only

energy has been shuffled. If there's unlimited energy in the Universe,
we can tap into the supply if we make sure we don't block the Universe's
stream of good with our own negative attitudes. We can keep a constant
flow of money in our daily round through giving with love and paying
what we owe with gratitude. Once, in a flush season when I had no reason
to worry about money, I created a ritual for paying bills. At the
beginning and the middle of each month, I would set aside a half hour to
quietly, consciously settle my accounts. I'd clear my desktop, leaving
only my bills, checkbook, calculator, envelopes, and stamps in view. As
I worked, I'd play soft, soothing music, and sip a lovely cup of tea,
and pay loving attention to what I was doing. As a result, I actually
began to enjoy the experience. When leaner times arrived, I still relied
on the power of ritual to keep me positive. If I was feeling frightened,
I would retrieve the memories of when I paid bills with ease, recalling
the positive feelings of plenty: well-being, peace, security, freedom.
Since our subconscious minds cannot distinguish between reality and
fantasy, I would begin to relax. Even if my reality was not set during a
season of plenty, I gradually came to know contentment in the season of
enough. This does not mean I don't still have moments of panic when a
big bill arrives. But I have taught myself how to achieve virtual
reality when paying bills and so can anyone. Right now go to your wallet
and take out a dollar bill. Turn it over. What do you see? In God We
Trust. Place that bill, with the trusting side facing you, where you can
see it the next time you settle your accounts. "Guard me against the
arrogance of privilege, against the indulgence of feeling that I don't
have enough, and the poverty of spirit that refuses to acknowledge what
is daily given me," Gunilla Norris writes in her beautiful book of
meditations, Being Home. "Keep me truthful in knowing where I spend,
where my values actually are. "Let me not skip this monthly knowing,"
Gunilla asks of Spirit, as we all should. "Instruct me in judicious
spending and in gratitude with no holds barred."

OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 26

Spending Habits I don't know much about being a millionaire, but I'll
bet I'd be darling at it. ---DOROTHY PARKER

Without a doubt, we'd all be darling millionaires. We know that money
can't buy happiness, but we also know where to shop. The problem for
many of us is that too often we act as if we're already millionaires.
"Acting as if" is a very powerful psychological tool to help us make
positive life changes. We act as if we're confident and we become so. We
act as if we're clean and sober and we stay so. We act as if we're
serene and we experience more moments of calm in our daily round.
"Acting as if" can improve the quality of our lives enormously, with one
exception: spending money. You can't act as if you have all the money in
the world if you don't. You can't spend money as if there were no
tomorrow if you can't cover the check, pay off the charge card bill
monthly or barely make your minimum. As far as paying for your pleasure
is concerned, tomorrow always arrives in a white envelope at the end of
the month. I grew up in a family of spenders. My husband grew up in a
family of savers. When we got married we were the yin and yang of money
handlers. Now, after sixteen years, one of us has evolved into that
space of harmony that Aristotle called "the Golden Mean" and Buddha
called "the Middle Way." The other still saves. Taking the middle path
of money---Simple Abundance---is really taking the best from both
approaches; extravagance and asceticism. Extravagance offers
gratification and a feeling of abundance. Asceticism endows simplicity
and a sense of security. Simple Abundance offers it all.

One of the greatest gifts my husband has ever given me is the ability to
think before I spend. This is how savers behave. Savers don't get a high
from recreational shopping. Savers don't shop in order to make
themselves feel better. Savers have seen many sales they can walk away
from. Should they have to spend money, savers will ask, "Do I really
want this? Do I really need this? Can I do without this? Where can I
find this SO percent off?" Like naturally thin people who don't eat when
they're not hungry, savers don't spend if they don't have to. And they
certainly never squander money. Savers put aside for rainy days, which
is why they don't panic when the roof starts leaking. An interesting
eye-opener is to discover how much money you've earned in your lifetime.
Think back to every job and guestimate your earnings. If you've stayed
at home and your husband is the chief wage earner, calculate his salary.
You will be astounded at how much money has passed through your hands.
It's even possible that you've seen several million dollars come and go.
This comes as no surprise to Joe Dominguez and Vicki Robin, authors of
Your Money or Your Life, a guide to achieving financial independence by
transforming your relationship to money. "Money is something we choose
to trade our life energy for. Our life energy is our allotment of time
here on earth, the hours of precious life available to us.... it is
limited and irretrievable.... our choices about how we use it express
the meaning and purpose of our time here on earth." It's amazing how
this enlightened definition of money can alter the shopping experience.
Is that \$90 blouse really worth six hours of your life? This week, keep
track of your every expenditure, be it large or small, routine or
one-time-only, for services rendered or for actual purchases, and
whether made with cash, check, or credit card. Carry a small notebook or
index cards---one card for each day---to track your spending and see
where the money goes. At the end of the week, take a sheet of paper and
list your expenditures under these headings: Necessities, Comforts,
Wants, Indulgences, Extravagances, Insanity. How much life energy did
you spend? What was worth it? What expenditures make you sigh? With
happy recollection or with regret? Now look at the choices that make you
feel uncomfortable. What could you have passed up without a sense of
deprivation kicking in? Now take

that amount and multiply it by fifty-two. I'd be willing to bet that the
total amounts to a nice chunk of change that could have been saved
either for an authentic want that would thrill you or for a
peace-of-mind savings investment. And you probably wouldn't even have
missed it. Other suggestions for moving your spending habits into the
golden mean include leaving your credit cards and checkbook at home and
buying only with cash; enlisting the help of a friend who also wants to
bring her spending under control and acting as each other's conscience;
and not hiding your purchases. When you can walk into the house with
your shopping bags in the light of day instead of hiding them in the
trunk until dark, you'll know you've entered the moderate zone. Today,
be willing to gently explore your life-energy expenditures. Don't blame
yourself for bad choices. Do attempt to make better ones. Most of our
problems in handling money stem from unexamined patterns rather than
from uncontrollable urges. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 27

Quieting the Wants There must be more to life than having everything.
---MAURICE SENDAK

Yes, there is, but your material girl doesn't know it. About this time
of the year the shopper from hell reappears, and she's hungry. Be
careful, she can undermine every bit of progress you've made on this
path if you're not careful. Each day's mail brings luscious mail-order
catalogs, the preholiday sales have begun, and you've started thinking
about your gift list. Your material girl wants her share. Even if you're
experiencing "less is more" contentment, the world is putting on the
Ritz and it's hard not to be dazzled by all that's displayed. So many
choices, so many wants, so many beautiful things beckoning you to buy.
Attempts at deprivation or reason in these year-end weeks of temptation
are fruitless. But there is a savvy way to quiet the wants. Don't deny
them. Indulge them. Revel in your wants. Exult in extravagance.
Surrender to them. Let yourself go. Don't worry. I've not lost my
senses, but found them. You can as well, and you won't have to spend a
cent. Here's how: collect those mail-order catalogs each day, but don't
quickly flip through them. Wait until you can enjoy shopping slowly.
Circle in red everything that captures your material girl's fancy. Don't
let price influence you. Spiritually you have all the money you need. Go
on a shopping spree on paper. Visualize wearing that elegant cashmere
blazer, sitting down in that gorgeous chair, putting on that gold
necklace, entertaining with those beautiful dishes. Mentally claim them
as your own. Tell yourself "I can have that." Write down all the
particulars on a piece of paper, insert it in the catalog, and put all
your catalogs into a basket of their own. Now forget about things for
you and

focus only on the gifts you need to get for other people. If your
material girl starts to whine, reassure her that you've already taken
care of her wants. Then, after the holidays are over, peruse your
catalogs again. See if the wants are still there. Maybe you were given a
gift that satisfied the yearning. Maybe your original favorite has gone
on sale. But don't be surprised if you're no longer interested. Why?
Because you satisfied the material girl. You fed her wants with
attention. You didn't ignore, dismiss, or deprive her. You told her she
could have anything she wanted. But all she really wants is to hear you
give her permission. What you're actually doing with this exercise is
expanding your abundance consciousness by releasing mental limitations,
the ones that really hold you back. "When you repeatedly say, 'I can't
afford it,' your subconscious mind takes you at your word and sees to it
that you will not be in a position to purchase what you want," Joseph
Murphy explains in The Power of Your Subconscious Mind. "As long as you
persist in saying, 'I can't afford that car, that trip to Europe, that
home' ... you can rest assured that your subconscious mind will follow
your orders, and you will go through life experiencing the lack of all
these things." We quiet our wants when we acknowledge them. We can do
that on the material or a metaphysical plane. The best things in life
might not all come free, but the best bargains are discovered by your
own personal shopper: your subconscious mind. Honor your desires by
winnowing them out, so that all that remain are authentic.
OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 28

Financial Serenity A little bit added to what you've already got gives
you a little bit more. ---P. G. WODEHOUSE

We're zealots at pursuing financial security when what we really hunger
for is financial serenity. Financial security is never having to worry
about money again because you've accumulated all you'll ever need In
today's uncertain economic climate---when the only thing we can expect
is the unexpected---how long do you think it will take for us to
accomplish this? Financial serenity is never having to worry about money
again because you've discovered the true Source. You have access to an
inexhaustible, invisible storehouse of good. We don't have to wait
another moment for financial serenity. We can begin to experience it
today regardless of our economic condition. Financial serenity starts
when we accept as our truth that money is a state of mind and that
abundance is a state of belief. When we choose abundance, we become rich
in the Real. We attain true wealth. Of course, money is part of personal
wealth, but so is love, inner peace, harmony, beauty, joy, perfect
health, authentic expression, discovering your bliss, pursuing your
passions, fulfilling your Divine destiny. However, there are certain
actions we can take to increase our wealth. The first is choosing to
live on less than we earn, so that we can save and share more. Many of
us want savings accounts in theory, but psychologically resist them.
That's because we associate savings with deprivation instead of
gratification. For in order to save we must do without something else.
What we don't consider is that having a savings account enables us
eventually to experience authentic satisfaction instead of the cheap
imitation of instant gratification.

The way to start saving money on a regular basis is to think of it as a
positive choice, one that affirms your abundance. I call mine my
serenity account. As you save money, you begin to let go of limiting
thought patterns. How much should you save? Start with whatever you can,
but aim for ten percent of whatever money comes your way, depositing it
in your account before it goes somewhere else. Your savings is a
"positive affirmation that you have more than you need at the moment,"
Sanaya Roman and Duane Packer remind us in Creating Money. "As you feel
abundant, you become magnetic to even more money.... Think of how much
you would like in your savings account; imagine it as vividly as you
can. Imagine the balance you would like in your passbook. Envision
yourself putting money into your account. Feel the joy you will have
when you look at the balance. Picture your savings as your wealth
account. View it as money that is teaching you how to handle a larger
and larger flow of prosperity." OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 29

Affirming Abundance Whoever thinks that \[she\] is helping to keep God's
work going on the earth cannot help but believe that God will help
\[her\]. ---CHARLES FILLMORE

Another step toward financial serenity is taking on a "Silent Partner"
with a vested interest in your prosperity. This is done through tithing:
returning a portion of your wealth to the work of Spirit. When you
tithe, you acknowledge and honor the true Source of your supply. Tithing
is an ancient spiritual tradition and a universal prosperity law used by
the great wealthy civilizations---Egyptians, Babylonians, Chinese,
Greeks, and Romans---to ensure abundance. Unless you were raised in a
spiritual tradition that honors tithing, such as Judaism and Mormonism,
you may be unfamiliar with the practice and uncertain about what it
involves. Understanding how tithing works metaphysically helps skeptics
become more open to the ways in which its practice can enrich our lives.
Spiritual law, no matter which path, tells us as we give, so shall we
receive. We realize that money is a form of energy. Energy does not
increase if it's hoarded. Energy must circulate freely for power to be
released. When we receive an increase of money in our lives, giving away
a portion of that money keeps the channels of abundance circulating
freely, as Spirit intended. On a practical level, tithing allows us to
express our thanksgiving with action. Returning some of the material
good we receive is a tangible demonstration of trust. But also, tithing
changes our attitudes about money. We become expectant, anticipating the
best. We've kept our part of the bargain. Now that we are givers, we can
ready ourselves to receive.

Tithing will make you more magnetic to money, whether you believe it or
not. The mechanics of tithing involve taking one-tenth of all money you
receive---from earnings, gifts, or interest on savings and
investments---and regularly donating it to the church, temple, mosque,
or other spiritual organization that inspires, uplifts, and encourages
your personal growth. If there isn't one, your tithe can be given to a
nonprofit organization that carries on Spirit's work in the world,
caring for those unable to care for themselves---the sick, the hungry,
and the homeless. This is how I tithe. But each woman should consult her
own heart. My experience with tithing on the Simple Abundance path has
been erratic but amazing. When I tithe, I experience more financial
serenity than when I don't. The money seems to stretch further or my
expenses diminish. When I tithe I'm able to save more with ease, and new
moneymaking opportunities arrive, often unsolicited. The floodgates of
heaven do shower me with blessings, although I've not yet reached the
point at which I can't find room for more. When I don't tithe, I'm not
struck down, but I do start to worry about money. There seem to be
longer stretches between bank deposits and more unexpected expenses,
which always end up costing me more than the amount my tithe would have
been. So I know it's time to write a check. Wait and watch what happens.
Very quickly, the ebb recedes and the flow begins again. Coincidence?
Some people say if you don't have much money to spare, it's just as good
to tithe your time or goods. It's been my discovery that when I tithe
time, I receive more time. When I tithe goods, I receive gifts. If I
want more money in my life, I tithe money. When we're in great financial
straits, we think we can't afford to tithe. But when our financial needs
are great, can we afford not to try tithing? Or we tell ourselves that
if we ever get to a point in our life at which money is not an issue,
we'll be generous givers. I have no doubt. But money will cease to be an
issue only when we relax about it. Affirming our abundance now, by
becoming generous givers, dramatically demonstrates our prosperity to
the doubter within. Let your authentic self convince her and watch what
happens. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 30

Becoming More Magnetic to Money A lean purse is easier to cure than
endure. ---GEORGE S. CLASON

The wealthiest civilization in the ancient world was Babylon. Babylon
was famous for its fortune because its people as well as its king were
rich, enjoying a level of personal wealth beyond our contemporary
comprehension. The poor Babylonian was the exception, because knowledge
of the laws of prosperity was available to everyone. The man-made laws
of money created by the Babylonians were very simple, even for the
financially impaired. And they're just as true today as they were eight
thousand years ago. The path to personal wealth is regular saving and
sharing, controlling expenditures, living debt-free, increasing
prosperity through prudent investment, protecting the bulk of your
wealth from loss, owning property, establishing a future income for old
age, and increasing the ability to earn money through perseverance.
During the late 1920s and the Depression years of the 1930s, many banks
and large insurance companies distributed free pamphlets explaining
these ancient laws of thrift and personal wealth through parables
written by George S. Clason. In 195S a collection of them was published
as The Richest Man in Babylon, becoming an inspirational classic. The
first of the Babylonian secrets for achieving personal wealth was to
"Start thy purse to fattening." This was accomplished by taking a part
of all one earned---not less than ten percent---and claiming it as one's
own. This money was kept in a purse usually worn at the waist. The
purpose of the purse wasn't simply to save money but to act as a money
magnet, endowing its owner with a sense of financial serenity as it grew
fatter. When the purse became too heavy to wear, some of the money could
be transferred to a

larger savings chest and used for lending, trading, acquiring property,
and making investments. But a portion of the money remained in the purse
to attract more. Babylon's richest always kept a fat purse close by as
physical proof of their prosperity. Creating a money magnet is a
fabulous psychological ploy to jump-start a sense of financial serenity
if you're worried about money. A money magnet is not a savings account;
it's in addition to the money you deposit in your savings account. You
keep your money magnet close at hand so that you can see your
prosperity---touch it or count it as often as you like. You need some
money that is completely yours, which is why the existence of your money
magnet is to be kept secret. It's not intended to pay the pizza delivery
boy. A symbolic money magnet that's a personal favorite is to carry a
hidden \$ 100 bill in addition to whatever money I think I need when I
go out. The reason for this is that, no matter what happens, I'll always
have \$100 to spend as I wish or for emergencies. But it must be a \$100
bill, not merely \$100. You'll spend \$100, but you'll rarely break a
\$100 bill. (At least I won't.) This way you always feel abundant
without spending money. It's a terrific reconditioning tool to teach us
that abundance must occur in our minds before it can manifest itself in
our lives. OceanofPDF.com

OCTOBER 31

Make Room for Mystery, Awaken to the Magic To work magic is to weave the
unseen forces into form; to soar beyond sight; to explore the uncharted
dream realm of the hidden reality. ---STARHAWK

At last the bewitching hour has arrived: All Hallow's Eve. Some of us
will be accompanying little goblins on their appointed rounds; our love,
care, and concern providing their protection during the dark of night.
Many other women will be greeting high spirits at the front door with
sweet bribes, choosing to treat rather than be tricked. Wise choice.
Halloween comes down to us from the pre-Christian Celtic festival of
Samhaim, held October 31, the last autumn night before the cold and
bleakness of winter. On this night---considered the Celtic New
Year---the Druids believed that the supernatural world drew closer to
the physical world, so human beings were more susceptible to the power
and influence of the unseen. Magic spells could be cast more easily,
divination (predicting fortunes) was more revealing, and dreams held
special significance. Being Celtic, I still believe this. Being human, I
believe Halloween is the perfect reminder that magic flows through us,
mystery infuses every encounter of every day. We conjur up the shoe that
cannot be found anywhere in the house, transform leftovers into a feast,
coax bounty from barren earth, banish fear, heal hurts, make money
stretch till the end of the month. We carry, cradle, nurture, and
sustain life. We do all this and much more. But most women are not aware
of their tremendous power for good. We are asleep to our Divinity. We've
not consciously awakened to the realization that we are descendants of
an ancient, sacred lineage: the She.

Isn't magic what you're performing when you creating an authentic
lifestyle for yourself and those you love? Aren't you shaping unseen
forces with your creativity and soul crafts, bringing into the physical
world through passion what has only existed in the spiritual realm? If
you can do this unconsciously, how much more could you accomplish if you
were fully aware of your powers? O daughter of the She, much power has
been gifted you. It is the power of Love. Tonight by candlelight or by
the light of the full moon in your backyard, commit to use your power
wisely for the Highest Good of all. You have no idea of the countless
lives you touch in the course of jour lifetime. Souls searching for
Wholeness that could be healed with the magic at your command. Go
directly to the Source. Acknowledge your lineage and your authentic
gifts with a grateful heart. "I am sure there is Magic in everything,"
Frances Hodgson Burnett observed, "only we have not sense enough to get
hold of it and make it do things for us." Now we do.

Joyful Simplicities for October • Plan an outing to a pumpkin patch or
farmers' market. Select the perfect jack-o'-lantern, but get an
assortment of smaller pumpkins on which to carve different designs, like
checkerboards, hearts, or the moon and stars. Pie pumpkins are the
perfect size for creating luminaries for steps or driveways and the
midgets pumpkins make charming votive candle holders for dinner tables.
• Create a seasonal table. Set aside one small space on which to arrange
an autumnal still life: wheat sheaves, pumpkins, gourds, Indian corn, or
bittersweet, with bouquets of dried flowers and preserved autumn leaves.
• Preserving autumn leaves was a favorite pastime for Victorian women.
Select large branches, when the leaves have first turned their beautiful
crimson, orange, and gold, and before they start to fall, just as you
would flowers. Split the stems of your branches about three inches from
the bottom; stand them in a bucket of warm water for several hours. If
any leaves begin to curl, remove them. Prepare a solution of glycerine
(available at pharmacies) and water by combining one part glycerine with
two parts

water. Bring the solution to a boil, simmer gently for ten minutes, and
let it sit until completely cool. Cut the bottom of your stems at a very
sharp angle and lightly hammer the ends; stand your branches in the
mixture, storing your container in a cool, dark place until all the
glycerine mixture has been absorbed (about a week to ten days). When you
first notice tiny beads of glycerine forming on the leaves, remove the
stems, wipe down the leaves with a damp paper towel, and dry thoroughly.
Your leaves will stay beautiful and bright for several seasons. •
Pumpkins make very attractive natural vases for autumn bouquets. Scoop
out the center as you would for a lantern and fill with a damp oasis
(the floral sponge) cut to size. Arrange jewel-tone flowers, preserved
leaves, and vines in the oasis for a long-lasting arrangement.
Occasionally test the oasis to see if you need to add more water. •
Halloween is traditionally the night for fortune-telling. A delicious
way to do this is with a Victorian fate cake. Make a spice cake and
insert specially made silver charms into the batter after it is poured
into the pan. When the cake is cut, the charms will reveal the future:
the bell is a wedding; the thimble blesses the owner; the wishbone
grants one wish; the coin promises prosperity; the horseshoe ensures
good luck; and the button, domestic bliss. Remember how many charms you
insert in your batter and count them afterward! A safe alternative for
kids (children under twelve) is a charm pull, where the charms are
attached to ribbons and stuck into a ready-made cake. The charm pull
custom originated with Victorian brides. Visit the website
www.jewelrybyrhonda.com for a great selection. I also use the charms on
Christmas Day. • Dress up for Halloween, or at least find yourself a
wonderful mask to wear when opening the front door. • This is the month
to plant crocus, daffodils, and tulips outdoors for next spring's season
of showing off. • If you live in a four-season climate, take a Sunday
drive in the country to revel in Mother Nature's flamboyant fancy dress.
Pack a picnic. Linger as long as you can. • Mull cider and /or wine on
the weekends for an autumn cup of cheer, especially delightful after
raking leaves! The best mulling spices I've ever found are the
Williams-Sonoma brand, available from their shops and online at
www.Williams-Sonoma.com.

OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER All freezes again--- among the pines, winds whispering a
prayer. ---RIEI, EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY JAPANESE POET

November silently sneaks up on us, catching our senses by surprise.
Suddenly, as the English poet Thomas Hood sullenly observed two
centuries ago, there's "no shade, no shine, no butterflies, no bees, no
fruits, no flowers, no leaves, no birds." Outside, silvery gray shafts
reveal a familiar landscape stripped of pretense. Behind closed doors,
glowing amber fires shed light upon the Real. Like a woman who has found
her authenticity, November's beauty radiates from within. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 1

Embracing the Ebb The season when to come, and when to go, To sing, or
cease to sing, we never know. ---ALEXANDER POPE

There once was a mighty queen with a short fuse. One autumn, as the year
was beginning to ebb, the queen fell into a deep melancholy. She could
neither eat nor slumber, and tears of an unknown origin fell frequently,
which infuriated her, triggering angry fits that made those around her
quake in fear. Each day the queen summoned a new adviser from her
esteemed circle of sages to explain the cause of her baffling condition.
In they came and out they went: the court physician, the stargazer, the
psychic, the alchemist, the herbalist, the philosopher. All were
dismissed as charlatans for their inability to unravel the mystery of
the royal black spell. They counted themselves lucky to have only their
illustrious careers shortened. "Surely there must be one among you who
knows the source of my suffering," the queen cried in despair. But her
pathetic wail was greeted only with awkward silence, for all were wary
of her wrath. Finally, the royal gardener was moved by compassion for
the poor woman and slowly approached her throne. "Come into the garden,
Majesty, beyond the walls of your selfimprisonment, and I will disclose
your dilemma."The queen was so desperate, she did as she was bid. When
she went out to the garden for the first time in many weeks, she noticed
that the bright, vivid colors of summer had faded and the garden seemed
bare. But it was not, she saw, wholly bereft of beauty, for it was regal
in autumn's brilliant hues of crimson and gold. The air was refreshingly
cool and crisp, and the sky, pure

blue. "Speak, gardener," the queen ordered, "but choose your words
carefully, for I seek the truth." "Majesty, it is not your body or your
mind that is ailing. It is your soul that is in need of healing. For
while you are a mighty and powerful queen, you are not Divine. You are
suffering from a human condition that afflicts us all. Earthly souls ebb
and flow in sorrow and joy according to the seasons of emotion, just as
the seasons of the natural world move through the cycle of life, death,
and rebirth. These are the days to be grateful for the harvest of the
heart, however humble it might be, and to prepare for the coming of the
year's closure. Even now, the season of daylight diminishes and the time
of darkness increases. But the true Light is never extinguished in the
natural world, and it is the same in your soul. Embrace the ebb, my
beloved queen, and do not fear the darkness. For as night follows day,
the Light will return and you will know contented hours once again. Of
this I am sure." The unhappy queen considered this wisdom thoughtfully
and asked the gardener how she possessed the secret knowledge of inner
peace during the seasons of emotion. The gardener led her to a brass
sundial. It read: This too, shall pass. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 2

Caring for Your Soul Let us imagine care of the soul, then, as an
application of poetics to everyday life. ---THOMAS MOORE

Soul. Created on the sixth day. After the cherubim and seraphim. After
the dominions, virtues, powers, principalities, archangels, and angels.
After Light was called forth from the void of darkness. After morning
and evening were delineated. After space and time. After air, fire,
water, earth. After the sun, moon, and stars were hung in the heavens.
After the Universe began spinning. After its Power was switched on and
its Energy was charged. After the music of the spheres began the
celestial concerto. After the beasts ran upon the fields and birds
soared. After the garden was in full bloom. Only after all was made
ready---and the Great Creator pronounced it very good---only then, was
it the Beloved's moment. For the Beloved---to be known through all
eternity as Soul---was sent into the world on Divine breath as Spirit
laughed and cried. Soul was born in both joy and pain. Blown into a
handful of dust. Divinity was to live and move and have its being in a
creature made of mud. There you have it. Go figure. Which is precisely
what men and women have tried to do down through the ages. But even
reason, intellect, imagination, passion, poetry, prayer, art, sex, song,
and saxophone cannot unravel or fully reveal the mystical nature of our
souls. Let alone understand it. Obviously, after twenty-five thousand
years of trying, we're not meant to understand the essence of Soul. But
we can come to know her. For we were created for no other reason than to
love, nurture, nourish, sustain, protect,

uplift, inspire, delight, charm, and comfort the beloved presence within
each of us. Psychotherapist and writer Thomas Moore calls this profound
attention to the authentic needs that stir deep within "caring for our
souls." Today is All Souls' Day, a solemn day set aside since the Middle
Ages for remembrance of the beloveds who no longer laugh and cry with us
on earth. But All Souls' Day is a beautiful occasion for contemplating
how we care for our own souls, the degree of hospitality we extend to
these guests in our daily round, and the quality of their visit so far.
In order to approach "the depth that is the domain of the soul," Moore
urges us to become "artists and theologians of our own lives." It is
through "the small details of everyday life" that we make our souls feel
welcome. "Tending the things around us and becoming sensitive to the
importance of home, daily schedule, and maybe even the clothes we wear
are ways of caring for the soul," Moore tells us in his deeply moving
meditation, Care of the Soul: A Guide for Cultivating Depth and
Sacredness in Everyday Life. Today, be willing to ask your Guest what
she requires to make her stay more pleasurable. Ask often: "What do you
need at this moment? What would bring you peace, contentment, joy? It
may be to slow down, take a walk, hug a child, caress a cat. Flip
through a magazine. Call your sister. Send a funny card to a friend.
Take a nap. Order Chinese carryout. Watch a favorite movie. Have a good
cry. Find a drugstore with an old-fashioned soda fountain that serves
cherry phosphates. Solve an English mystery. Turn in early. Dream.
Fantasize. Pray. Whatever it might be, she will tell you. Ask. "'Stay'
is a charming word in a friend's vocabulary," Louisa May Alcott reminds
us. Stay, my Beloved. Stay. Say it now. Say it often. Come live with me
and be my love. Stay. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 3

Becoming Real Once you are Real you can't become unreal again. It lasts
for always. ---MARGERY WILLIAMS

On Christmas morning the bunny sitting in the top of the Boy's stocking
with a sprig of holly between his paws looked quite splendid. He was fat
and bunchy in all the right places, with a soft, spotted white-and-brown
coat, thread whiskers, and ears lined in pink sateen. The Boy was
enchanted and played with the rabbit for two whole hours until the
family directed his attention to all the other wonderful parcels lying
under the tree "and in the excitement of looking at all the new presents
the Velveteen Rabbit \[was\] forgotten." For a long time, the bunny
remained just another plaything in the nursery. But he didn't mind
because he was able to carry on long, philosophical discussions with the
old Skin Horse who was very old, wise, and experienced in the strange
ways of nursery magic. One of the rabbit's favorite topics of
conversation was on becoming "Real." Here is the heart of Margery
Williams's mystical tale of the transformative power of love, The
Velveteen Rabbit, written in 1927. The Skin Horse patiently explained to
the bunny that "Real isn't how you are made. It's a thing that happens
to you. When a child loves you for a long, long time, not just to play
with, but REALLY loves you, then you become Real." Becoming Real doesn't
happen overnight to toys or people. "Generally, by the time you are
Real, most of your hair has been loved off, and your eyes drop out and
you get loose in the joints and very shabby. But these things don't
matter at all, because once you are Real, you can't be ugly, except to
people who don't understand."

In order for toys to become Real, they must be loved by a child. In
order for us to become Real, we must become lovers of real life in all
its complexity and uncertainty. Like the Velveteen Rabbit, we long to
become Real, to know what authenticity feels like. Sometimes this hurts.
The thought of losing our whiskers and having our tail come unsewn is
frightening. In a world that judges by appearances, it's embarrassing
having all the pink rubbed off your nose. The Velveteen Rabbit isn't
alone in wishing to become Real without any uncomfortable or unpleasant
things happening. One of the ways that we become Real without too much
discomfort is by growing gradually into our authenticity. As you learn
to acknowledge, accept, and appreciate what it is that makes you
different from all the other toys in the cupboard, the process begins.
As you learn to trust the wisdom of your heart and make creative choices
based on what you know is right for you, process becomes progress. As
you learn to endow even the smallest moment of each day with Love,
progress becomes reality perfected. Your black-button eyes might have
lost their polish, but now these windows to the soul see only beauty.
You become not only Real to those who know and love you, but Real to
everyone. You become authentic. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 4

Return of the Goddess And write about it, Goddess, and about it.
---ALEXANDER POPE

She's ba-aa-aak! The goddess has returned with another book to lead us
from desire to fulfillment. Which one? Doesn't really matter! The
goddesses of gracious living, entertaining, decorating, fitness,
fashion, beauty, and relationships regularly appear this time of year,
keeping in motion the cycle of worship and words. It used to be that
goddesses performed miracles. Now they write books telling us how to
perform our own. Four o'clock on a cold November afternoon, and it's
already dark. Disciples from all over the Washington area have left
their jobs, homes, and families to await the Appearance, Signing, and
Rapture at the ceremony of the book-signing. The goddess will not arrive
for another hour, but already the faithful number two hundred. We're
everywoman: suburban mothers with small children in tow, executive women
in power suits with briefcases and cellular phones. The first in line
have camped out here all day. My daughter and I have only been here for
half an hour conducting field research on the contemporary goddess
scene, but already there are two dozen well-dressed women behind me.
Every now and then a bookstore employee comes out to remind the flock
that the goddess is signing only her latest offering and only two books
per customer. This particularly irks one woman who just minutes ago
bought ten copies of the latest tome to give to family and friends as
Christmas presents; no one ringing up the \$250 sale told her she
couldn't get eight of them signed. Now there is much grumbling about
nerve, fame, wealth, business empires, and goddesses who forget who
elevated them from divas

to divinities. But we are resourceful. Not all of us have more than one
book for signing; up and down the line the books are distributed and the
problem is solved. Instead of loaves and fishes there will be canapÉs.
Every once in a while, Katie comes back to give my aisle the latest
reconnaissance on the goddess's estimated time of arrival. Katie is
starved; it never occurred to me to pack provisions. I snatch two
cranberry tartlets the size of postage stamps from a passing tray,
wrapping them in a tissue for safekeeping in my pocket until her next
report. After another hour, fearing that I won't get to the front before
the great one must leave, I sneak behind the barricades up to the front.
I haven't waited this long not to get at least a glimpse of the goddess
in the flesh. But I get much more than I imagined. For behind her is an
altar: a gorgeous French country table of washed pine covered in checked
homespun. Upon it are mountains of fruits, vegetables, loaves of bread,
copper cooking utensils, and candles. In front of the altar, she sits in
a tapestry chair behind a cherry Queen Anne desk bearing an arrangement
of exquisite flowers that are only in season in designer floral shops.
Nearby, tokens of devotion from the disciples have created a shrine;
individual bouquets of flowers and a large pile of presents, many of
them wrapped in homemade wrapping paper, variations on a theme of potato
stencils. Frankly, I've seen more than enough. The goddess is as lovely
as her images; the altar is beyond belief, except that I saw it with my
own eyes. It gives me the shivers. I want to leave, but Katie is
horrified at the thought of going without getting our book signed. We
stay. By now, it's much too late to cook dinner, so we stop off for
burgers and fries. A few minutes later, I'm fishing for my house keys
and pull out the crushed tissue containing the cranberry tartlets. The
house is dark, cold, and forlorn. No fire, no candlelight, no animation,
no inviting aromas to welcome us. "A house is no home unless it contains
food and fire for the mind as well as for the body," Margaret Fuller
wrote in Woman in the Nineteenth Century in 1845. The crust is
delicious, but the cranberry tartlet is not as filling as I imagined it
would be. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 5

The Goddess Within Come, Vesta, to live in this Beautiful Home. Come
with warm feelings of friendship. Bring your intelligence, Your energy
and your Passion To join with your Good Work. Burn always in my Soul.
You are welcome here. I remember you. ---HOMERIC HYMN (TRANSLATION BY
FRANCES BERNSTEIN)

Ever since civilization began, women have turned to goddesses for
intercession and inspiration. For Roman women, the most beloved goddess
was Vesta. She, like her Greek counterpart, Hestia, was the goddess of
the hearth. Vesta is the one who urges women to be quiet, to sit, to
gaze, to listen, to prepare delicious meals, to bring beauty into our
daily round, to live through our six senses, to create a sacred haven of
security and serenity set apart from the world in order to protect all
we cherish. Vesta is the ancient goddess who calls on us to focus our
creative energies on the Real. In an unpublished book on ancient women's
spirituality, Frances Bernstein notes that the Latin word for hearth is
focus. Focusing is the sacred art of Vesta. Focusing is also a crucial
need today for women who spend much of their time rushing to fulfill the
inexhaustible demands of family and work. The faster we run, the more
conflicted we become. As we get nowhere fast, we lose focus and clarity,
existing in a perpetual state of confusion. Many times during the day
we'll speak of feeling "out of kilter," "spaced out," or "off the wall."
These expressions are quite apt because they accurately describe a lack
of centering within. When the center isn't

holding, it's because we've lost touch with the tremendous healing power
of our Vesta aspect. We have wandered far away from the sacred hearth
and don't know how to find our way back to heat, light, and warmth. In
order to regain focus, women need to restore a sense of "at homeness" to
their lives, which is what we are really attempting to do when we create
domestic goddesses. We glorify women whose public careers exploit our
private yearnings. It's far easier to live vicariously through their
books, videos, magazines, newsletters, television shows, or infomercials
than it is to nurture our own gifts. It is much more comfortable to
create goddesses than honor our own Divinity. Don't misunderstand me. I
love the goddesses. They are clever, savvy, and possess marvelous
creative talents. They have much good to offer us; certainly I've done
my share to make them all wealthy women. I need a new low-fat risotto
recipe just as much as you do. But there is a significant difference
between being an avid fan and a rabid follower. You don't have to belong
to a cult to become brainwashed. When admiration leads to adoration, we
unconsciously create graven images that diminish rather than enrich our
lives. We deny our own authenticity. Disown our passion. Siphon off our
own power by endowing women who clearly have enough our portion. Is this
what "the rich get richer and the poor get poorer" really means? Being
poor in self-confidence and creative energy keeps us in lack much more
than a lean purse. By worshipping false goddesses, we make another woman
the Creatrix, instead of honoring the Creatrix within. If you're really
seeking an authentic goddess, you know where to find her. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 6

Rising to the Occasion To be really great in little things, to be truly
noble and heroic in the insipid details of everyday life, is a virtue so
rare as to be worthy of canonization. ---HARRIET BEECHER STOWE

In real life, serenity depends on coping and coping well. Rising to the
occasion. Consider the following scenarios. You have a flat tire on the
way to an important business meeting. You find yourself locked out of
the house. You discover that your husband's college roommate is coming
for dinner in two hours. The pipes freeze. The puppy swallows an
earring. Someone's sick or snowed in. You're asked to send money, switch
car pool trips, show up for jury duty. One minute you're called out of
town, the next you're asked to step in on a moment's notice to save the
school bazaar. Real life is the collison---day in, day out---of the
improbable with the impossible. Longfellow believed that situations that
call forth our coping abilities are "celestial benedictions" in dark
disguises, sent not to try our souls, but to enlarge them. Just as dough
rises in a bowl, expanding before it becomes bread, we become larger
than we ever thought possible when we rise to occasions, performing
miracles with good humor and grace. Coping well enables you to see
beyond the circumference of circumstance, so that the Real in the center
of your daily round is not hidden by happenstance. Most women are
geniuses at rising to the occasion. But we've never realized how
extraordinary this talent really is, because it's second nature by now.
We've never given credit where credit is due, because we've never given
coping much thought. But if women who cope well ran everything, Nirvana
wouldn't only be the name of a grunge band.

We become more adept at rising to the occasion each time we see
ourselves doing it. Every time we cope well with whatever real life
throws our way, it's another deposit of confidence, creativity, and
courage in our self-esteem account. So congratulate yourself each night
for handling the unexpected with finesse. Well done. Today, when you
need to rise to the occasion, do it with style. Do it with a knowing
smile. Confound them. Astound yourself. Make it look easy, and it will
become so. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 7

Shepheard's Hotel She had been forced into prudence in her youth. She
learned romance as she grew older---the natural sequence of an unnatural
beginning. ---JANE AUSTEN

Christmas. Dublin. 1878. I'm hiding a handsome Irish patriot on the run
from the British police in a room beneath Neary's pub. No thought of the
risk. But that's just one of my many lives. Other nights it's 1915 and
I'm on the veranda of the Muthaiga Club, the "Moulin Rouge of Africa."
Or I may be watching for the guanacos in the mist of the Andes, running
bulls with Hemingway in Pamplona, sailing down the Nile, trekking
through Karakoram, whizzing across the frozen Neva River in a sleigh
driven by my devoted Cossack manservant, descending the steps at the
Paris Opera House with a suave Guy de Maupassant (or is it the fiery
young Toscanini?). Neither. It's J. Peterman, the last romantic man on
the earth. Peterman believes I'm mysterious, powerful, irresistible,
smart, sharp, sassy, funny, sexy. And beautiful, it goes without saying.
The kind of woman for whom a man would commit perjury or embezzle.
(Doesn't really have to do it, mind you, it's the offer that counts.)
The kind of woman others spend their entire lives remembering and
envying. Not too surprisingly, when I'm with him, I become that woman.
My authentic self. Sentimental. Incurably romantic. Emotional.
Impulsive. Passionate. Like Peterman, I lament the passing of a lost way
of life, especially since most of it was lost before we were born, when
romance was a part of the daily round. With Peterman's help, the days of
ocean liners, crepe de chine, train cases with secret compartments, and
Morris Minor roadsters can be summoned back at will. He travels the
world in search of the last vestiges of

real romance. When he finds a little piece of it, he has it reproduced
and tells me about it in his mail-order catalogs known as "Owner's
Manuals." No glossy pictures, no hard sell. Just personal vignettes of
what we were doing the last time I wore or used it, accompanied by
evocative watercolor sketches to jog my memory. I wait for J. Peterman
in the post the way some women wait for Fabio's appearance at the mall.
My trysts with Peterman are nocturnal, and always take place in bed.
There my soul mate and I reminisce, retrace roads not taken, and recall
risks not ventured, until there is no longer a trace of regret, only
fond remembrance. I knew J. Peterman was my soul mate when he poured out
his regrets for not spending a night in Shepheard's Hotel in Cairo. It
burned to the ground in 1952 before he could afford to check in. "That
night, it became my code word for everything unobtained, undone." I'd
thought there wasn't another soul on the face of the earth who mourned
missing out on
one-impossibly-perfect-night-at-Shepheard's-Hotel-in-Cairo. Peterman
knows the woman I truly am, even if I forget. He knows that I was
created in a burst of passion, for romance. So were you. Plumb the
female psyche and you will find an elegy of romantic remorse---the
unobtained, the undone. Melancholy fragments of unrequited loves that
stretch from our cradles to our graves. Regrets not necessarily caused
by lovers who chose to live without us, so much as by recollections of
the things we loved once but learned to live without. It could be the
novel you abandoned writing, the art fellowship in Paris you never
pursued, the black velvet cape that finally found you at an antique
stall but you passed up because, where would you wear it? (Everywhere.)
The love you couldn't return, the love that frightened you, the love
that you were afraid to express. The loving gesture that died in
hesitation. The romance of living that we let slip away every day
because real life forces us into prudence. When you acknowledge your
romantic impulses, no matter how implausible or impractical, you
strengthen the intimate connection with your authentic self. Connection
with those who cherish and love you unconditionally. Connection with
those things that fuel your passions, feed your soul, keep you alive.
Today, check into Shepheard's Hotel. What must you do before you die?
Where must you go? What worlds must you conquer? Begin exploring,

today, small ways in which to honor your sacred yearning for romance,
even if it's just by telephoning for a mail-order catalog. Bogart and
Bergman will always have Paris. Peterman and I will always have Cairo. I
have the bathrobe to prove it. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 8

Everyday Life Is the Prayer More things are wrought by prayer than this
world dreams of. ---ALFRED, LORD TENNYSON

In the beginning was the Word. And the Word was with God. And the Word
was God. Might I have a word? Some women know they pray. Other women
think they don't because they aren't down on their knees morning and
night. But they're up in the dark with sick children, visiting an
elderly parent on their lunch hour, supporting the dreams of those they
love with their work, helping a friend bear grief or rejoice, nourishing
bodies and souls. This, too, is prayer. For whether we realize it or
not, with every breath, with every heartbeat, women pray. We pray with
desire, longing, hunger, thirst, sighs, remorse, regret. We pray with
disappointment, discouragement, despair, disbelief. We pray with anger,
rage, jealousy, envy. We pray with pleasure, contentment, happiness,
exultation, joy. We pray with gratefulness, acknowledgment,
appreciation, acceptance, relief. We pray when we comfort, cheer,
console. We pray when we laugh. We pray when we cry. We pray when we
work and play. We pray when we make love or make a meal. We pray when we
create and admire creation. One way or another, we pray. Everyday life
is the prayer. How we conduct it, celebrate it, consecrate it. It's just
that some prayers are better than others. Conscious prayers are the
best. In its purest form, prayer is conversation. Communion. Connection.
Intimacy. Prayer is the dialect of Divinity. Prayer is actually the
authentic

conversation because you don't have to hold back; you can say whatever
needs to be said, exactly the way you want to express it, when you want
to express it. You won't be judged. You won't risk losing love; instead,
by praying you will increase your awareness of it. You won't have to
phrase your words carefully lest there be misunderstandings, because you
can't be misunderstood. Even if you don't know what you want or need,
Spirit knows what you're about to say, ask, beg, scream, or praise
before you utter a syllable. Then why do we need to lift up our voice in
prayer? Because it's not good for women to be silent. We need to get
real life off our chests. Get whatever's bedeviling us out into the
open, so that we can get on with it. We can't do that when we're stuck,
and women do get stuck, in a kind of self-destructive holding pattern,
when they're silent. "Every person's life is lived as a series of
conversations," Deborah Tannen tells us. Women pray because we need to
talk to Someone who's really listening. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 9

The Sacrament of the Present Moment There is nothing so secular that it
cannot be sacred, and that is one of the deepest messages of the
Incarnation. ---MADELEINE L'ENGLE

If everyday life is our prayer, the moments we offer up to create an
authentic life are our sacraments. The Book of Common Prayer defines a
sacrament as "an outward and visible sign of an inward and spiritual
grace." The put-ward and visible way in which we move through our daily
round--- the time, creative energy, emotion, attitude, and attention
with which we endow our tasks---is how we elevate the mundane to the
transcendent. Moments of illumination aren't just experienced by saints,
mystics, and poets. There are seven traditional Christian sacraments:
baptism, penance, eucharist, confirmation, marriage, ordination, and
healing the sick. But we don't have to think of the sacraments only in
religious terms, as Matthew Fox notes, for "the Sacred is everywhere."
When we welcome the new day, we baptize it with our gratitude and
enthusiasm; when we reconcile with another or ourselves and make amends,
we experience penance. Confirmation bestows wisdom. Marriage is the
sacrament of relationships. Eucharist is the sacrament of nourishment.
Holy orders or ordination is the sacrament of authority, and healing the
sick is the sacrament of Wholeness. It does matter how we braid her
hair, pack his lunch, send them on their way, greet their return, make
suggestions, change the contract, return the telephone call, pass the
pasta, pour the wine, listen to a friend, lift a burden, share a secret,
visit him in a nursing home, check for monsters under the bed.

"For the wonderful thing about saints is that they were human," Phyllis
McGinley reassures us in Saint-Watching. "They lost their tempers, got
hungry, scolded God, were egotistical, or testy or impatient in their
turns, made mistakes and regretted them. Still they went on doggedly
blundering toward heaven." OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 10

The Gaps Where so many hours have been spent in convincing myself that I
am right, is there not some reason to fear I may be wrong? ---JANE
AUSTEN

It's difficult for me to write about faith without also writing about
doubt. I'd love to write a meditation on the comfort of absolute faith,
the faith of Abraham walking in the desert with his beautiful little
boy, Isaac, on their way to make a burnt offering to God. They have the
fire, they have the wood. But where is the lamb? Isaac asks his father.
God will provide the lamb for the burnt offering, Abraham tells the son
he prayed seven decades for. Of course, this being a story about
absolute faith, God does provide. After an altar is built, the wood is
arranged, the child is bound, and the knife is unsheathed, an angel
intervenes. God provides. Faith breaks a heart in order to make it
Whole. But I can't write about the comfort of an absolute faith like
Abraham's because you'd never have found me walking in the desert with
fire, wood, my child, and no lamb. For Abraham, there were no gaping
black holes of doubt. Or were there? Not even as he held the knife
aloft? Once a friend told me of a conversation she'd had with another
mutual friend on God, faith, and doubt. In passing, she mentioned that
they both wished that they possessed my faith. I have no recollection of
the rest of the conversation. I do recall, however, my need to hang up
the phone, shocked that anyone should believe my fragile faith worth
emulating. Annie Dillard tells that the Old Testament prophet Ezekiel
was wary of those who hadn't floundered in the gaps before finding their
way back across deserts of the heart. "The gaps are the thing," she
points out. "The gaps are the spirit's one home, the altitudes and
latitudes so dazzlingly spare

and clean that the spirit can discover itself for the first time like a
onceblind man unbound." I hope to God she's right. For perhaps the gaps
are what make faith possible, especially when the pain is unbearable. If
there were no doubt, why would we need faith? Perhaps the doubts must be
acknowledged, accepted, embraced, and pushed past before our faith is
strong enough, not just to talk about, but to sustain. It's okay if you
hold your breath when you leap. Just don't look down. "Faith is not
being sure. It is not being sure, but betting with your last cent," Mary
Jean Irion reassures us in Yes, World. "Faith is not making
religious-sounding noises in the daytime. It is asking your inmost self
questions at night---and then getting up and going to work."
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 11

Amazing Grace Grace fills empty spaces, but it can only enter where
there is a void to receive it, and it is grace itself which makes this
void. ---SIMONE WEIL

Grace is direct Divine intervention on our behalf that circumvents the
laws of nature---time, space, cause and effect, the availability of
parking--- for our Highest Good. Theologians tell us that grace is an
unmerited demonstration of God's love, proof that we're not in this
alone. Considering that most of us operate under the assumption that
daily life is a one-woman battleground, it's no wonder we're amazed when
out of the blue, the Force suddenly seems to be with us. Grace is the
Force---a spiritual energy field that protects and assists. Grace is
Spirit's test flight; we seem to glide through the moment, the
encounter, the day, without friction. We experience Real Life. We access
grace like every other spiritual tool, by asking for it specifically and
regularly. In the morning you brush your teeth, put on the kettle or the
coffee maker. Now that you're awake, gratefully and expectantly ask for
one day's portion of grace. The kids eat their breakfast, get dressed
without fuss, and are out the door on time. The bus driver waits for
you. The day unfolds in blissful uneventfulness. Someone asks if you've
lost weight. You realize you're smiling at four o'clock in the
afternoon. You think, maybe there's something to this. The next day you
ask for grace. Eventually you get to the point where asking for grace is
as natural and as necessary as breathing. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 12

Celestine Moments These are only hints and guesses, Hints followed by
guesses, and the rest Is prayer, observance, discipline, thought and
action. ---T. S. ELIOT

Carl Jung called it "synchronicity": two seemingly unrelated events that
cannot be explained by cause and effect but are uniquely linked by
personal meaning. We call it coincidence. Serendipity. Luck. Chance.
Fate. We call it everything, but what it really is: Grace. God. When
chance events occur "at just the right moment, and bring forth just the
right individuals to suddenly send our lives in a new and important
direction," James Redfield tells us in The Celestine Prophecy, we're
meant to "intuit higher meanings in these mysterious happenings." But
most of the time we're too busy to pay attention. Too busy with real
life to give Real Life more than a passing nod. So the celestine moment
is written off with an "Isn't that interesting?" shrug instead of a
"What do you suppose this means?" inquiry. And instead of waiting for
Spirit's reply, we're off again in a thousand directions. Artists depend
on the higher harmonic of synchronicity. And because they expect it,
they receive it. Today, begin an experiment in enlightenment. For one
week operate on the assumption that nothing that happens in your daily
round is accidental. Cast a wider net. Pay close attention to your
dreams. Follow your urges. Honor your hunches. Use intuition as the
spiritual tool it is. Consider what movies you're interested in seeing.
Really listen to the lyrics of songs. If someone suggests something new
for you to do, try it. If a lecture or workshop sounds interesting, go
to it. Notice what

books you're drawn to. Strike up conversations with strangers who sit
next to you or someone interesting-looking who makes eye contact. Be
receptive and alert. See how many celestine moments you can accumulate
in the course of a day. The more open you are to synchronicity's role in
your life, the more magnetic you become to Divine assistance.
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 13

Answered Prayers God answers sharp and sudden on some prayers, And
thrusts the thing we have prayed for in our face, A gauntlet with a gift
in "it." ---ELIZABETH BARRETT BROWNING

Oscar Wilde believed that there were only two tragedies in life: not
getting what you pray for and getting it. "Answered prayers are scary,"
Julia Cameron admits in The Artist's Way. "They imply responsibility.
You asked for it. Now that you've got it, what are you going to do? Why
else the cautionary phrase 'Watch out for what you pray for; you just
might get it'? Answered prayers deliver us back to our own hand. This is
not comfortable." Very often the reason we're uncomfortable is because
we've not been praying for the right thing, and on some deep level we
know it. We pray to meet our soul mate, instead of praying for the grace
to become the woman our soul mate would be attracted to; we pray for
worldly success when what we really long for is a sense of authentic
accomplishment; we pray for more money, when what we need is a change in
our relationship to money. We pray for a certain outcome in any given
situation, when what we should be praying for is peace of mind, no
matter which outcome occurs. Actually, our prayers are always being
answered. We just don't like to think that "no" is a reasonable response
to our very reasonable requests. Writer Madeleine L'Engle admits, in The
Irrational Season---surely speaking for us all---"We don't like Noes;
and sometimes we like the Noes of God less than any other No." The
"noes" of Spirit are more of a Holy Mystery than the "yeses"; more
meaningful to meditate upon, after the tears, the fury, and the cursing

subside. The "Noes" of God don't make sense to our conscious, rational
mind, especially since we're convinced we know what's best. But do we?
Really? We want the "yes," but sometimes we need the "no." Consider the
disaster that would ensue if we answered a child's every request with a
"yes." That's too frightening even to contemplate. But we're children of
Divinity. We can't begin to envision the big picture; nor do we weigh
our requests against the prayers of others. Spirit hears both the
hopeful entreaties for a sunny family reunion picnic and the farmer's
plea for rain. You would be astounded at the relief that comes once you
stop assuming you have all the answers. When your prayers seem delayed
or denied, you need to ask Spirit if you re praying for the right thing.
If you're not, ask that the right prayer might be revealed to you. Very
often when we're told "No," it's to allow us more time, space, wisdom,
and experience to prepare for the glorious moment when, because you're
finally ready, willing, and able, Spirit answers you with a sharp,
sudden, and resounding "Yes!" OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 14

Miracles There are only two ways to live your life. One is as though
nothing is a miracle: The other is as though everything is a miracle.
---ALBERT EINSTEIN

We think of a miracle, such as a sudden physical healing, as an event.
Actually, the real miracle is not the event, but how we perceive the
event in our lives. Ask yourself which is the real miracle: when the
check finally arrives, the deadline is extended, the lawsuit is settled,
the exception is made? Or when you cope, serene and smiling in the face
of unbearable circumstances, triumphantly blowing everybody's
mind---including your own---with your poise and courage? Marianne
Williamson describes a miracle as "a parting of the mists, a shift in
perception, a return to love." The sacred continuum of Love is what
makes miracles possible: Spirit's love for us, our love for each other,
our love for Spirit. In her book A Return to Love: Reflections on the
Principles of a Course in Miracles, she tells us that once miracles were
all we knew, because we existed in Love. Then we woke up on earth and
"were taught thoughts like competition, struggle, sickness, finite
resources, limitation, guilt, bad, death, scarcity, and loss. We began
to think these things, and so we began to know them." Love was replaced
by fear. When we exist in fear---which for many of us is real
life---miracles become the exception, not the daily round. But it
doesn't have to stay that way. What we need to do is find our way back
home, back to our authentic self. There are many paths to Wholeness. The
one Marianne Williamson began taking in 1977 was A Course in Miracles,
which she explains is a "self study program of spiritual psychotherapy"
based on universal spiritual

truths transcribed by a Jewish psychologist in mystical dictation
sessions during the mid-1960s. Through a daily meditation and workbook
exercise, seekers learn to surrender all the ego's preconceptions---what
we want, need, and think will make us happy---exchanging it only for the
practical daily application of Love in our lives. "Whether our psychic
pain is in the area of relationships, health, career, or elsewhere, love
is a potent force, the cure, the Answer," she reassures us. The
introduction to A Course in Miracles states that the crux of the
three-volume, 1,188-page course is very simple: Nothing real can be
threatened. Nothing unreal exists. Herein lives the peace of God. In
becoming aware of this, we experience the miracle of Real Life. "In
asking for miracles, we are seeking a practical goal," Marianne
Williamson reminds us, "a return to inner peace. We're not asking for
something outside us to change, but for something inside us to change."
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 15

Heaven Watching Over You We all have angels guiding us.... They look
after us. They heal us, touch us, comfort us with invisible warm
hands.... What will bring their help? Asking. Giving thanks. ---SOPHY
BURNHAM

Do you remember the comfort and joy of an imaginary playmate when you
were a child? Just because the rest of the world couldn't see your
constant companion, didn't mean he or she wasn't Real. What's more, your
reassuring companion spirit is still an immediate presence in your daily
round---guarding, protecting, guiding, inspiring, and loving you---even
if it's been a long time since you made mud pies together in the
backyard. Angels are our proof of God's love for us, continuous
reminders that we're not alone. Almost everyone has had an experience of
being pulled back from danger by an invisible force. At that moment we
felt that Heaven was truly watching over us. And we were right. While
over two-thirds of us believe in the existence of angels, not everyone
is ready for an intimate earthly relationship with a Heavenly superior
being. For the last three years I've enjoyed an intimate relationship
with my guardian angel, whom I call Annie. As I committed to my
spiritual growth, I consciously sought a mystical friendship, and it has
brought me great joy, comfort, security, and peace. Annie's greatest
gift has been helping me relax. She frequently reminds me that Real Life
isn't a one-woman melodrama although I have a tendency to keep rewriting
the script. However much I'd like to, I've never seen her. Angels cannot
be conjured up on demand; they're not genies in magic lamps. However, we
can call on these constant companions to guide, help, and inspire us.

"Our angels know us more intimately than our parents or our spouses.
They care passionately about our well-being, and about our physical
health, too," Eileen Elias Freeman tells us. "They know what we do, what
we pray, what we see and say. They watch over the life and death of
every single cell, and they love us, because they are beings who come
from God, and God is love." Although there are more books on angels
today than ever danced on the head of a pin, Freeman's books, Touched By
Angels and Angelic Healing, are my favorites. She argues convincingly
that deep and abiding angelic encounters are only possible when we
become aware that the special relationship we really seek is with
Spirit. We may love the message and the messenger, but we should never
forget the One who sent it. As with every spiritual gift, we must ask
our angels to help us. We must ask Spirit to deepen our relationship
with our Heavenly guardians, offering thanks that the lines of celestial
communication are continuously open. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 16

Riding the Big Kahuna Ask yourself whether you are happy and you cease
to be so. ---J. S. MILL

Go with the flow. Catch the wave. Ride the big Kahuna. Wouldn't I just
love to! How about you? But real life these days rarely includes a stop
at Surf City unless you live in Malibu. Whenever we experience the Flow,
we experience a luminous liftoff: we're alert, soaring, unselfconscious,
authentic, moving at the peak of our abilities. We forget food, drink,
sex, sleep. Why? We're fueled by highoctane Love. Calling forth our
gifts at the top of our lungs to a celestial "Bravo!" Reveling in our
passion. We don't need positive-thinking mantras to motivate us;
happiness propels us at Warp 9 toward our aspirations. Obstacles
dissolve in the Flow. Toxic emotions, anxieties, and depression
disappear. We're in this world, but certainly not of it. Here we
experience a profound pleasure not found in the erogenous or erroneous
zones, a peace that surpasses our puny understanding. Exhilaration. Joy.
Transformative transcendence. What you're really looking for when you
ask the doctor for Prozac. What you thought sex was when you were
sixteen. The bad news is that we don't ride the big Kahuna often enough.
The good news is that the Flow can be invoked and induced; it's even
expected to become one of the most productive specialties of
psychological research in the next decade. For the last twenty years
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi has been pioneering the scientific study of joy,
scrutinizing altered states of "optimal experience," those moments when
we feel deeply connected with Real Life, which he labels "flow." He
believes that exhilaration can be part of everyday life, and I'm a
believer. Reading his incredible book Flow: The Psychology of Optimal
Experience might make a believer out of you.

What's more, going with the Flow is most often attained with simple
pleasures, even work, when we bring the right attitude and attention to
our tasks. Complete consciousness---focusing our psychic energy on what
we're doing---induces the Flow. As we learn to shut out chaos,
concentrating our creative energies within, our attention fuels our
ability to accelerate beyond our normal capacities. When working,
playing, or creating, ritual plays an important role in preparing our
minds, bodies, and souls to tap into the mother lode. The particular way
you arrange your desk at the beginning of the day, the soft pencil you
prefer, the music you listen to when you write in your discovery journal
is an invocation to the Flow. Small moments---reading, gardening,
cooking, arts, and crafts---take on new meaning when we honor them as
waves on which to catch the Flow. Exploring your family's heritage,
commemorating special moments or people in your life by collecting and
displaying talismans, can invite the Flow by linking the past with the
present. Varying the routines of your daily round can induce the Flow
because novelty increases the frequency of the waves; thinking of
lovemaking in new ways can fan waves of desire previously doused with
familiarity. Memorizing favorite quotes, poetry, songs, and facts and
enlivening our conversation with them, evokes the Flow. Mastering a
game, sport, or new skill activates the Flow process. But so does
solitude and daydreaming. Indulging your imagination brings the big
Kahuna within reach, because your imagination is your soul's way of
communicating with your conscious mind. "How we feel about ourselves,
the joy we get from living, ultimately depends directly on how the mind
filters and interprets everday experiences," Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
reminds us. "Whether we are happy depends on inner harmony, not on the
controls we are able to exert over the great forces of the universe."
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 17

Weather Report It's terribly amusing how many different climates of
feeling one can go through in a day. ---ANNE MORROW LINDBERGH

Today, variably cloudy. Moody. Didn't sleep well last night; up twice
with children. Much tossing, turning, churning. Could be time of month,
bills due. Heavy water retention. Alternating gray punctuated by streaks
of light, some levity but not quite sunny. Most likely at lunchtime, if
with friends. Foreboding, if lunching at desk. During the afternoon,
expect thunderstorms due to deadline approaching, boss's frustrations,
revised sales figures. Tonight, turning colder. Didn't resolve argument
with husband over upcoming holidays. Possible frost late tonight, which
will make for another unsettling day tomorrow. Many women today are
struggling with various addictions to drink, drugs, smoking, food, sex,
shopping, or sleeping. Most of these forms of self-abuse are frequently
discussed in books, magazine articles, and television specials. But
there's another "habit" that affects many of us but gets little airplay,
and that's addiction to the highs and lows of emotions. There was once a
period in my life when I could literally cry or rage for hours---and did
so frequently. I was an emotional drunk, bingeing on selfabuse with
tears and tantrums until I was exhausted, unable to be a loving partner
or a productive writer. Emotional binges aren't just a matter of
temperament; they can spell termination for relationships, careers, and
dreams. The only way I got sober was by acknowledging my dependence on
personal drama to a Source stronger than my instinct for self-sabotage
and finally surrendering the theatrics. I prayed every day for emotional

sobriety. One day at a time. I got therapy. I got better. I became well.
But I know that as far as emotions are concerned, I'll always be in
recovery. Sometimes emotional bingeing is precipitated by a physical
disorder--- PMS, manic-depression, or clinical depression, or by stress,
and fatigue. But changes in our emotional climate that disrupt and
destroy our daily round are anything but amusing. Becoming aware of our
emotional weather patterns is essential if we want to remain sane,
functioning, and well-loved members of the human race. Every woman has a
pattern, and everyone's pattern is different. If you don't recognize
yours, start paying attention. When an outburst of anger or tears
erupts, step back. Breathe deeply. Center yourself. Count to one hundred
before issuing an ultimatum. When you're calm, replay the circumstances
surrounding your emotional surge. You're frustrated. Why? How much sleep
did you have last night? What did you eat for lunch? How many glasses of
wine did you drink? When was your last period? Your last physical
exercise? You're enraged. Why? You're grief-stricken. Why? You're
resentful. Why? Deal with it. Talk to a friend. Write in your discovery
journal. Write a letter you don't send. Update your resume. Clean a
closet or purge files at work. Now that you're calmer, what one
practical step could you take to make the situation, if not better, then
at least tolerable? Yes, there must be one thing you can do. Do it.
Unfortunately, emotional drunks do not overindulge with the positive
emotions: gratitude, forgiveness, empathy, admiration, wonder. But we do
recover our authenticity and our equilibrium with joy. Cultivate
happiness. Hone your sense of humor; it's the most irresistible asset
any of us can possess. Smile, especially if you don't feel like it. The
physical workout of the muscles around your mouth increases the positive
enzymes in your brain chemistry. "The truth is that we can overhaul our
surroundings, renovate our environment, talk a new game, join a new
club, far more easily than we can change the way we behave emotionally,"
Ellen Goodman observes. "It's easier to change behavior than feelings
about that behavior." But no behavior can be changed before it's
acknowledged. And no addiction is beyond the reach of Love.

OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 18

The Blessing of Friends Each friend represents a world in us, a world
possibly not born until they arrive, and it is only by this meeting that
a new world is born. ---ANAÏS NIN

Angels aren't our only constant reminders of Divinity's devotion to our
emotional, physical, and psychological well-being. So are our friends.
Angels bestow grace and perform miracles; so do our friends. Angels are
Divine messengers; so are friends. God speaks to us through all those
intimate chats, conversations, and confessions. Probably because, if
we'll listen to anyone, it's to a pal who loves us unconditionally and
is committed to our happiness. Our friends are the jewels in our crown
of contentment. We need to treat them as preciously as we truly hold
them in our hearts. There are many ways to do this. Rituals of
friendship are especially meaningful. Take each other out for festive
birthday lunches. Share your favorite books. Read one simultaneously,
then get together once a month for afternoon tea or coffee just to
discuss it. Be on the lookout for newspaper and magazine articles,
recipes, and cartoons you can clip or photocopy and drop them in the
mail. Remember friends with cards and thank-you notes. Brief,
encouraging notes when tough times hit will be treasured, even more than
phone calls. Share resolutions or aspirations with a friend on New
Year's Eve. Go on walks together. Make annual outings a tradition:
antiquing, flea marketing, or thrifting together in the summer; holiday
shopping together in the winter. Once a year, have a swap meet of
clothes and accessories. When a friend's sick, deliver a get-well
"indulgence basket" filled with bedside comforts: something irresistible
to read, cough drops, tissues, assorted fruit teas, homemade soup, a
small, flowering plant. Send or give friends flowers:

spur-of-the-moment bouquets from a street vendor before you meet for
lunch or to bring a smile during dark days. When there's a death in a
friend's family, instead of making a contribution in the deceased's name
or sending flowers to the funeral (others will do that), wait a couple
of days and send her a beautiful plant or bouquet. It will comfort her
more than you can imagine. During tough times, put her name on a prayer
list. Sometimes our prayers for our friends are the greatest gifts we
can give them. Start or continue collections for a friend, adding a new
collectible each birthday or at holiday time. When giving a cherished
pal a gift, always give her something she'd never give herself, an
indulgence. Cook for your friends. During trying times---while a friend
is sick or under tremendous stress--- double a recipe and deliver a
casserole to her home. Above all, let your friends know how much you
love them. Tell them frequently how much you treasure the gift of their
friendship. Sadly, significant others come and go. Children grow up.
Parents die. Siblings are separated by distance. But our friends are the
continuous threads that help hold our lives together. Cherish your
friends, not only in thought but in action. "Friends are people who help
you be more yourself," Merle Shain reminds us, "more the person you are
intended to be." OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 19

The Kindness of Strangers Whoever you are---have always depended on the
kindness of strangers. ---BLANCHE DUBOIS (TENNESSEE WILLIAMS)

In the Bible, the angels who intervened in the lives of humans were most
often strangers who appeared on the scene just once, gave assistance,
and then disappeared as mysteriously as they arrived. From all the
published firsthand accounts, the standard angelic operating procedure
hasn't changed in five thousand years. From this day forward, start
becoming consciously aware of your encounters with strangers. Look for
them. Smile. Make eye contact. Strike up a conversation. You never know.
Even if it's not an angelic encounter, it might be a celestine moment.
Several years ago I was in New York hostessing a week of Victorian
lectures at Macy's. One day I was riding in a freight elevator. Not
thinking I was doing anything extraordinary, I held the automatic door
open for two employees with their arms full, asked what floor they
wanted, and made chitchat. "You must not be a New Yorker," one
commented. I told them I wasn't, and they broke into laughs. "Knew it.
No New Yorker would be this friendly or helpful." Later that day as I
was leaving, I was really struggling with two boxes of props and a
costume bag when I ran into one of my new acquaintances. Not only did he
offer to carry my boxes; he walked out to the street and waited with me
until he hailed a cab, sending me on my way with a smile. Never turn
down a stranger's offer of help, unless you're alone in a dark, secluded
place, where you shouldn't be in the first place. Life is hard for many
women. But gradually, I'm becoming aware that it's really not as hard as
we make it. One of the reasons real life is difficult is that we don't
ask for assistance---from family, friends, co-workers, strangers. We
feel

uncomfortable, as if asking for help is confirmation that we're
completely inept or spongers. Stop the rather self-centered assumption
that a little help is too much to ask for. Because we become a burden
only when we're overwhelmed by our own hubris and have to rely on others
to bear our load as well as their own. Be kind to strangers. Let
strangers be kind to you. Think of it as a positive exchange of comfort
and compassion in the circle of life. Remember, as St. Paul reminds us,
"Some have entertained angels unaware." And some of us have encountered
them without knowing, sending them away before receiving their blessing.
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 20

Blessed Be the Ties That Bind Call it a clan, call it a network, call it
a tribe, call it a family. Whatever you call it, whoever you are, you
need one. ---JANE HOWARD

Around this time of year we start thinking of family, sometimes
lovingly, sometimes with dread. Although the configuration of the family
has changed drastically since the Victorian era, what hasn't changed is
our need for close ties to those who call us their own. Real life often
frays the ties that bind families. Some families are separated by
distance, others by estrangement and obligation. Many women today care
not only for their children and spouses but also for their elderly
parents. Constant caretaking often creates strain and resentment between
us and our parents as we assume more responsibility for their affairs.
But it is possible to draw close to those we love if we plan for it. It
seems absurd that we must make time for love, whether it's carving out
time for a romantic interlude with a partner, setting up an official
lunch date with a sister, or penciling in a long telephone call with a
brother or a favorite cousin. But there you have it. I have a dear
friend who is absolutely marvelous about remembering her large extended
family and great circle of friends. The way she does it is to buy a
stash of cards regularly throughout the year for all occasions. At the
beginning of every month, as automatically as she does her bills, she
looks at her calendar to see whose birthday is coming up or what
holiday. Many times we have the loving impulse to send a get-well,
new-baby, or condolence card, but because we have to make a special trip
to get one, the loving gesture is lost, not through indifference but
inconvenience.

Be creative with your gestures. If you have a favorite meditation book,
get one for your sister and mother. Tell them that when you read yours,
you'll be thinking of them. Become an inveterate clipper of articles
that will interest or amuse family members. I keep scissors handy when
I'm reading and place the clips in a special basket. Every couple of
weeks, usually when I settle accounts, I'll drop them in the mail. You
don't have to write more than "Thought you might like this." The gesture
takes a total of five minutes from clipping to putting a stamp on the
envelope, but the cheer it brings is amazing. If you live away from
family members, schedule telephone calls on a regular basis. Elderly
parents need the reassurance of a weekly check-in that they can count on
and look forward to. We all remember the children in our extended
families around the holidays, but it takes a little extra effort to
remember the kids' birthdays. There are more hurt and silent feelings
smoldering over this one omitted gesture than you can imagine. Try to
make the effort. Not having time, or "meaning to," really doesn't cut
it. None of us have time, all of us mean to. We all can do it, once we
make thoughtfulness easy with a system. Share family stories. Record
them on audiotapes so they won't get lost. Especially have your parents
and grandparents record their memories. After he's gone, the sound of
your father's voice will break your heart but heal your soul. Go through
your old family photographs and have copies made for everyone. Start an
extended family video record. Try to get together annually. After a
friend's mother died, there was a small amount of insurance money to be
divided among the grown children. She and her siblings didn't want to
drift apart, but they knew they'd have to make an effort to stay close
since everyone lived so far from each other. They created a reunion fund
to pay for lodging and food so that everyone could get together each
summer. She says it was the first few reunions that were so crucial;
after that, a new family tradition had been established. Now my friend
feels closer to her brothers and sisters as an adult than she ever did
as a child. Simone Weil believed, "To be rooted is perhaps the most
important and least recognized need of the human soul." That's a
wonderful thought to meditate upon this Thanksgiving.

OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 21

Playing Hooky You must have been warned against letting the golden hours
slip by. Yes, but some of them are golden only because we let them slip.
---J. M. BARRIE

Today let's meditate with our calendars open. How does your week look?
Which day could you take off without your world grinding to a halt
because you're temporarily unavailable to keep it spinning? Good. Now
write in, "mental health day." Remember the "mental health" days we'd
cite in high school in order to drop out for a day? It's time to revive
the tradition. Don't feel guilty about calling in sick; this is
preventive action. Sometimes I wish I were a physician specializing in
women's medicine. I would surprise each one of my patients annually with
a written prescription to play hooky for a day. I would convince them
that hooky is absolutely necessary for their good health: physical and
psychological. Then I would give them an official note excusing them
from real life. I think the crucial reason it's so difficult to be a
grown-up is that there's no one to write a note for us excusing us from
the job, the marriage, caring for Mom, and driving the car pool. Don't
worry. I'll write your note. Will you write mine? Playing hooky is not
the same as "sitting one out." When---because you simply can't stand it
anymore---you sit one out by taking a sick day or a vacation day, you
don't have the creative energy for "hookiness." When we play hooky, the
operative word here is "play" and no one's to know it but your authentic
self. (Or a good friend who's playing hooky with you.) Send your husband
off to work, call in and say you'll see whomever tomorrow, take the kids
to day care. If you're at home, call a sitter or arrange with another
mother to exchange hooky days.

Now you have approximately eight hours to call your own. Do whatever
seems most frivolous, most totally self-indulgent. Get a European body
wrap, a pedicure, a cosmetic makeover, or a facial. Treat yourself to an
aromatherapy massage. Pretend you're a tourist and take in the local
attractions. Go to the movies. Go out to lunch in another part of town.
Stay at home watching soap operas, talk shows, classic sitcoms, or
cinema on cable. Rent Ferris Bueller's Day Off. Read a fabulous novel in
one sitting with a small box of Godiva chocolates in your lap. Don't
answer the phone. Only do what you want to do, not what needs to be
done. Pick up the kids and your favorite carryout food. When your day is
over, all you've accomplished is caring for your soul. Luxuriate in your
idleness. "It is impossible to enjoy idling thoroughly unless one has
plenty of work to do," the Victorian British writer Jerome K. Jerome
confessed. "There's no fun in doing nothing when you have nothing to
do.... Idleness, like kisses, to be sweet must be stolen."
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 22

Meditation for Bad Girls It's so easy to be wicked without knowing it,
isn't it? ---ANNE SHIRLEY (L. M. MONTGOMERY)

A friend and I were chatting away on the phone when she blithely
confessed doing something totally outrageous but hilarious. "You're so
bad," I admonished her with admiration (especially because ninety-nine
percent of the time she is too good for her own good). After we stopped
laughing long enough to catch our breath, she suggested that bad girls
have something to teach the rest of us. How to spot a bad girl. Bad
girls sip only champagne and cocktails---not beer, wine, sherry, mineral
water, cafÉ lÁtte, or Darjeeling tea. (Think Martinis, Stingers, Black
Russians.) Bad girls prefer spandex, halters, high heels, fishnet
stockings, silk, suede, leather, or white satin cut on the bias and
black satin cut down to here. Bad girls have blond, raven, or flaming
tresses, red mouths and nails. Think Mae West, Rita Hayworth, Ava
Gardner. (But the baddest girls have mousy brown hair.) Bad girls wear
capri pants, mules, cashmere or mohair twinsets, silk scarves covering
their pin curls, and black sunglasses to the grocery store, then don
black tuxedos and silver fox boas at night. Bad girls are in touch with
their inner bitch because they run with dobermans wearing studded black
leather collars. Bad girls travel to Vegas with their ex's gold card
while their own name is still on it. Are passionately loyal to their
friends. Have been known to torture those who break the hearts of pals.
Bad girls call the psychic friends network. Have their own astrologer.
Know a cusp is not an intimately transmitted condition. Bad girls listen
to Billie Holiday. Know the importance of

regular waxing. Bad girls exercise muscles the rest of us don't even
know we have. Bad girls smell expensive and never leave the house
without wearing fabulous earrings. Read Nietzsche. Buy the National
Enquirer. Can pronounce Goethe and recite Fleurs du Mal. Bad girls use
cigarette holders; really bad girls attend cigar dinners. Bad girls like
disguise: they like presenting themselves as perfect moms, ice
princesses, and librarians. Bad girls are passionate while the rest of
the world is cool. Prefer gold to silver. Bare their midriffs, never
their souls. Bad girls make hay on Ralph Lauren sheets. But bad girls
never marry for love, which is why they often change their names. Really
bad girls have numbered bank accounts. Bad girls know it's not the cards
you're dealt but how well you play your hand. Bad girls win at
blackjack. Vacation at backgammon tournaments in Monaco. Frequent pool
halls but shoot billiards. Have a bookie, accountant, and lawyer on
retainer. Bad girls send large checks to good causes and never take a
tax deduction. Bad girls don't just want to have fun, they make sure
they do. Bad girls are committed to the philosophy of personal pleasure.
Most of us are only bad girls in our dreams. But there's a pattern in
the bad-girl lifestyle that deserves contemplation. Bad girls buy what
they want to buy, eat what they want to eat, wear what they want to
wear, sleep when they want to sleep. Bad girls do not have therapists
because they don't need them. Instead, bad girls have housekeepers and
masseuses. Bad girls realize this isn't a dress rehearsal. Real life is
what you make of it. You can be bad. You can be good. You just sure as
hell better be authentic. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 23

True Thanksgiving An open home, an open heart, here grows a bountiful
harvest. ---JUDY HAND

The turkey is in the oven, filling the air with the fragrance of
anticipation, and my heart is glad. The pies are cooling on the rack,
overflowing with the fruits of the earth, and my heart is full.
Conversation, companionship, and conviviality transform the rooms of
this beloved home, and my heart is at peace. Soon dear ones---family and
cherished friends---will gather at the table to rejoice in our bounty of
blessings, and with us lift up their hearts in thanksgiving. As the
table is set, my heart gratefully remembers the legacy of love and
tradition represented in the talismans of freshly laundered linens,
sparkling crystal, and gleaming china. The silver shines, the candles
glow, the flowers delight us with their beauty. This is good. This is
very good. Let us hold fast to this authentic moment of Simple
Abundance. Let us cherish this feeling of complete contentment. Let us
rejoice and praise the Giver of all good. The English novelist Thomas
Hardy believed that the days of declining autumn created an inner season
in which we could live "in spiritual altitudes more nearly approaching
ecstasy" than at any other time of the year. Let us exult in our souls'
ecstatic accord. Come, my thankful sisters, come. Offer grace for the
bounty of goodness. Raise the song of harvest home, the glass of good
cheer, the heart overflowing with joy. We have so much for which to be
thankful. So much about which to smile, so much to share. So much, that
in this season of

plenty, we can embrace the season of relinquishment. All we have is all
we need. O beloved Spirit, truly you have given us so much, an
extravagance of riches. Give us, we pray, one thing more. The gift of
grateful hearts. Hearts that will not forget what You have done.
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 24

The Blessing of Health The first wealth is health. ---RALPH WALDO
EMERSON

At this time of year our conscious attention often turns to what we
don't have rather than what we do---and for a very good reason. The
season of nonstop shopping has arrived. With Thanksgiving only just
behind us, the race to get ready for the next round of holidays begins.
No sooner have we celebrated the season of plenty than, with the advent
of the first official days of Christmas shopping, we enter four frenetic
weeks of looking, finding, buying, and ordering---but not for ourselves.
We feel overwhelmed by a season of lack. So before we head to the mall,
it would do our souls good to have a reality check, in the form, not
only of counting our blessings, but of focusing on them. Money is going
to have to buy a lot in the next few weeks, but it can't buy the gifts
that count most: good health, a loving and supportive marriage, healthy
children, the fulfillment of creative expression, and inner peace. We
forget this, not because we're ungrateful louts, but because we get
distracted with the razzamatazz of real life. Now is the time to
remember. What if I gave you a choice. You're guaranteed all the above
joys but not a BMW in the driveway. Or you are guaranteed a BMW in the
driveway, with the cash to pay comfortably for the luxury home adjacent
to it, but you'll have to throw the dice for the Real Life blessings.
Which would you choose? The blessing we'll meditate on today is health.
We can't buy good health, no matter how much money we have. We can
purchase the best medical treatment available in the world, but good
health is not for sale. Health is a priceless gift from Spirit that most
of us take for granted until

we become sick. "One of the most sublime experiences we can ever have is
to wake up feeling healthy after we have been sick," Rabbi Harold
Kushner reminds us in Who Needs God. "Even if it is only relief from a
headache or toothache, the health we take for granted most of the time
is suddenly seen to be an incredible blessing." Today, realize if you
have nothing else but your health, you are a wealthy woman. If you have
a healthy mind, a healthy heart, and reserves of stamina and creative
energy to draw on, the world is literally lying at your feet. With your
health you have everything. But health is not just the absence of
sickness. Good health is vitality, vigor, high energy, emotional
equilibrium, mental clarity, and physical endurance. These are the gifts
to pray for, not just that your credit charge purchases will be approved
and you won't have to slink away in disgrace. Take your vitamins. Thank
Spirit for the health you enjoy, and ask for more. If there is only one
spiritual lesson I can inscribe on your consciousness, it's to ask. Ask
and you shall receive. Ask and if you don't get it, at least you tried.
Ask and be specific. Today, why not ask for the creative and physical
energy you'll need, not just to survive the holiday season, but to enjoy
it? OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 25

When You're Sick Illness is the doctor to whom we pay most heed; to
kindness, to knowledge, we make promises only; pain we obey. ---MARCEL
PROUST

You feel like you're dying, you look like you're dying, and you sound
like you're dying," my doctor said while studying my lab slips and X
ray. "Thankfully, you're not. You've got a relapse of the flu, infected
sinuses, and now pleurisy. I want you to take an antibiotic and go back
to bed where you belong until you're well enough to be up, which could
be another week to ten days." When I feebly protested that I'd already
been sick with the flu for three weeks and that I was far behind in my
work, my doctor nodded sympathetically. "Well, go home then, take your
medicine, put on your pajamas," she advised, "and write a meditation
about how important it is to take care of yourself when you're sick. But
I will be very angry if the next time we meet it's in the hospital." I
did as I was told. Sort of. I send this dispatch from underneath the
covers. Most women don't go to bed when they're sick because they can't.
The children still need to be taken care of, the work still has to get
done, the meals still have to be made, life marches on. So you stagger
around like Typhoid Mary until you drop. One morning you just can't move
and with good reason. You're sick. For a day or two---at the most---you
allow yourself a reprieve. Your mate and/or the children of the
household solicitously inquire if there's anything you need, then
quietly close the bedroom door so you can rest. Frequently, they'll poke
their heads in to check on you because the sight of mother prone on the
bed for more than two hours registers a 6.5 on their personal Richter
scales. "Feeling better

yet?" you're asked cheerfully. Eventually, after this question has been
posed enough times, you say you do, even if you don't. You get out of
bed, get dressed, and get ready once again to swallow swords while
juggling flaming torches. The show must go on. But sometimes we can't
get up. Sometimes we're so run-down that we can't shake the flu standing
up, or our bad cold becomes bronchitis or we break a bone, slip a disc.
Sometimes the unthinkable confronts us: a lump in the breast, a high
white-cell blood count, a whack on the head, chest pains that stun us
into submission. We're not asked politely if we'd like to pause on the
path for a refreshing respite. We're abruptly ordered to a halt. The
deeply spiritual Southern writer Flannery O'Connor came to believe, "In
a sense sickness is a place more instructive than a long trip to Europe,
and it's always a place where there's no company, where nobody can
follow." The next time you're sick, stop feeling guilty about it. And
quit operating under the deranged and dangerous delusion that it's all
under jour control. Instead of setting yourself up for a fall, give
yourself permission to drop out for as long as you really need to in
order to (1) get well and (2) gently explore this strange but temporary
detour. Be as open to new insights as an inquisitive tourist would be.
If I'd never sustained a head injury ten years ago, I don't think I
would have started my own business, written a syndicated newspaper
column, or eventually published three books. My nearly two years'
arbitrary sabbatical provided me with the opportunity to strike out on a
new path after I recovered. Every illness, from a cold to cancer, has a
life-affirming lesson for us if we're willing to be taught. It can be
simple or profound. Learning to take better care of ourselves in the
future in order to stay healthy. Bringing more harmony into our daily
affairs. Balancing our need for rest and recreation with the demands of
responsibility. Appreciating the subtle nuances of the dark days as well
as the light-filled ones. Seeking Wholeness as well as healing.
Searching not just for a possible cure, but for the probable cause.
Flannery O'Connor searched for the positive aspects of her illness until
she viewed her tutorial with lupus as "one of God's mercies." We may
never become that enlightened. But the next time you're not feeling
well, please cradle yourself gently with kindness and compassion. You'll
be better for it.

OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 26

Rx for Harried Hearts and Frazzled Minds There is hope for all of us.
Well, anyway, if you don't die you live through it, day in, day out.
---MARY BECKETT

Some nights waves of weariness beat against our brains, crash against
our hearts, wash over our bodies, threatening to erode our best defenses
like sand dunes upon the shore. The water is cold, dark, and deep.
Diversions that have worked in the past---drink, drugs, food, sex,
shopping, work--- now obscure a dangerous undertow. Nothing seems to
hold back the tide. We need some-one to throw us a line, to rescue us
from drowning in disappointment. When these nights come and I find I'm
stranded alone on the beach of faltering belief, I have found refuge in
a very centering and comforting prayer by Dame Julian of Norwich, a
thirteenth-century English mystic: All shall be well, And all shall be
well, And all manner of things shall be well. This simple affirmation of
faith is especially comforting because it seems to console the dark
submerged sadnesses of the inexplicable, the unexpressed, the
unresolved, the unfair and the undeniable that stalk my soul after I
close my eyes. I'll say the prayer over and over again softly, under my
breath like a mantra, not trying to understand the meaning of the words
because I can't. Some mysteries are beyond our comprehension. Some
mysteries we will never solve. Never know.

So instead of trying to make sense of it all, I'll simply let the Spirit
of the words soothe my frazzled mind and harried heart until sleep
comes. Sometimes we can't make sense of it. Sometimes none of it makes
sense. Sometimes it just is. But if we can hold on long enough for this
night to give way to another day, all shall be well, even if it's
different from what we had expected. Even if it's different from what we
had hoped for and believed with all our hearts would happen. All shall
be well, And all shall be well, And all manner of things shall be well.
OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 27

What Women Want The great question ... which I have not been able to
answer, despite my thirty years of research into the feminine soul, is
"What does a woman want?" ---SIGMUND FREUD

A nap, Dr. Freud. A nap. Now. Today. All right, if not today, at least
on Sunday afternoon. This is the platform I'll run on: eight hours of
work, eight hours of rest, eight hours to do whatever we please. Should
one of those pleasant hours be spent napping on your bed under a cozy
comforter, door closed, curtains drawn, I would pronounce you a woman of
great discernment. A nap is not to be confused with sleeping. We sleep
to recharge our bodies. We nap to care for our souls. When we nap, we
are resting our eyes while our imaginations soar. Getting ready for the
next round. Sorting, sifting, separating the profound from the profane,
the possible from the improbable. Rehearsing our acceptance speech for
the Nobel Prize, our surprise on receiving the MacArthur genius award.
This requires a prone position. If we're lucky, we might drift off, but
we won't drift far. Just far enough to ransom our creativity from chaos.
Where to have a proper nap? Your own bedroom. On the living room couch
when you visit your parents because the grandchildren have been told to
leave their poor mother alone and go outside to play (just the way you
were told when you were little and your poor mother wanted to be alone).
Or in a hammock. On a chaise lounge. Under an umbrella on the beach. In
a wingback chair in front of a fire. How long do we nap? One hour at the
very least.

How do we do this if we have small children at home? We nap when they
nap. But they don't nap, you say. They do now. How do you nap at the
office? Unfortunately, you don't, unless you shut the door and put your
head on the desk for a quickie. Usually this is reserved for when our
eyes are sizzling out of their sockets. Which makes the tradition of the
Sunday nap all the more essential. If you want to be happy for the rest
of your life, napping is not optional. How do you begin this tradition?
Sunday at three o'clock, after the potatoes are peeled and the roast is
in the oven, you disappear up the stairs or down the hall. Reassure them
you will be back. Tell anyone who might be interested in your
whereabouts that you need to sort something out. Alone. If you must look
like you're about to do something productive, carry the newspapers with
you as if you're going to read. What they don't know can only help you.
Now crawl under the covers. Good. You've done it. "No day is so bad it
can't be fixed with a nap," Carrie Snow insists. No day is so good that
it can't be made better with a terrific time out. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 28

Daydreams Reverie is not a mind vacuum. It is rather the gift of an hour
which knows the plentitude of the soul. ---GASTON BACHELARD

Were you admonished in no uncertain terms during your wonder years to
get your head out of the clouds? Quit daydreaming? Unfortunately, so was
I. It's taken me three decades to unlearn the impulse to be practical.
Just imagine what you might have accomplished if only you'd been
encouraged to honor your creative reveries as spiritual gifts. Daydreams
are the fertile soil in which our imaginations flourish and reach for
the Light. Daydreams incubate creativity and make possible reveries,
visualization, and maybe even visions. A lot of people think that
daydreams are fantasies, but fantasies possess a sense of improbability
and often danger. Fantasies are perfectly healthy---we all have them,
especially sexual ones---and they're very therapeutic. Fantasies allow
our shadows to act out our unacceptable tendencies in the safety of a
protective inner hologram. Mrs. Billy Graham was once asked if she ever
thought of divorcing her famous evangelist husband to whom she had been
married for half a century. No, she confessed, but she'd often thought
of murder. We must enter a daydream---willingly suspend conscious
thought of reality with our eyes open---before we can experience the joy
of reverie. Poets, artists, writers, musicians, and scientists know that
the Muse visits in reverie, even if the subject of the reverie has
absolutely nothing to do with the creative project at hand. Reveries
seem to be experienced through a scrim, a gauzy curtain, just beyond the
other side of consciousness. Reveries are always pleasurable but take
time. I need at least fifteen minutes of active daydreaming before I can
enter the reverie zone. You'll

know you've experienced one if you feel as if you've been pulled back
into your body when you're snapped out of it. Visualizations are
daydreaming's virtual reality: a deliberate, positive scene-setting of
what you'd like to see happen in your future. When we visualize, we make
the interior scene as realistic and detailed as possible, coloring the
scene with the senses until what we are viewing is so realistic it
triggers an emotional response: happiness, ecstasy, joy, relief,
thanksgiving. Since the subconscious mind cannot distinguish between
reality and virtual reality, deliberate visualization over a period of
time usually results in the desired end. The subconscious mind is the
soul's servant; it willingly sets in motion whatever behavior and
circumstances are necessary to manifest physically the desired program.
The pulse of the subconscious is belief. If you truly believe it, you'll
eventually see it in your life. Visions are Divine revelations through
supernatural images. Visions are usually the province of saints,
mystics, and shamans because these special people are spiritually strong
enough to handle them. We can't really induce a vision, although we can
invoke one through daydreams. But if you're not successful at visions,
think of this as a blessing. Visions utterly, dramatically, vividly,
often violently change the course of lives. You don't go back or stay in
one place after you've encountered a vision. You're propelled forward in
a quantum leap. Those who are able to call forth visions usually prepare
themselves for the experience with days of isolation. Native Americans
and indigenous people like the Aborigines embark upon "vision quests" as
ceremonial rites of passage, and while this is an ancient tradition,
it's not one that readily translates into a contemporary woman's real
life. There are many marvelous books available offering the wisdom of
different spiritual paths, but most of them seem to have been written by
people who do not have children; people who are free to travel to
ashrams, convents, monasteries, power points and sacred places where
Heaven and earth meet. But I believe with all my heart that today's
woman can and must find this sacred intersection in her daily round.
We've been given the spiritual tools of prayer, meditation, solitude,
gratitude, simplicity, order, harmony, beauty, joy, and daydreams. "A
dream is a scripture," the Italian novelist Umberto Eco tells us in The
Name of the Rose. If we seek divine revelation, we'll find it, even if
it occurs during a bus ride or while folding laundry.

OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 29

Nightscapes Dreams are illustrations ... from the book jour soul is
writing about you. ---MARSHA NORMAN

Last night I dreamed I was at a flea market searching for the Holy
Grail, supposedly hidden in a bushel of gold, silver, and copper sugar
bowls. I had just spied it when a pink porcelain vase I didn't even know
I was holding shattered onto the concrete floor and I had to rush out
into a thunderstorm to get the children off a beach. I'm sure there's a
message encrypted in there, though I haven't had time today to figure it
out. But at least I've written the dream down, so that I can seek
divination when an opportunity for reflection presents itself. While
I've been on the path toward authenticity, I've experienced more
technicolor nightscapes than I've ever known. We have dreams every
night, though we don't always remember them. As you seek your
authenticity don't be surprised if you start remembering more dreams.
This is not a coincidence. We communicate our willingness for Divine
revelation with daydreams, and our authentic self responds with a visual
fax in the form of a nightscape. Our dreams are Divine stories that
reveal where we've been and why, where we're headed, and the easiest way
to get there. Dreams are our authentic Rosetta stones. Each night new
hieroglyphics are inscribed, but not in Egyptian. Our Divine
inscriptions are familiar faces, settings, objects, pursuits, dilemmas.
We just need to make time to translate them. Dreams are also problem
solvers. When we are perplexed about a course of action or need creative
direction, we can seek Divine assistance through our dreams. Scientists,
inventors, writers, and composers creatively brainstorm

with their authentic selves in nightscapes. Beethoven and Brahms would
jump out of bed in the middle of the night to write down scores. Thoreau
kept a pencil and piece of paper under his pillow. Samuel Taylor
Coleridge received the entire text to the poem "Kubla Khan" in a dream,
and Robert Louis Stevenson worked out plot developments to The Strange
Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde while dreaming. The most informative
dreams usually occur when we've gotten a good night's sleep and didn't
go to bed exhausted or intoxicated. If you can't pick up a pen the
moment you get out of bed because you have children, lie quietly before
getting up, and run the dream consciously through your mind several
times so that you can remember the gist of it. If you do find time to
write it down sometime during the morning, you'll be surprised that your
pen will reveal details you didn't even remember. After a few hours of
consciousness, however, even vivid nightscapes tend to fade back into
the deep. Jung believed that all the participants in our dreams are
aspects of ourselves. If that's the case, then my dream last night was a
clear signal from Spirit that Simple Abundance---the search for my
authentic self---is the path I need to continue following in order to
become the woman I really am. But I don't think the message was meant
only for me. The Holy Grail is our authenticity. It's glimpsed hidden
among what is familiar to us---home, family, work, pleasures. But what
appears on the surface to be ordinary---sugar bowls---is really a
treasure because the sugar bowls are all made of precious metals. The
vase that slips to the floor and shatters is who we were before we
awakened to our Divinity. Our authenticity begins to emerge in our daily
round, but as it does, sudden storms develop as the ego tries to
frighten us back into denial. We are the little children huddling on the
beach afraid to move forward. We feel alone and helpless. Then, when we
look up, we see our authentic self rushing toward us---strong,
beautiful, and brave. Gently she scoops us into her arms and reassures
us there is nothing to fear. She has come to carry us to safety. To
return us to Wholeness. To bring us Home. OceanofPDF.com

NOVEMBER 30

The Loss of Control We are most deeply asleep at the switch when we
fancy we control any switches at all. ---ANNIE DILLARD

Life is an illusion," the notorious World War I double agent Mata Hari
confessed in 1917, as her eyes met a French firing squad. You know what
they say about confessions on the way out: it's the truth whether you
believe it or not. Certainly Mata Hari lived the ultimate illusion. She
was all things to all men, at least until she gave herself away by
assuming she had it all under control. First she seduced French officers
into divulging military secrets that she passed along to the Germans.
Then she cajoled the Germans into giving her information coveted by the
French. But the trouble with illusion, as the famous femme fatale
discovered to her regret, is that you can't keep it up forever.
Eventually it all goes up in a puff of smoke, and you might not be left
standing when the smoke clears. Illusions are the conscious mind's
double agents. The ego doesn't like to think that anybody---especially
the authentic self---can do it better than she can. So she seduces the
rational mind into believing those things that help us make it through
the day---that this time he'll stop drinking, that the kid's just going
through a phase, that the argument's over money and not power, that the
unworkable will work, if you just try a little harder. Now, maybe all of
this is true. But if it's not, you're setting yourself up for the
double-cross. When that subterfuge succeeds, the master illusion---the
mind's Mata Hari ---moves in for the kill, convincing you that life can
be manipulated. Life can't. But we can. A few weeks go smoothly, at home
and work, and suddenly we secretly succumb to the lure of thinking we
can control relationships or the course of events. We line everything up
in perfect order

so that, through sheer force of will, we'll be at the right place at the
right time. But when we become addicted to thinking we can control
another person's behavior or a particular outcome, we're as vulnerable
as a crack addict who thinks this hit will be her last. High on
determination, we assume we can handle the day, the deal, the deadline,
the divorce, the disease, if we can just keep everything under control.
When we can't, we spin dangerously out of control and into a nosedive.
As Melanie Beattie reminds us in The Language of Letting Go: "Whatever
we try to control does have control over us and our life." And while we
might walk away from the wreck, we're often more upset by the loss of
the illusion than by the reality of the rubble. The good news is that we
can pick up the pieces and salvage the best of a bad situation, but only
after we become aware that we have unconsciously betrayed ourselves. You
can never lose something if you never had it to begin with. You were
never in control and never will be. Let go of that illusion so that you
can cut your losses and move on. Acceptance of the inevitable---as
difficult and painful it might be today---is the first step toward an
authentic tradeoff. "We trade a life that we have tried to control,"
Melanie Beattie reassures us, "and we receive in return something
better---a life that is manageable."

Joyful Simplicities for November • J. Peterman operates as an online
service these days. It's not as emotionally satisfying as curling up
with his mail order catalogs from yesteryear, but he still rounds up an
amazing collection of exotic clothes and accessories. I've yet to be
disappointed with anything I've purchased at www. jpeterman.com. •
Native American legend reminds us that both good and bad dreams hover
over us while we sleep, waiting to capture our minds for the night. In
order to ensure a peaceful night's sleep, "dream catchers" were
prepared: webs of colored string with a hole in the middle to let happy
dreams pass through to the subconscious mind. Bad dreams are caught in
the dream catcher's net, where they disappear with the first light of a
new day. Dream Catchers made by Native Americans (as well as kits for
making them) are

available from large craft stores, ethnic gift shops, and catalogs. You
can also make one yourself by taking a small embroidery hoop and
stringing it with a net made of colored embroidery thread. (Be sure to
leave a hole in the middle.) Add festive colored beads (green is the
color of abundance; rose or red is the color of love; blue is the color
of healing and protection; purple is the color of inner power) and
feathers. Hang it over your bed. • Write your own personal grace and
offer it for the first time on Thanksgiving. This is a wonderful
restorative, because you must carefully consider those things for which
you are truly grateful. To inspire you, peruse One Hundred Graces edited
by Marcia and Jack Kelly. • Fill a basket of food and take it to a
shelter the day before Thanksgiving. Re-create your family dinner as
much as possible, if you can, starting with the turkey. But any
contribution you make will be welcome. If you have children, let them
help you shop, load the basket, and deliver it with you. This is a very
visceral reminder of how much we have for which to give thanks. • Watch
the Macy's Thanksgiving Day parade. • Don't rush out the day after
Thanksgiving to do holiday shopping with the rest of the world. Instead,
make a pot of homemade turkey vegetable soup, write out a shopping list
for the Christmas pudding ingredients, create an Advent wreath, and
start listening to holiday music. • Have fun choosing your own Advent
calendar. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER I open the door. The gorgeous guest from ajar sweeps in. In her
hands are her gifts---the gifts of hours and far-seeing moments, the
gift of mornings and evenings, the gift of spring and summer, the gift
of autumn and winter. She must have searched the heavens for boons so
rare. ---ABBIE GRAHAM

December's gifts---custom, ceremony, celebration, consecration---come to
us wrapped up, not in tissue and ribbons, but in cherished memories.
This is the month of miracles. The oil that burns for eight days, the
royal son born in a stable, the inexplicable return of Light on the
longest, darkest night of the year. Where there is Love, there are
always miracles. And where there are miracles, there is great joy.
Gratefully we weave the golden thread of the sixth principle of Simple
Abundance---Joy---into our tapestry of contentment. At last we embrace
the miracle of authenticity, changing forever how we view ourselves. Our
daily round. Our dreams. Our destinies. Days we once called common, we
now call holy. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 1

Charmed Lives There is entirely too much charm around, and something
must be done to stop it. ---DOROTHY PARKER

Charmed lives. Crammed down our throats in the glossy pages of lifestyle
magazines. Paid for with a portion of our life energy. It's sick, I tell
you, sick. You know who was celebrated for having a charmed life?
Macbeth. Now there's a thought worth meditating on. Did Lady Macbeth
share this opinion? Actually, we all have charmed lives. We just don't
have a conscious awareness of it, especially after reading about the
airbrushed lives of other women. It takes a 1990s version of
Everywoman's story to help us see. This had been one hell of a year for
Everywoman. Just about everything that could go wrong, had gone wrong.
Or so it seemed. Money was tight because Everywoman was paid on
commission. It didn't seem to matter how hard she worked, the recession
kept the paychecks irregular. Because finances were tight, there was
tension in her marriage, which increased after their adjustable rate
mortgage went through the roof. Her husband worked two jobs. Many of
their conversations (when they were speaking) were about her finding a
more reliable form of employment. Every woman enjoyed her work and was
good at it; she just needed a little more time to make it pay off. But
time seemed to be running out. That year, her various aches and pains
had turned out to be due to a chronic condition. Her doctor told her to
make a lifestyle adjustment: eliminate the stress and fatigue that
triggered flare-ups. One of her children had required special attention
to get him through a rough emotional patch, which only made the other
children resentful. Last spring her dad had died

suddenly. Soon afterward, her mother had a series of heart attacks and a
debilitating stroke. Unable to care for herself, she had to be put into
a nursing home. Her widowed mother-in-law fared better. She came to stay
"temporarily" during the summer and hadn't left yet. Her teenage
daughter frequently complained about having to give up her bedroom for
Grandma. Seeing her mother-in-law at the dinner table made Everywoman
feel guilty and resentful that she couldn't do the same for her own Mom.
Everywoman felt worn to a raveling. Today she begged Anyone Who Might Be
Listening to give her a break. "You're right. It's been tough," the
kindly voice of her guardian angel agreed. "Take heart. Every life comes
with its hard times. The Boss says there's a holiday special going on
right now. Come up and choose another life, or choose the
Strength-Wisdom-Grace package. Strength to meet your challenges, Wisdom
to embrace real life, and the Grace to be grateful not only for what you
have, but what you've escaped." "I want a charmed life," Everywoman
said. "A charmed life, is it? Well, let's see what's available." The
next thing Everywoman knew she was sitting in front of a celestial
computer, as the charmed lives of women all around the world came
online. The faces were familiar but different in private than in public.
Not very glamorous. She was told she could exchange her life for the
life of any other woman. A woman's life appeared. "How about her?" an
angelic lifeexchange counselor asked. "Comfortable---there's a live-in
housekeeper--- but rather hectic. Had to put aside her career as a
famous trial attorney because of her twin daughters' cystic fibrosis."
Everywoman asked to be shown other lives ... There was the beautiful
woman beaten by her superstar husband ... The woman whose child was hit
by a drunk driver and is now in a coma ... The infertile woman who
finally became pregnant only to discover she had breast cancer ... The
famous woman whose very public husband had a reputation for being a
philanderer ... The woman whose husband is about to go to prison for
insider financial manipulation. Everywoman was shaken. "I asked for
women with charmed lives," she moaned. "You've only shown me women with
great sorrow, humiliation, pain, and despair in designer clothes."

"Each of these women has been celebrated for her charmed life in those
magazines you're so fond of reading. Time's up. What will be it be?" "Is
it too late to choose Strength, Grace, and Wisdom?" Everywoman asked
hesitantly. "Good choice. Has anyone told you lately that you lead a
charmed life?" OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 2

Passionate Kisses A kiss can be a comma, a question mark or an
exclamation point. ---MISTINGUETT

Every woman knows the subtle nuances of puckering up: fly kisses, bye
kisses, real kisses. Lock-the-door kisses. Ah, lock-the-door kisses
...Vaguely, wistfully recalled. It's been a while since we had some of
those. Actually, it's been a while since we've had any kind of kisses
around here. For the last month all the kissers in this house have been
gripped in a relentless cycle of contagion---strep throat, flu,
bronchitis---unvanquished despite megadoses of every antibiotic known to
modern medicine. At this moment I don't want to be kissed by anyone on
this ward and they certainly don't want to be kissed by me. The good
news is that the same precious natural resources not being pleasurably
expended in regular lovemaking can be channeled into your creativity.
Waste not, want not. Passion ignites sexual energy or creative energy.
Your choice. Every artist, if they're telling the truth, will confess
that when they're working at full throttle---writing a book, making a
movie, directing a play, preparing for an exhibition, rehearsing for a
concert, choreographing a new pas de deux---the sex drive diminishes.
Frankly my dear, we don't give a damn. That's because we can make wild,
passionate love or make wild, passionate art. Rarely both at the same
time. This natural sublimation process works just as well in reverse.
Found yourself in solitary space as far as an intimate relationship is
concerned? Don't waste time sulking. Try not to get caught up in what's
missing but what's presenting itself to you. Dame Fortune's knocking.
Invite her in. This is the perfect time to get serious about that
screenplay, sign up and show up for the photography class, finish your
degree, check in to

Shepheard's Hotel, fall in love with your authentic self. There is
nothing sexier than the woman emitting the pheromone of personal
fulfillment. You'll not be alone for long, unless you want to be. I can
think of only one reason on earth why we shouldn't be able to have all
the good stuff as well as passionate kisses: real life. Every woman
knows times when she's alone: by choice, by chance, by circumstance.
Cheer up. Sometimes you haven't found the lips you want to kiss.
Sometimes the lips you want to kiss aren't available. Sometimes the one
you'd like to kiss is sweaty and chilled, hacking and moaning in the
bedroom just down the hall. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 3

No Sex Please, We're Married Personally I know nothing about sex because
I've always been married. ---ZSA ZSA GABOR

Remember when we used to call sex "sleeping together"? How prophetic.
There's one that Nostradamus missed. Having touched on the sublimation
of sex for art, let's meditate for a moment on the profound but
necessary sublimation of sex for survival. Not survival of the species.
Survival of the sleep-starved. The women I know lust after twelve hours
of uninterrupted slumber. The only married women having sex as often as
the magazines and marriage experts tell us we should be are on the
soaps. Often the real-life demands of family and work mean that married
women discover there are many ways to make love besides the missionary
position: turning the lights down low, handing him a nightcap, and
joining him to watch a weekly news show that presents his political
point of view; asking how his favorite teams are doing and listening to
the answer; sleeping on the couch so that you can rest when his cough
sounds like a foghorn; sending him to the auto show alone; never going
to sleep without saying "I love you"; calling once a day just to see how
it's going; attending a couples' massage workshop to learn how to do it
yourselves; remembering his mother's birthday; wearing socks to bed;
telling each other how nice you look; touching; creating a private
language; filling up the tank; picking up a magazine he'd like at the
newsstand; renewing her books at the library; doing the crossword puzzle
together; fixing each other's favorite meals a couple of times a week;
reading, talking, laughing, crying together in bed.

"Exhaustion and lack of privacy make intimate moments of raw passion
rarer than in our courting days," attorney and writer Linda Aaker
reassures the married chaste among us. "Sex is also meeting your
partner's eyes over the tousled head of a child.... Sex is sometimes
just sleeping well beside the person you love, and drinking coffee
together." OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 4

The Refinement of Everyday Thinking The whole of science is nothing more
than a refinement of everyday thinking. ---ALBERT EINSTEIN

There is a significant difference between thinking you know and actually
knowing. Just as there's a significant difference between superficial
change and change on a cellular level. It's one thing to move the
furniture around for a fresh new look; it's quite another to rearrange
your "DNA"---your destiny, nature, and aspirations---which is exactly
what you're doing when you search for your authenticity. Start to do
that and you get a fresh new life. When I started writing this book, I
knew that if I integrated gratitude, simplicity, order, harmony, beauty,
and joy into my daily round, a sense of lack diminishes and a sense of
abundance increases. That seemed to be quite enough. What I didn't know
or even anticipate was the potency of the Simple Abundance process when
combined with passionate and persistent reflection over two years. It is
virtually impossible to write a book on authenticity as a spiritual and
creative path and not be profoundly changed by it. On paper, Einstein's
mathematical equation E = mc2 appears rather benign, doesn't it? But it
led to the development of the atomic bomb. On paper,
gratitude/simplicity/order/harmony/beauty/joy = authenticity appears
equally benign. But I have discovered that this equation leads to
complete personal and spiritual transformation---a mystical
metamorphosis of our particular "DNA" that's so deep our egos don't know
whether they're

coming or going. One minute we're sure of ourselves, the next, we're
second-guessing. This can be very disconcerting to our conscious selves.
Of all the definitions of the ego I've ever discovered, my favorite is
Joseph Campbell's: "What you think you want, what you will to believe,
what you think you can afford, what you decide to love, what you regard
yourself as bound to." Now, there's one tough babe to reckon with, and
she's got a stranglehold on your destiny, nature, and aspirations that's
so strong it will take nothing less than a Divine detonation before she
lets go. Don't worry. About this time, you're poised for critical
mass---that point when a self-sustaining chain reaction occurs. In
physics, nuclear fusion occurs when two separate elements, like hydrogen
and helium, are forced together. Through the exertion of extreme
pressure and temperature, a surge of energy as powerful as the sun is
suddenly released until the hydrogen and helium are completely
transformed, producing an entirely new force in the universe. This is
how new stars are created. In your search for authenticity, a similar
process occurs. You fuse the six Simple Abundance principles, or outward
lifestyle changes, with your own inner work, or what Einstein called
"the refinement of everyday thinking." Now exert real life's pressures
and the heat of your own passions on the six principles, and ponder for
at least one to two years. The result? One day the transformative
process builds to a point at which it can no longer be contained within.
A huge surge of creative energy is suddenly released, bringing forth a
completely new entity: your authentic self, the visible manifestation of
your soul. When this happens, "what you think you want, what you will to
believe, what you think you can afford, what you decide to love, and
what you regard yourself as bound to," will seem as if they belonged to
another woman. They did. After passionately and persistently exploring
the origins of the universe, Albert Einstein came to know that
"Something deeply hidden had to be behind things." When you passionately
and persistently search for Wholeness, you'll know as well.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 5

Sigh Some More, My Ladies, Sigh Some More Most of the sighs we hear have
been edited. ---STANISLAW JERZY LEC

I have a habit that drives my husband crazy and keeps me sane. I sigh.
Obviously, I sigh more than I am consciously aware. Yet I've noticed
that whenever my sighing is brought to my attention---"Please don't do
that"---I'm taking deep breaths for a very good reason. Women sigh so
that we won't scream. There are several occasions in the course of any
woman's day when, without question, screaming is the appropriate
response. However, on this side of an electrified fence, screaming is
not considered good form. So we sigh. First we breathe in, quickly and
sharply, inhaling reality, acknowledging the present situation---the
current hassle or disappointment, confrontation or challenge, long wait
or lack of cooperation. We hold our breath for a heartbeat. Then we
breathe out, slowly and deeply, exhaling and letting go of our initial
response---our dismay, impatience, frustration, annoyance,
disappointment, regret. Letting it out. Letting it go. The act of
sighing is a quiet vote of acceptance---of "getting over it" and moving
on. Women with significant others and/or children sigh more than their
solitary sisters because there are more preferences, needs, wants,
wills, and

demands to be dealt with, if there is to be a state of detente in the
daily round. More bending in order not to break. So should you feel the
need to sigh today, by all means breathe slowly and deeply. Breathe
expressively. Think of sighing as the hot air that makes rising to the
occasion possible. Hot air that's pent up will eventually explode, and
steam can burn. But steam that's deliberately allowed to escape through
a safety valve can be converted into creative energy. So sigh without
hesitation. Sigh without guilt. Sigh without embarrassment. Sigh with
pleasure. Sigh some more, my ladies, sigh some more. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 6

The Festival of Lights To be a Jew is a destiny. ---VICKI BAUM

In the dark days of December comes the wonderful holiday of Hanukkah,
celebrated in Jewish homes. Originally known as the "Festival of
Lights," Hanukkah commemorates a miracle that occurred in 165 B.C.,
after Judas Maccabaeus and his followers reclaimed Jerusalem from a
Greek emperor who considered Israel a Greek province. In an attempt to
assimilate conquered nations into a cohesive and controllable society,
the Greek empire prohibited any other religion; Jews were forced to
abandon their faith and ordered to worship Greek gods. By decree, the
Temple of Jerusalem was turned into a Greek shrine, and Jews were
forbidden to study the Torah, celebrate their holidays, or practice
Jewish customs. Many Jews, disobeying the edict, died for their beliefs.
After a three-year guerrilla campaign, the Maccabees were victorious and
the temple was restored to Jewish worship. As part of their rededication
ceremony (the word "Hanukkah" means dedication) the Maccabees began an
eight-day purification rite, only to discover there was barely enough
sacred oil to keep the temple menorah---a candelabrum with eight
branches ---lit for one day. Miraculously, the temple lamp burned
continuously for eight days. Ever since that time the Jewish people have
observed Hanukkah in remembrance of their struggle for religious freedom
and the miracle of restoration, symbolized by the abundance of oil. Many
who celebrate Christmas believe that Hanukkah is a festival reserved
solely for those who practice Judaism. But as Harold Kushner points out
in his enlightening and engaging meditation To Life: A Celebration of
Jewish Being and Thinking, if it weren't for Hanukkah, we

wouldn't be celebrating Christmas. Had the Maccabees not rebelled
against the Greeks, the Jewish faith would have faded into Greek
culture, never to be heard of again. "There would have been no Jewish
community for Jesus to be born into a century and a half later. No one
would have remembered the messianic promises he claimed to fulfill.
Without Hanukkah, there would have been no Christmas." When one follows
any family tree back far enough, there are bound to be surprises. And
those who follow the Christian path will discover, if they truly search
for their roots, that by faith, we belong to the House of David. Jesus
lived his entire life as an observant Jew. He celebrated Hanukkah as a
child; the Last Supper was a Passover seder. All the apostles and most
of those who became his early followers were Jewish. The crowds who came
to hear Jesus preach called him "Rabbi," the Hebrew word for teacher.
Perhaps our similarities and heritage are greater than our differences
after all. Personally, I've come to think of Hanukkah as a celebration
of authenticity. The Maccabees refused to surrender what made them
authentic ---their faith---even if it cost them their lives. Not to be
able to live as observant Jews was not to live at all. I also consider
the Hanukkah miracle the earliest recorded demonstration of Simple
Abundance. Two thousand years ago there was only enough sacred oil for
one night. But all that these faithful, courageous, and grateful people
had was all that they needed. Sacred oil in a temple. Loaves and fishes
on a mountainside. Miracles are of Spirit, not any one faith. Miracles
are for anyone who believes. That is the heart of Hanukkah and the soul
of Christmas. The more we allow ourselves to recognize the wisdom and
truth in other spiritual paths, the closer to Wholeness we become.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 7

Are Women Human? We are not human beings trying to be spiritual. We are
spiritual beings trying to be human. ---JACQUELYN SMALL

Whether women were human fascinated the English writer D. H. Lawrence,
who often explored this conundrum in his work. "Man is willing to accept
woman as an equal, as a man in skirts, as an angel, a devil, a babyface,
a machine, an instrument, a bosom, a womb, a pair of legs, a servant, an
encyclopaedia, an ideal or an obscenity; the one thing he won't accept
her as is a human being, a real human being of the feminine sex."
Perhaps the reason men find it so difficult to accept women as human
beings is because we're not, and deep down everyone knows it. But often
women forget their Divinity as they go about their daily round. How
often do we excuse ourselves with the expression, "Well, I'm only
human." No, you're not, and neither am I. We forget we're spiritual
beings appearing for a brief span on this planet as humans. I certainly
forgot that this morning when my daughter stayed home from school
because she's sick. Again. In a little while, I'll have to take her to
the doctor for a strep test and my entire work day will have been
disrupted. I'm frustrated and angry; not at Katie---at real life, at
deadlines. But did she realize that, when I rolled my eyes at the
thought of another day gone awry? I don't think so. Spiritual beings do
not sweat real life's small stuff. They also know that most of what
drives us crazy in real life is small stuff. The only thing that isn't
small stuff is the reason you're on earth in the first place: to find
that portion of the world's lost heart that only you can ransom with
your love and authentic gifts and then return it, so that all of us can
experience Wholeness.

A spiritual being knows that the work will be waiting for her when she
gets back from the doctor's office. A spiritual being knows that there
is no such thing as a deadline. Deadlines are chronos, the world's time;
Divinity knows only kairos, Eternity. The deadline will be met if I
remember to ask for grace. A spiritual being knows that the only thing
that's not small stuff today is caring for and comforting a sick child.
This spiritual being might have also known that this morning if she'd
taken five minutes to center herself. Scripture tells us that men were
created a little above the angels. But don't ever forget that women were
the climax of the Spirit's creativity cycle. After woman was created,
Wisdom realized there was no need to proceed further: this superior
being would save the world. Big things are expected of us. As for me,
there's a lost heart that needs to be ransomed by a spiritual being
trying to be human. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 8

Tidings of Comfort and Joy Gloom we have always with us, a rank and
sturdy weed, but joy requires tending. ---BARBARA HOLLAND

This is the week that women's shoulders begin to droop as their list of
holiday "should do's" becomes as long and heavy as Jacob Marley's
chains. There's card writing, card mailing, gift buying, gift wrapping,
gift sending, tree buying, tree trimming, cookie baking, party giving,
turkey roasting. By next week, unless a Power greater than ourselves
restores us to sanity, women will be dropping in their tracks. Not
surprisingly, the Christmas holidays are the height of the flu season.
The author of a recent book on simplifying our lives suggests that we
"bow out" of the holidays---as if this were an option for real women. Is
it for you? When it begins to look a lot like Christmas, it's because
women across the country are wearing red hats and pointed shoes to
accessorize their Donna Karan suits, Gap jeans, or Lands' End sweats. In
case anyone hasn't noticed, women are the ones who "do" Christmas,
performing miracles on demand. Women are Spirit's deus ex machina,
making holiday dreams come true from behind the scenes. The celebration
of Christmas as we know it today, with its whirl of festivity,
decorations, lavish gifts, parties, and family-centered traditions, was
a creation of middle-class Victorians in both England and the United
States in the mid-nineteenth century. Victorian women, who were
full-time homebodies, began "doing" Christmas in July. However, in the
final two decades of the twentieth century, women have been doing lots
of other things while we're doing Christmas. Which is why we end up
doing ourselves in every December. For many women, this is the season of
misery

and angst: tears, tantrums, screaming, yelling, hustle, bustle, cash
conflicts, royal-pain relations, and holiday humbug. Wouldn't the real
Christmas miracle be if we slowed down long enough to remember the
reason for the season, so that our holiday celebrations became authentic
and meaningful? So be of good cheer. Be not frazzled, frustrated, nor
frantic, for I bring you tidings of comfort and joy. If you do Christmas
at your house, you can choose to do it your way. Whatever that way might
be. You can consciously decide to be happy, loving, fulfilled, generous,
peaceful, contented, spiritual, joyous, calm, festive, and emotionally
connected to the important people in your life for the holidays this
year. Or you can, unconsciously, choose to be a wreck. Today, realize
that you can't do everything. Not all at once. Not in the next sixteen
days. Not at all. Period. Now, recognize that one of the reasons
Christmas pasts probably didn't live up to your expectations is because
you've tried to do too much, too perfectly. Look at that list. Choose to
let only what you love best about the holidays remain. Cross out two
more "musts." Now there's time for gazing out the window at gently
falling snow, delighting in the sounds of bells and joyful music,
savoring the sweet aromas of hot cider, roast turkey, and gingerbread,
sipping hot chocolate and homemade eggnog, reading a holiday story each
night at dusk, basking in a fire crackling on the hearth and re-creating
cherished customs that care for your soul as well as the souls of those
you love. "I do hope your Christmas has ... a little touch of Eternity
in among the rush and pitter patter and all," mystic Evelyn Underhill
recommends. "It always seems such a mixing of this world and the
next---but that, after all, is the idea!" OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 9

The Christmas Letter This is my letter to the world. ---EMILY DICKINSON

There is a woman still at large---charmed and dangerous. She waves her
clever hand over a room and it looks like a page from House Beautiful.
She waves her creative hand over the fruits of the earth and a feast
appears nightly. Her thumb is green, her herb vinegar is curing, her
potpourri recipe is sought, her PTA cupcakes are from scratch, her
Halloween costumes are legendary, she still wears size 8. Her celebrity
lawyer husband adores her, her five summa cum children think she's
laude. She finished her holiday shopping, wrapping, and sending in
November. Now she's turning her attention to making her own New Year's
Eve confetti out of naturally colored crushed egg shells. I know this
because I've just received her annual Christmas letter. Be forewarned.
It's speeding its way to your house. This woman must be stopped. She
undermines our domestic tranquillity. She threatens the common good.
Here's the plan. This year, we'll write a letter of our own. We'll write
about our exciting safari of the self and Spirit. We'll write about
Simple Abundance. We'll write about the tiny changes that have made a
great difference in how we approach our daily round. Then we'll write
another letter, dated this time next year, in which we'll describe how
our dreams came true. In it, we'll outline our glorious ideal lives in
detail---exactly what we're doing, how we're doing it, who's doing it
with us. But we'll write these two letters in our discovery journals
only; they're for our eyes alone. Because this is not merely our letter
to the world, this will be our letter to the Universe. What we're really
doing is setting down our New

Year's aspirations in concrete form. It's the same as writing down our
goals but far more creative and fun. Your Christmas letter to the
Universe can be the most powerful of motivational tools because it
engages your emotions increasing the pulses of creative energy your
subconscious mind needs to transform a reverie into reality perfected.
Many of us react to Christmas letters as if they were fingernails on the
blackboard of our brains. But my oldest friend---we lived across the
street from each other from birth---writes fabulous annual letters which
I look forward to receiving. That's because it's a Real letter; it fills
me in on her family's tough times as well as on their achievements and
happy times. She may send it to a hundred people, but it's as warm,
witty, and authentic as Peg herself, and it reads as if she's written it
only to me. So if one of your pleasures is writing seasonal greetings,
please don't stop. Just remember that your family and friends don't live
edited lives. You needn't either. As for this year's crop of Christmas
letters, I find they make quite absorbent liners for the gerbil cage.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 10

Gifts of the Magi Christmas won't be Christmas without any presents.
---JO MARCH (LOUISA MAY ALCOTT)

Jo's right. Remember when she grumbled about not having any money for
presents in Little Women? Christmas is about gifts. Always has been. But
we feel uncomfortable with this emphasis on gimme, gimme, gimme. Buy,
buy, buy. Charge, charge, charge. We admonish our children to remember
the reason for the season, even though we have difficulty remembering it
ourselves when we're caught up in the chaos and commotion of the
holidays. Today let's ruminate on the Real role of gifts in the
Christmas story. Those gifts were wrapped in miracles, which is probably
why we can't find them at malls or in mail-order catalogs. The first
gift was of Spirit: unconditional Love. The next gift came from a Jewish
teenager named Miriam, who was known to her family and friends as Mary.
Her Christmas present was selflessness, the complete surrender of ego
and will needed to bring Heaven down to earth. The gifts of her fiancÉ,
Joseph, were trust and faith. He trusted that Mary wasn't pregnant with
another man's child; he believed there really was a Divine Plan to get
them through this mess. The Child brought forgiveness. Wholeness. Second
chances. The angels' gifts were tidings of comfort, joy, and peace, the
reassurance that there was nothing to fear, so rejoice. The shepherd
boy's gift was generosity: his favorite lamb for the baby's birthday
present. The innkeeper's wife's gifts were compassion and charity: a
warm, dry, safe place for the homeless family to stay, her best coverlet
to wrap the new mother and little one, a meal for Joseph, the donkey's
fresh hay.

Three kings from the east traveled many hot, dusty miles following a
bright star in search of a royal birth. The sages' divination foretold
the coming of the "King of Kings"; on their camels' backs were treasures
with which to honor his arrival. But when they arrived in Bethlehem,
they found the newborn prince in a cow stall instead of a palace. The
shocked Wise Men unwrapped gold, frankincense, and myrrh, but their Real
gifts were wonder, acceptance, and courage. They offered wonder by
surrendering logic, reason, and common sense. Accepting the impossible,
they suspended skepticism long enough to double-cross the insane King
Herod, frantically searching for the child who would change the world.
With courage---at the risk of their own lives---the Wise Men helped the
young family escape to a safe haven in Egypt. Oh, yes. Christmas is all
about gifts. Nothing but gifts. But such gifts! Gifts tied with
heartstrings. Gifts that surprise and delight. Gifts that transform the
mundane into the miraculous. Gifts that nurture the souls of both the
giver and the given. Perfect gifts. Authentic gifts. The gifts of
Spirit, a frightened teenage girl, her bewildered sweetheart, the Child,
the angels, the shepherd boy, the inn-keeper's wife. The gifts of the
Magi. Unconditional Love. Selflessness. Trust. Faith. Forgiveness.
Wholeness. Second Chances. Comfort. Joy. Peace. Reassurance. Rejoicing.
Generosity. Compassion. Charity. Wonder. Acceptance. Courage. To give
such gifts. To truly open our hearts to receive such gifts gratefully.
Christmas just won't be Christmas without any presents. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 11

Only Fourteen Shopping Days Till Christmas Giving presents is a talent;
to know what a person wants, to know when and how to get it, to give it
lovingly and well. ---PAMELA GLENCONNER

Now that we've accepted that gifts are the center of Christmas, deciding
what to give and how to get it comfortably and affordably deserves some
reflection, especially considering that there are only fourteen shopping
days left until Christmas. Keep in mind that Christmas will arrive on
December 25 whether we're ready for it or not. How're you doing? That
frantic? In that case, promise your authentic self that this is
absolutely the last time you'll shop, wrap, and send all your gifts in
the space of four weeks. It took nine months to orchestrate the first
Christmas, which is exactly what you're going to aim for in the future.
Next year, you swear, it will be different. But in order for that to
happen, you're going to have to get started on it the last week of
December. That's just when you're absolutely sick of Christmas, of
course, but that's also when you can get next year's wrapping paper,
cards, and holiday novelties at bargain prices. In addition, there are
regular sales throughout the year. Keeping your eye open for bargains
year round, as well as bearing in mind the special interests of your
family and friends, will permit you to gather Christmas gifts at a
leisurely pace and at the best prices months in advance. You won't find
delightful, affordable gifts in department stores at the eleventh hour.
Christmas accounts for nearly one-half of annual retail revenues. How
many genuine sales do you think are going on in December?

Always work from a list of people you give gifts to, noting their
hobbies, personal passions, treasured collections, and sizes. Don't try
to carry it all in your head; free up some mental RAMs with written
reminders. Try to keep apparel gifts for kids to a minimum; they grow in
such spurts, it's virtually impossible to get the size right. Gifts
purchased throughout the year, especially on sale or at outlets, aren't
always returnable. It's also difficult to keep track of what's in and
what's out with kids; presents aren't supposed to make everyone
miserable. Mail order is a spiritual gift, if you really use it to your
advantage. When you find a potential gift for someone, stick a note on
the front cover. Every month, try to get at least one Christmas gift;
spacing out the spending means less stress next December, a personal
present of peace of mind that won't go unappreciated. Making gifts for
those we love can be fun and occasionally economical, but only when
we've got the time and creative energy to do it properly. This is not
the day to begin that four-hundred-piece doll quilt for little Minnie
May, no matter how darling either of them are. Put the patterns and
magazine directions away; find the fabric on a sale table and enjoy
beginning a gift of heart and hands one rainy day in March. Celebrating
Christmas in July is a fabulous tradition worthy of revival. Resourceful
Victorian women made most of their gifts and no one started them later
than July. Hold a birthday tea on July 15 in honor of the Reverend
Clement Clarke Moore, the author of "The Night Before Christmas" and
start planning homemade presents. If you're buying or making Christmas
gifts ahead of time, you need a place to put them. Designate one closet,
cabinet, trunk, or drawer as the gift repository. A gift-cache is a
sanity saver during the year; gift gathering can become a joyful
simplicity. You can't imagine the satisfaction that comes when you open
your cache and pull out the perfect gift for an unexpected occasion. But
should you choose to delight in your own cleverness by sneaking into
your gift closet throughout the year, just remember to restock. Since
you already have your gift wrapping stashed away, you don't have to wait
to wrap them in a frantic flurry; you can wrap them creatively and with
pleasure. Make your wrappings part of the gift. Forget store-bought bows
in big plastic bags; they're hideous and you know it. However, the
really great bows can cost more than the gift. Throughout the year you
can

find gorgeous ribbons, cords, and trimming at fabulous prices, once
you're consistently looking for them. Label your wrapped gift; who it
goes to and what it is. Trying to mentally retrace the origins of
mystery packages without opening them is not fun. But plotting a loved
one's glee on gazing at your holiday remembrance is a gift of joy you
give yourself. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 12

A Partridge in a Pear Tree There is only one real deprivation ... and
that is not to be able to give one's gifts to those one loves most.
---MAY SARTON

I don't think many of our true loves are waiting with bated breath for a
partridge in a pear tree this year. But I do know a one-size-fits-all
gift that would be absolutely thrilling for everyone on your list: the
gift of yourself. Unfortunately, this most personal gift is very
expensive, for it requires large expenditures of our precious, but
dwindling, natural resources. Time. Creative Energy. Emotion. It would
be far easier to give everyone two turtle doves and be done with it.
This doesn't mean that we don't want to give of ourselves during the
holidays. Actually, that's what we're desperately trying to do.
Obviously, we're not doing it very well. This is why many of us end up
feeling depressed and discouraged as we pack away the ornaments. How did
Christmas slip out of our grasp, again? Because we were holding too many
things at once: obligations, promises, should-dos, conflicting
commitments. "Oh, sure, no problem" is the first indication of the
discombobulated mind. First thing: excuse yourself from every evening
meeting for the rest of the month. Only accept social events that you
really want to attend. Your absence might be noticed any other time of
the year, but not during the holidays. Everybody's focus is as scattered
as yours. You'll not be missed. Now about those gifts. All those bright,
pretty baubles blowing your budget are only symbols of the gifts you
really long to give. So this year why don't you try to give them the
Right Stuff?

On the first day of Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The gift of my
Undivided Attention On the second day of Christmas, I gave to my true
loves: The gift of Enthusiasm On the third day of Christmas, I gave to
my true loves: The gift of Creative Energy On the fourth day of
Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The gift of Simple Seasonal
Pleasures On the fifth day of Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The
Gift of Tenderness On the sixth day of Christmas, I gave to my true
loves: The gift of Good Cheer On the seventh day of Christmas, I gave to
my true loves: The gift of Beauty On the eighth day of Christmas, I gave
to my true loves: The gift of Communication On the ninth day of
Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The gift of Surprise On the tenth
day of Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The gift of Wonder On the
eleventh day of Christmas, I gave to my true loves: The gift of Peaceful
Surroundings On the twelth day of Christmas, I gave to my true loves:
The gift of Joy "Be ready at all times for the gifts of God, and always
for new ones," Meister Eckhart urges us in this season of giving. Be
ready at all times to give those you love the simply abundant gifts of
Spirit. If you do, they'll give you Christmas gifts you'll never forget:
happy smiles and contented hearts. And you won't want to exchange them.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 13

Yes, Virginia, There Is a Santa Claus Nobody can conceive or imagine all
the wonders there are unseen and unseeable in the world. ---FRANCIS P.
CHURCH

Francis P. Church had no intention of composing a classic essay in
inspirational literature that September afternoon in 1897 when he sat
down to answer a little girl's query. Virginia O'Hanlon was eight years
old, precisely the age when skepticism starts to erode faith. Her
friends had told her there was no Santa Claus. When she went to her
father for the truth, he was as tongue-tied as many parents are when
conversations start to focus on the veracity of North Pole activities.
He told her to take her question to the experts on everything: the
editors of the newspaper. So Virginia took pen in hand and posed the
eternal question of childhood to her local paper: "Papa says, 'If you
see it in the Sun it's so.' Please tell me the truth, is there a Santa
Claus?" Nearly a hundred Christmases have come and gone since Virginia
asked for the truth, but what's Real and what's not hasn't changed.
Children of all ages have a deep desire to believe in a great,
benevolent, and generous gift giver who rewards the good. Christmas
allows the child slumbering in each of our souls the chance to be reborn
every year, awakening a sense of joy and wonder that even eleven months
of doubt, derision, or discouragement can't snuff out. All that's
required of us is that we believe. Believe in what? Believe in whatever
means the most to you at this moment. That Love makes it possible to
believe in all things, especially miracles. That this is the season of
miracles. That there's a miracle with your name on it. That when you
wish upon a star, grace steps in to bridge

the gaps until your dreams comes true. That there is a Santa Claus and
you have been very, very good this year. Have you written your letter
yet? Yes, I do mean you. If you haven't, do it today with great
ceremony. Sit down with a cup of hot cocoa, your best stationery, and
your wish list. Pick one worldly gift and tell Santa what you want. Now
pick one gift that only Spirit can give. Put your letter in an envelope
and send it off. Wait. Watch what happens. Be happy. For the rest of the
season, frequently declare (under your breath is okay) during your daily
round: "I believe! I believe! I believe!" Right now I'm going to believe
that Frank Church wrote today's meditation for me, as well as Virginia,
a century ago: Virginia, your little friends are wrong. They have been
affected by the skepticism of a skeptical age. They do not believe
except what they see. They think that nothing can be which is not
comprehensible by their little minds. All minds, Virginia, whether they
be \[grown-ups\] or children's are little. Yes, Virginia, there is a
Santa Claus. He exists as certainly as love and generosity and devotion
exist, and you know that they abound and give to your life its highest
beauty and joy. Alas! how dreary would be the world if there were no
Santa Claus! It would be as dreary as if there were no Virginias. There
would be no childlike faith then, no poetry, no romance to make
tolerable this existence. We should have no enjoyment, except in sense
and sight. The eternal light with which childhood fills the world would
be extinguished. Not believe in Santa Claus! You might as well not
believe in fairies! ... The most real things in the world are those that
neither children nor \[grown-ups\] can see. Did you ever see fairies
dancing on the lawn? Of course not, but that's no proof that they are
not there. You tear apart the baby's rattle and see what makes the noise
inside, but there is a veil covering the unseen world which not the
strongest \[grown-up\] ... that ever lived, could tear apart. Only
faith, fancy, poetry, love, romance, can push aside that curtain and
view ... the beauty and glory beyond. Is it all real? Ah, Virginia, in
all this world there is nothing else so real and abiding. No Santa
Claus! Thank God! he lives, and he lives forever. A thousand years from
now, Virginia, nay, ten times ten thousand years

from now, he will continue to make glad the heart of childhood. Clap
loudly if you believe. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 14

Legacy of Love All happy families resemble one another, but each unhappy
family is unhappy in its own way. ---LEO TOLSTOY

Most people assume that Christmas is hardest for children who've stopped
believing in Santa Claus. But I think the holidays are the most
difficult for those who have experienced a recent loss, through death or
divorce, particularly if this is the first or second holiday after their
world has been torn asunder. Many single mothers often feel
uncomfortable at Christmas and unconsciously convey this discomfort to
their children. One way this is done is by putting off holiday
preparations until the very last moment, then throwing everything
together in a halfhearted frenzy. Perhaps one of the reasons single
women and single mothers experience difficulty during Christmastime is
because, deep in their hearts, they think holiday traditions belong only
to perfect Norman Rockwell families. The first time a woman newly on her
own opens the ornament box alone (if she even bothers to pull it out),
she experiences such a sense of loss she may decide not to continue the
holiday rituals she once treasured because the comparison of Christmases
Past with Christmas Present is too painful. "What's the point?" she
says. The point is that we all need the reassuring and healing messages
that treasured rituals provide. "One of the most important aspects about
family traditions---rituals that families continue to do year after
year---is that traditions have symbols and families need symbols,"
Dr. Steven J. Wolin, a clinical professor of psychiatry at the George
Washington University Medical School, explains: "You bring out the old
glass, you sing the old

songs, you say the same prayer, you wear a certain outfit, you set the
table in a certain way." These are the unconscious moments of family
ritual that become emotional security blankets to be tugged on in times
of stress. Cherished customs are just as important for grown women as
they are for children. When I first began updating Victorian traditions
for modern families, I thought the reason I delighted in doing them was
so that I could create happy memories for my daughter. But after a few
years, I realized that our rituals brought me comfort and joy. I longed
for the reassuring rhythm of marking the seasons just as much as Katie
did. We need to trim the tree, light the menorah, make the Valentines,
dye the Easter eggs, attend the Passover seder just as much as our
children do. Our souls can never outgrow the yearning for luminous and
liminal moments of Wholeness. So unpack those beloved holiday
traditions. Create new ones that express your authenticity, just as you
create a new lifestyle. "Traditions are the guideposts driven deep into
our subconscious minds," Ellen Goodman tells us. "The most powerful ones
are those we can't even describe, aren't even aware of." OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 15

Meditation for Women Who Read Too Much She is too fond of books, and it
has turned her brain. ---LOUISA MAY ALCOTT

Virginia Woolf believed that when we women who read too much arrive at
the pearly gates carrying our beloved books with us, the Almighty will
tell St. Peter: "Look, these need no reward. We have nothing to give
them here. They have loved reading." In real life there are women who
read and women who read too little. There aren't women who read too much
because this is an impossible feat. How can one read too much with only
twenty-four-hour days? Lifetimes that average only 80 years? Any time of
the day is perfect for reading. Any place. Any excuse. Reading is the
last refuge for addictive personalities; there are no bad side effects
from reading too much. Louisa May Alcott thinks becoming too fond of
books will "turn" our brains. Of course, any woman so fond of books that
she felt compelled to write her own can't be all wrong. Books do turn
us. Turn us on to our passions and to pursuing our passions. Turn us
into authentic women. When a sentence in a book resonates within, it is
the voice of your authentic self. Listen to what she's trying to tell
you. Spirit is constantly communicating with us. Most of us long to
experience Paradise on earth. Women who read do. Whoever said that you
can't take it with you obviously never read a good book. For everything
you've ever read, loved, and remembered is now a part of your
consciousness. What is once cherished can never perish.

"Reading means," Italo Calvino tells us, "\[being\] ready to catch a
voice that makes itself heard when you least expect it, a voice that
comes from an unknown source, from somewhere beyond the book, beyond the
author, beyond the convention of writing: from the unsaid, from what the
world has not yet said of itself and does not yet have the words to
say." OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 16

Gold-Star Days Maybe one of these days I'll be able to give myself a
gold star for being ordinary, and maybe one of these days I'll give
myself a gold star for being extraordinary---for persisting. And maybe
one day I won't need to have a star at all. ---SUE BENDER

I haven't yet gotten to the point where I don't need gold stars:
gleaming, golden, five-pointed proof that I've accomplished something
that was a bit of a stretch, especially if it was remembering to treat
myself with the loving kindness that seems so much easier to give to
others. Back in the days of blackboards and chalk, gold stars came in a
small cardboard box. You'd take the lid off to find five hundred gold,
paper-foil stars, stiff with dry glue backs. Running your fingers
through the small pile of possibilities, you'd hear the rustling of
self-worth. Nowadays gold stars get pulled off selfsticking sheets. You
don't even get the taste of success on your tongue, but I love them just
the same. A good friend of mine has a different memory of gold-star
days. Her mother maintained star charts for each of her eight children.
Every Sunday night after dinner, the past week's reckoning would occur
in the dining room as the gridded charts revealed who had excelled at
homework, chores, personal hygiene, and behavior---and who hadn't. The
striving for gold stars was supposed to be a motivational game. However,
accumulating gold stars under duress wasn't fun for Anne, despite the
fact that she excelled at everything and was a model "good girl." For
her, the pressure of constant evaluation was excruciating. Opening the
cardboard box was a psychological and emotional stretching on the rack
of self-respect.

But gold-star days are very different when we give them to ourselves.
When you give yourself a gold star, sticking it to an empty calendar
block, the star twinkles, winks, and whispers "Good for you, girl!" I
particularly like to give myself gold stars when I'm embarking on a new
self-nurturing pastime or reviving one that has fallen by the wayside:
walking, creative movement, healthy eating, writing my dialogue pages,
meditation, slowing down, balancing work and play. The spirit may be
willing, but all too often the flesh gets sidetracked. The extraordinary
days don't need gold stars. But ordinary days sure can be brighter with
a shiny, five-pointed pat on the back. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 17

Act Two For years I wanted to be older, and now I am. ---MARGARET ATWOOD

The other day I switched on the television while I was waiting for the
kettle to boil and caught a glimpse of my favorite actress in a cable
movie. I was thunderstruck at how much older she seemed since the last
time I'd seen her. If this gorgeous, high-maintenance, personal-trainer
using, spaattending woman was visibly maturing, what did a
low-maintenace, carpool schlepping, suburban mother and
stressed-out-writer-on-deadline look like? "How old do I look?" I asked
my daughter when I picked her up at school. "Old enough to be my
mother," the wag shot back. "Am I showing my age?" I asked a good friend
over lunch. "No more than I'm showing mine," she reassured me. How
vividly I remember an evening in my sixteenth year, when a friend of my
parents, who I thought was in his dotage (mid-forties) brought his
beautiful new fiancÉe over for dinner to introduce her to the family.
Mike had been an eligible bachelor for many years. Susan had been a Miss
America runner-up. It was all very romantic, and I wanted all the juicy
details. At one point I asked Susan, with that casual, insufferable
insouciance of a smart-assed teenager, "How old are you?" The only sound
in the living room was my mother's eyebrows rising. Susan's warm smile
broke through the awkward embarrassment. "Thirtytwo," she said
matter-of-factly. The gulp of soda I was just about to swallow spurted
out into the air. "Thirty-two? And you're getting married for the first
time?" (It's a miracle I'm alive to recount this tale.) "Young lady," my
mortified mother

admonished me, "you should be ashamed of yourself. We do not ask women
older than ourselves their age. Apologize to Susan immediately." "No,
please," Susan laughed, as the rest of the room broke up. "It's all
right. Do you think thirty-two is too old to be a bride?" Of course I
did, unless she was going to be the bride of Methuselah. Except that
Susan didn't look "middle-aged," she looked absolutely fabulous. She was
the most glamorous "older woman" I had ever seen in person. But waiting
until you were that old to get married, especially when you were
gorgeous, was beyond my conception. Now, of course, I know from personal
experience why she was marrying for the first time at such an advanced
age. But it was too late. At that moment, Cupid marked me. Two weeks
after I married my husband, I celebrated my thirty-second birthday. As I
remember, it was a very good year. Now, like many of my women friends,
I'm discovering that Act Two is much more interesting than Act One. Act
One just sets the scene---who our heroine is, where she came from, the
forces that shaped her. It's in Act Two that the creative tension really
begins to build as her story unfolds. Act Two is teeming with twists and
turns as the pivotal moment of choice comes into view. Act Two reveals
the dramatic center of her authentic plot. What will happen next? How
will our heroine cope? How will she change? We simply can't move into
Act Two until we have several decades under our belt. Hopefully we're
wiser, more experienced, self-confident, courageous, and canny.
Suddenly, there's more depth and breadth to the scripts we create. "In
middle age we are apt to reach the horrifying conclusion that all
sorrow, all pain, all passionate regret and loss and bitter
disillusionment are self-made," the novelist Kathleen Norris confessed
in 1931. But now we know how to change all that. Don't we? I'm ready for
my close-up, Mr. DeMille. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 18

A Birthday Ritual The birthday of my life Is come, my love is come to
me. ---CHRISTINA GEORGINA ROSSETTI

Today isn't my birthday, but it might be yours. If it is, I hope you're
having a wonderful day---a day of authentic indulgences, joyful
simplicities, contemplation, closure, and celebration. We should all
commemorate our birthdays that way. I've reached a point where I'm not
really big on major birthday gatherings, but I do need to distinguish
the birth day of my life in special ways from the rest of the calendar.
So I've created my own birthday ritual to help me commemorate the year
just past while invoking illumination for the year to come. First, I
take a soothing bath, symbolically washing away the past year's pain,
sorrow, regrets, mistakes, and guilt. Then I go alone to my bedroom and
light one votive candle for each year. (This is not as daunting as it
sounds if you use the tiny "tea lights" that come in their own metal
container. Gather them together on a tray or spread them around the
room.) My favorite music is playing in the background, fragrant incense
fills the air, and beside my bed is a bouquet of my favorite flowers. I
put on a brand-new nightgown and get comfortable in my freshly made bed.
Then I offer a personal psalm of thanksgiving for my life. As the
candles burn I reflect on my personal journey so far. I look at old and
recent photographs, then read selections from my journal. So many
wonderful moments from the past year have already slipped from my
conscious memory; it's comforting to call them back for a brief visit.
Next I ask for a birthday gift that only the Giver of Good can bestow:
to conceive a wonderful new dream or plan; to realize a dream delayed;
to overcome an old fear or be released from an old

pain; to experience a new freedom; to discover a new strength; to find a
new friend; to achieve a long-sought goal; to reach toward a new
aspiration; to overcome a new challenge. I sip a glass of champagne,
then slowly open a beautifully wrapped gift from my authentic self. And
of course, it's the perfect present. Many people who love you will try,
but no one can celebrate your birthday exactly the way you need for it
to be observed. That's because no one really knows the year you've just
completed; no one else has lived it. What's more, each year is
different. Your thirty-second and forty-eighth birthdays won't begin to
resemble each other. Your husband, lover, children, friends, and
co-workers can be aware of recent events that have unfolded in your
life, but only your authentic self knows how deeply these events
reverberated. Perhaps a loved one died six months ago. The rest of the
world assumes you've moved on, when the reality is that the shock of
your loss has only begun to wear off and your grief has just set in.
Perhaps the perfect birthday gift is to have a special photograph of
your loved one professionally framed or restored. No one else is going
to know you need this emotional touchstone, but you do. Maybe you need,
not a boisterous family party, but a few private hours to remember, to
honor the sacredness of the profound changes that have occurred in your
life. Birthdays are new beginnings, but they're also moments of personal
closure, which are crucial if we are to grow positively into our
authenticity. Every birthday, not just the ones marking a new decade, is
a significant milestone. Every age brings with it three hundred
sixty-five Real Life lessons. "We turn, not older with years, but newer
every day," Emily Dickinson reassures the birthday girl in all of us.
And that's certainly something worth celebrating in grand style. So:
Happy Birthday! Happy birthday to you! I've got a good feeling that this
coming year is going to be your best yet. Heaven knows you deserve it.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 19

A Woman of a Certain Age Men don't make passes at crones with big asses.
---CYBILL SHEPHERD

Grow older, I shall. Grow older gracefully, I shall try. Grow into a
crone? Over my dead body. Crone. What an ugly word to describe such a
creative chapter in a woman's story! But no woman need become a crone if
she doesn't want to. You can be a Wisewoman without being a hag.
Personally, I think invoking the image of a crone as a figure to emulate
diminishes a woman's sense of well-being, rather than enhances it. The
French call feminine Act-Two players "women of a certain age," and that
describes a lot of women very succinctly; we become more certain of
ourselves as our authenticity emerges. When it comes to a choice between
Lena Home's sexy chuckle or Madam Mim's gleeful cackle, I'm much more
inspired by the lady and her music than by the lady with her magic
spells. I think it's vital for us to change the concept of feminine
aging from "invisible" to "vibrant," because a sweeping societal change
is waiting in the wings as the millennium approaches. Fasten your seat
belts, boys. Some of you are in for a bumpy ride as the Century of Women
begins. By the year 2000, forty-two percent of all adult American women
will be fifty or older. However, we really don't have to wait to start
making an attitude adjustment about second acts. We can start today.
Contemporary women are already redefining the midlife passage that Gail
Sheehy calls "the Flaming Fifties." After five years of research for her
book New Passages: Mapping Your Life Across Time, she's discovered that
the women of the 1990s are in their fifties. And from a look at the
company she keeps---Barbra Streisand, Linda Ellerbee, Janet Reno, Judy
Collins, Lauren Hutton, Jane Fonda,

Martha Stewart, Donna Shalala, Judith Jamison, Barbara Boxer, and Tina
Turner---the fiftysomething decade sizzles. "Women at this stage of life
find themselves blazing with energy and accomplishment as never before
in history.... the struggles that sapped so much of their emotional
energy have subsided by now. The results \[of Sheehy's research\]
strongly suggest that the dominant influence on a woman's well-being is
not income level or marital status; the most decisive factor is age.
Older is happier." Coco Chanel reminds us that "Nature gives you the
face you have when you are twenty. Life shapes the face you have at
thirty. But it is up to you to earn the face you have at fifty." As long
as the face staring back at you is authentic, you can call yourself
anything you want to. But you'll find me hanging out backstage with
red-hot chanteuses, not my "crone-ies." OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 20

The Glad Game Reconsidered Be Glad. Be Good. Be Brave. ---ELEANOR
HODGMAN PORTER

Bah! Humbug! You can't mean that, four days before Christmas! Oh yes you
can, especially four days before Christmas! This morning the
test-that-tries-women's-souls commences. As with Christmases past, this
year the test will be multiple-choice: who sleeps where, who cooks what,
who gets custody of Christmas morning, which gifts haven't arrived,
which gifts haven't yet been sent, who picks people up at the airport,
who checks into Bedlam. Suddenly Ebenezer Scrooge seems like the most
maligned and misunderstood figure in literature. But I know someone
whose literary reputation needs rehabilitation even more than Scrooge's.
Remember Pollyanna? "The Glad Girl"? Now don't snicker at the thought of
her name. Pollyanna's cloying determination to find the good in any
situation might seem too saccharine to swallow four days before
Christmas, but I think the instructions to her Glad Game should be
festively wrapped and put under Everywoman's tree. Sneer if you must,
but the Glad Game is the perfect antidote when a holiday problem flares
up suddenly. "Pollyanna did not pretend that everything was good," her
creator, Eleanor Hodgman Porter, insists. "Instead she represented a
cheery, courageous acceptance of the facts. She understood that
unpleasant things are always with us, but she believed in mitigating
them by looking for whatever good there is in what is." When Pollyanna
was originally published in 1913, no one was more shocked than
Mrs. Porter at the sudden and widespread appeal of her eleven-year-old
orphan's ability to find the silver lining in any black cloud.

Although the book was published without any publicity, word-of-mouth
recommendation made it a best-seller, eventually selling over a million
copies. Pollyanna was translated into a dozen languages and was so
popular that the character's name entered the English vernacular to
describe irrepressible optimism. In the novel, Pollyanna Whittier is the
daughter of an impoverished missionary who continuously preaches the
sermon of gladness to anyone who'll listen. The Reverend Whittier points
out that the Bible records eight hundred instances of God instructing
his children to be glad and rejoice. Obviously, the Reverend concludes,
He must have wanted us to live that way, at least some of the time. One
Christmas these beliefs are put to a severe test when the annual holiday
hamper arrives from the Missionary Ladies Aid Society. Pollyanna has
asked for a real china doll for Christmas. But when she opens the hamper
on Christmas morning, she finds that the good ladies have mistakenly
sent her a pair of children's crutches instead. Naturally, she feels
devastated. In an effort to comfort her, the Reverend makes up a game to
see if they can find one good thing about receiving a pair of crutches
as a Christmas gift. Of course, they do: Pollyanna doesn't need them!
Thus, the Glad Game is created. After Pollyanna's father dies, she's
sent to live with her Aunt Polly Harrington, a wealthy but lonely
spinster. No one doubts that the reason Miss Polly never married is her
very stern and unpleasant personality. When Pollyanna arrives in the
little Vermont town, she soon transforms the community with her spunk
and good cheer. The sick become well; the lonely find friends and
sweethearts; unhappy marriages are saved. Everyone except Aunt Polly
succumbs to looking for life's bright side. But Aunt Polly remains a
hard nut to crack. At one point she explodes: "Will you stop using that
everlasting word 'glad.' It's 'glad'---'glad'---'glad' from morning till
night until I think I shall go wild." (A response one could imagine
sharing occasionally!) However, even Aunt Polly comes under the Glad
spell after Pollyanna has a serious accident and only pulls through
because of her own pluck and the goodwill of the community. Pollyanna
may be hopelessly sentimental, old-fashioned, and outdated as a novel,
but this business about eight hundred reassurances to "Cheer up, it's
not so bad!" deserves reconsideration. Perhaps this is exactly the
nugget

of good news we should meditate on as we deck the halls and roll out the
red carpet. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 21

Seasonal Soulcraft Live in each season as it passes; breathe air, drink
the drink, taste the fruit, and resign yourself to the influences of
each. Let them be your only diet drink and botanical medicines. ---HENRY
DAVID THOREAU

The winter air outside is thin and bracing: sharp, frigid, icy,
stinging. We do not saunter; the pace of our steps is quick, mirroring
on the outside the accelerated forward motion within as holiday
preparations take center stage. Once we close the door, the winter air
is warm, heavy, and aromatic: wood burning, fresh evergreens, spicy
cinnamon and ginger. Breathe in deeply the fragrance of contentment. In
winter we live in anticipation. Friends come in from the cold to be
embraced by the convivial chaos of our family's annual holiday open
house. "All year long I dream about your homemade eggnog," a guest
confides as soulful gifts are exchanged: heartfelt compliments and a cup
of cheer. In the kitchen, frothy hot wassail---spiced cider and dark
English ale---is ladled into cups, ransoming hands and hearts from
winter's chill. The dining room table groans good-naturedly from the
bounty of abundance: roast turkey, baked ham, cheeses, fresh breads.
Children of all ages crowd around seasonal sweets and winter's fruits:
candy canes and sugarplums, pumpkin, mince, and apple pies. Souls, sip
and savor. Take thine ease. Eat, drink, and be merry in this season of
joy. "The most ancient spiritual wisdom was centered around the
predictable shifts in seasonal energies. Rituals revolved around sowing,
reaping and the cycles of light and darkness," Joan Borysenko, the
respected scientist, gifted therapist, and unabashed mystic, reminds us
in her tiny contemplative

jewel, Pocketful of Miracles: Prayers, Meditations, and Affirmations to
Nurture Your Spirit Every Day of the Year. "The seasonal rhythms
correlate with our bodily rhythms.... Our dream life and inner life grow
more insistent in the winter darkness.... The old year is put to bed,
one's business is finished, and the harvest of spiritual maturity is
reaped as wisdom and forgiveness." For centuries, Eastern
healers---particularly practitioners of Chinese medicine---have taken
into consideration the impact the seasons have on our bodies, minds, and
souls. But the symbiotic relationship between human beings and nature
has virtually been ignored by Western medicine until recently. Now
physicians acknowledge that some people suffer from a deep depression in
the winter because they're extremely sensitive to darkness. Light
therapy restores their subtle energies to a healthy balance. Learning
the soulcraft of seasonal healing can bring new depth to our journey
toward Wholeness. In the natural world, winter is the season of rest,
restoration, and reflection. There's not much of that going on this
week, but after the holidays are behind us, consider how you spend
whatever time you have at your personal disposal. And if you have as
little as I think you do, reflect on how you can change that next year.
The twelfth-century German mystic Hildegard of Bingen suggests a simple
way for us to begin exploring the richness of seasonal soulcraft: Glance
at the sun. See the moon and the stars. Gaze at the beauty of earth's
greenings. Now, Think. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 22

Here Comes the Light There are two ways of spreading light; to be The
candle or the mirror that reflects it. ---EDITH WHARTON

In ancient times, as the days grew shorter and darker, people became
increasingly anxious and depressed, fearing that the sun was dying.
Without the sun, whom they worshipped as a god, people knew they would
perish. In order to coax back the source of their warmth, light, and
abundance they created midwinter rituals, culminating in a great
festival at Winter Solstice, on or about December 21--22, the longest
night of the year. The women would gather greenery to decorate dwellings
and prepare elaborate communal feasts. The men would light huge
bonfires; in the bright glow of the flames representing the energy of
the sun, they would hold revels with music and dance. Today, celebrating
the Winter Solstice is becoming very popular. For people who don't feel
comfortable with organized religion or even with exploring an individual
spiritual path, honoring the festivals of the natural world fulfills a
deep, primordial need to connect with a Power greater than humanity, no
matter what the Power is called. Women reviving the ancient feminine
traditions celebrate the Solstice as the birthday of the Great Mother.
Ecology-minded people, such as many Native Americans, honor the
sacredness of their connection with the Earth. Women who have interfaith
marriages and can't make a choice between celebrating Hanukkah and
Christmas often view the Winter Solstice as a neutral holiday the whole
family can celebrate. One meaningful way to celebrate the Solstice is to
consider it a sacred time of reflection, release, restoration, and
renewal. Zsuzsanna Budapest, a

leader in the Goddess movement, believes the interval of the winter
solstice is the ideal time to reach out to those from whom we feel
estranged. In The Grandmother of Time: A Woman's Book of Celebrations,
Spells and Sacred Objects for Every Month of the Year, she reminds us
that "Every so often, we want to make a clean beginning and must
therefore atone for the past. I don't mean we have to feel guilty; just
the opposite. When you send out your Winter Solstice greeting cards,
send some to people with whom you are not on good terms or to those with
whom you have quarreled. Just say, 'Hey, let's forget our bad times.
Blessings to you.' Each time you share forgiveness, somebody else will
forgive." To make sure your forgiveness card is not misunderstood, which
might make things worse instead of better, she recommends rubbing the
cards with lavender buds or including them in the envelope. The card
will offer a heavenly fragrance, surely the sweet scent of
reconciliation. It really doesn't matter whether we reflect the Light
through our authentic gifts or whether our authentic calling is to
spread it. What matters is that tonight the world is dark, cold, and
bleak. Your flame burns so brightly. Share your Love and warmth with
others. Watch the Light return. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 23

It's a Wonderful Life \[I\]nstead of the usual "Why can't we make movies
more like real life?" I think a more pertinent question is "Why can't
real life be more like the movies?" ---ERNIE PYLE

Some holiday traditions are sacred. In our house one such tradition is
the annual Christmas classic cinema celebration. Over the course of a
week, as we hang stockings, wrap packages, and munch more popcorn than
we string, we watch White Christmas, Holiday Inn, Christmas in
Connecticut, The Bishop's Wife, Miracle on 34th Street, A Muppet
Christmas Carol, and of course, It's a Wonderful Life, the fabulous
three-hanky film fable starring James Stewart and Donna Reed. After
nearly fifty holiday seasons, its potent alchemy of idealism and irony
still conjures up movie magic. In 1946, Frank Capra had no idea his
sentimental small town fantasy would become a seasonal favorite for the
ages. "In its own icky bittersweet way, it's terribly effective," The
New Yorker begrudingly conceded. It's Christmas Eve, the night of
miracles, and George Bailey certainly needs one. After a lifetime of
saving the lives of others, he's giving up on his. He's broke,
disgraced, facing prison, and in despair over a savings and loan
shortage that is truly not his fault. After angrily wishing he'd never
been born, he's about to jump off a bridge, when he's rescued by his
guardian angel who temporarily grants his wish by showing him what the
world would have been like without his authentic contribution. George
believes he's never had a lucky break. But when he steps back to
reconsider his choices, he realizes they were the right ones. He's also
a rich man: he has a loving and supportive wife, healthy children, work
that

makes a difference, and more friends than his house can even hold at one
time. Quite frankly, it's a wonderful life he was about to throw away.
We can discover just how wonderful our lives are---exactly as they are
right at this moment---by doing what George did (without the bridge
scene!). We can step back and take another look at our lives and the
lives we've touched. One of the unexpected blessings of writing this
book is that I've gone back over the ordinary moments of my life, mining
them for meaning. Writing a meditation around an encounter, mistake,
regret, or conversation is very revealing---even more so than is keeping
a journal. Every day in the two years it has taken me to write Simple
Abundance, I've had a topic to muse upon, usually a title, often a
quote, but always a blank page. Most of the time I've found out what I
was writing about only after I was well into it. And what I've
discovered---as you can---is that I've enjoyed a wonderful life. That
knowledge has resonated deep within me and I'm truly grateful. Obviously
there are many things I wish I hadn't done or crises I brought upon
myself, but now I see that every experience is a loving teacher. Next
year I want you to seriously consider writing your own authentic
meditations. Start slowly. Only write one every week or every month.
Search for the Sacred in the ordinary and you'll find it. Nothing in
your life is too insignificant to be a source of inspiration. As you
begin to write your own meditations regularly, you'll be amazed at how
much you start remembering or recognizing. The English poet Cecil
Day-Lewis confides: "We do not write in order to be understood, we write
in order to understand." If you start writing your own authentic
meditations, what you'll remember, recognize, and understand is that
it's a wonderful life. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 24

Here Is All I've Counted Splendid Write it down, when I have perished:
Here is everything I've cherished; That these walls should glow with
beauty Spurred my lagging soul to duty; That there should be gladness
here Kept me toiling, year by year ... Every thought and every act Were
to keep this home intact. ---EDGAR A. GUEST

Tonight is my favorite night of the year. In this quiet moment, Simple
Abundance is not a philosophy but reality perfected. My heart is full of
gratitude; striving for simplicity in our holiday obligations has
preserved my sanity; order has kept all the moving parts moving; a sense
of harmony has emerged because I finally stopped long enough to balance
work and family at least for the holidays; beauty surrounds me in the
festive decorations throughout the house, now illuminated and
intensified with the glow of candles and a cozy fire; and joy, the child
of laughter and contentment has arrived, the guest of honor at our
festive family feast. After dinner, after we have each opened just one
gift and other members of the household are snug in their beds, it's
time for my own private Christmas ritual: the preparation of a Nativity
tray, an English medieval custom that never fails to bring the true
meaning of this special night into sharp focus. Legend has it that on
the night of the Nativity, whosoever ventures out into great snows
bearing a succulent bone for a lost and lamenting hound, a wisp of hay
for a shivering horse, a warm cloak for a stranded wayfarer, a

garland of bright berries for one who has worn chains, a dish of crumbs
for all huddled birds who thought their song was dead, and sweetmeats
for little children who peer from lonely windows---whosoever prepares
this simply abundant tray, "shall be proffered and returned gifts of
such an astonishment as will rival the hues of the peacock and the
harmonies of heaven." So I quietly take down from the top of the
cupboard a huge willow tray, line it with cloth, and place on it a juicy
bone from our standing rib roast dinner; a bowl of cat food; hay from
the bale I used for autumn decorations; a warm coat someone has outgrown
or grown tired of; a string of cranberries; a dish of fresh bread crumbs
and sunflower seeds; and a plate of sugarplums. Quietly, I sneak out the
door and bring it down to the top of the stone wall in front of our
house near the street. Sometimes there's snow, sometimes there's not,
but it's always cold. I look up to find a bright star; is it the Star?
It is to my eyes. I'm freezing. Now it's impossible on this holy night
not to think of the homeless as I settle the tray into a drift or dirt.
Two thousand years ago another homeless family depended on a stranger's
charity. They didn't find any until an ordinary, harried, exhausted
woman stopped long enough to feel her heart tug. Mine now tugs with
guilt; that a basket and presents were dropped off earlier this
afternoon to a shelter salves the sting a bit, but I'm disappointed and
saddened that I didn't, don't, do more. I will next year, I promise.
Sometimes I keep those wellintentioned promises, sometimes real life
distracts me from Real Life. I don't do enough, and both Spirit and I
know it. I started preparing the Nativity tray because an almost
palpable mysticism seemed to surround the legend. I was also very
interested in the promise of astonishing gifts to rival the harmonies of
heaven. Every year when I go out on Christmas morning to collect the
tray, many of the offerings are gone. One year, even the coat. For all I
know, I'm the squirrels' Santa Claus. But it does give me happy pause,
wondering whose Christmas dreams came true. And the astonishing gifts to
rival heaven? Everywhere I look. But the best one is that now I can
truly see them. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 25

Christmas If, as Herod, we fill our lives with things, and again with
things; if we consider ourselves so unimportant that we must Jill every
moment of our lives with action, when will we have the time to make the
long, slow journey across the desert as did the Magi? Or sit and watch
the stars as did the shepherds? Or brood over the coming of the child as
did Mary? For each one of us, there is a desert to travel. A star to
discover. And a being within ourselves to bring to life. ---AUTHOR
UNKNOWN

I first discovered this profound expression of Simple Abundance's
essence just before I began writing this book. While browsing in a
gallery in Vermont, I was drawn across the room to a display of work by
the gifted calligraphy and graphic artist Michael Podesta. There it
was---an elegant script rendering of exquisite grace. "That's it," my
authentic self whispered. "That's Simple Abundance." Of course it was,
and I had to have it. But when I spotted the price tag, I knew it
wouldn't be at that moment. That's okay, I reassured Herod's daughter,
writing the quote down. Just accept the gift of the quote right now; the
print will come when it's supposed to. I picked up the artist's
mail-order catalog and continued to enjoy a wonderful day with Katie,
her cousins, and my sister. Back at my mother's, I mentioned the print
and how this quote was the very first one I had for the book. "It's
perfect for Christmas," I told her. "It sums up the book in one amazing
paragraph." When I arrived home, Michael Podesta's print was waiting for
me, a good luck gift from my mother. After I had cried and laughed and
called to thank her, I hung it over my meditation table. Its beauty acts
as an anchor to my bedroom, the place where I sit, work, dream, sleep,
love, and pray; its

timeless message a deep harbor for my restless heart, a soulful safe
haven. When I called Michael to ask where the quote came from, he told
me that he didn't know; someone had sent it to him anonymously in the
mail without attribution. But it spoke to his heart and he knew he
needed to make a print using it. To the unknown poet, giver of wisdom
and truth, thank you for this very special gift. "Oh, would that
Christmas lasted the whole year through, as it ought," Charles Dickens
lamented. "Would that the spirit of Christmas could live within our
hearts every day of the year." But what is the Christmas spirit? Perhaps
the Christmas spirit, like the nature of the Beloved, is meant to be a
Holy Mystery. Perhaps the Christmas spirit is our souls' knowledge that
things, no matter how beautiful, are only things; that we were created,
not always to do, but sometimes simply to be. Perhaps the Christmas
spirit is a loving reminder that we must make time for the long, slow
journey across the desert; we must take time to discover our star; we
must honor the time necessary to brood over the coming of the authentic
women we were created by Love to become. It has been said many times
that our lives are gifts from God---that what we do with them is our
gift in return. Today is the perfect day to remember this. So this is my
Christmas wish for both of us: that behind the toys, tinsel, carols,
cards, and convivial chaos, there will come a moment of quiet reflection
and peace. That it may be truly said of each of us that we know how to
keep Christmas well, if any woman does. Merry Christmas! and God bless
us, God bless us every one! OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 26

Two Lives We must be willing to get rid of the life we've planned, so as
to have the life that is waiting for us. ---JOSEPH CAMPBELL

Do you remember the scene in the movie The Natural, when Robert Redford
is lying in a hospital bed, sick, discouraged, and about to give up?
It's the last game in the play-offs and he's not there because he's been
poisoned by the woman he thought he loved. Glenn Close, his childhood
sweetheart, comes to visit him. Bob's feeling pretty sorry for himself.
The doctor's told him that he can't ever play baseball again. But
baseball is his life. He's thirty-nine years old and he's just made it
to the majors. "I believe we have two lives," Glenn tells him. "The life
we learn with and the life we live after that." Well, she's right, as
we've been learning up till now on the Simple Abundance path. And what
have we learned? That there are only two classes in the University of
Life. Over one door the sign reads: "Heaven on Earth." Over the other
door: "Seminar on Understanding the Mechanics of How Heaven Works." The
first course is a hands-on work/study program. We live Real Life.
Honest. The other course is an intellectual seminar. We try to figure
out how we can manipulate real life, with a little metaphysical mumbo
jumbo. Maybe. Every morning we're given the opportunity to choose which
class it will be for the next twenty-four hours: Real Life or real life?
In each class, there will be unexpected pop quizzes. Some of us are not
given advance notice of when the final exam is scheduled; some students
are more fortunate. There's no way of knowing which group we're in.

"On this narrow planet, we have only the choice between two unknown
worlds," Colette instructs us. "One of them tempts us---ah! what a
dream, to live in that!---the other stifles us at the first breath."
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 27

A Woman of Substance First we have to believe, and then we believe.
---G. C. LICHTENBERG

As the season of Believing seems to wind down for the rest of the world,
please let me gently make something very clear. Many dreams still wait
in the wings. Many aspirations are just within our grasp if we keep
stretching. Many hungers need nourishment. Many yearnings must be
acknowledged, so that they can be fulfilled. Many authentic sparks must
be fanned before Passion performs her perfect work in you. Throw another
log on the fire. This is not the day you quit. This is not the day you
cry. This is the day you stare down every naysayer in your life who
doesn't get it yet. Because you do. Finally. And now you know that faith
is the substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen.
This is the day you shout, "I Believe!" Keep on shouting it until you're
hoarse. No more muttering under your breath. Do you know what happens
every time a child says, "I don't believe in fairies!" A fairy falls
down dead. Do you know what happens every time a woman says, "I don't
believe. It's taking too long!" The woman falls down dead. Inside. Where
it counts. But it just might take another forty years before they get
around to burying you. And do you know what they'll say as your ashes
are scattered? "I don't think I can ever remember a time when she was
truly happy." And they'll be right. This is not the time you stop
believing. You simply can't afford the luxury of skepticism. And what
must you believe with every breath, until you do believe? How about the
mystical alchemy of style and Spirit. In the

past a woman's spirituality has been separated from her lifestyle. But
now you know this doesn't make any sense. Never did. Never will. Now you
know that the union of Authentic Style and Spirit creates a woman of
Substance. You. So keep on believing that you have the passion,
intelligence, brilliance, creativity, wisdom, clarity, depth, and savvy
to find that quiet center of solace, serenity, and strength necessary to
create and sustain an authentic life. Every day is the prayer. An
authentic life is the most personal form of worship. When you start
believing, you'll discover that all things are really possible. Clap.
Clap once again. But let's really hear it this time! Wow! That's better!
Why, it's so loud, it'll wake up the dead. Good for you. OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 28

The Courage to Create the World You Want You can have anything you want
if you want it desperately enough. You must want it with an exuberance
that erupts through the skin and joins the energy that created the
world. ---SHEILA GRAHAM

The first time you think you'd like to do something a little different
from the way you've always done it---maybe bring Creole shrimp stew to
the pot-luck supper instead of your delicious-but-predictable
potato-and-peas casserole---you pick up a pebble. The first time you
actually do it differently---whether you're delighted or disappointed in
the results---you throw the pebble into the pond. The pebble sends out
tiny, barely visible ripples of movement toward the center. No one else
notices. But the woman who threw the pebble or spent two hours in the
kitchen cooking up simple pleasure does if she's paying attention. It's
the same way with courageous acts in your daily round. They may be so
small that only you realize something's going on. But one day, all those
small but indelible moments of private courage will burst through. And
both you and your world will have changed in an authentic moment. We
become authentic the same way we become courageous. By doing it. Not by
thinking about it. Rosa Parks didn't think about becoming the symbol of
the Civil Rights Movement when she refused to give up her seat and go to
the back of the bus. But her authentic and exuberant commitment to
equality pushed through her reserve, joining with the Energy that
created the world. Exuberant means not only "joyously unrestrained" but
"displaying something in abundance." Rosa Parks displayed an abundance

of authentic courage. And at that defining moment, can we doubt that her
soul was "joyously unrestrained" even if her heart was trembling? This
week African-American women begin celebrating a festival honoring faith,
unity, heritage, and values. Kwanzaa, which means "first fruits of the
harvest" in Swahili, was started in 1966 by civil rights activist
Maulana Karenga. Over the last three decades the holiday has become
widely celebrated by black women who cherish their authenticity. The
seven-day celebration, which starts on December 26, is observed by
lighting a candle each night to honor a specific value. They are, in
order, unity, self-determination, cooperative work and responsibility,
cooperative economics, purpose, creativity, and faith. There is no
prescribed way to celebrate Kwanzaa except with great festivity. Not all
of us celebrate Kwanzaa, but the courage to embrace authenticity with
joyous unrestraint is certainly something to celebrate by lighting a
candle, raising a glass, and doing something completely unexpected that
lifts our spirits. "We need to feel the cheer and inspiration of meeting
each other," Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin believes. "We need to gain the
courage and fresh life that comes from the mingling of congenial souls,
of those working for the same ends." OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 29

A Success Unexpected in Common Hours I learned this, at least, by my
experiment: that if one advances confidently in the direction of \[her\]
dreams, and endeavors to live the life which \[she\] has imagined,
\[she\] will meet with a success unexpected in common hours. ---HENRY
DAVID THOREAU

Some days---and today is one of them---I think of Simple Abundance as
the woman's Walden. But Thoreau went off alone to a hut in the woods.
We're surrounded by offspring-on-vacation, many of them mopey and
miserable because "there's nothing to do." When we point out that
there's plenty to do, it's not exactly what they had in mind. Henry, can
we trade? Today is the day the post-holiday blues usually drop in for
their annual visit. After any strenuous exertion, especially one that's
lasted several weeks, there's a natural letdown in energy and
enthusiasm. "The life in us is like the water in a river," Thoreau tells
us. It rises, even floods, but then it recedes until it finds its true
level. The year is drawing to a close; and whether we're aware of it or
not, we're balancing our personal books, tallying up the profits and
losses. If we're in the red as far as achieving goals, surrendering
expectations, reaching for aspirations, coming to terms with situations
we can't change, or acknowledging that we could have made changes but
chose not to, we're going to end up feeling blue. If we've blown our
budget, it's likely our purses will be leaner for a couple of months.
Not fun. To make matters even worse, you're probably not feeling very
well. Don't be surprised by nasty colds or lingering chest congestion.
Practitioners of Eastern medicine expect these ailments in the winter;

metaphysically the lung is the organ that processes grief. If we've
experienced a loss---and all of us have in one way or another this
year---we might still be grieving, unable to accept and release it. Old
pain is very difficult to give up; by now it's a familiar friend, just
not a very nurturing one. When this happens we need to remember to treat
ourselves kindly. This is the time to trust, not make judgments. Soon
the children will go back to school. The company will leave. The work
will get completed. The bills will be paid. The quiet moment will come.
You'll be able to catch your breath, and then you'll notice that it
doesn't hurt anymore. Your creative energy and enthusiasm will return.
Once again you'll start to advance confidently in the direction of your
dreams. "However mean your life is, meet it and live it; do not shun it
and call it hard names. It is not bad. ... It looks poorest when you are
richest. The fault-finder will find faults even in paradise. Love your
life, poor as it is. You may perhaps have some pleasant, thrilling,
glorious hours, even in a poor-house," Henry reassures us. "The sun is
reflected from the windows of the almshouse as brightly as from the rich
man's abode; the snow melts before its door as early in the spring."
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 30

Ithaka As you set out in search of Ithaka Pray that your journey be
long, full of adventures, full of awakenings. Do not fear the monsters
of old ... You will not meet them in your travels if your thoughts are
exalted and remain high, if authentic passions stir your mind, body and
spirit. You will not encounter fearful monsters if you do not carry them
within your soul, if your soul does not set them up in front of you.
---CONSTANTINE PETER CAVAFY

At the funeral of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, many of us heard for the
first time the poem "Ithaka," written in 1911 by the Greek poet C. P.
Cavafy. This exquisite song of encouragement to travelers setting out on
a voyage of self-discovery is often read as an elegy. But I believe
"Ithaka" is even more powerful when it becomes a personal affirmation of
our Real Life journey. Ithaka was the beloved island home of the
legendary Greek hero, Odysseus. After playing a leading role in the
Trojan War, Odysseus roamed the world for ten years, having adventures,
meeting challenges, and learning lessons that profoundly changed him.
Today an odyssey means a long, often exhausting, exhilarating and/or
excruciating transformative journey. The search for authenticity is our
personal odyssey. As we move through our daily rounds on the Simple
Abundance path as daughters, friends, lovers, wives, mothers, and
artists of the everyday---what we are really seeking is the Ultimate
Reality. We are seeking Ithaka.

Over the last fifty years, there have been several fine translations of
Cavafy's poem, but for me, they've always seemed as if they had been
written for men. This is not too surprising, as they were all translated
by men. However, since "Ithaka" has become an emotional touchstone for
me, a poem I find myself meditating on a great deal, I was inspired to
create a personal translation/adaptation of Cavafy's classic for women:
Pray that your journey be long, full of many summer mornings when with
much pleasure and much joy you anchor in harbors never seen before;
Browse through Phoenician markets, to purchase exquisite treasures---
mother-of-pearl and coral, ebony and amber and sensual perfumes of all
kinds--- as much as you desire. Visit many Egyptian cities, content to
sit at the feet of sages, eager and open to receive learning. Keep
Ithaka always in your mind. Your arrival there is your destiny. But do
not hurry the journey at all; be patient. Better that it lasts for many
years--- longer than you can even imagine. So that finally, when you
reach this sacred isle, you will be a wise woman, abundantly fulfilled
by all you have gained along the way; no longer expecting Ithaka to make
you wealthy, no longer needing Ithaka to make you rich. Ithaka offered
you the profound journey, the chance to discover the woman you have
always been. Without Ithaka as your inspiration, you never would have
set out in search of Wholeness. And should you find her poor, Ithaka did
not deceive you. Authentic as you have become, full of wisdom,

beauty and grace, enriched and enlightened by all you have experienced
You will finally understand what all of life's Ithakas truly mean.
OceanofPDF.com

DECEMBER 31

Pray the Journey Is Long The world is round and the place which may seem
like the end may also be only the begining. ---IVY BAKER PRIEST

Life as a journey. Life as safari. Life as a pilgrimage. Life as a
garden. Life as the highest art. Pathfinders. Prospectors. Pioneers.
Detectives. Explorers. Archaeologists. Pilgrims. Poets. Sojourners.
Gardeners. Artists of the Everyday. Women of Spirit. Women of substance.
Women with style. Women who have lived the questions. Women ready to
embrace the answers. Women who look great in hats. That's why we wear so
many different ones. Seekers of the Sacred in the ordinary. Real Life.
The Mystical in the madness. The Holy Mysteries of the mundane. Seekers
of Love. Passion. Wholeness. Authenticity. Where are we headed? We're
headed Home. Ithaka. But before we arrive, there are vast worlds
awaiting exploration. Worlds within. Worlds without. Earth. Heaven.
Heaven on earth. Sometimes the terrain is rocky and the slopes steep.
Sometimes the jungle is thick and its interior very dark. Sometimes the
water is deep and the waves extremely rough. Do you see now why we need
some variety in our approaches? How will we know when we get there?

You'll know. It's that simple. Real things are. Are we there yet? Not
quite. But it's taking too long. Often it seems that way.
Chronologically we're at the end of the year but the beginning of the
journey. Not to worry. We'll have all the time we need in kairos to find
ourselves. Here's where we must part company. At least for a little
while. I've got some discoveries I need to make on my own. And so do
you. But you won't be alone. Someone who loves you unconditionally is at
the helm. Divine Love sustains you, surrounds you, enfolds you, protects
you. Go in peace. You're as ready as you ever will be; well equipped for
the adventures awaiting. Divine Substance---which is your only
Reality--- provides abundantly. But you must ask. Ask for help, supply,
guidance, Grace. Ask for the Power to be switched on. Ask to catch the
Flow. Ask to soar. Ask. Ask. Ask. Ask for a respite from all your
crises. Surrender suffering, sorrow, pain. Surrender expectations. Ask
to be surprised by joy. Give thanks. Wait. Watch what happens. Get
excited. Open your arms as wide as you can to receive all the miracles
with your name on them. Never forget that all you have is all you need.
Simple Abundance is a creative and practical path, full of joyful
simplicities waiting to be revealed in the small moments. But don't
forget, the path is a spiral. If you get stuck, look out at the wider
vista and see how far you've traveled. For the parts of the journey when
only the far horizon is in sight, Simple Abundance becomes a caravel of
contentment---a small but sturdy vessel, strong enough to withstand
storms. Her triangular sails have been spiritually designed to take
advantage of winds blowing from either side of real life---the shadows
and the Light. Let's see. Do you have everything? Get out your treasure
map. Think of your illustrated discovery journal as your ship's logbook.
Your wise and loving heart is your compass to determine the latitude and
longitude of longing. Check it every day. Trust it to keep you steady
and on the mark. Love will not fail you.

Believe. Believe in yourself. Believe in the One who believes in You.
All things are possible to she who believes. Blessings on your courage.
Navigate by the stars. Search the Heavens for yours. Follow it. Keep on
the lookout for soulful markers. They surround you. The Soul's awakening
is gratitude. The Soul's essence is simplicity. The Soul's serenity is
order. The Soul's serenity is harmony. The Soul's passion is beauty. The
Soul's purpose is joy. Pray your journey be a long one. Savor the stops
along the way. They make the search marvelous. Meaningful. Memorable.
Find and honor your own pace. There are still so many harbors to be seen
for the first time. You're headed for someplace you've never been
before. Keep your thoughts held high. Let personal passions stir your
mind, body, and spirit. Set your course for Authentica. Legend has it
that once you reach her shores, you'll not leave the same woman. For if
you find this sacred isle, you will remember what you have always known.
You will discover the woman you have always been. No longer will you see
things as they are. You will see things as you are. Through the parting
of the mists where doubt and faith meet, you will see the authentic self
is the Soul made visible. Godspeed.

Joyful Simplicities for December • Really deck the halls. Spread holiday
cheer throughout your entire home with seasonal decorations, no matter
what holiday you celebrate. Evergreens, beautiful flowering plants,
candles, tiny lights, and natural decorations don't have to be
associated with any one holiday unless you make them so. When you make a
special effort to create beauty in your home, you set the stage for
festivity, an authentic quality of Hanukkah, Winter Solstice, Christmas,
and Kwanzaa. • Dip into the simply abundant treasury of seasonal
stories. O'Henry's Gift of the Magi before you start your Christmas
shopping. Enjoy A Christmas Carol as a serial story over a couple of
weeks. But don't stop there! Many wonderful writers have given us
holiday word gifts over the

last century. My favorite anthology is A Christmas Treasury, edited by
Jack Newcombe. • To every month there is a sale, and you'll find a savvy
strategy for gift shopping throughout the year (and it works!) in 365
Ways to Prepare for Christmas by David E. Monn, with Marilyn J.
Appleberg. • Delicious food is each winter holiday's gift. Enjoy potato
latkes, Christmas pudding, sugarplums, eggnog, wassail, spicy Creole
shrimp. You don't have to bake to enjoy Christmas cookies. Start
thinking about calories on January 2. Forget about fruitcake. Think
about Black Cake. "There is fruitcake, and there is Black Cake, which is
to fruitcake what the Brahms piano quartets are to Muzak," Laurie Colwin
tells us. She'll tell you how to make one in Home Cooking (and again in
More Home Cooking). • Hold a Christmas classic-film fest. Besides
familiar favorites, there are many more marvelous movies you probably
aren't familiar with that celebrate Christmas as the star or the
subplot. You'll find a list of them in The Great American Christmas
Almanac by Irena Chalmers and Friends. • Fulfill the holiday dreams of a
child who isn't yours. • Share your blessings with a shelter for women
or the homeless. • Prepare a Nativity Tray. • Find your star. Follow its
Light. If you really want a star you can call your own, you can have
one. Each day new stars are discovered in the heavens. The International
Star Registry will name one after you, a dream, or a loved one as a
memorial. Contact them online at www.intlstarregistry.com. • Michael
Podesta's inspirational calligraphy art is exquisite. Visit his lovely
website: www.michaelpodesta.com. • If you would like information on
obtaining a signed, limited edition print of the Simple Abundance tree
by Margaret Chodos-Irvine, featured on the cover and throughout this
book, please write her, enclosing a selfaddressed stamped envelope:
Margaret Chodos-Irvine, 3018 45th Avenue, SW, Seattle, WA 98116. • Look
back on the aspirations you wrote on January 1. Don't be discouraged if
you haven't achieved them. It's the reaching for them that's important.
Make a new list. Carry whatever's still meaningful to you over to the
New Year's list. Now confide your new dreams to a close friend, who will
act as your witness.

• Before we can welcome in the New Year, we need to put the Old Year's
unfinished business---mistakes, regrets, shortcomings, and
disappointments---behind us. Here's how: write down on small slips of
paper whatever you'd like to forget, then place the slips of paper in a
small cardboard box. Next, with ceremony, wrap the box in black or very
dark paper, sealing in the sorrow and hard luck. Say, "Good riddance,"
and toss the box into the fireplace to burn away the past. If you don't
have a fireplace, toss the bad memories from the past into the trash
where they belong. Keep only the good. • Chill something bubbly. Honor
the Old Year with a farewell toast, welcome the New Year within. Offer
thanks. Celebrate how far you've come, how much you've learned, and the
glorious woman you Really are. • Happy New Year! OceanofPDF.com

WITH THANKS AND APPRECIATION If the only prayer you ever say in your
entire life is "Thank You," it will be enough. ---MEISTER ECKEHART

During the long time it took to realize the dream of this book, a close
circle of family, friends, creative colleagues, and "unseen hands"
assisted me and nurtured Simple Abundance as if it were their own. I
want to acknowledge the love, support, time, creative energy, emotion,
guidance, inspiration, and faith so generously bestowed on me as I
followed my bliss. With all my heart I thank God for entrusting me with
Simple Abundance and rejoice in the countless contributions that made
its completion possible. Among my many blessings was being led to Liv
Blumer at Warner Books. Her generosity, thoughtfulness, passion,
intelligence, wit, and respect for my work moved me deeply, and her
elegant grace is evident on every page. A special note of heartfelt
affection goes to Caryn Karmatz Rudy, who also superbly edited portions
of this book and all my succeeding books at Warner. Caryn always
responded to my requests and concerns with cheerful élan and much
appreciated kindness. From the very beginning it was apparent to me that
Liv and Caryn really loved Simple Abundance, confirming what Victorian
philosopher John Ruskin said about the harmony that results "when love
and skill work together." Grateful thanks to my other benefactors at
Warner over the last decade, particularly my good friend Larry
Kirshbaum, Chairman of Time Warner Book Group, who changed the face of
the publishing industry with his savvy dedication to not only the bottom
line, but the well-being of his authors. Larry made this 10th
anniversary edition a beautiful reality for me.

Much affection is sent to Jamie Raab, Warner Books' hardcover publisher,
for caring as much about the writer's process as the product, a rare and
greatly appreciated benediction. Blessings to my dear friend Dawne
Winter who manages the Simple Abundance office and is my first link to
the public. Dawne has shared the ups and downs of this ten-year ride
with such grace, humor, and unconditional concern about me and my
readers that it's made her irreplaceable and cherished in all our
hearts. My sister, Maureen O'Crean, continues to keep the home fires
burning on the Simple Abundance Web site with enthusiasm, empathy, and
encouragement, especially when I'm overwhelmed by other commitments. To
Oprah Winfrey, who became Simple Abundance's godmother, unbounded thanks
for your enormous generosity of spirit in supporting my work these last
ten years. This book could not have been written without my agent and
close friend, Chris Tomasino. Her unconditional faith in me and her deep
and fervent belief that women needed to read what I needed to write made
Simple Abundance possible. She was the first to read my drafts in
monthly installments (cutting the manuscript down from over 1,200
pages!), and her vision of what this book could be stretched and
sustained me during our long, difficult journey to publication. Her
steadfast support gave me the courage to take the creative risks
necessary to hear my authentic voice after two decades of journalism. I
learned to soar on these pages because I knew Chris was holding the net.
My daughter, Kate, was eight when I conceived this dream and will turn
twenty-three as this 10th anniversary edition goes to press. For over
half her life she has graciously accepted the overwhelming presence of
"The Book" in her daily round, one way or another, with great humor,
patience, and consideration. She's always kept the faith, especially
when mine faltered, and it is a privilege to reverse roles as she now
follows her authentic path in film. The writing, publishing, and
promoting of Simple Abundance over the last fifteen years meant many
personal sacrifices in our lives, especially for Katie. Only Heaven and
I know the depth and breadth of her contribution. This 10,th anniversary
edition was inspired by my husband Jonathan Donahue Carr's steadfast
belief that my work in the world has only begun.

May I end this note of thanksgiving wishing that everyone connected with
Simple Abundance, especially you, dear Reader, reap the rich harvest
sown by my love. As Meister Eckehart tells us, and Simple Abundance
proves, we should "Be always ready for the gifts of God, and always for
new ones" because "God is a thousand times more ready to give than you
are to receive." Your names are forever engraved in the gratitude
journal of my heart. OceanofPDF.com

ABOUT THE AUTHOR SARAH BAN BREATHNACH (pronounced Bon Brannock)
celebrates quiet joys, simple pleasures, and everyday epiphanies. She is
the author of ten books, including the best-selling titles Something
More, The Simple Abundance Journal of Gratitude, and Romancing the
Ordinary. Simple Abundance has been back to press 60 times and was on
the New York Times bestseller list for more than two consecutive years,
topping the list at No. 1 for a year. Simple Abundance was named one of
the top ten best-selling books in the United States during the nineties
according to USA Today. Sarah Ban Breathnach is also the president and
CEO of Simple Abundance®, Inc., a consultancy firm specializing in
publishing and multimedia projects that give creative expression to the
Simple Abundance® principles and the concept of personal authenticity.
Sarah Ban Breathnach is the founder of the Simple Abundance Charitable
Fund, a nonprofit bridge group between charitable causes and the public
dedicated to increasing awareness that "doing good" and "living the good
life" are soul mates. The American Benefactor noted that while "it's not
necessary to reconcile your public persona with your personal life these
days, it's refreshing when someone does, like Sarah Ban Breathnach ..."
Since 1995 the SACF has supported the vision of more than one hundred
non-profit organizations by awarding over \$ 1 million in financial
support. The Simple Abundance Charitable Fund is underwritten with
proceeds from Sarah's speaking engagements, royalties, and product
sales. Her latest book is Moving On: Creating Your House of Belonging
with Simple Abundance. Sarah lives in the English countryside with her
husband, Jonathan Donahue Carr. Sarah Ban Breathnach would love to hear
from you! Her new address is:

Simple Abundance P.O. Box 77420 Washington, D.C. 20013 Or visit her on
the web at www.simpleabundance.com. Sarah Ban Breathnach offers a
limited number of lectures and private workshops in the United States
annually, as well as residential courses in the beautiful English
countryside. Please contact us for more information. OceanofPDF.com

What's in a Name? Both legally and familiarly, as well as in my books, I
now have only one name, which is my own. ---COLETTE La Naissance du jour
(1928) Like Colette I also have a name, both familiar and legal, which
is found in my books and which I own: Simple Abundance®. Please do not
use it for your garden center, B&B, cooking courses, workshops, or
magazine features (unless, of course, you're writing about my work). If
you're thinking about naming a rose or a health food supplement after
Simple Abundance, I'm flattered, but you still must write for
permission. Intellectual property pilfering is spiritually distressing
and now, thank goodness, it's also internationally prohibited by law.
SARAH BAN BREATHNACH OceanofPDF.com

BIBLIOGRAPHY I am a part of all I have read. ---JOHN KIERAN My sources
for the quotes have been many and varied. Collecting the pithy and the
profound has been an absorbing pastime for over twenty years, and I
gather them from many sources: books, magazine articles, reviews,
newspaper features, radio interviews, television broadcasts, plays, and
films. My favorite collections of quotations are: The Beacon Book of
Quotations by Women, compiled by Rosalie Maggio (Boston: Beacon Press,
1992); Bartlett's Familiar Quotations, Sixteenth Edition, edited by
Justin Kaplan (Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1992); and The
Columbia Dictionary of Quotations, compiled by Robert Andrews (New York:
Columbia University Press, 1993). Ackerman, Diane. A Natural History of
the Senses. New York: Random House, 1990. Anthony, Evelyn. The Avenue of
the Dead. New York: Coward, McCann & Geoghegan, 1982. Antin, Mary. The
Promised Land. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1969. Armstrong, Karen. The
History of God: The 4,000-year Quest of Judaism, Christianity and Islam.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1993. Austen, Jane. Mansfield Park. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1990. Baldwin, Christina. Life's Companion:
Journal Writing as a Spiritual Quest. New York: Bantam, 1991. Beattie,
Melody. The Language of Letting Go. New York: Hazelden/Harper & Row,
1990. ---------. Gratitude: Affirming the Good Things in Life. New York:
Hazelden/Ballantine Books, 1992.

Beeton, Isabella. The Book of Household Management. London: 1861.
Bender, Sue. Plain and Simple: A Woman's Journey to the Amish. New York:
HarperSanFrancisco/HarperCollins, 1989. Bennett, Arnold. How to Live on
Twenty-Four Hours A Day. London: 1910; Plainview, New York: Books for
Libraries Press, 1975. Berenbaum, Rose Levy. The Cake Bible. New York:
William Morrow and Company, Inc., 1988. Berwick, Ann. Holistic
Aromatherapy: Balance the Body and Soul with Essential Oils. St. Paul,
Minnesota: Llewellyn, 1994. Black, Penny. The Book of Potpourri. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1989. Bolen, Jean Shinoda. Goddesses in
Everywoman. New York: Harper & Row, 1985. Borysenko, Joan. Minding the
Body, Mending the Mind. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1987. ---------. Guilt
Is the Teacher, Love Is the Lesson. New York: Warner Books, 1990.
---------. Fire in the Soul: A New Psychology of Spiritual Optimism. New
York: Warner Books, 1993. ---------. Pocketful of Miracles: Prayers,
Meditations, and Affirmations to Nurture Your Spirit Every Day of the
Year. New York: Warner Books, 1994. Breathnach, Sarah Ban. Mrs. Sharp's
Traditions: Nostalgic Suggestions for Re-Creating the Family
Celebrations and Seasonal Pastimes of the Victorian Home. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1990. (Published in paperback as Victorian Family
Celebrations. New York: Fireside/Simon & Schuster, 1992.) ---------.
TheVictorian Nursery Companion. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1992.
BrontË, Emily. Wuthering Heights: Complete Authoritative Text with
Biographical and Historical Contexts. Boston: Bedford Books, 1992.
Brussat, Frederic, and Mary Ann Brussat, editors. 100 Ways to Keep Your
Soul Alive. New York: HarperSanFrancisco, 1994 Buchman, Christina, and
Celina Speigel, editors. Out of the Garden: Women Writers on the Bible.
New York: Fawcett Columbine, 1994. Budapest, Zsuzsanna. The Grandmother
of Time: A Woman's Book of Celebrations, Spells and Sacred Objects for
Every Month of the Year. New

York: Harper & Row, 1989. Burnett, Frances Hodgson. The Secret Garden.
New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1911. Burnham, Sophy. A Book of Angels.
New York: Ballantine, 1990. Caddy, Eileen. Opening Doors Within. Forres,
Scotland: The Findhorn Press, 1987. Cantwell, Mary. "The Mauv-ing of
America." New York Times Magazine, March 17, 1991. Cameron, Julia. The
Artist's Way: A Spiritual Path to Higher Creativity. New York: Jeremy P.
Tarcher/Perigee Books/Putnam Publishing Group, 1992. Carter, Mary
Randolph. American Junk. New York: Viking Studio Books, 1994. Chalmers,
Irena. The Great American Christmas Almanac. New York: Viking Studio
Books, 1988. Clampitt, Amy. The Kingfisher. New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
1983. Clason, George S. The Richest Man in Babylon. New York: Hawthorn
Books, Inc. 1955; New York: Bantam, 1976. Clurman, Carol. "Family
vs. Career: A Woman on the Road to Power Takes a U-Turn." USA-Weekend,
December 2-4, 1994. Colwin, Laurie. Home Cooking: A Writer in the
Kitchen. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1988. ---------. More Home Cooking:
A Writer Returns to the Kitchen. New York: HarperCollins, 1993. Conran,
Shirley. Superwoman: For Every Woman Who Hates Housework. New York:
Crown Publishers, 1978. Conwell, Russell H. Acres of Diamonds. New York
and London: Harper & Brothers, 1915. Cooper, Dona. Writing Great
Screenplays for Film and TV. New York: Prentice Hall, 1994. Coupland,
Ken. "Is There a Doctor for the House?" New Age Journal,
November/December, 1991. Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly. Flow: The Psychology
of Optimal Experience. New York: Harper & Row, 1990. Damrosch, Barbara.
The Garden Primer. New York: Workman Publishing, 1988.

Davidson, Diane Mott. Catering to Nobody. New York: St. Martin's Press,
1990. ---------. Cereal Murders. New York: Bantam, 1993. ---------.
Dying for Chocolate. New York: Bantam, 1992. Davis, Bette. The Lonely
Life. New York: Putnam, 1962. Deval, Jacqueline. Reckless Appetite: A
Culinary Romance. Hopewell, New Jersey: Ecco Books, 1993. de Wolfe,
Elsie. The House in Good Taste. New York: The Century Company, 1913.
Dickinson, Emily. Emily Dickinson: Selected Letters, edited by Thomas H.
Johnson. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The Belknap Press of Harvard
University Press, 1985. Dillard, Annie. Pilgrim at Tinker Creek. New
York: Harper & Row, 1974. ---------. The Writing Life. New York: Harper
& Row, 1989. Dominguez, Joe and Vicki Robin. Your Money or Your Life.
New York: Viking, 1992. du Maurier, Daphne. Rebecca. New York:
Doubleday, Doran and Company, 1938. Eco, Umberto. The Name of the Rose.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983. Eliot, George. The Mill on
the Floss. New York and Chicago: Scott Foresman & Company, 1920. Eliot,
T.S. Collected Poems 1909-1962. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich,
1963. Emerson, Ralph Waldo. The Best of Ralph Waldo Emerson. New York:
Walter J. Black, Inc., 1941. ---------. Self-Reliance: The Wisdom of
Ralph Waldo Emerson as Inspiration for Daily Living (selected and with
an introduction by Richard Whelan). New York: Bell Tower, 1991.
Engelbreit, Mary. Mary Engelbreit's Home Companion: The Mary Engelbreit
Look and How to Get It. Kansas City: Andrews and McMeel, 1994. Esquivel,
Laura. Like Water for Chocolate. New York: Doubleday, 1992. Estes,
Clarissa Pinkola. Women Who Run with the Wolves. New York: Ballantine
Books, 1992.

Fields, Rick, with Peggy Taylor, Rex Weyler, and Rich Ingrasci. Chop
Wood, Carry Water: A Guide to Finding Spiritual Fulfillment in Everyday
Life. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Perigee/Putnam, 1984. Ferguson,
Sheila. Soul Food: Classic Cuisine from the Deep South. London and New
York: Weidenfeld & Nicholson, 1989. Fernea, Elizabeth Warnock, editor.
Women and Family in the Middle East: New Voices of Change. Austin,
Texas: University of Texas Press, 1985. Ferrucci, Piero. Inevitable
Grace. New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Putnam Books, 1990. Field, Joanna. A
Life of One's Own. London: Chatto & Windus, 1936; Los Angeles: J. P.
Tarcher, 1981. Fisher, M.F.K. How to Cook a Wolf. New York: Duell, Sloan
and Pearce, 1942. Fitzgerald, Sally, editor. The Habit of Being: Letters
of Flannery O'Connor. New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 1979.
Foster, Patricia, Editor. Minding the Body: Women Writers on Body and
Soul. New York: Doubleday, 1994. Fox, Emmet. Power Through Constructive
Thinking. New York: HarperCollins, 1989. Fox, Matthew. The Reinvention
of Work: A New Vision of Livelihood for Our Time. New York:
HarperCollins, 1994. Fraser, Kennedy. The Fashionable Mind. Boston:
David R. Godine, 1985. Freeman, Eileen Elias. Touched by Angels. New
York: Warner Books, 1993. ---------. Angelic Healing: Working with Your
Angels to Heal Your Life. New York: Warner Books, 1994. Geddes-Brown,
Leslie. The Floral Home. New York: Crown, 1992. Gibson, Cynthia. A
Botanical Touch. New York: Viking Studio Books, 1993. Glaspell, Susan.
The Visioning. New York: Frederick A. Stokes, 1911. Godden, Rumer. A
House with Four Rooms. New York: William Morrow and Company, Inc., 1989.
Goldberg, Natalie. Writing Down the Bones: Freeing the Writer Within.
Boston: Shambhala, 1986. ---------. Wild Mind: Living the Writer's Life.
New York: Bantam, 1990. Graham, Abbie. Ceremonials of Common Days. New
York: The Womans Press, 1923.

Green, Harvey. The Light of the Home: An Intimate View of the Lives of
Women in Victorian America. New York: Pantheon Books, 1983. Guest, Edgar
A. Collected Verse of Edgar A. Guest. Chicago: Reilly & Lee Co., 1934.
Hampton, Mark. Mark Hampton on Decorating. New York: CondÉ Nast
Books/Random House, 1989. Hancock, Emily. The Girl Within. New York:
Fawcett Columbine, 1989. ---------. "Growing Up Female." New Woman, May,
1993. Hanh, Thich Nhat. The Miracle of Mindfulness: A Manual on
Meditation. Boston: Beacon Press, 1987. Hepner, Harry. The Best Things
in Life. New York: B. C. Forbes & Sons, 1953. Hill, Napoleon. Think and
Grow Rich. New York: Fawcett Crest, 1963. Hillier, Malcolm. The Book of
Container Gardening. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1991. Holland,
Barbara. Endangered Pleasures. Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1995.
Holmes, Marjorie. I've Got to Talk to Somebody, God. New York:
Doubleday, 1968. Holt, Geraldene. The Gourmet Garden. Boston: Bullfinch
Press Books/Little, Brown, 1990. Huxley, Judith. Table for Eight. New
York: William Morrow and Company, 1984. Hyatt, Carole, and Linda
Gottlieb. When Smart People Fail: Rebuilding Yourself for Success. New
York: Penguin Books, 1988. Irion, Mary Jean. Yes, World: A Mosaic of
Meditation. New York: R. W Baron, 1970. James, William. The Principles
of Psychology. New York: Henry Holt & Co., 1890; Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press, 1983. Johnston, Mireille. The French Family
Feast. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1988. Kelly, Marcia, and Jack Kelly.
One Hundred Graces. New York: Bell Tower, 1992. Kornfield, Jack. A Path
with Heart: A Guide Through the Perils and Promises of Spiritual Life.
New York: Bantam, 1993. Kosinski, Jerzy. Being There. New York: Harcourt
Brace Jovanovich, 1971.

Kripke, Pamela. "Create Your Own Decorator's Notebook." Mary Emmerling's
Country Magazine, Premiere issue; August, 1993. Kron, Joan. Home-Psych:
The Social Psychology of Home and Decoration. New York: Clarkson N.
Potter, 1983. Kushner, Harold. Who Needs God? New York: Summit Books,
1989. ---------. To Life! A Celebration of Jewish Being and Thinking.
New York: Warner Books, 1993. Johnson, Samuel. Samuel Johnson / Oxford
Authors. Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 1984. Lamott, Anne.
Bird by Bird: Some Instructions on Writing and Life. New York and San
Francisco: Pantheon Books, 1994. Lawrence, Brother. Practicing the
Presence of God. Wheaton, Illinois: Harold Shaw, 1991. L'Engle,
Madeleine. Walking on Water: Reflections on Faith and Art. Wheaton,
Illinois: Harold Shaw, 1980. ---------. A Circle of Quiet. New York:
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1972. ---------. The Irrational Season. New
York: The Seabury Press, 1979. Lewis, C.S. Miracles. New York:
Macmillan, 1947. Lindbergh, Anne Morrow. Gift from the Sea. New York:
Pantheon Books, 1955. Magoun, F. Alexander. Living a Happy Life. New
York: Harper & Brothers, 1960. Martin, Tovah. The Essence of Paradise:
Fragrant Plants for Indoor Gardens. Boston: Little, Brown, 1991. May,
Rollo. The Courage to Create. New York: W. W. Norton, 1975. McCall, Anne
Bryan. The Larger Vision. New York: Dodd, Mead & Company, 1919.
McGinley, Phyllis. Saint-Watching. New York: Viking, 1969. Merker,
Hannah. Listening. New York: HarperCollins, 1994. Miller, Ronald S., and
The Editors of New Age Journal. As Above, So Below: Paths to Spiritual
Renewal in Daily Life. Los Angeles: Jeremy P. Tarcher, 1992. Mitchell,
Stephen. Tao Te Ching, A New English Version. New York: Harper & Row,
1988. Monn, David E. 365 Ways to Prepare for Christmas. New York:
HarperCollins, 1993.

Moore, Thomas. Care of the Soul: A Guide for Cultivating Depth and
Sacredness in Everyday Life. New York: HarperCollins, 1992. ---------.
Soul Mates: Honoring the Mysteries of Love and Relationship. New York:
HarperCollins, 1994. Morris, Mary. "Hello, This Is Your Destiny" New
Woman, February, 1993. Moss, Charlotte. A Passion for Detail. New York:
Doubleday, 1991. Murphy, Joseph. The Power of Your Subconscious Mind.
New York: Bantam Books, 1982. Nearing, Helen. Loving and Leaving the
Good Life. Post Mills, Vermont: Chelsea Green, 1992. ---------. Simple
Food for the Good Life: An Alternative Cook Book. New York: Delacorte
Press/Eleanor Friede, 1980. Nearing, Scott, and Helen Nearing. The Good
Life: How to Live Sanely and Simply in a Troubled World. New York:
Schocken Books, 1970. ---------. Continuing the Good Life: Half a
Century of Homesteading. New York: Shocken Books, 1979. Needleman,
Jacob. Money and the Meaning of Life. New York: Doubleday/Currency
Books, 1991. Nelson, Gertrud Mueller. To Dance with God. New
York/Mahwah: Paulist Press, 1986. Newcombe, Jack, editor. A Christmas
Treasury. New York: Viking, 1982. Norris, Gunilla. Being Home. New York:
Bell Tower, 1991. O'Connor, Elizabeth. Eighth Day of Creation: Gifts and
Creativity. Waco, Texas: Word Books, 1971. Ohrbach, Barbara Milo. The
Scented Room. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1986. ---------. Simply
Flowers. New York: Clarkson N. Potter, 1992. Olsen, Tillie. Silences.
New York: Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte Press, 1978. ---------. Tell Me a
Riddle. New York: Seymour Lawrence/Delacorte Press, 1979. Pascale,
Richard Tanner. "Zen and the Art of Management." Harvard Business
Review, March/April, 1978. Peck, M. Scott. The Road Less Traveled. New
York: Simon & Schuster, 1978.

---------. Further Along the Road Less Traveled. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1993. Perenyi, Eleanor. Green Thoughts: A Writer in the
Garden. New York: Vintage Books, 1983. Phipps, Diana. Affordable
Splendor. New York: Random House, 1981. Ponder, Catherine. The
Prosperity Secrets of the Ages. Marina del Ray, California: DeVross &
Company, 1954. ---------. Open Your Mind to Prosperity. Marina del Ray,
California: DeVross & Company, 1971. Porter, Eleanor Hodgman. Pollyanna.
Boston: The Page Company, 1913. Post, Emily. The Personality of a House.
New York and London: Funk & Wagnalls, 1948. Priestly, J.B. Delight.
London: Heinemann, 1949. Radner, Gilda. It's Always Something. New York:
Simon & Schuster, 1989. Raynolds, Robert. In Praise of Gratitude: An
Invitation to Trust Life. New York: Harper & Brothers, 1961. Redfield,
James. The Celestine Prophecy. New York: Warner Books, 1993. Ripperger,
Henrietta. A Home of Your Own and How to Run It. New York: Simon &
Schuster, 1940. Rilke, Rainer Maria. Letters to a Young Poet. New York:
W. W. Norton, 1934. Robbins, John, and Ann Mortifee. In Search of
Balance. Tiburn, California: H J Kramer Inc., 1991. Roesch, Diana K.
"Body Language." Lear's, February, 1994. Roman, Sanaya, and Duane
Packer. Creating Money. Tiburn, California: H J Kramer, Inc., 1988.
Rossbach, Sarah. Feng Shui. The Chinese Art of Placement. New York:
Dutton, 1983. ---------. Interior Design with Feng Shui. New York:
Dutton, 1987. Sacks, Oliver. Awakenings. New York: Summit Books, 1987.
Sangster, Margaret E. Ideal Home Life. New York: The University Society,
Inc., 1910. Saltzman, Amy. Downshifting: Reinventing Success on a Slower
Track. New York: HarperCollins, 1991. Sarton, May. Plant Dreaming Deep.
New York: W. W. Norton, 1968. ---------. Journal of a Solitude. New
York: Norton, 1973.

Seal, Mark. "Laura Esquivel's Healing Journey." New Age Journal,
May/June, 1994. Seuss, Dr. Oh, the Places You'll Go! New York: Random
House, 1990. Shain, Merle. Hearts That We Broke Long Ago. New York:
Bantam, 1983. ---------. Courage My Love: A Book to Light an Honest
Path. New York: Bantam, 1989. Sheehy, Gail. Pathfinders. New York:
William Morrow, 1981. ---------. New Passages: Mapping Your Life Across
Time. New York: Random House, 1995. ---------. "The Flaming Fifties."
Vanity Fair, October, 1993. Sher, Barbara, with Annie Gottlieb.
Wishcraft: How to Get What You Really Want. New York: Viking Press,
1979. Sher, Barbara, with Barbara Smith. I Could Do Anything If I Only
Knew What It Was. New York: Delacorte Press, 1994. Shi, David E. In
Search of the Simple Life. Layton, Utah: Peregrine Smith/Gibbs M. Smith,
Inc., 1986. Shinn, Florence Scovel. The Wisdom of Florence Scovel Shinn.
(Includes four complete books: The Game of Life and How to Play It; The
Power of the Spoken Word; Your Word Is Your Wand; The Secret of
Success.) New York: Fireside/Simon & Schuster, 1989. Siegel, Alan B.
Dreams That Can Change Your Life. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher, 1990.
Sinetar, Marsha. Do What You Love and the Money Will Follow. New
York/Mahwah: Paulist Press, 1987. ---------. Reel Time: Spiritual Growth
Through Film. Ligouri, Missouri: Triumph Books, 1993. Starhawk. The
Spiral Dance. New York: Harper & Row, 1979. Steindl-Rast, Brother David.
Gratefulness, the Heart of Prayer: An Approach to Life in Fullness. New
York/Ramsey, New Jersey: Paulist Press, 1984. Steinem, Gloria.
Revolution from Within: A Book of Self-Esteem. Boston: Little, Brown and
Company, 1992. Stern, Jane and Michael. Square Meals. New York: Alfred
A. Knopf, Inc., 1984. Stern, Janet, editor. The Writer on Her Work. New
York: W.W. Norton, 1980.

Stoddard, Alexandra. Daring to Be Yourself. New York: Doubleday, 1990.
---------. Creating a Beautiful Home. New York: William Morrow, 1992.
Taylor, Terry Lynn. Messengers of Light: The Angels' Guide to Spiritual
Growth. Tiburon, California: H J Kramer Inc., 1990. ---------. Guardians
of Hope: The Angels' Guide to Personal Growth. Tiburon, California: H J
Kramer Inc., 1992. ---------. Creating with the Angels. Tiburon,
California: H J Kramer Inc., 1993. Terkel, Studs. Working: People Talk
about What They Do All Day and How They Feel about What They Do. New
York: Pantheon Books, 1974. Thoreau, Henry David. Walden and Other
Writings of Henry David Thoreau. New York: Modern Library, 1992.
Thurman, Judith. Isak Dinesen: The Life of a Storyteller. New York: St.
Martin's Press, 1982. Tisserand, Robert B. The Art of Aromatherapy. New
York: Inner Traditions International, 1977. Tudor, Tasha, and Richard
Brown. The Private World of Tasha Tudor. Boston: Little, Brown, 1992.
Uchida, Yoshiko. Ajar of Dreams. New York: Antheneum, 1981. Underhill,
Evelyn. Mysticism. New York: World Publishing, 1955. van Amringe,
Judyth. Home Art: Creating Romance and Magic with Everyday Objects.
Boston: Bulfinch Press/Little, Brown, 1994. Wasserstein, Wendy. Uncommon
Women and Others. New York: Dramatists' Play Service, 1987. ---------.
"The Me I'd Like to Be." New Woman, December, 1994. Watts, Alan W. The
Way of Zen. New York: Random House, 1965. White, Katharine S. Onward and
Upward in the Garden. Edited by E.B. White. NewYork: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux, 1979. Wickham, Cynthia. House Plants through the Year. London:
William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd., 1985. Williams, Margery. The Velveteen
Rabbit, or How Toys Become Real. Garden City, New York: Doubleday, 1960.
Williamson, Marianne. A Return to Love: Reflections on the Principles of
a Course in Miracles. New York: HarperCollins, 1992. ---------. A
Woman's Worth. New York: Random House, 1993. Witty, Helen. Fancy Pantry.
New York: Workman Publishing, 1986.

Wolfe, Thomas. Look Homeward, Angel. New York: Charles Scribner, 1957.
Wolfman, Peri, and Charles Gold. The Perfect Setting. New York: Harry N.
Abrams, Inc., 1985. Woolf, Virginia. A Room of One's Own. New York:
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1929. OceanofPDF.com

I would like to gratefully acknowledge all of the writers I have quoted
from in my meditations for their wisdom, comfort and inspiration. An
exhaustive search was done to determine whether previously published
material included in this book required permission to reprint. If there
has been an error, I apologize and a correction will be made in
subsequent editions. The following authors, their agents, and publishers
have graciously granted permission to include excerpts from the
following: Loving and Leaving the Good Life by Helen Nearing, published
by Chelsea Green Publishing Co., is reprinted by arrangement with
Eleanor Friede Books, Inc.© 1992 by Helen Nearing. All rights reserved.
In Search of Balance, copyright © 1991 by John Robbins and Ann Mortifee.
Reprinted by permission of H J Kramer Inc. P.O. Box 1082, Tiburon, CA
94920. All rights reserved. Creating Money, copyright © 1988 by Sanaya
Roman and Duane Packer. Reprinted by permission of H J Kramer Inc. P.O.
Box 1082, Tiburon, CA 94920. All rights reserved. A Return to Love by
Marianne Williamson. Copyright © 1992 by Marianne Williamson. Reprinted
by permission of HarperCollins Publishers, Inc. I Could Do Anything If
Only I Knew What It Was, copyright © 1994 by Barbara Sher. Used by
permission of Delacorte Press, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell
Publishing Group, Inc. "Ash Wednesday," from Collected Poems 1909--1962
by T. S. Eliot, copyright 1936 by Harcourt Brace & Company, copyright ©
1964, 1963 by T. S. Eliot, reprinted by permission of the publisher.
"Little Gidding," and "Dry Salvages," from Four Quartets, copyright 1943
by T. S. Eliot and Renewed 1971 by Valerie Esme Eliot, reprinted by
permission of Harcourt Brace & Company. "I Remember I Was a Point, I Was
a Circle" by Hoda al-Namani from Women and the Family in the Middle
East: New Voices of Change, edited by Elizabeth Warnock Fernea,
copyright © 1985. By permission of the University of Texas Press.
Letters to a Young Poet by Rainer Maria Rilke, translated from the
German by M. D. Herter. Copyright © 1934, reprinted by permission of WW.
Norton & Company, Inc. Revised translation copyright 1954 by W. W Norton
& Company, Inc.

Money and the Meaning of Life, copyright © 1991 by Jacob Needleman. Used
by permission of Doubleday, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell
Publishing Group, Inc. I've Got to Talk to Somebody, God by Marjorie
Holmes. Copyright 1968, 1969 by Marjorie Holmes Mighell. Used by
permission of Doubleday, a division of Bantam Doubleday Bell Publishing
Group. Inc. Reel Power: Spiritual Growth Through Film, copyright © 1993
by Marsha Sinetar. Reprinted with permission by Triumph Books. A Woman's
Worth by Marianne Williamson. Copyright © 1993. Reprinted with
permission of Random House, Inc. Being Home, copyright © 1991 by Gunilla
Norris. Reprinted with permission of Bell Tower Books, a division of
Random House, Inc. Gift from the Sea, copyright © 1955 by Anne Morrow
Lindbergh. Reprinted by permission of Pantheon Books, a division of
Random House, Inc. Selected excerpts, one used as a \[meditation\]
heading, from More Home Cooking by Laurie Colwin. Copyright © 1993 by
the Estate of Laurie Colwin. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins
Publishers, Inc. OceanofPDF.com


