A Sense of Self Memory, the Brain, and Who We Are VERONICA O'KEANE

For Esther and Sean

Contents

Foreword PART 1 HOW WE MAKE MEMORIES

1.  Dawnings

2.  Sensation: The Raw Ingredient of Memory

3.  Making Sense

4.  The Story of the Hippocampus

5.  The Sixth Sense: The Hidden Cortex

6.  A Sense of Place

7.  Time and Experiencing Continuity

8.  Stress: Remembering and 'Forgetting' PART 2 HOW MEMORY MAKES US

9.  Self-Recognition: The Start of Autobiographical Memory

10. The Tree of Life: Arborizations and Prunings

11. A Sense of Self

12. Sex Hormones and Songbirds

13. The Shifting Narratives of Life

14. False or True?

15. The Oldest Memories

Postscript Notes References Index

Foreword

This heart within me I can feel, and I judge that it exists. This world
I can touch and I likewise judge that it exists. There ends all my
knowledge and the rest is construction. Albert Camus, The Myth of
Sysiphus (1955)

A small detail about the translation of the title of Proust's famous
exploration of his childhood memory, À la recherche du temps perdu,
demonstrates much of what I will address in this book. Initially
translated in 1954 as Remembrance of Things Past, the English title was
changed in the 1992 edition to the more accurate In Search of Lost Time.
The original translation's 'remembrance of' suggests a passive recall of
memories from a hidden and fixed repository, while the later
translation's 'in search of' suggests an active pursuit of a fluid past
that is lost. Neuroscience almost caught up with Proust in the interval
between the translations.

Notes Literary bibliographical references and short explanatory notes
are given in footnotes. Discursive notes are indicated by roman
numerals, and can be found on pp. 235--47. Academic and scientific
references are indicated by arabic numerals, and can be found on
pp. 249--60.

PART ONE

How We Make Memories Memory is the medium through which we filter
present experience and create a sense of time, place and person. Through
my own experiences as a clinician and scientist and through the
experiences of my patients, we will see how neural pathways carry
sensations from the outside world to become representations in the
brain, and the role that emotions play as an intrinsic part of the
memory process. We then dive into the brain's memory factory of the
hippocampus, the emotional fire-spark of the amygdala and the rag and
bone shop of the insula to understand the inner workings of the brain.
Finally, I will explore why we fail to even register some things, while
vividly remembering others.

1. Dawnings

There are events that occur in each of our lives that are experienced
with a prescient sense that they will always be remembered. Occasionally
this feeling is particularly intense and, while not epiphanic, carries
with it a sense of having stumbled into a new level of awareness. This
new awareness is pre-verbal, like the rattling of cups on saucers that
is the only sign of subterranean shifts. The rattle that set me on the
journey to understanding the real matter of memory occurred in London in
the early 2000s. Looking back, the incident is like the introductory
scene in a novel where every ingredient of the story to be told is laid
out with a canny casual innocence that, if retrospectively analysed, is
prophetic of the outcome. Edith's story set me on a journey of breaking
down and reformulating my ideas about memory -- knowledge that had
become automatic to me, but that somehow eluded the material essence of
what it is to be a sensate, living human, with a memory sculpted by
individual experience. I met Edith in the Bethlem Royal Hospital, the
oldest psychiatric hospital in the world and now part of the Maudsley
Hospital of more contemporary fame. The Bethlem dates back to 1247, when
it was called the Bedlam, until 'bedlam' became a noun that indicated
chaos and turmoil. The hospital was renamed in the early twentieth
century as the Bethlem Royal. National treatment units were located in
the 100-plus acres of horse chestnut and hazel tree grounds of the
hospital. I worked for five years as the lead clinician in a National
Perinatal Psychiatric Unit in the early 2000s, a unit that has so far
been spared the decimation in NHS services that has since occurred.
Women from all over the UK were transferred to us for specialist
treatment of perinatal psychiatric illnesses -- illnesses that arise
during pregnancy or during the postpartum period. A badger family had
setted in a tunnel in the ground close to the entrance to our unit. I
often paused to look at the opening to their sett in its soft

grassy mound on the off chance that the badger would, perhaps in a
spontaneous moment of protective night watchmanship, pop its head out
during daylight. I was commuting between London and Dublin during these
years, and my two little ones in Dublin waited each week for news of
sightings, but they had to do instead with pressed woodland flowers in
spring and summer, and hazelnuts and conkers in late autumn. I loved my
five years of working in the Bethlem, bringing women like Edith, who had
been felled by the cruel illness of postpartum psychosis, back to their
lives. Most of the women admitted to our unit had this rarely
spoken-about psychosis, which occurs in about 1,400 women in the UK
yearly. Edith was admitted to the Bethlem a few weeks following the
birth of her baby. This is her story. Edith had no history of
psychiatric illness when she gave birth to her baby. Baby's arrival was
anticipated with joy. The pregnancy was healthy, and fetal scans were
normal. Labour was uncomplicated and a healthy baby was delivered at
term. In the days following Baby's birth, Edith became emotionally
distant, and seemed to become increasingly bewildered. She appeared to
be distressed and preoccupied but would not communicate the cause of her
distress. Her condition rapidly deteriorated and at the time of her
admission she had stopped eating and was wandering aimlessly around her
home day and night ignoring Baby and the rest of the world. Her family
doctor assessed her at home and she was referred immediately to us for
assessment and treatment. When I met Edith I noted that she was
unusually slim in spite of having given birth less than two weeks
previously. She had a closed expression and was more or less mute and
unresponsive to our questions. We frequently see this 'locked-in' mien
in individuals with psychotic experiences. In the case of women with
postpartum psychosis, they usually hear voices that are not audible to
others, may smell odours -- usually unpleasant -- that are not coming
from the outside world and may feel sensations on their body that are
not caused by anyone or anything that is visibly touching them. Such
auditory, olfactory (smell), visual or somatic (touch or visceral)
hallucinations are referred to as psychotic symptoms.

The first principle that we need to establish is that what are called
symptoms are real sensory experiences. Hearing a sound, a human voice,
is a subjective experience, whether the voice originates in the outside
world or is generated in the brain by pathological neuronal firing. The
experience of hearing the voice is similar in both cases: the origin of
the sensation is a separate consideration. If the experience is
generated by pathological brainfiring, the voice hearer will look around
to see who's talking, as one does, and may attribute the voices to
whoever is present, or to hidden speakers. Commonly, those experiencing
auditory hallucinations will look as if they are talking to themselves,
whereas in their reality they are responding to voices that are as
audible and real to them as the voice of a living person. This leaves
the psychotic person isolated, trapped in a sensate world that is a
misinterpretation of the outside world. They may come to believe that
they are privy to a level of sensory experience that is not available to
others, a 'sixth sense'. Mostly, individuals in a psychotic state will
invoke unseen forces, such as IT, ghosts, magic, deities or, in the case
of Edith, the devil, to explain these subjective experiences that are at
odds with the world as experienced by others around them. Edith was
preoccupied with making sense of her vivid experiences and was unable to
respond to the world of external sensate stimuli. Like most women in the
throes of postpartum psychosis she appeared to be in a state of altered
consciousness, as if removed from the world. On assessment I noted that
Edith sometimes stared into my eyes and sometimes firmly closed her eyes
shut, and occasionally she stared at a member of the team. She seemed to
be looking at whoever was placed in the direction of the voices that she
was hearing. Her movements were stilted and non-purposeful. She was
guarded and trying to hide her confusion and her fear. It was apparent
to us that Edith was responding to sensory stimuli that were not
originating from the external world, that she had a postpartum
psychosis. Edith had stopped caring for Baby. She 'knew' that her baby
was not the baby that she had given birth to, although it looked
identical. Her own baby could not have a rotting smell. So Baby had been
switched, somehow. In the beginning she was not sure whether her birth
baby had been taken away and the baby before her was an identical
substitute, or whether her baby

had been taken over by some evil spiritual force, probably the devil. On
the way to the Bethlem she passed a graveyard that was familiar to her,
being close to her home. Glancing through the gates, her eye caught a
small gravestone that she noticed had a slight tilt. She suddenly
realized when she saw the small gravestone that her baby had been buried
there. The old headstone disguised the new burial, and it was tilted
because it had been recently disturbed. This proved that what she now
had was an imposter baby. The evil separation of Edith from her birth
baby was complete, and now she was being locked up by the perpetrators
of the malevolence. She did not reveal this to me or to anyone else when
she was admitted to the hospital, because that would have given the game
away, thereby exposing herself. It was only by pretending that she did
not know that we were feigning roles to deceive her, that she would have
a chance to save herself. She could give nothing away. She was playing
our game and trying to say as little as possible. One of the experiences
that I have frequently observed in women suffering with postpartum
psychosis is a belief that people close to them, and particularly their
newly delivered babies, have been replaced by a double, an imposter.
This phenomenon is called Capgras syndrome, after the physician who
apparently first described it. I say 'apparently' because the idea of
changeling babies goes back as far as our oldest stories, the fairy
tales. We'll return to the fairy story at the end of the book.

Apart from Baby, Edith also thought that her partner was an imposter, an
identical substitute, colluding in the plot to harm her. She only
revealed this to me months later, following her recovery. Because Edith
was terrified at being taken captive by evil forces, she wanted to
escape from the hospital. She refused to take medication, which she
predicted would be poisonous, or at best a drug that would weaken her
power to fight the conspiracy. She reasoned that she was the only one
left to dispose of before the new order could be established. Her
imposter husband and the grotesque production around her were now
targeting her. Gestures among the malicious schemers carried meaning;
nothing was accidental or incidental. No one was who

they appeared to be, and her imposter family, in collusion with others,
had taken her baby away, killed him and buried him in haste in the local
graveyard. We decided that it would be unsafe for Edith to leave the
Unit, and treatment with antipsychotic medication was commenced. Over
the course of days she became less distressed and began to respond to
us. Two weeks later, as the psychosis receded, she became distressed at
being separated from what she now realized to be her birth baby and
wanted to be reunited with him. When Baby was brought to the Unit by
Edith's partner she responded with tears and joy. I can't imagine the
confusion of emotions that she was experiencing, but among them were the
emotions of a newly delivered mother. She gradually recovered and left
our Unit three weeks later, no longer psychotic but traumatized by what
had happened to her. On return visits to my outpatient clinic over the
subsequent months, Edith told me about what she had been experiencing
when psychotic. Following the commencement of treatment the voices had
gradually faded from a normal volume to whispers, then became less
frequent and had finally faded away. The thoughts that her partner and
baby had been replaced faded also, and with this the idea that everyone
around her, including the medical team, were part of a paranoid plot.
She became quite shamed by her beliefs when psychotic, particularly
about Baby, and wanted to put the whole episode behind her. She was also
worried that, if she revealed what she had thought had been happening,
others might see her as an unsafe mother. Before becoming psychotic,
Edith knew little about psychosis and had never heard the term
postpartum psychosis. Her understanding of herself had been turned
upside down. I reassured her that the psychosis was an illness caused by
the rapidly changing hormones during birth that had affected her brain .
. . that this had caused parts of her brain to fire off, creating
subjective experiences that seemed to come from the outside but that had
really been generated within her brain. Subjective experience is where
any explanation of psychosis must begin. All sensations, whether a
voice, a smell, a touch, a visual image, whether 'psychotic' or 'real',
whether being stimulated by something in the outside world or because
the brain is firing off for no apparent reason and without

external sensation, are experienced as real. Edith and I had established
that her experiences had been subjectively perceived as real
experiences, and were therefore unmistakably subjectively real. We would
refer to the experiences as real, with an implicit understanding that
they were also psychotic. The scene that came back to me again and again
was a conversation that we had following her discharge. I asked her if
she had experienced fleeting psychotic ideas about Baby or her partner
since her discharge. Edith responded that she had done so in the early
stages of recovery, but less so as time progressed. She told me that as
she was passing the graveyard on her way to an outpatient consultation
following discharge from the unit, her eye caught the small gravestone
in her local graveyard that she had seen on her way to involuntary
detention in the Bethlem. This was the same gravestone that she had
immediately understood then, prior to admission, as being where her baby
was buried. As she looked at the small tilted gravestone months later,
for a few moments she was 'back' on her way to the hospital being
involuntarily detained by the imposters who had replaced the real people
in her life. She had a rush of the full range of these beliefs,
accompanied by a feeling of terror. I asked her if she knew that the
psychotic ideas were not real on this, the second, occasion. What she
said next set me on a long-term pathway of inquiry about the nature of
the matter of memory. She looked straight at me and said, 'Yes . . . but
the memories are real.' And so I learned that Edith's memory seemed to
exist as a discrete organic entity -- an experiential snapshot, a
'flashback'. What is a flashback except a vividly experienced memory?
For Edith, the time interval between the event and the recall had
disappeared, and the memory was a present lived experience hitting her
with an emotional punch all over again. The experience of this memory
was a thing apart and more powerful than all the reasoning and insight
into psychosis that she had accumulated since the memory was laid down.
Edith knew that she had been psychotic, knew that her psychosis had been
treated and that she was now better, knew that her baby was at home, was
not a changeling, was not dead and buried in the local graveyard, and so
on, but all this knowledge was suspended while she was experiencing the
memory. The memory was real.

Edith's Proust-like ability to communicate her memory as unreconstructed
sensory experience -- visual and emotional and seemingly
time-independent -- initiated a process in me of unlearning learned
constructs. Before this conversation I had not really thought about
memory beyond the anatomical circuits learned in medical school, the
psychological theories learned in postgraduate clinical training, the
mnemonic difficulties that occur in brain illness and that we measure in
clinical work, and the neuroimaging and molecular research in
psychiatry. Memory was more of an abstract construction, drawn from
different knowledge repositories. If Edith had told me that seeing the
gravestone had reminded her of her coming to the hospital in a psychotic
state and that she had experienced a flashback on seeing it again, I
would probably have continued to trundle on with this flat understanding
of memory. So, one of the first, of many, lessons that I Iearned from
Edith was that the theoretical classifications of psychology and the
clinical classifications of psychiatry were blinding me to subjective
experience. Samuel Beckett, the brilliant observer of anguished human
states, beloved of intellectuals, wrote, 'I am not an intellectual. All
I am is feeling.' This resonates with me, and in this book I have turned
my back on intellectual explanations and eschewed theory, even the basic
classifications of memory, to follow the journey of memory from sensory
experiences of the world and inner feeling states to neural memory
lattices.i I have laid out some of the questions, and some possible
explanations based on observations of lived experience and scientific
experiment, that arose silently over the years that followed, the
post-Edith years. How does a visual image trigger a lived memory? How do
we re-experience and feel through a memory? What is the difference
between a memory that is experienced with emotion and one that is not
felt but 'thought', as it were? Why did Edith ascribe the idea of a
substitute baby to her strange sensory experiences of hearing voices and
rotting smells? If Edith's memory experience of the gravestone as being
the burial place of her birth child was a true memory, what then
constituted a false memory? The search through the memory pathways in
the brain will show how emotional and feeling states are intrinsically
wired in to the laying down of memory and to the experience of recall.
We will journey through some of

my own professional and biographical memories and hopefully stimulate a
slow meandering through some of your own. For thirty-seven years I have
observed, treated and researched mood and psychotic disorders.
Psychiatrists have a mixed bag of skills -- pharmacology, neurology,
psychology and intuitions gained by experience -- but I think that the
expertise that we own exclusively in psychiatry is in the understanding
of the nature of experience, what we call 'phenomenology'. We classify
some experiences as normal, others as abnormal, and some as
pathological. I am not that interested in the distinction between normal
and abnormal experience, but I have always had a huge curiosity about
the neural mechanisms that create experience. One can start anywhere in
the search for neural explanations of experience -- sensation, cognition
or emotion -- but it will all eventually lead to memory. Memory brings
what we know and what we feel together and becomes the medium through
which we filter present conscious and non-conscious experience. Another
fundamental lesson that Edith taught me is that we can learn more easily
about normal experience from individuals who have abnormal experiences.
William James, a late nineteenth-century psychologist and brother of the
more famous novelist Henry, said, 'to study the abnormal is the best way
to understand the normal'. So the starting point for me is patients,
like Edith, who demonstrate the complexity and entanglements of memory
as experienced in real life. I remember patients for many reasons, some
for their astonishing resilience and acceptance, others because their
presentations have been dramatic or atypical, and others because I could
not work out what was wrong. The unexplained presentations remain
hovering in my memory, sometimes for many years, until some new
understanding dawns, and they suddenly reappear and the puzzle that they
posed has been answered. It is as if it is they who have led me to
explore, to find and identify the brain mechanism of, their experience.
To quote Henry James, brother of the less famous William, 'Our doubt is
our passion.' Edith's gravestone memory, although hidden, was perfectly
preserved . . . like the never-seen badger. The badger sett now brings
with it, for me, an image of my small children and a sense of the lost
opportunities of those precious years that will never return: when time
rushed for me, while for them, as for all children, it must have stood
still. Personal memory can range from a blindingly sensory and emotional
experience, as it was for

Edith, to one where there may only be a sense of an emotion -- a twinge
of sadness, a tiny rush of love, an almost imperceptible knot of loss, a
whiff of regret -- as I now experience writing this. What does the
neural circuitry of memory, which I thought I understood, mean in the
world of human experience? This is essentially what I want to explore
with you in this book.

2. Sensation: The Raw Ingredient of Memory

In truth, all sensation is already memory. Henri Bergson, Matter and
Memory, 1896

The famous short story 'The Yellow Wallpaper' was written by Charlotte
Perkins Gilman and published in 1892. Perkins Gilman was a feminist, and
the tone of the story is of suppressed gothic horror, reflecting the
experiences of life as a woman in the nineteenth century. It can also be
read as a fascinating first-person account of a postpartum psychosis.
Her genteel descriptions would lead the reader to think that she was the
cherished wife of a perfectly kind husband, John, but as the story
progresses you realize that she seems to be locked in a disused attic
nursery in a largely uninhabited colonial mansion. She doesn't say where
this is but tells the reader that she has moved there for the summer,
and that she is alone in the nursery. It seemed likely to me when I
first read the story that she might be in a psychiatric hospital,
because all the windows are barred, the gateway to the stairs is locked,
there are chains for restraints attached to the walls, and her bed is
nailed to the floor. She is in a state of extreme 'nervousness . . . no
one would believe what an effort it is to do what little I am able, --
to dress and to entertain, to order things . . . I cry at nothing, and I
cry most of the time'. But she meets no one except her husband, who 'is
a physician of high standing', and her brother, also a prominent
physician, and John's sister, the housekeeper who also tends to her, and
whom she refers to as 'Sister', and seems to me to be a nurse. Her baby,
'who she cannot be with', is being cared for by Mary. Is she not allowed
to be with Baby? . . . is she not able to care for Baby? . . . is she
unable to attach emotionally to Baby? . . . is Baby safe with her?

She is allowed to do nothing, having been prescribed total rest, but
cheats to write entries in the journal that she is now sharing with the
reader. Neither John nor Sister knows about the journal. She becomes
obsessed with the patterns in the tattered, intricately patterned yellow
wallpaper. 'There are things in that paper that nobody knows but me, or
ever will. Behind that outside pattern the dim shapes get clearer every
day.' She can see something moving under the wallpaper and can also feel
it move, and works out that there is a woman creeping behind it. The
creeping woman escapes at night and crawls around the floor. There are
also descriptions of her seeing the woman moving in the garden during
the day. The wallpaper gives off 'the most enduring odour I ever met . .
. the only thing that I can think of that it's like is the colour of the
paper. A yellow smell!' For those of you who have not read it, this
6,000-word story can be easily found on the internet. Like all great
works of literature, 'The Yellow Wallpaper' can be interpreted on
several levels, all of which have validity. It is a feminist story about
women being pasted behind wallpaper, not being allowed to write, being
locked up and deprived of sensory stimulation when mentally ill, being
treated as hysterical and being treated as a generic group innately
intellectually and morally weaker than men, and about the suffocating,
patronizing patriarchy of nineteenth-century society and the medical
profession. This has made 'The Yellow Wallpaper' a story much
investigated by feminist scholars. But . . . Charlotte Perkins Gilman
was psychiatrically ill following the birth of her baby, and in a letter
to the famous physician Silas Weir Mitchell she speaks about 'the agony
of mind \[that\] set in with the child's coming', her 'dreadful ideas',
her 'times of excitement', her days of sleeplessness, of being 'wild,
hysterical, almost imbecile at times', and closes with her fear about
losing her 'memory entirely', and a request for treatment.i Everything
about postpartum psychosis is in this short story: an absent, recently
delivered baby; misidentification of the doctors for her husband and her
brother; misidentification of the nurse, Sister, for her sister-in-law;
the singular and repulsive olfactory hallucination that is ever-present;
the visual and tactile hallucinations; the confusion; the sense of her
trying to dupe others who are trying to dupe her; the casual references
to wanting to

burn the house down to get rid of the smell, to biting off a piece of
the bedpost, to hiding a rope to restrain the creeping woman when next
she escapes . . . The denouement, in which we recognize the creeping
woman as the author herself, reflects the disintegration of the sense of
self that occurs in psychotic states. 'The Yellow Wallpaper' tells what
seems to be a mysterious story in a superficially integrated way and is
a brilliant account of a woman trying to bring some coherence, however
superficial, to her chaotic sensory hallucinatory experiences. In this
story the woman describes her sensations as they are. She does not sound
'mad'. Her experiences sound strange, but sometimes the world is a
strange place. What of her sensations? She senses the presence of the
woman, she feels her behind the wallpaper, she sees her shape in the
slithering moving patterns in the wallpaper and finally sees her in the
flesh after she creeps out from behind the wallpaper, she hears her moan
and smells the horrible 'enduring smell'. These hallucinatory sensations
are experienced as real, and we read her diary account of them as being
real. Although 'The Yellow Wallpaper' has been interpreted as an account
of postpartum psychosis, there has been almost no analysis of the
narrator's actual sensory experiences. Her psychotic experiences are
generally analysed as a metaphor for her captivity by the harsh societal
institutions of the time. It is interesting that, although her
experiences are the primary fascination in the story and are what
captures the reader, the extensive analysis -- you get more than 1
billion hits on a Google search -- has almost entirely focused on
speculated socio-political meanings of the experiences, rather than the
nature of her subjective experiences. She makes sense of her
hallucinatory experiences in the same way as we all do . . . we know
something because we have seen it, heard it, felt it, smelled or tasted
it. The reader knows that there is no creeping woman behind the
wallpaper, and yet the narrator does not seem 'mad' in any conventional
way. The story possibly shows how close anyone can be to psychosis if
placed in a locked room and denied any recognition. The caveat, mostly
overlooked by scholars, is that she was probably psychotic prior to
being given the 'rest cure' horror of isolation. In the rest of this
chapter we will look at how we interpret the world through our senses,
and how sensation is the thread that feeds the loom of understanding and
memory.

The fundamental point that we cannot make memories without sensation may
be so familiar to us that we are blind to it. It is difficult to believe
that it took many hundreds of years to understand the now self-evident
fact that the five senses bring information to the brain so that one can
learn and categorize information and ultimately form a coherent sense of
the world. The story of the relationship of sensation to memory dates
back to the beginnings of the scientific revolution, four to five
centuries ago. The shift in the understanding of memory from being a
static repository of knowledge to being a dynamic living human
experience is a profound one, and was highly contested. This shift
started in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries, at the time of the
beginnings of modern scientific thinking. Copernicus, and then Galileo,
proposed that the Earth, rather than being the centre of the universe,
was a small planet that travelled around the Sun. This effectively
removed Earth from the creationist dogma of the Church.ii At that time,
the belief systems of the Church had dominated thinking for one and a
half thousand years. The same dogma that denied the science of physics
also obstructed the progression of ideas about learning and memory. Men
-- women were not considered -- did not learn about the world through
information coming from the world, because it was held to be a truth
that all knowledge was given by God and was housed in the soul. There
was a God-given soul and a material human body. The idea of a soul, as
distinct from a body, has existed for as long as philosophical ideas
have been pondered. Plato's division of humans into body, mind and soul
was laid out in the fourth century BC and became an enduring template
for the categorization of human experience. The Platonic triad of mind,
body and soul was transmuted into comparable Christian triads -- for
example, God the father, God the son and God the holy spirit/ghost --
and has permeated the zeitgeists that have come and gone . . . it is the
enduring zeitgeist in successive guises that has had to be endured.

The New Brain/Body Divide: Mind/Brain

The brain/body divides tend to dissolve, and the soul disappears, when
the brain causes of mental experience are discovered. A good example of
this is General Paralysis of the Insane (GPI), which accounted for up to
25 per cent of admission to psychiatric institutions in the nineteenth
century. The symptoms were considered to be a particular type of
insanity known as 'moral insanity'. In the 1880s it was discovered that
GPI was a brain disease caused by end-stage syphilis, and, following the
discovery of penicillin in the 1950s, care of those who suffered from
the disease was transferred from alienists, as psychiatrists were then
called, to physicians. The identification of the spirochete bacterium
that causes syphilis moved the disease from a moral insanity caused by
sexual promiscuity to infective medicine. Strange cultural ideas have
historically been used to explain mental illness, and this mix of myth
and science still continues to confound psychiatry. Epilepsy is an
example of a disease that was first treated by psychiatry and was then
transferred to neurology -- once a cause and treatment for the disorder
were discovered. Unexplained mental experience seems to find asylum in
psychiatry before being transferred to 'organic' medicine following
scientific discoveries. This is now happening even with psychosis, which
is gradually being transferred from a 'mind' to a 'brain' disorder. The
mind, in any understanding of the ambiguous word, is the essence of the
human brain. The mind is seen as highly subjective and mysterious, but,
as we will see, each brain is highly individualized and is forged by the
unique experiences and wiring of a person's life. A neat contemporary
example of the transfer of a disorder from psychiatry to neurology is
NMDA encephalitis.1 NMDA encephalitis commonly presents with psychotic
experiences -- voice hearing or paranoia -- and movement disorders, and
individuals are often admitted and assessed on psychiatric wards.
Encephalitis means an inflammation of the brain, and in the case of NMDA
encephalitis the inflammation is caused by antibodies directed against
brain tissue, often the NMDA receptor found in abundance in the brain.
Antibodies are defence proteins produced by the immune system. Usually,
antibody synthesis is triggered by foreign organisms, such as a virus, a
bacterium or a donor organ, but sometimes the immune system can form
antibodies that will attack one's own body tissues, called
autoantibodies, and this leads to autoimmune disorders. In the case of

NMDA encephalitis, the autoantibody produced by the body fits or matches
to the NMDA receptor on neurons and, since NMDA receptors are
ubiquitous, brain inflammation -- encephalitis -- follows. When
antibodies form against one's own body -- 'autoimmunity' -- the targeted
tissue becomes damaged because it is identified by the immune system as
being a foreign invading body, like a bacterium or virus.iii Once the
cause of this psychosis was discovered in 2007, it was transferred to
neurology. There has been much written since the discovery of this form
of psychosis about it being not a psychiatric illness but a neurological
one.2 Since then, evidence has emerged that there is an autoimmune
component in many forms of schizophrenia.3 It is becoming more apparent
that brain and mind are one indivisible whole. The transfer of NMDA
encephalitis from psychiatry to neurology, even though patients may be
presenting with similar experiences and clinical signs to those with
other forms of psychosis, is generally viewed as positive by the
sufferers. For most, a neurological diagnosis is better than a
psychiatric one.

The Third-eye Phenomenon The roots of the mind/brain divide go back as
far as the beginning of recorded history. There has always been some
symbolic representation of 'mind' or 'soul', what I call the 'third-eye
phenomenon'. We are at a period in history where we are in awe of the
revelations of neuroscience rather than of the extraordinary cultural
mythologies that have heretofore explained the experience of being
human. My daughter Rowan had a dream one night when she was about
thirteen. She woke up in a distressed state, calling for me and for her
brother. We sat on her bed as she described vivid staccato scenes from
her dream, the sort that one can describe in detail from replaying the
visuals immediately on wakening. In the most memorable scene she was in
a boat in a large mass of water with a woman, possibly me but she wasn't
sure exactly. The boat was rocking in rough waters. Both she and the
woman were trying to row towards land that was in sight and looked
close, but they could not close the gap because the boat was riding the
swells and not making headway. A large snail came out

of the sea, terrifying her, and was suddenly in the centre of her
forehead. Slowly the snail began to cork-screw into her head following
the spiral pattern of its shell, terrifying her into wakefulness. I was
fascinated by Rowan's dream and came to the conclusion that she had
transformed the mystical imagery of the 'third eye' into the novel image
of a snail. In Egyptian mythology 3,000 years BC this symbol was known
as the Eye of Horus. The symbol travelled through the ages, becoming the
Eye of Siva in eastern mythology, and in modern day mysticspeak is
generically referred to as the third eye. The image is now imbued with
vague ideas of unspoken trans-generational female wisdom, having
transmuted over the millennia from a masculine symbol of seer-like
qualities and protection. Viewed in this context, Rowan's snail could be
interpreted as a metaphor of the fears of a female child transitioning
-- classically a journey over water -- into womanhood, being steered
precariously over these troubled waters when attacked by the third eye.
My interpretation of the iconography may be far-fetched, but I was quite
pleased, I have to admit, with her perspicacious fears about her
traditional inheritances from female lore and how this could be a
destructive invasive force in her thinking. Rowan's dream did not come
from a mystical dipping into an eternal pool of hidden wisdom but seemed
to spring from a fear of this mythology. One lesson that I learned from
the third-eye dream is that we are steeped in mythology about how we
acquire knowledge, and that the imagery is ubiquitous whether you are
Christian, Hindu, Buddhist, Muslim or an atheist teenage girl in
Ireland. The third eye is now frequently represented as a pine cone,
derived from the location of this putative wisdom structure in the
pineal gland. The gland was so named because of its similarity to a
pinea -- latin for pine. It is located on a horizontal plane between the
eyes, but pushed back behind the brain lobes, similar to the route that
Rowan's snail was taking. In the first century AD the famous physician
Galen, possibly the first scientist physician, identified the pineal
gland as the probable seat of the soul/mind. He believed, with
incredible prescience, that all human experience could be explained by
the workings of the body. He didn't believe in an immaterial soul but
instead looked to the human brain to explain experience. Galen's
suggestion may now sound ridiculous and

naïve, but it represented an advance from the common wisdom of the day
that the soul and mind were separate -- the soul belonging to God, and
the mind to the individual. In the fifteenth century Leonardo da Vinci
brought the culturally accepted idea of a soul and a mind together and
located the junction in the brain. This nudged the idea of the soul away
from one of a wandering spirit with a tenancy in a human body that
terminated at the time of death, when the spirit left the body -- either
to go to an unearthly world or possibly to take up residency in another
body -- to something that was connected directly to the mind-in-brain.
The soul became less spirit and more flesh, less 'god' and more 'man'.
We now know that the pineal gland is quite a primitive brain structure,
mostly involved in the secretion of melatonin. Melatonin is important in
the world of birds, sheep, horses and cows, in which it is secreted in
tandem with available light. It promotes the secretion of their
reproductive hormones and ensures the birth of fledglings, lambs, foals
and calves during the warm and bright conditions of maximum fertility of
land and sea, affording offspring a better chance of survival. In
humans, melatonin is involved in the sleep--wake cycle but has no effect
of note otherwise. The pineal gland is an unpaired structure in the
middle of the brain, which is very rare because almost everything else
is paired, and it is tucked into the crevices of deep brain structures
like a curious stand-alone vestige of nature-controlled fertility.

The Beginnings of Brain Science The scientific revolution that exploded
post-Leonardo pulled understanding of the world away from the
creationist views of the Church and into the universal laws of physics
that could explain multiple phenomena. The Earth moved and operated as a
consequence, not of the will of God or gods, but of basic laws of
physics. The Earth was no longer the centre of the universe, and the
idea arose that perhaps man was also subject to some set of scientific
principles. The supernatural was being replaced by the natural. In this
way science was inadvertently undermining Church dogma.

René Descartes provided a potential solution to the Church/science
divide when he outlined his philosophical principle of dualism in the
seventeenth century. He argued that the soul was non-matter and
God-given and was made of a substance different from the matter of the
body -- the soul was ethereal and the body was flesh and blood. The
brain was a centre of some sort for the material body, but was separate
from the immaterial soul. With this theory of 'dualism', Descartes was
presenting the first pseudo-scientific explanation of what has evolved
to become the contemporary mind/brain division. He brought together a
confusion of ideas about physics and knowledge, a mishmash of the
religious and scientific ideas of the day . . . but importantly he
dismissed the material sensate experience of living as being of lesser
importance. The invisible soul, perfect and made in God's image and
likeness, was given superiority over the sensate, capricious body. A
group of philosophers vociferously opposed to Descartes' theory believed
that knowledge was accumulated through living, and specifically through
the senses. Those who believed in knowledge being acquired through
sensation were called the Sensationalists. And so we arrive at the
origins of the intellectual battle of whether knowledge (small k) was
learned through the material senses or was innate Knowledge (big K),
bestowed in non-matter by God. Those who opposed Descartes' views, the
Sensationalists, were seen as heretics, and some lost their lives, and
many their liberty, in reclaiming knowledge from god to humans. We now
know that we understand the world through learning, but in the debate
about whether Knowledge was implanted by God or knowledge was derived
from sensate experience, or learning, there was a lot at stake in terms
of the world order. Perhaps the most important issues were political,
because the idea that God implanted superior Knowledge into certain
people, like the pope, who was infallible, or monarchs, who were chosen
by God, gave absolute power to the Church over lay people, monarchy over
the commoners, men over women, and so on. The various stakeholders in
maintaining this myth of innate superiority fought within their systems
of power. The competing claims of would-be possessors of innate
superiority led to schisms in the Church, the overthrowing of one
exploitative monarch for another, and Church--state battles. Thousands
were slaughtered in inquisitions and wars. Holding on to the God-given
Knowledge idea meant

that knowledge could not be learned to make one person potentially equal
to another. The battle that was fought throughout the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries remains today, Vesuvius-like, active and
simmering, and sometimes erupting ingloriously. The Sensationalists,
although they argued largely from a philosophical and humanist
perspective, formed, I think, the intellectual foundations for what are
now the disciplines of neuroscience. They were also fighting for human
potential over innate Knowledge, and were also the original humanists,
laying the foundations for ideals of personal freedom and liberation
from tyranny. The story of how sensation came to be understood as the
material for knowledge and memory is the first chapter in the story of
neuroscience, and of modern ideals of human rights.

Molyneux's Question One of the great debates during the seventeenth
century about whether knowledge was innate or was learned through the
world of experience is worth elaborating on here, because it shows how
arguing about, say, how many angels may dance on the head of a pin can
be crisply put to bed with an advance in medical science. The other
reason for telling this story is that the debate took place on the
campus of Trinity College, Dublin, where I work. The debate was started
by William Molyneux (1656--98), a TCD scholar, and John Locke
(1632--1704), the famous radical English physician and philosopher.
Locke is one of the best-known philosophers of the seventeenth century
who opposed the notion of a Cartesian soul and innate Knowledge. He
dared to challenge the dictums of the establishment that Knowledge was
given by God to men and, furthermore, given to them in proportion to
their status. He wrote that the mind was a tabula rasa (or blank slate)
at birth.\* Knowledge was acquired by 'our ordinary abilities to come to
know things', as one memorized the world through sensory information.
Philosophy encompassed many disciplines then, including politics,
medicine, psychology, natural sciences, physics and mathematics. Some of
the discussions that were held by the Philosophical Society,

founded by Molyneux, would be more suited thematically today to the
Trinity College Institute for Neurosciences, where I work. Molyneux
wrote a letter to Locke on 7 July 1688 in which he posed a question that
has come to be known as Molyneux's Question (or Molyneux's Problem). The
question concerned a hypothetical man who had been born blind and had
learned to 'see' objects through touch. He was then given sight later in
life. The question was whether this man, born without sight and who had
learned to distinguish shapes through touch, would be able to
distinguish the shapes through looking at them if his vision was
restored. He gave as an example a sphere and a cube that the non-sighted
man had learned to recognize and differentiate by touch. Would the newly
sighted man be able to identify the cube and sphere from sight alone,
without touching them? They approached this puzzle from a philosophical
perspective. If the man whose sight had been restored was able to
understand the difference between a sphere and a cube through sight
alone, without learning shapes through seeing them, then visual
knowledge would be already present in his mind, and visual knowledge
would be innate. If, on the other hand, the newly sighted man did not
know the difference through looking at the objects, this would mean that
visual memory was acquired through visual sensory experience, and
knowledge was not innate. In this latter empirical framework -- that is,
learning through observing -- one only knew what one had learned through
the senses. Locke and Molyneux correctly reasoned that the blind man
would not be able to distinguish between the sphere and the cube by
sight alone because knowledge was not innate, and had to be learned
through each sense, sight and touch, separately. Molyneux's Question was
only resolved finally when surgical correction for congenital cataracts,
the most common form of congenital blindness, became widely available in
the following century. It gradually became apparent that newly sighted
people were not able to tell the difference between a cube and a sphere
from sight alone, and therefore they did not automatically understand
the visual world. The visual image of a sphere and cube had to be
learned from touch because that is how the nonsighted patient had
learned to make sense of objects. Oliver Sacks, the neurologist
storyteller, wrote a now famous article in the New Yorker in 1993 called
'To See and Not See'. It concerned a man, whom he called

Virgil, who was 55 years old when he first gained sight. Everything that
Virgil saw for the first time, from his house and its contents to the
world of nature, was unintelligible. Sacks noted specifically, in
reference to Molyneux's Question, that Virgil could not tell the
difference between a sphere and a cube through sight. The mind is a
blank slate at birth, and sensate experience of the world accumulates to
form knowledge and memory.

Common Sense The story of Molyneux's Question shows how medical science
could translate unanswerable philosophical debates into unequivocal
real-life knowledge. This was, as I see it, the first major victory of
neuroscience over a fixed and harsh world. The idea of the senses
feeding the brain to create a person's knowledge base became widely
accepted during the eighteenth century. These issues were debated in
influential intellectual salons in the latter half of that century,
almost exclusively led by women.iv It was so widely accepted that the
most popular book of that century, written by Thomas Paine and published
in 1776, was called Common Sense. It was a political pamphlet that was
steeped in the ideas of acquired sensory knowledge, and was hugely
influential on the composition of the American Declaration of
Independence some months later. In Common Sense, Paine laid out a clear
case for a natural equality, rather than an innate inequality, among
people. This could not have been written without the Sensationalist idea
that we are constructs of acquired sensory information. The historical
and philosophical ideas about knowledge, spirituality, soul and mind
remain. The splitting of human experience and function into 'body, mind
and soul' continues to permeate most cultures. The common denominator of
all these religious and spiritual systems is that of implanted or
external knowledge, the third eye, a force beyond the individual.
Neuroscience is fascinating to us not just because it helps us
understand ourselves, for which we have an insatiable curiosity, but
also because it liberates us with scissor-snip conclusiveness from
third-eye phenomena. Strangely, neuroscience has not yet permeated the
culture of psychiatry as

one would expect. There is still a widespread perception that
psychiatry, as a form of medicine, does not necessarily involve the
brain, but a hypothesized mind/spirit domain of the human condition.
Dualism for me, as a psychiatrist, is the enemy, whether the dualism is
that of the body-- brain, brain--mind, body--soul, reason--emotion. The
divisions between these made-up domains collapse when you realize that
the world is conveyed to you only through your senses and that we make
sense of it all through the pervasive connectivity of brain circuitry (a
phrase that I have borrowed from the physicist-neuroscientist Danielle
Bassett4). The internalization of the world in a human being is
transmitted through the Big 5 -- sight, sound, touch, taste and smell --
that are being fed continually into memory networks. Sensation from the
world, such as touch or sight, allows you to learn different shapes,
forming relatively simple knowledge upon which more complex information
gets built. There is also the often-ignored but constant feed of sensory
information from the body to the brain that gives rise to feelings from
simple emotions to complex feeling states. Sensation is the fundamental
raw ingredient that feeds the brain: the substrate upon which the
pervasive connectivity in the brain is based. Memory is, in its essence,
the infinitely complex neural representation of sensory information that
has been carried to the brain.

Learning Through the Senses The slow process of learning through the
senses can be seen in how infants develop, and how we teach them about
the sensate world. It can be difficult to appreciate so-called intuitive
knowledge -- which is really the automatic processing of learned
knowledge -- except when one thinks about how an infant develops through
sensate experience. We love their innocence of not knowing things that
we consider to be intuitive: 'When will Dada grow down to be my size?',
the magical disappearing and reappearing of peek-aboo, the untutored
emotional responses. There are armies of neuroscientists researching how
babies learn through sight, sound, touch, smell and taste. A leading
developmental psychologist puts it well: 'Babies know squat,' a modern
iteration of the tabula rasa of Aristotle and Locke.v

A more startling example, following on from Molyneux's Question, is how
newly sighted adults like Oliver Sacks' Virgil learn about the visual
world. They have to be slowly exposed to images of the world to learn
what these images represent -- otherwise they will be overcome by a
flood of visual sensory information that they are unable to process.
Because of this, newly sighted individuals are kept in minimally
visually stimulating environments and gradually exposed to the world of
images. This is not difficult to understand once you grasp the idea that
everything has to be learned through the senses. When we say that we see
something we mean that we see an image in our brain that we interpret as
being something. You see a Rubik's cube or you see a tennis ball and
you're not confused -- you don't have to touch them to decide which is
which. You know the difference between a cube and a sphere. What you are
really saying when you say that you see a Rubik's cube or a tennis ball
is that you have learned that the image you are looking at is a Rubik's
cube or a tennis ball. What we call a sense is also a memory: seeing is
both the immediacy of the sight of the object and the identification of
the image. This brings us back to Bergson's quotation from 1896 that I
opened this chapter with: 'In truth, all sensation is already memory.'
Generally, perception is organized in line with the sensory information
that is being fed to the brain. We make sense of whatever our senses
feed into the brain, forming memory pathways and interpretative
frameworks that are dynamic. The simultaneous experience of sensation
and memory can be understood if you are listening to a piece of music
familiar to you that you are unable to immediately identify. Trying to
identify the tune involves sensory and memory circuitry. More sensory
information is coming in to augment and stimulate further
sensory--memory integration. Sometimes we abandon our attempts to
remember, knowing that the conscious search will probably fail and that
it will come to us later. This silent processing may lead to the
identification of the tune some minutes later. Memory is not static: it
is in a state of flux in a never-ending dance with sensation. Try to
imagine that your peripheral senses are intact, you have 20/20 vision
and excellent hearing -- neurologically intact, as we medics say -- but
you see and hear things that others do not. We are now moving into the
domain of hallucinatory experiences, where subjective sensory experience

is no longer a reliable transmitter of information from the world around
you. Hallucinatory experiences may come from a misinterpretation of
sensory signals, if someone has a fever, for example, or from a phantom
limb in a below-knee amputee, where the signal seems to be coming from
the part of the leg that has been amputated. In psychosis there may be
no incoming sensation when sounds are heard that are experienced as
coming from the outside world or images can be seen that are not
apparent to others. Sensate experiences determine a person's
understanding of the world. In 'The Yellow Wallpaper' the diarist
deduces that there is a woman behind the wallpaper because she sees her
in the moving patterns, feels her behind the wallpaper, smells the
pungent odour of the wallpaper and can hear her groans. In 1925 Virginia
Woolf, probably when psychotic and hallucinating, received the same
'rest cure' treatment as had Charlotte Perkins Gilman in 1884, from the
same neurologist, Silas Weir Mitchell. Rest cure as previously outlined
involved almost complete isolation and forced inactivity. To be put in a
situation nearing sensory deprivation with the wild, uncontainable
sensory experience of psychosis must have been torture and could only
have exacerbated the psychosis. Virginia Woolf killed herself in 1941
because she was unable to endure any longer the torture of psychosis.
Charlotte Perkins Gilman also killed herself, in 1935, writing in her
suicide note that she would rather die by her own hand than suffer a
slow death from cancer. In the next chapter we will explore how we make
sense of sensation and how we may not all share a common sense of the
world. \* The concept of tabula rasa was first proposed by Aristotle in
pre-Christian times.

3. Making Sense

Our intelligence is the prolongation of our senses. Henri Bergson
(1859--1924)

Some years ago, I was at a dinner party when a conversation about
psychics started. Everyone was giving their opinion, some more eagerly
than others, as is always the case. My turn came, and my two cents'
worth, a bit offpiste, was that while most commercial psychics were
charlatans who exploited individuals in emotionally vulnerable
situations, there could occasionally be individual psychics who have
psychotic experiences themselves, and may attribute their hallucinatory
voices to the dead person who is being 'communicated with'. A woman, who
appeared to be not in the least eccentric except perhaps that she
'believed in' psychics, looked to me and said, '. . . if you're not
psychotic, where do the voices come from?' I had already replied 'What
voices?' before I realized that she was telling the rest of the dinner
party that hearing voices, for her, was a normal experience.
Voice-hearing is surprisingly common in the general population -- 10 per
cent of people will experience hearing voices at some point in their
lives -- and does not mean that the voice-hearer will go on to develop a
psychotic disorder.5,6 My dinner guest was simply making sense of her
sensate experiences. For the voice-hearer, auditory hallucinatory
experience may be a voice in their head that seems to be separate from
them, or, at the other end of the spectrum, the voices may be just as
real as voices coming from the external world. The latter -- real
external auditory hallucinations -- are common in individuals who have a
diagnosis of schizophrenia. How they make sense of their voices and
other hallucinatory experiences gives an insight into how

dependent we are on sensory experience in how we make sense of the
world. Joseph is a young man who has a diagnosis of schizophrenia. This
is the story of how he made sense of his auditory experiences. Joseph
had been advised for many years by his family, friends and the family
doctor to see a psychiatrist. The event that finally brought him to my
clinic occurred in the preceding week in his local grocery store. He
overheard a conversation between two men. One told the other that he
wanted 'him dead by tomorrow'. Joseph did not know to whom they referred
but knew that someone was in danger, possibly himself. He went to the
police, who were very helpful, telling him that they would investigate,
and also suggesting that he should go to the ER in the local hospital as
he seemed very stressed. From the ER he was referred to the psychiatry
services . . . and hence, in his early twenties, he came to my clinic.
He was a fine, healthy-looking young man with slouchy adolescent
deportment, obligatory headphones, a quiet smile and a soft manner. He
was dressed in loose-fitting, trendy clothes and was at ease, unusually
so, when communicating his story. Joseph had been bright in school,
having a particular flair for maths, physics and IT. He began to realize
in his midteens that he had special gifts, a sixth sense, that allowed
him to understand the world in a more profound way than normal folk.
This, combined with his IT knowledge, allowed him to gradually
understand what most people were blind to: that reality, as most people
perceive it, is 'a simulation'. Since realization of this certainty, his
life had centred on trying to understand who, or whose forces,
orchestrated the simulation. His guess was that the unreality shared by
most people was being technologically manufactured by the simulators. He
did not know who was controlling the simulation, or what 'real' life was
as experienced by most people. He was neither in the real world that was
controlling the simulation, nor the unreality that other people shared.
In Joseph's world, everyone's reality was being implanted through this
mechanism, but he was one of the few people who knew this. He knew
because he was able to hear voices from the 'outside' -- the real
reality that was under the radar.

In the beginning, in early to mid-adolescence, he heard occasional dim
voices that were difficult to understand. He could only make out bits
and pieces of what they were mumbling when he concentrated hard on
listening to them. Smoking cannabis cleared his mind of the clutter of
the everyday, and he could hear the voices clearly. His friends told him
that he talked rubbish when he smoked, and Joseph thought that this was
ironic because he was the only one who understood what was really
happening, and he did so with greater clarity when smoking weed. His
family became more and more exasperated by his self-imposed isolation in
his room, his dopesmoking, and his apparent laziness and lack of
interest in his studies. Joseph did not feel uncomfortable being cut
loose from the world and even felt creative in the complex paranoid
puzzle. The influence of the simulator spread and demanded more of his
attention as time went by. In the early days it leaked occasionally
through the TV in his room, later spreading to his phone and then his
headphones. He went on to study computer science in college. These
studies would facilitate his investigation of the origin of the outside
force: it had to be transmitted, he reckoned, through some form of
centralized digital hub. After graduation he decided to do a higher
degree in cyber security. Joseph could now hear the voices all the time
and 'in stereo'. He could hear them speaking when he was talking to
others, competing with and often invalidating what present people were
saying. When he heard the voices in a crowd, he wondered if the
simulators might be among the strangers in the street. He would then
wonder if there was a group of people who 'knew'. Sometimes he thought
that the knowing others were signalling to him, the signals disguised as
casual gestures, but he couldn't be sure. Another possibility was that
the outside force had transiently entered the body of a stranger to
communicate something to him. Walking out was a minefield of complex
interpretations and paranoia, and he became more and more reclusive.
Doing the degree in cyber security would give him more skills to
outmanoeuvre the outside forces and possibly allow him to 'disappear'.
He began to make false identity documents and created several aliases,
multiple bank accounts and fake utility bills that together would make
it difficult for the simulators to trace him. The Fraud Squad caught up
with him, however, and, not wanting to draw attention to the simulators,
he did

not mount a defence. He served a four-month jail sentence and became
further ostracized socially. I saw him about a year after his release
from prison. He spent almost all the time now in his room deciphering
the voices and the codes. The controllers had gained a further foothold,
and he worried that they could now force him to do something repugnant.
They sometimes threatened this, and sometimes told him that he should
kill himself. On the rare occasions when he was out and about they now
found him easily, speaking to him all the time through random strangers.
Joseph would then find refuge in an internet café, where his signal
could get lost among other competing signals. He had been conflicted
about taking 'treatment' but wanted to rid himself of his burdensome
insights. In the end he decided that he wanted to 'enter society again',
even if it meant losing his awareness of the real reality. Joseph used
an interesting phrase -- 'I want my attention back' -- as a reason for
taking treatment. Over the first few weeks of antipsychotic treatment
the voices became less intrusive, and, as we increased the medication,
they gradually faded over a period of months. The ideas that followed
from his voice-hearing began to disassemble, leaving a strange empty
wasteland of personal memory. He slowly became re-connected with his
family and friends, and the stronger these connections became the
further away he moved from the psychotic world of the simulators. Our
occupational therapist introduced Joseph to a computer workshop that in
time he helped to run before he moved on to successfully apply for IT
jobs in the open market. Joseph now believes that his psychosis gave him
entry to a world that does exist 'somewhere in cyberspace', but he is no
longer interested in pursuing the isolating paranoid labyrinth. Joseph's
story shows how one makes sense of the world through one's senses and
how this becomes the basis for one's interpretation of the world and for
one's memory. Joseph did not share in the common sense of the world.
Joseph created a narrative from his sensate experiences, as we all do.
His colonization by psychosis had made him a stranger in the world of
common shared experience. Like Virgil, the man who gained sight at 55
years of age and who had to build up a memory system for visual
information, Joseph had to construct a new framework within which he

could interpret and memorize the world post-psychosis. He has a
diagnosis of schizophrenia -- a broad diagnosis -- in which the core
experiences are hallucinations, usually hearing voices, and delusions,
or bizarre beliefs. Organized psychotic belief systems, or delusions,
gradually develop over time: Joseph came to organize the information
coming from the sensate world into plausible and superficially coherent
systems. If looked at from the outside, Joseph's worldviews were
'crazy', but they had an internal logic that explained his experiences.
His scheme of the world was really quite clever.

Interpreting Sensation How do we make sense of what the senses feed to
the brain? A basic rule is that nerves from a particular part of the
body go to a particular part of the brain for interpretation. The brain
is a gelatinous blob of uncooked-shrimp colour, with squiggly
indentations. The brain blob is fitted snugly into the concave grooves
of the interior surface of the skull, similar to the shrimp in its
shell, or a highly ruched walnut in a shell. The inside of one half of
the walnut shell is similar in principle to the inside of the skull.
Like a walnut, the brain is visibly divided into two halves. We say that
the brain has two hemispheres, but actually the whole brain is more like
a hemisphere composed of two quarter-spheres, but we'll stick with the
familiar convention of hemispheres. The outside layer of the brain is
called the cortex, and this is the destination for most of the nerves
that come from the body. We think about the cortex as being divided into
zones, like countries on a map, each country receiving neurons from a
particular part of the body. We call this representation of the
body-in-brain 'brain mapping'. The Big 5 sense organs each have their
own patch of cortex that is easy to delineate by the big fissures in the
brain surface: the visual cortex (sight), the auditory cortex (sound),
the olfactory cortex (smell), the gustatory cortex (taste) and the
somatosensory cortex (touch) (see Figure 1). Figure 1. The sensory path
from the senses to their cortex

Illustration of the brain on the outside. The nerve tracts go to the
outside of the brain, called the cortex. This demonstrates where the
'Big 5' -- hearing (auditory), sight (visual), smell (olfactory), taste
(gustatory) and touch (somatosensory) -- sensations are mapped on the
cortex.

Sensory neurons are nerve cells that enter the brain from all parts of
the body, from the toes to the scalp. Neurons vary in design but in
general have dendrites, hairy outgrowths, at one end that coalesce to a
single strand of cytoplasm that ends in a nerve terminal (Figure 2). The
nerve terminal is a blunted knob of cytoplasm containing bubbles of
neurotransmitters. The bubble of cell membrane containing the
neurotransmitter, if stimulated by an electrical signal, merges with the
membrane surrounding the cell, and the neurotransmitter spills out into
the synapse. The synapse is the gap between one neuron and the next. The
released neurotransmitter floats off and attaches to nearby receptors on
adjacent dendrites, triggering an electrical wave in the post-synaptic
neuron. This electrochemical signal is the basis of all brain activity.
Figure 2. A typical neuron

The electrical signal is conducted down the neuron from the dendrites to
the nerve terminal. There, the signal changes the cell membrane
microstructure and the bubbles of cell membrane containing
neurotransmitters merge with the membrane surrounding the neuron,
rupturing the bubble into a continuous surface with the outside, and
releasing the contained neurotransmitter.

The electrochemical energy that transmits the signal from one neuron to
the next can be generated in ways other than through neurotransmitter
release. Light may trigger an electrical signal in the retina, air-borne
pheremones may light up a smell receptor in the nasal passages, food
chemicals may trigger an electrical signal in taste buds on the tongue,
sound waves may cause movement of the ear drum to generate a signal, or
touching something may stimulate touch receptors under the skin to
generate a small signal.

Touch Sensation Back in the very early days of neuroscience, Molyneux
and Locke could only imagine the sensory pathways of touch, from the
fingers to the brain, and sight, from the eyes to the brain, that are
now common knowledge. The sense organ for touch from the outer world is
the skin. The signals from everything that we touch, or are touched by,
arrive in the touch cortex -- the visible bulge on the surface of the
brain behind the big horizontal fissure (see Figure 1). Wilder Penfield
(1891--1976) was a pioneering neurosurgeon, at a time when very few
ventured into the brain, at the beginning of the twentieth century. He
carried out experiments on conscious patients who were about to undergo
brain surgery for epilepsy, and he found

that pinpricking the touch cortex produced sensations of being touched
in different body areas. Surprisingly, one does not feel any sensation
on the touch cortex, because, although the brain interprets touch from
on and in the body, there are no touch receptors on the brain itself.
This counterintuitive fact, that the cortex cannot feel but feels the
body, is a simple demonstration of the indivisibility of the brain--body
complex. Over time, Penfield observed that pinpricking a similar
location on the touch cortex of different patients produced sensations
in the same location in the bodies of all the patients. He came to
understand that the body was 'mapped' in a predictable way on the cortex
of the brain. In 1951 Penfield published a book with a map of the body
as he found it to be represented on the touch cortex. He was the pioneer
cartographer of the body-in-brain map, and his original sensory
homunculus (meaning small man) has changed very little over the years.
You can see from Figure 3 that the body is disproportionally represented
in the touch cortex with the more sensitive zones, such as the mouth and
lips, having a relatively large amount of nerves, and therefore cortical
surface, compared to, for example, the legs, which are much bigger in
corporal terms but are less sensitive because they have a lower
concentration of touch receptors. Figure 3. The somatosensory homunculus
or touch cortex

A vertical cross-section, from ear to ear, through the hemispheres of
the brain at the level of the touch cortex. The touch cortex is located
behind the big horizontal groove on the cortex. The mapping of the human
sense of touch for general body parts can be seen. The more sensitive
body areas have a disproportionately greater area of representation
because more nerves leave the more sensitive parts of the body, like the
lips and tongue.

As well as the outer cortex where nerves from the Big 5 arrive, there is
another map for nerves that come from inside the body, delivering what
is called 'interoceptive' sensation. The interoceptive cortex, called
the insula, is in a fold of cortex not visible from the outer surface of
the brain, rather like our feelings. The insula is very important
because it interprets 'gut' feelings. We will look at this in a coming
chapter, but just note for now that the way we experience the world is
determined as much by the interoceptive as the exteroceptive inputs to
the brain. Penfield's work demonstrated, at a basic philosophical level,
that feelings in the body can only be experienced through the brain.
Sometimes the brain can get the interpretation from its peripheral
neurons wrong, such as in the case of a phantom limb. In phantom-limb
pain, the pain sensation coming from the stump, say that of a below-knee
amputation, is interpreted by the amputee as coming from the severed
leg, now absent. This is because the nerve going down to the original
foot, although no longer there, continues from the severed nerve in the
knee stump up to the foot area of the sensory homunculus. The map of the
foot is fixed in the sensory homunculus, that is, the nerve from the
lower part of the leg always goes to a particular part of the sensory
cortex. This nerve tract has been memorized in the touch cortex, and it
will fire the 'lower limb' patch of cortex even if it has been
amputated. This is an example of hard wiring -- the anatomy of the nerve
from the lower limb to the touch cortex is fixed. If, in a situation of
reversed anatomical pathology, the cortex for the lower limb is damaged,
for example following a stroke, there can be no experience of the leg,
although the stroke survivor may have a perfectly formed limb. We
experience the body only because of the brain. The hard-wired sensory
homunculus of Wilder Penfield's can now be seen in humans using the
brain neuroimaging technique of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).i Arno
Villringer's group, only fifty years later, were able to touch parts of
the hand to identify the areas of the touch cortex that would 'light up'
using MRI.7 The leap from Penfield's homunculus

derived from open brain surgery to the visualization of the brain
through neuroimaging is an example of how neuroimaging tools have opened
up brain exploration.

Multimodal Sensation The core principle of the mapping of the body in
the brain is that every bit of the body outside the brain is represented
in the brain. Within the brain it is all pervasively and uniquely
interconnected, fashioned by the hard wiring of the genetically
inherited brain and the soft wiring of experience that is grown by
sensation, in a complex interplay of memory and learning. Soft wiring is
how the brain wires to adapt and to learn. There is an ongoing organic
interplay between hard and soft wiring. For example, non-sighted
individuals read the world through touch. The anatomical basis for
seeing through touch is that neurons from the touch cortex go, via
cross-cortical connections on the surface of the brain, to the visual
cortex. 'Touch' sensation then gets translated into 'sight' information.
Individuals who are non-sighted from birth, compared to sighted people,
have a smaller visual cortex but more cross-sensory cortical connections
to the visual cortex from other cortical regions.8 Non-sighted
individuals do 'see', but the images are two-dimensional or flat: they
do not have visual field depth. The way that non-sighted people 'see'
tells us a lot about the abstract nature of sensation. Sensation is
primarily about discrimination between incoming stimuli, and
discriminatory mechanisms are common across all sensory interpretations.
The brain learns to discriminate one shape from another by touch, one
image from another by shape, and so on. The same with sound. Sounds are
identified in relation to other sounds: think of musical scales and
keys, or the different beats of music. Discrimination of one image or
sound from another leads to pattern formation and hence recognition, the
basis of memory. If the congenitally non-sighted individual is fortunate
enough, like Virgil, to have sight restored, the visual cortex will
become re-organized around input from external images, rather than from
the touch cortex.ii Another common example of cross-sensory memory is
lip reading, and, without either sight or hearing, visual and auditory
stimuli can be learned

through touch and vibration. The cortical adaptation, with the shunting
of sensory information around the cortical sensory map, shows how an
individual's brain can adapt to memorizing and interpreting sensory
information.8 Brain plasticity -- the ability of the brain to grow and
adapt -- has now been exploited for the non-sighted using sensory
substitution devices that convert visual imagery, via a camera fixed on
a person, to sound, so that the auditory cortex can learn to interpret
the images caught on camera.9 The language of the neuroscience of the
senses has shifted from a sense-specific cortical model to a
computational meta-modal organizational model reflecting the highly
connected brain.

Sensation and Perception In his book Ways of Seeing, and the BBC series
that followed in 1972, John Berger (1926--2017) explored the concept of
how we 'see' beyond the sensation of sight. He was an influential
communicator on how the human brain interprets what is seen: perception.
Berger, as an art critic, visual artist and writer, demonstrated how
ways of seeing develop from our learned framework of the world, what he
called 'perceptual constancy'. We see women and men in different ways,
for example, because of deeply conditioned value systems. Perceptual
constancy is necessary, or we would be in a state of constant
re-evaluation of every stimulus, but it is also the basis for
prejudices. Berger had first-hand experience of learned ways of seeing
the world because he gradually lost his own sight owing to growing
cataracts. Following cataract surgery his sight greatly improved.10 He
describes the 'visual renaissance' that he experienced post-op as if he
was seeing everything for the first time. His visual memory circuits
were being re-charged by light after many years of quietude,
re-awakening his foundational visual memories. Vivid visual childhood
memories returned: a white sheet of paper brought him back to his
mother's kitchen and 'those whites on the table, on the sink, on the
shelves'. In Over The Backyard Wall the Irish writer Thomas Kilroy has
written about a similar experience of visual rebirth following the
surgical removal of cataracts. Kilroy visits his childhood memories by
travelling in his

imagination through the geography of his town of origin, Callan. This
book was of particular interest to me because I was reared for some
years in this small Irish midland town. I vicariously enjoyed his visual
renaissance as he was describing the awakening of old visual memories.
He writes that the 'actual origin of sight itself' is memory. Vision,
like all sensation, cannot be separated from memory, and the two
interweave to form perception. To return to the psychic dinner guest who
had benign auditory hallucinations, and to Joseph who had persistent
intrusive hallucinations: what might be the sensory mechanism underlying
auditory hallucinations? We don't know exactly, but we do know that the
parts of the brain involved in hearing normal speech are firing when a
person with psychosis is hearing voices.11,12 You can imagine how, if
the visual cortex was firing off, one might see wallpaper undulating; if
the smell cortex was firing off, one might experience a rotting smell;
if the taste cortex was firing off, one's food may taste strange, as if
poisoned, perhaps. There is now evidence that the overall neural wiring
of the sensory pathways in the brain that project to the cortex is
different in schizophrenia.13 This means that any problem that
interferes with any part of the sensory pathways within the brain could
potentially impact on sensory experiences. There are multiple reasons
why the different sensory cortices may fire off in the absence of
sensation coming in from the peripheral nerves: epilepsy, a brain tumor,
local chemical stimulation from psychedelic drugs, miswiring,
neurotransmitter malfunction. To put it pithily, as medical students are
taught: a hallucination is the experience of a sensation in the absence
of an external stimulus or, more correctly, a matched external stimulus.
Virginia Woolf suffered from bipolar mood disorder, and it is beyond
doubt to me that her descriptions of the sensory experiences of
Septimus, in Mrs Dalloway, were informed by her own experiences when
psychotic and manic. In mania there can be a normal delivery of external
sensation, but this is experienced in an exaggerated hyper-perceptive
way, or may be misinterpreted if the person has psychotic mania. Sitting
under trees in Regents Park, London, Septimus feels that the 'leaves
were alive, trees were alive. And the trees had been connected by
millions of fibres with his own body'. This passage ends with his
conclusion that, 'All taken together meant the birth of a new religion.'
We can feel the tremulous hyper-

perception of Septimus, his fragmented understanding of the visual and
auditory experiences, and then . . . his deluded interpretation: 'All
taken together meant the birth of a new religion.' He had intact sensory
delivery of sensation -- the tree and leaves were real -- but he did not
make sense of it. Woolf's is one of the best descriptions that I have
ever read of what in psychiatry we call a delusional perception, or a
bizzare idea that arises from real externally derived sensations. In the
end, Septimus, unable to endure the mental bombardment of psychosis,
kills himself, foretelling the death by planned suicide of Woolf
herself. Many people, including psychiatrists, argue that we should
scrap the diagnosis of schizophrenia on the basis that psychotic
experiences are common and that schizophrenia is a spectrum disorder.
This, they argue, would have the added benefit of de-stigmatizing the
disorder. For me, changing the word does not do it. The stigma is not
present because of the word 'schizophrenia', and removing this word is
an acknowledgement that it is indeed stigmatizing. Autism has become
de-stigmatized, not because the word has been replaced, but because
society has been educated. Individuals with autistic spectrum disorder
(ASD) are not seen as 'weird' any more; they are rightly seen as
different/special. The insight and tolerance required to understand
special, non-neurotypic, individuals raises us all to higher levels of
kindness and generosity. But there is a very important caveat: there is
a world of a difference between being on an autistic spectrum and having
autism; or being on a psychosis spectrum and having schizophrenia; or
being obsessional and having OCD; and as for the casual remark that
someone who is unpredictable and emotionally unstable is 'bipolar' . .
.! As I've mentioned, new knowledge awareness is usually overgeneralized
initially and, in matters of the brain and behaviour, we tend to apply
new information to ourselves first because we are so interested in
understanding ourselves. Traits or tendencies do not make a disease,
however, that can erode one's life, and this sort of self-diagnosis
diminishes the sometimes devastating suffering experienced by those with
full-blown mental illness. Hearing voices is not schizophrenia, any more
than feeling sad is depression, or being highly organized to the point
of rigidity is OCD, or having poor communication skills is autism, or
being emotionally unpredictable is bipolar illness.

Interpretations of Strange Sensations The distinction between delusional
belief systems and the strange things that 'ordinary' people believe can
be problematic. Some of the nonscientific marginal cultural belief
systems, the third-eye phenomena, can seem quasi-psychotic, and some are
frankly psychotic. It is noteworthy that some movies have a particular
resonance and can provide frameworks of explanation for those with
psychotic experiences. Many of the young men now attending our services
with diagnoses of schizophrenia reference the mind-bending psychological
thriller genre, typically The Matrix, Inception or Memento, to give a
framework to their experiences of living in strange and fluid sensate
states. Inception, in which the protagonist, Cobb, steals a person's
thoughts while they are dreaming, had a profound influence on my patient
Joseph. Cobb eventually trains himself to implant thoughts into the
brain of another person while that person is sleeping. Inception
demonstrated to Joseph how an alien idea could be implanted into a human
brain and how, as Cobb says, 'once implanted it is impossible to
combat'. Sometimes the movies are set in dystopian futures, bringing a
dislocated sense of time to the sensory confusion -- the cyberpunk genre
that was led by Ridley Scott's original and brilliant Blade Runner is an
example. Each of us is a mixture of soft and hard neural wiring that
develops from an initial state of nerve pathways laid down in fetal
development and that grows with input from the world of experience.
Sensory information becomes discriminated as memory becomes more
elaborated through experience. This is the basis of perception and the
perceptual constancy within which we automatically filter the world,
giving each of us an individual and unique filter, our memory. In the
uncut version of Blade Runner, Decker, disturbed by the human qualities
of the replicants, wonders 'why a replicant would collect photos. Maybe
they were like Rachael. They needed memories.'

4. The Story of the Hippocampus

Long ago, in a place far away, a princess . . . the cosy composition of
the traditional story is as familiar to us individually as it is
culturally ubiquitous. We think that we intuit the time-place-person
format because we have imbibed it as far back as stories have been
recorded. Think of the format when you watch your next few movies: you
are usually given the coordinates of time, place and person within the
first few minutes. If not, you will be held watching until either you
give up because it hasn't hooked you, or you will get a character, a
location and/or time before you engage, and with a silent sigh you fall
into the story. Although the format feels intuitive, it would be a
mistake to attribute this to being steeped in it from the beginning of
our lives. The first thing that medical students and nurses are taught
about mental state examination is what we call 'orientation in time,
place and person'. This means knowing the approximate time of the day,
the day of the week, the month and the year, and where and who you are.
If a patient is not 'orientated by three', we know that something is
seriously wrong with their brain function, whether lasting or temporary.
We are actually, factually, neuronally wired to learn through the
coordinates of time-place-person. The story of how we are wired to learn
through these coordinates is the story of the hippocampus, and the
matter of memory. Try to imagine a way of being in the world without the
story coordinates. What happens to an individual without a
time-place-person format within which to process experience? Samuel
Beckett is king of the exigent without a past, without memory, without
identity. Many of Beckett's characters are amnesic and seem paralysed in
an ever-present world. Vladimir and Estragon, the unfortunate tramps in
Waiting for Godot, are trapped in the present, with no past and no
future, waiting for someone -- 'the saviour' -- who may not exist and
the audience knows will never arrive. The tramps

are like two sides of a coin and seem unable to separate from each other
or to derive any comfort from each other, a twosome without
individualized personhood, anguishingly alone in a world without time
and without place. They 'exist' outside the time-place-person format of
the cosy story. They cannot remember the past (even the previous day),
establish the present or project into the future, and go around in a
blind circadian circuit seemingly waiting for death or salvation.
Estragon's remark that there is 'no lack of void' encapsulates their
disorientation. Beckett may have been writing about a world without God
and filled with human cruelty and uncertainty, but he cleverly parsed
down the experience of living to the time-placeperson format that we
live within. By removing the familiar coordinates, Beckett makes us feel
how it is to live outside the orientation of memory. In the previous
chapter we looked at sensory memory; now let's look at the elaboration
of sensory information into the hippocampal memory format of
time-place-person. I witnessed, early in my training in psychiatry, what
could happen to an individual in real life if they lost the capacity to
form hippocampal memory. It was my first year of training in psychiatry
in the late 1980s and I was working in St Patrick's Hospital in
inner-city Dublin. St Patrick's was founded in 1746 by Jonathan Swift, a
Protestant clergyman. Swift is best known for writing Gulliver's Travels
and in his day was an infamous satirist. In Ireland he is better known
for penning the outrageous satire A Modest Proposal, in which he laid
out with deadpan irony a potential solution to the poverty that the
Irish suffered under English rule -- for the rich English to eat
cherubic Irish babies. He wrote his own epitaph, referring to his
posthumous self resting in his grave 'where savage indignation can no
longer lacerate his heart'. Another 'savage indignation' that pained the
living Swift was how the insane were ignored and abused by society.
Swift had been a former governor of the Bedlam in London that became the
Bethlem Royal where I treated Edith, and had brought his enlightened
views about the humane treatment of the insane from the Bedlam to
Dublin. Incidentally, Swift and Molyneux, of Molyneux's Question, lived
during the same time in history and in the same place -- a short walk
from each other in Dublin -- and were mutual admirers. They

were driven by key ideals of the Enlightment -- Molyneux that the brain
was a human organ that processed knowledge from the human world, and
Swift by an understanding that insanity was a disease of the human mind
that needed humanitarian care. By the time I was working there, St
Patrick's Hospital had little in common with Swift's founding principles
of equality and charity, and had become a private hospital.

The Case of MM MM had been referred for investigation of memory loss and
personality change. She was a middle-aged, as I then saw it, woman in
her early forties who was a homemaker with two children of early
double-digit ages. I conducted the clinical assessment in an interview
room facing the reception desk in the hospital foyer. I remember being
in that room and MM sitting across the desk from me with an anxious,
mistrustful face, frowning under her eyebrows at this strange young
doctor. We decided that I would interview MM and her mother together
because Mother was needed to provide MM's history. Mother told me that
MM had been behaving in an increasingly strange and uncharacteristic
way, starting a few months previously. Apart from her almost complete
memory loss, Mother noted that MM had become distant emotionally, even
from her children. She sometimes did not recognize members of her family
anymore, even her children, but this was not consistent. Her normal
personality had been warm and she had been a successful mother and
daughter. MM's parents had stepped in to take over the task of
collecting the children from school, as she could no longer find her way
to the school. The grandparents provided emotional support for the
children, who were bewildered and upset by their mother's unpredictable
responses. MM's husband was unable to cope with what seemed to him to be
hostile behaviour from his wife. Each encounter and event that MM
experienced seemed to be a new event not connected to anything
previously, even if an event had happened only minutes before. I
particularly remember Mother saying to me that her daughter was always
lost: if she left a room, even momentarily, and then returned, the

room was new to her and she had to re-orientate herself. Testing this, I
asked her to pause and look around the interview room and then
accompanied her and Mother outside to the hospital foyer, closing the
door to the room. I asked her again to pause and take a good look around
the foyer and we turned around and returned to the room. The interview
room was completely new again to her, and she was unable to identify it.
Her disorientation had increased to the point where she could no longer
be left alone. She was in a state of constant fear, and everything that
happened seemed to be continuously new and frightening for her. MM, in
spite of her crippling memory loss, remained capable of doing
complicated motor tasks such as cooking and writing. When I talked to
her, although she was bewildered and terrified she was unable to
pinpoint her problem. She was able to see and identify objects. She was
able to hear words, understand language and respond coherently. She
could taste and smell. One of the problems that she did understand about
her predicament was her complete loss of memory for location -- she felt
an overwhelming sense of being lost all the time. MM struck me as being
absent in all ways except that she was sitting in a chair at the other
side of the desk. She had a distant and distrustful affect. ('Affect' is
the word clinicians use to describe the impression that the emotional
state of someone makes on you.) I knew that she did not know who I was,
and the interview was strange because our rapport did not warm or change
in any way as the consultation progressed. I had a sinking feeling as we
were talking that day that MM would not come back and that her condition
was beyond the remit of medicine to repair. I felt that I was simply an
observer of some catastrophic brain event. MM had what seemed like total
short-term memory loss. I had never seen someone previously, nor have
since, who had such a complete absence of short-term memory, with
otherwise normal mental function, and with full sensory awareness. It is
difficult to imagine. We are familiar with dementia, when memory
function deteriorates in tandem with other brain functions, such as
understanding speech or speaking coherently. Individuals who lose their
memory usually also lose their ability to do tasks such as cooking or
driving a car. MM had excellent sight, hearing and touch sensation.
Unlike the blind man of Molyneux's Question, who was unable to make
sense of imagery, MM was able to make sense of images and indeed all
other

sensations, but she lacked the capacity to make sense at another level
of memory -- time, place and person -- which we will henceforth call
'event' memory. Event memory involves a bringing together of disparate
sensory information in the dynamic living world. It is memory for what
happens. MM could not commit to memory what was happening around her or
to her. With this she had lost her ability to form biographical memory.
You may wonder why MM had been admitted to a psychiatric hospital. I had
been instructed to admit MM for investigation of a possible 'hysterical
amnesia' because her brain function, apart from memory, appeared to be
intact and functioning. Hysterical amnesia, now called dissociative
amnesia, was, and is, taught to trainee psychiatrists as being a state
of dissociation in which memory abruptly stops working while other
mental functions remain intact. This leaves the patient with a
circumscribed memory loss but with otherwise normal brain function.
Trauma is theorized to be the precipitant of the dissociation: that is,
someone has been so traumatized that they are unable to commit the event
to memory, with a resultant 'blockage' of general memory function. The
impaired memory, it is hypothesized, protects these individuals from the
potentially overwhelming emotional experience of recalling the event or
the memory. The treatment for dissociative amnesia is to unveil the
trauma and guide the patient through the experience of the trauma,
thereby restoring the flow of memory function. I have not seen a case of
hysterical/dissociative amnesia in thirtysix years of clinical practice,
and it is generally seen as an outdated diagnosis, but the underlying
explanations put forward historically for this alleged state of mind are
important in understanding some of the lingering misconceptions about
psychiatry.

Hysterical Amnesia Hysteria was a very common diagnosis given to women
in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Freud's account of
his famous patient Anna O in Studies on Hysteria (Studien Über Hysterie,
1895), is a richly layered story that deserves revisiting because it
contains many of the fallacious tenets of Freudian theory. Anna O was a
pseudonym for a strong,

intelligent feminist who became a patient of Freud through his mentor,
the neurologist Josef Breuer. She was being treated by Breuer because
she developed strange states where she appeared to lose awareness, to
repeat words or gestures and experience visual and auditory
hallucinations. Breuer noticed that her symptoms appeared to change when
she talked about them -- what we would nowadays call inconsistent
accounts or hysterical elaborations -- and he went on to try out what
became known as the 'talking cure'. The talking cure was the basis of
what Freud later elaborated into psychoanalysis. Freud believed that
Anna O's states, and those of most of his patients, were caused by some
form of repressed memory, usually of a sexual nature. His treatment --
analysis of the psyche, or 'psychoanalysis' -- was to facilitate the
patient to freely associate, or to talk in a non-directive way. Free
association was theorized to lead to revelations about the individual
and ultimately to reveal the trauma. Contrary to Freud's claim in his
written case history that Anna O made a full recovery following her
so-called talking cure, she went on to be hospitalized many times. There
has been much speculation since about Anna O's diagnosis. Descriptions
of her abnormal states sound similar to temporal lobe epilepsy, or could
have been accounted for by tubercular meningitis (TB in the membrane
surrounding the brain), or by chloral hydrate or morphine addiction or
withdrawal. There is now a list of speculated causes of Anna O's
symptoms that were not recognized in those days.14 Breuer, not in denial
about Anna O's outcome, became increasingly distanced from Freud.
Breuer's divergence from what he saw as Freud's increasingly narrow
ideas about talking cures, and over-attribution of the causes of
neurosis to infant and child sexuality, reflects what has happened since
in the discipline of psychiatry. The talking therapies now commonly used
thankfully have little in common with the Freudian practice of
non-directive free association therapy. Therapy, most commonly some form
of cognitive-behaviour therapy, is now goal-directed and is emotionally
contained. Nor is therapy based in Freudian theory. It is remarkable
that the bizarre idea that penis envy is the basis for some neuroses in
females was taught to trainee psychiatrists like me, with no sense of
irony, only thirty years ago.i The idea that girls are sexually
attracted to their fathers is repulsive to us now, and

can be seen as providing a bona fide rationale for the rampant child
sexual abuse of the time. (We will look at this in greater detail in a
future chapter.) Psychotherapy these days is much closer to Breuer's
solution-focused original experiment with Anna O than to Freud's
undirected freeassociation time-unlimited psychoanalysis. What
characterizes many of the famous historical cases of hysteria is an
intense relationship between the therapist and the patient, one of whom
has an emotional, the other a professional, investment in the diagnosis.
Anna O saw Breuer for two hours daily for some months, and these
encounters were emotionally intense. Later, during one of her
hospitalizations, another doctor fell in love with her. Some patients,
and some psychiatrists, enjoy the melodrama of hysteria, whether this
drama is so-called psychogenic amnesia or, even more dramatically,
multiple personality disorder (called dissociative personality disorder
in DSM 5\*). I had one patient in recent years who was arousing great
interest among the younger staff because she was 'dissociating' into
three different personalities with different names, different genders
and different characteristics. The younger staff were fascinated,
watching and waiting for the next character episode to emerge. I
instructed that the patient be escorted to and observed in a private
room when this occurred, and was only to be addressed, and responded to,
when she became herself again. Her dissociative episodes petered out and
she attended our psychologist, not to investigate her multiple
personalities but to try to address her real and substantial problems.
The attraction to hysteria can also be seen in the voyeurism that these
cases arouse outside of medicine.ii Hysteria, as a diagnosis, is now
considered to be defunct, but the idea that a neurological impairment,
usually a sensory or motor impairment, or memory loss, can have a
'psychological' or 'non-organic' cause remains accepted within clinical
practice. The clinical nomenclature and the literature in this area is a
minefield of unhelpful abstractions and terms that shuttle between
neurology and psychiatry, but underlying all of it is the implication
that some human experiences are 'psychological' and some are 'organic'.
In the real organic life of the human, brain function and matter are
indistinguishable, because every experience in the brain, whether a
normal or an abnormal one, is based in matter and how that matter

functions. Until the 'Decade of the Brain' in the 1990s, the discipline
of psychiatry was considered by most people, including practitioners, to
be in the domain of the intangible 'mind', while neurology was in the
camp of the 'organic' brain.iii Neuroscience is quietly transcending
mind--brain dualism with new insights about brain function, without
having to argue the toss about brain versus mind. Clinical medicine
understandably lags behind cutting-edge neuroscience, and the concept of
whole-brain indivisibility of function has not fully permeated all
medical disciplines. Let's return to MM, who was admitted for
investigation of hysterical amnesia. I could not elicit any trauma in
her past, yet she presented to me as a very sick person who was
terrified and bewildered. At this time, neuroimaging was in its infancy
and was a very scarce resource clinically. MM did get a brain scan in
the following weeks that demonstrated a large tumor at the centre of her
brain and she was transferred to oncology for ongoing care. There were
few details in the scan report, except that the hippocampus, on both
right and left, was not visible. The tumor was inaccessible to surgery
and she died shortly thereafter. MM was typical of many patients who
were investigated for, and sometimes diagnosed with, hysteria, in the
times before there were good investigative neuroimaging tools. The
historical literature is rich with such cases. The case of a woman
admitted to the Maudsley hospital in London in the 1950s and diagnosed
with hysteria following input from the most acclaimed psychiatrists and
neurologists of the time, and who died two years later from a brain
tumor, is an infamous example.15 I never saw MM again, but the tragic
sense of her being an empty shell, a daughter lost to her mother, a wife
lost to her husband, a mother lost to her children, and, most of all, a
person lost to herself, has stayed with me. With her total event-memory
loss she seemed to have lost her personhood. MM taught me that without a
hippocampus each one of us would wander about like Estragon and Vladimir
in a timeless, disorientated state without a memory of passing events
and unable to contemplate the future. Importantly, unlike Beckett's
tragi-comical creations, MM was intensely distressed. She also taught me
that you cannot make a past without first making a present. The
hippocampus makes a present because it integrates the sensory inputs
from the cortex into a story of the present. We will look

at how the hippocampus makes time-place-person information -- the basis
for event memory -- in coming chapters. We need to start with how the
hippocampus processes the raw sensory information that was available to
MM, to create something more integrated -- a perception of the
continuous present -- that was absent in MM.

The Hippocampus Understanding the anatomy of the hippocampus is
important to understanding the flow of sensory information from the
outside world, through the sense organs, to the cortex on the outside of
the brain, and on to the hippocampal hub at the centre of the brain. The
hippocampus is snugly tucked into the bottom rim of the cortex; think of
a closed button mushroom cut lengthwise into two halves and look at the
cut surface. The mushroomcoloured cap is the cortex and the hippocampus
is the curled-in dark brown part of the mushroom where the cap meets the
stem (see Figure 4). We have a hippocampus (plural, hippocampi) on each
side of the brain -- the brain being a mirrored structure -- and while
the right and the left hippocampus serve somewhat different memory
functions they have a common mechanism of action. The name hippocampus
derives from a Latin word meaning 'seahorse', referring to its shape. It
has a big head, with chin tucked in and the body gradually tapering to a
tail. It lies head-first in a front-to-back orientation of the brain.
Figure 4. The hippocampus

A vertical cross section through the brain showing the hippocampus at
the curled-in rim of the outer cortex.

Sensory memory, distributed around various cortical areas, is connected
to the hippocampus through the neurons that converge on to the
hippocampus from the cortex, like the gills from the cap of the mushroom
that attach to the curled-in part (see Figure 5). Once the signals
arrive from the cortex, they are processed through the cell-layers of
the hippocampus that create new connections among the hippocampal cells.
The signals cause hippocampal neurons to connect together, and the newly
connectedup hippocampal neurons are essentially 'memory codes' of the
nerve signals from the sensory cortices. Before looking at the
hippocampal coding processes in more detail, I'd like to tell the story
of how neuroscience learned so much about hippocampal function from one
man, Henry Molaison. Figure 5. The sensory-memory path

A vertical cross-section through the brain, cut in the middle in a
profile orientation. Sensory information is transmitted through neuronal
pathways from the sensory cortices to the hippocampus.

HM The reason we know that the hippocampus is central to memory function
in humans is largely due to the life of Henry Molaison (HM), the
best-known case in the neuroscience of memory, whose history was written
up in a landmark paper in 1957.16 His clinical profile was very similar
to MM's, although the cause of the hippocampal damage was different. HM
fell off his bicycle when he was seven years old and damaged his
hippocampus. The torn brain tissue led to the formation of scar tissue
because brain tissue, like all body tissue, tends to scar during the
healing process. Epilepsy, which HM subsequently developed, is often
caused by scar tissue in the hippocampus: signals are blocked by the
scar tissue and the electrical energy builds up, leading to an
uncontrolled spreading of electrical signals in brain circuits. The
brain is a mega-network of different circuits in which the hippocampus
is a central hub, and, if the current flow is dysregulated here, the
whole brain can misfire. This can cause states in which all of the brain
is misfiring simultaneously and nothing is being processed normally. In
such circumstances, the unfortunate person will lose consciousness and
fall, experiencing 'tonic--clonic seizures' in which the body muscles

contract and relax uncontrollably. The seizure, if not controlled, will
over time cause further neural tissue damage. Eventually, with doctors
unable to control brain firing using even the strongest of
anti-epileptic medication, HM had both his right and left hippocampus
removed. In 1957, HM's surgery was a pioneering treatment, and removal
of his two hippocampi did lead to a great improvement in his epilepsy.
The unexpected and tragic consequence of this procedure, as you have
probably predicted, was that HM suffered from profound memory loss for
the rest of his life. Neurosurgeons now remove only one hippocampus
because of the consequences of removing both, not known before the HM
case. Following surgery, HM was unable to commit any event to memory.
Every day brought with it a new world -- a day preceded by no other days
-- of new places and new people. The house that he lived in was as
unfamiliar to him from the first day of his post-surgery life as it was
when he died fifty years later. Nothing was connected to past
experiences, whether the past experience was two minutes previously or
two decades previously. There was no past and no future, only an endless
disjointed present -- a staccato 'now'. HM, similar to MM, was alert,
verbally fluent and had full motor function, but was still unable to
recall exchanges in conversation beyond one or two sentences. HM was
studied in great detail following his bilateral hippocampectomy,
particularly by a meticulous neuropsychologist called Brenda Milner,
until his death in 2008, aged 82 years. Milner's mission was to try to
find the reason why some memory function was intact and functioning in
HM -- even complicated sensory-motor tasks such as word-recognition and
speech were still working -- but he could somehow not put it all
together outside of the moment to make event memory. Brenda Milner
discovered that much of the memory that we use in routine daily tasks is
stored in the cortex and may not involve using the memory factory of the
hippocampal circuitry. This explains why HM could see, hear, touch,
walk, cycle, converse -- his cortex was intact -- but the putting
together of the 'who, where and when' to make an event memory was not
possible. HM's visual cortex had already learned to understand the world
by sight, so this information remained safely stored. Similarly, sound
and smell, motor and language skills were all functioning. What he was
missing was the past context, and any possible future context. The
difference between memory stored in the cortex and

event memory, which is processed in the hippocampus, can be seen in some
rare cases of babies and children with severely impaired hippocampal
function.17 They can learn facts and figures, and language, and can even
operate at an average academic level, but they do not make biographical
or event memory.

Cells that Fire Together Wire Together How hippocampal neurons make
memories is the subject matter of a gargantuan literature and is one of
the key questions at the hub of memory research. The neuroscience of
memory is founded on the groundbreaking science of Donald Hebb
(1904--85), who gave the world the catchphrase that sums up the
neurophysiological process of memory: cells that fire together wire
together. Hebb was a Canadian psychologist who worked with the amazingly
creative group surrounding Wilder Penfield, who mapped the sensory
homunculus. In 1949, in his book The Organization of Behaviour, Hebb
described his theory of how neurons make memories, and how these
memories go on to help organize brain function. He hypothesized that
bunches of firing neurons connect up together to form cell assemblies
that become wired together. The cells wire together through the
formation of connecting dendrites made from the electrochemical energy
of the nerve signal. The connected-up cell assembly subsequently fires
as a single unit so that, if any of the constituent neurons of the cell
assembly are then stimulated, all of the neurons will fire. This cell
assembly represents a memory. To put this simply, a memory is
represented in a neural code that consists of cells that have been wired
together to fire as a single unit. The inter-neuronal connections in the
cell assembly could be, Hebb hypothesized, solidified by the physical
growth of dendrites between the neurons, creating a more permanent
memory, or alternatively they could fade away. The 'Hebbian' model of
dendritic growth, through the firing and the subsequent increased
connection of adjacent neurons, is now accepted as the cellular basis of
memory. The dendrites are all-important in this process, because they
transmit the nerve signal from one neuron to the next. Greater dendritic
growth means increased connectivity among neurons.

Dendrites grow in a quite beautiful way, called 'arborizing' (from the
Latin arbor, meaning 'tree'), because the dendritic fibres resemble the
branching of a tree. Neurons can have up to 15,000 dendritic outgrowths
and, you may remember, there are 68 billion neurons in the human brain;
consider, then, the astronomical possibilities of connectivity among
them through dendritic arborization and new synaptic formation. It is
not magic, but it almost seems to be so because there are virtually
infinite possibilities. The key process in forming even a short-term
memory is that the cells have to fire together for long enough to become
wired together. The firing together forms a transient memory and the
wiring a more permanent memory. The process of strengthening the encoded
cell assembly is called consolidation. Information is entering the brain
constantly during the waking state, but most of it is not solidified --
it simply fades because it has no relevance. On a molecular level, the
formation of a solidly connected memory from an ignited cell assembly
depends on the many factors that influence the strength of incoming
signals. If the strength of the signal is at a key threshold, the neuron
will make the dendritic proteins and the memory will become more
permanent. If the signal is poor, the cell assembly firing will fade
away, and there will be no wiring. Cells need energy to grow the
dendrites and the energy comes from the electrical activity in the
neurons -- the more firing, the more wiring. The Hebbian process of
converting electrochemical energy from firing neurons to form proteins
that constitute dendrites is a neat example of how, in the brain, energy
is converted to matter. Hebb, like all great discoverers, meticulously
observed his measures and faithfully recorded these observations in
spite of the fact that he was not able to prove the theory that followed
from these observations. My favourite thing about Hebb is that he
believed that a theory, rather than being pitched against another
theory, should be used to provoke thought and to guide research. One has
to sometimes struggle through an enormous and theoretically framed
literature in psychology to come to an understanding of what lies
beneath the theories and counter-theories. Outsiders often have
difficulty teasing apart juxtaposed theories that paradoxically can seem
quite similar. And they are similar, because new theories emerge from
pre-existing theories. Hebb did not cast his theories primarily in
counter-position to existing frameworks

but used this knowledge to move forward in terms of understanding his
observations.

Hippocampal Plasticity and the Organization of Memory There are a
limited number of hippocampal neurons, and they are in a constant state
of assembly, disassembly and re-assembly as we negotiate the present
sensate world and consolidate, or not, a memory assembly. Hippocampal
neurons have to be especially adaptable to allow continuous synaptic
growth and re-modelling. The ability of a physiological system to change
or re-model is called 'plasticity'. The hippocampus is intrinsically
plastic and can actually be seen to 'grow' as a unit in some situations
of intense memory-formation. A striking example of hippocampal growth
following learning is the famous London taxi-driver study, in which the
right hippocampus was found to be measurably bigger following two years
of intensive learning of routes.18 My 'sticky' memory of this study
comes to mind every time I step into a London taxi. Memory
deterioration, on the other hand, is part of normal ageing and can be
visualized on MRI in the reducing size of the hippocampus as the brain
ages. We now know that depression is associated with a smaller left
hippocampal volume and that this reduction is greater if depression is
recurrent or has been long-lasting. You can now see that there appears
to be a laterality effect (in which one side of the brain is more
involved in a particular function than the other) for different types of
memory: it is the right hippocampus that changes over time in the taxi
study, while the left hippocampus is generally found to be smaller in
depression. This is because the right hippocampus is more important for
place memory, and the left for biographical memory. Given this, it is
not surprising that depressed individuals typically have poor memory
function, and there is usually patchy, sometimes lost, biographical
memory for the duration of the depression.19 A recently published study
from my research group pinpoints that a specific area in the left
hippocampus, where the 'coding' of cell assemblies occurs, is reduced in
size in depression.20 iv In this study we found that those who were
having a first episode of depression did not have

changes in their hippocampus, while those who had been depressed for
longer periods of time had hippocampal changes. The happier news is that
memory function improves once depression is treated.

Cortical Memory Does all the memory remain in the hippocampus? No,
because, as we have seen, there are a limited number of neurons in the
hippocampus, and they need to be recycled to make new memories. So where
does all the hippocampal memory go? The simple answer is that there is a
constant dialogue between the hippocampus and the cortex, and much
memory is ultimately stored in the cortex. Neurons in the cortex, in
contrast to those in the hippocampus, are more difficult to change or
rearrange -- they are less plastic. This means that memory maps laid
down by the multiplicity of interwoven cell assemblies in the cortex are
relatively resistant to change and therefore to damage. Having the two
systems of memory, one that is rapid and plastic, and one that is slower
and more stable, means that we can continue to learn and adapt to change
within a relatively stable system of knowledge. This does not mean that
cortical memory is static, far from it. The cortical 'www' is in a state
of ongoing interaction with the plastic hippocampus throughout one's
life.21 The storage of event memory, of biographical memory, takes place
in the neuronal dynamic between the hippocampus and a cortical area in
the front of the brain, and in particular an area called the prefrontal
cortex.22 The prefrontal area is situated above the eyes, and it lights
up when a person is being scanned while consciously recollecting a
personal memory.23 The situation is that the hippocampus seems to be
involved in the laying down of event memory, and may also be involved in
the recall of events from the past.v Although HM could not memorize his
own life from the time of his surgery onwards, he could remember events
from his childhood for up to about three years prior to the removal of
his hippocampi. This is how it was first learned that although
biographical memory is made in the hippocampus it is not for ever stored
there. It was suspected that the threeyear period of biographical
amnesia prior to HM's surgery may have

reflected the time that it took to process and transfer biographical
memory from the relative instability of hippocampal cell assemblies to
the more consolidated connections in the prefrontal cortex.24 We now
know that, as memories age, they diffuse up to the cortex from the
hippocampus, and that it can take months or years for this process to
occur. Neuroscientists can now see that the hippocampus primarily lights
up when recent events are being recalled, whereas the prefrontal areas
are engaged with the recall of more remote events.25 HM had an intact
prefrontal cortex and was able to access biographical memories that had
woven their way to this higher part of the brain. 'Higher' is a word
conventionally used when referring to parts of the brain, like the
prefrontal cortex, that mediate complex functions like biographical
memory. The hippocampal-prefrontal circuit is the main neuronal highway
that processes your personal history over a lifetime.24 The prefrontal
cortex network is the storyteller, gathering information from all over
the brain in 'working memory' to tell the story. We have already seen
how sensory memory -- sight, sound, smell, taste and touch -- is
primarily organized in specific areas of the cortex. The visual cortex
develops and memorizes images as a child develops, or this can happen,
rarely, in adulthood when a newly sighted adult like Virgil emerges into
a visual world. The visual cortex retains the image memory and can
operate superficially as a hippocampal-independent system. This would be
consistent with the experiences of HM and MM, who, without a
hippocampus, had intact sensory knowledge. But this is an
oversimplification and one that misses the experiential wonder of
sensory memory. Remember John Berger's experience of a 'visual
renaissance' following cataract surgery and the restoration of his
sight: when he saw a white sheet of paper and was suddenly back in his
mother's kitchen. In Berger's vignette the visual cortex was stimulating
deep biographical memory. Visual art challenges automatic sensory
interpretation -- perceptual constancy -- and brings us into Berger's
world of breaking down perceptions. The original, and probably still
best, inroad to peeking into biographical hippocampal recall is the
experimental method of stimulation of hippocampal cells in conscious
patients during preoperative epilepsy surgery. Oliver Sacks, in his
famous The Man Who Mistook His Wife For a

Hat, described the original shock when Wilder Penfield stimulated the
hippocampus. Stimulation called forth intensely vivid hallucinations of
tunes, people, scenes, which would be experienced, live, as compellingly
real, in spite of the prosaic atmosphere of the operating room . . .
such epileptic hallucinations are never phantasies: they are memories,
and memories of the most precise and vivid kind, accompanied by the
emotions which accompanied the original experience.

Going Cortical Much of the process of daily memory 'going cortical'
seems to occur during sleep. The effects of sleep on memory were first
described by Hermann Ebbinghaus (1850--1909) in his seminal work on
memory Über das Gedächtnis (On Memory), in 1885. Ebbinghaus examined his
own pattern of memorizing and noted that new information was more likely
to be memorized if presented before sleep than during the day. It became
apparent in the sleep and memory studies following this discovery that
sleep deprivation impaired memory acquisition.26 One of the reasons, it
seems, for the positive effects of sleep on mnemonic function is the
electrical activity that occurs in the brain during sleep. Electrical
activity recorded from the scalp during rapid eye movement (REM) sleep
resembles the firing activity that wires hippocampal cell assemblies.
These rapid electrical brain cycles during sleep represent the zapping
of the cortex with the daily load of newly formed memories from the
hippocampus.27 The 'off-line' memory consolidation from the hippocampus
to the cortex during sleep has now been seen in mice.28 The cortex zaps
the hippocampus during the day and the hippocampus zaps the cortex
during sleep. Dreams occur during REM and may be prophetic because
present events from the hippocampus, when going cortical during sleep,
may re-activate associated cortical memories laid down in the past,
releasing a glimpse, sometimes a disturbing one, of what has happened
previously in similar circumstances . . . and therefore may happen
again. In Beckett's novel The Unnamable (1949), the narrator has no
identity -- there is only the voice, a disembodied voice, a stream of
words, that reaches

an existential crisis: '. . . you must say words as long as there are
any until they find me, until they say me . . . perhaps they have
carried me to the threshold of my story . . .' Each person's identity is
a story, and, if there is no story, there is really no self, more
precisely no continuous sense of self -- one is unnamable.vi Unnamable,
like Vladimir and Estragon in Waiting for Godot, gives us a disturbing
visceral inkling of an existence without a past or a future, an
interminable sense of a disjointed, disorientated, depersonalized
existential present . . . a staccato 'now'. Beckett's characters provide
theatrical creations of the harrowing loss of self that I imagine MM
experienced: the ultimate existential crisis that the hippocampus keeps
at bay. The often-quoted lines that form the conclusion in The Unnamable
-- 'You must go on. I can't go on. I'll go on.' -- will always move us
as a profound expression of the sometimes unbearable, universal human
condition that must be borne. Being in a world, with an identity, even a
disembodied voice created from language, compels one to go on. The
hippocampus will take whatever is presented from the cortical world of
your sensation and convert it through the cortex into your human story.
\*The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th
edition, is an internationally recognized diagnostic guide for
psychiatric disorders. The diagnoses are based on symptom checklists and
not on subjective impressions, facilitating consistent diagnoses across
the US and the world. There are three clusters of personality disorders:
Cluster A (odd, eccentric), Cluster B (antisocial, histrionic,
borderline), and Cluster C (anxious, fearful).

5. The Sixth Sense: The Hidden Cortex

The smell of cut grass evokes for many of us the memory of a childhood
summer or many happy summers merged, siblings and first cousins running
on lawns at family gatherings. The smell of potato clay turning to dust
. . . the small grocery shop in Main Street, Portarlington; the sawdust
and warm resin smell of newly cut wood . . . a Saturday morning in the
hardware shop with my father; the heavy sour smell of a creamery . . .
getting the country butter on Friday in the co-op in Green Street,
Callan. In these memories we can often see ourselves as we were then.
Marcel Proust's description of the immediacy and purity of the memory
associated with the taste and smell of a madeleine, a small sponge cake,
is famous, and perhaps over-referenced, but as a classic it is worth
quoting again. But when from a long-distant past nothing subsists, after
the people are dead, after the things are broken and scattered, taste
and smell alone, more fragile but more enduring, more immaterial, more
persistent, more faithful, remain poised for a long time, like souls,
remembering, waiting, hoping, amid the ruins of all the rest; and bear
unflinchingly, in the tiny and almost impalpable drop of their essence,
the vast structure of recollection.\*

Proust describes what we have all probably experienced at some time in
our lives. We taste or smell something and we immediately feel the
emotion associated with the memory of the taste or smell. Smell and
taste are interpreted in overlapping cortical areas, but smell is the
more immediate trigger for emotional memories. The experience of a vivid
emotional memory being triggered by a smell, wrapping you in your own
mystery, is known as the Proustian effect. We, each of us, experience
our own personal Proustian moments, and literature is full of arresting
Proustian memories. John Banville has written of one such experience:
'lupins are for me what the madeleine was to Proust.' When he catches
the smell of a lupin, 'time falls away and I am a child again.' He hears
'the

sound of the sea', feels 'the sting of salt on sunburnt skin', tastes
'banana sandwiches', and smells 'that mingled smell of crushed grass,
seaweed, nightsoil and cows . . .'† Smell is the most mysterious,
soulful and delicate and the most intrinsically emotional of our senses,
but it is not immaterial. In this chapter we will journey through this
material soul, using smell to look at how emotion, what I will call the
sixth sense, is woven into sensation and biographical memory. This will
involve an exploration of interoceptive sensation, body feelings and
their interpretation in the hidden emotional cortex, the insula -- 'the
rag and bone shop of the heart', in Yeats's memorable phrase.‡ During
the days of my first consultant post in Addenbrooke's Hospital in
Cambridge, I had a Proustian visceral experience that I will never
forget, which I will now recount.

The Cambridge Lovage Story It was the warm sunny summer of 1995, and I
was in the early months of my first pregnancy. We had bought a
300-year-old house with a garden so big that the back boundary was not
visible to the eye from the kitchen door. If, that summer, you had
followed the parched lawn down past the big oak tree and then the
orchard, you would have entered an undergrowth with a thick smell of
earth compost mixed with hot river vapour, before seeing the river that
marked the back boundary. The hot air, as stagnant as the shrunken
river, had trapped spinning clouds of small river insects. The mesmeric
unending sounds of the invisible crickets, possibly grasshoppers,
extended into mellow fermata as if sound was also trapped. I found
myself in a mood similar to the weather, suspended and absorbed by
nature, and I spent a lot of my time that summer in the herb garden,
laid out among flagstones, by the back door. Most of the herbs had been
planted by previous owners, and I spent weekends over months restoring
it -- weeding out ivy, mint and lemon verbena and cutting back the
lavenders and thymes that had gone to wood. I was also learning to use
the garden herbs in cooking. One day during this lovely summer, I picked
a bunch of herbs to flavour a salad. Although I had daily morning
sickness, I was always well by

evening, except for that night, when the nausea returned with a
vengeance. The next morning I was more than usually sick and remember
having to lie down on the wiry carpet tiles in my office between
consultations to close my eyes for one or two minutes before facing the
next anxiously waiting patient. Unable to identify what had made me ill,
I felt that it was something in the green salad that had brought it on
and decided that greens were out of my diet for the remainder of the
pregnancy. Some days later while working in the herb garden I bent down
and, inadvertently smelling a plant, felt a jolt of nausea. Looking
around to identify the source of the smell I saw a tall, luscious green
plant with yellow clusters of flowers that I instantly identified as the
culprit in my sickness of the previous week. It was lovage, an ancient
plant grown in convents and monasteries around Europe, used then
extensively in cooking and in herbal remedies. It was puzzling that it
had made me sick. I was so certain about the identification of the smell
that I left the garden to find my partner, Ivar, and tell him. He was
also intrigued and interestingly did not question that I had identified
the cause of the sickness. I didn't understand though . . . lovage was
not harmful . . . I must have misidentified the plant or have
misremembered what I had read about it. I consulted my herb books only
to discover, in a hidden-away paragraph, that lovage should not be
consumed during pregnancy. In olden times lovage was used as a herbal
abortifacient. Large quantities had been traditionally used to induce
abortion. Thankfully, I had eaten a few leaves at most. I began to
wonder whether other foods that I had identified as making me sick were
also potentially toxic to the pregnancy. That is not a question that I
can answer, but I can explain how my brain knew that lovage was the
culprit. There are several processes involved in the Cambridge lovage
story, although I did not experience them as separate. There was the
initial sensory recording of the smell and the taste of the lovage,
followed by the formation of a memory of this sensation -- otherwise I
would not have recognized it again -- and then the re-activation of the
memory on resmelling it some days later that brought with it,
incredibly, a sense of the sickness that it had caused. All this had
happened before the visual identification of the lovage. The sequence of
experiences demonstrates that the nausea/disgust feeling had happened
before I saw the lovage. It was as

if the olfactory memory of the lovage was paused, ready in waiting to be
ignited if smelled or tasted again, to warn me of its poisonous
consequences. The remembered smell had made a feeling. I was not even
aware that I knew the smell of lovage. How clever are our brains? A
smell may cause a range of feelings. Those of the 'vanished loveliness'§
i of childhood; of love -- a baby's scalp; of sexual excitement -- a
lover's neck; of fear -- rancid sweat; of disgust -- rotting fish or, in
my case, lovage. Smell brings you back in time and warns you about the
future in the blink of an eye. How does smell do this in such an
immediate way? We need to start at the point of entry of smell sensation
into the brain -- the odour receptors in the upper nasal passages that
recognise different scent chemicals.29 ii The scent chemicals may be in
food that is tasted -- a madeleine, a herb -- or may be airborne -- the
scent of cut grass, a lupin. At a molecular level, the specific pairing
of an odour molecule to its matched odour receptor in the nasal passages
triggers an electrical signal that is carried to the brain in a very
short nerve, about 5 cm or 2 inches long, called the olfactory nerve.
The olfactory nerve runs horizontally from the back of the nose to a
structure in the brain called the amygdala -- the heart of the matter of
memory (see Figure 6). I call the amygdala the 'emotional sparkplug' of
the brain, because it triggers emotional responses and feelings. It is
situated directly in front of the hippocampus, with which it is densely
interconnected, and into which the amygdala weaves its emotional
synapses. When neurons link up, as we know, they form cell assemblies
that all then fire together. Amygdala--hippocampal connections form the
basis for emotional memory.

The Amygdala The emotional sparkplug, the amygdala, like the
hippocampus, is plastic and can easily grow synaptic connections. Also
like the hippocampus, it has direct connections with the sensory
cortices, in particular the visual cortex, facilitating emotional
response to imagery. The difference between smell and the other four
sensations is that smell neurons from the nose go first to the amygdala
-- hurtling into it from the short run from the nasal passages --

before reaching the olfactory cortex. This is why we experience an
immediacy of emotion when we smell. Sensory experiences other than smell
-- seeing, hearing, tasting and touching -- relay through their cortex
on the surface of the brain before diving down to the
amygdala/hippocampus. Something is seen before you feel the associated
memory; you hear a song before you remember the summer when it was a
hit. Smell neurons, by first relaying to the amygdala, trigger feelings
before the smell can be consciously identified. Smell, as Proust
described, is remembered as a feeling. It is quite amazing that, through
intense introspection, Proust could pinpoint this subjective
phenomenological experience before it could be explained by science. In
my case, the lovage molecules had triggered a signal in the nasal
passages that had travelled to the amygdala causing a remembrance of a
feeling of nausea. Meanwhile, the image of the sunlit lovage was
shimmering on my visual cortex. The remembered nausea, the
identification of the smell, the visual identification of the lovage and
the memory of the salad came together, and the knowledge that the lovage
had made me sick emerged from the neuronal mix. Figure 6. The journey of
smell from the nose to the amygdala

The olfactory nerve carries the electrochemical signal from receptors in
the upper roof of the nose through two routes in the brain. (1) the
quick run to the amygdala, where the emotion associated with the smell
is released, and (2) the longer run to the olfactory cortex, where the
smell is identified. The smell and taste cortices overlap and this is
why taste and smell are often difficult to distinguish from each other,
or, rather, why smell is an intrinsic part of taste.

The Amygdala and Emotions How can a small brain structure, the amygdala,
create the experience of an emotion? We were taught in medical school
that the amygdala is the 'emotion centre' of the brain, but for me this
seemed improbable and the information had no fit in my personal
cognitive constructs. Since then I have built up a memory framework for
understanding the emotional systems in the human body, and I now know
that the amygdala does not create the emotion but is a nerve centre from
which neurons emerge to make emotions in the body. Before looking at how
emotions are made in the body, let's look at how we know that the
amygdala is the emotion maker. The most commonly studied emotion in
animals is fear. Fear is a welltried and tested method for measuring
emotion, because when animals are frightened they respond in ways that
can be visualized and measured, such as running away or freezing.
Emotions cause motion, and motion can be measured. The most famous
amygdala studies were conducted in the 1930s and 1940s by two
scientists, Heinrich Klüver and Paul Bucy. Their names are well known to
students of brain systems because of the Klüver--Bucy syndrome, caused
by removing both the right and left amygdalae in monkeys. Bucy, a
neurosurgeon, removed the hippocampi and amygdalae from both hemispheres
of the male monkey brain (this was before the days of animal rights).
Klüver, an experimental psychologist, observed that, following the
surgery, Monkey lost fear behaviours. Because Monkey no longer,
presumably, experienced fear, he no longer behaved in an appropriately
passive and submissive way to the dominant, and therefore stronger, male
in the colony. Nor did he learn fear from his blunders into inevitable
defeat. This led to serious injury, social isolation, and eventual
death. In a world without fear, Monkey perished.

If you were a monkey who had been spared a bilateral loss of your
amygdalae from Bucy's surgical knife, and still had nice healthy
amygdala, and if you were confronted by the dominant monkey, your heart
would beat fast and hard, your pupils would dilate, your muscles
tighten, your breathing quicken, your blood pressure rise, and the
stress hormone cortisol would be secreted. These physiological responses
constitute the emotion of fear. The emotions happen because the amygdala
is alive and responsive, unlike those of your unfortunate colony member
whose amygdalae have been lesioned, and who knows no fear. Female
monkeys were less studied, but the reports interestingly indicate that
those who had no amygdalae had impaired maternal behaviours, frequently
abusing or neglecting their offspring. The experiments showed that fear,
including maternal anxiety as I speculate, was mediated through the
amygdala in monkeys and was necessary not only for individual survival,
but also for the survival of the colony. Humans can, although very
rarely, be afflicted by the disease called Urbach--Wiethe, in which the
amygdalae become damaged, leaving the surrounding brain unaffected. This
leads to a failure to recognize fearful facial expressions, and a
reduced ability to register fear overall.30 Nonfunctioning amygdalae
means that the person can make event memory, but it will not have a
normal emotional content, and will not be recalled with the associated
emotion.31 On the other hand, those with intact amygdalae but damaged
hippocampi can feel the fear but are unable to consistently form event
memory and avoid the stimulus that triggered the fear. The consequences
of not having a functioning amygdala are sometimes dramatically observed
in Urbach--Wiethe sufferers.32 The life of one person with this disease,
known as 'SM', has been documented in the academic literature.33 SM has
been reported as having normal event memory, but she does not register
feelings of fear, even in life-threatening situations, and she does not
learn to avoid harm from previous experience. She approaches strangers
without any sense of fear and tends to stand in very close proximity to
them. Because of her inability to sense fear cues, and her behavioural
disinhibitions, she has had several near-death experiences that have not
led to future avoidance of these dangerous situations. She seems unable
to feel fear and to learn from fear. Interestingly, she describes

feelings of curiosity when an average person would be feeling fear --
for example, she was curious about what a tarantula would feel like to
touch. The amygdala lights up in MRI neuroimaging when a person is
feeling fear, such as when challenged with a hypothetically threatening
scenario.34 Individuals with spider phobias have very strong amygdalar
activation when exposed to pictures of spiders compared to those who are
not arachnophobic.35 If we were able to hypothetically peer into the
brain of an individual with arachnophobia as they were looking at a
picture of a tarantula, we would see connections lighting up between the
location on the visual cortex where the tarantula is mapped and the
amygdala.34 This hypothetical pathway is both memory and present
experience. It is made from past experience and is creating new emotion.
The next big question is, how does the amygdala generate emotion, in
this case fear? Figure 7. The amygdala as the emotional sparkplug

This illustration demonstrates how the amygdala circuits to the
hypothalamus to ignite the ANS in the body and create visceral emotions.

In essence, neural outputs from the amygdala go to the body and make
feelings in the body. The theory that emotion arises in the body was
first

proposed by a hero of mine you may remember from Chapter 1, William
James, in 'The physical basis of emotion' (1894).36 iii William, his
more famous brother Henry, and his less famous sister Alice, were all
magnificent interpreters of human emotions: James as the master of
fiction, William as a psychologist, and Alice as a diarist who wrote
vividly about her emotional breakdowns and depressions. William James
proposed that feelings were caused by the activation of visceral
sensations in the body. We now know that James was correct and that the
amygdala is directing this visceral activity from the brain, hence my
name for the amygdala, the emotional sparkplug. The system sparked in
making emotions is the autonomic nervous system (ANS), which innervates
all inner body organs: the heart, the gut, the lungs and blood vessels,
as well as the skin and some glands and smaller muscles. Functions
mediated by the ANS include facial blushing and blanching, dilation and
constriction of the pupil, respiratory rate, heart rate, tear production
and sexual arousal. 'Autonomic' is a synonym for 'automatic': our ANS
function is generally thought of as, and generally is, automatic and
mostly out of our control. The heart doesn't beat, or the gut contract,
or blood vessels dilate, because we will them to do so -- these things
are automatic. Nevertheless, it is possible to learn to modify autonomic
functions through meditative work, and this is the basis for
mindfulness.iv The ANS is like a puppet on strings, a marionette, that
is tugged this way and that by outputs from the brain.

The Hypothalamus The more precise marionettist of the ANS is the
hypothalamus, a small collection of densely packed neurons, with the
right cluster only separated from the left by a small canal of brain
fluid that marks the centre of the brain at the level of the bridge of
the nose. The hypothalamus is very close to the amygdala, to which it is
hard-wired. Anatomically, multiple brain circuits, one of the most
important of which is the amygdala/hippocampus, converge on the
hypothalamus, and it is the sum of these inputs that will determine the
output to the ANS. Darren Roddy, a psychiatrist and a neuroimager who
works in our group, says that he sees the hypothalamus as

the place where all outputs from the memory-emotional brain converge and
then go to the body to bring about changes in the ANS and the endocrine
systems. Multiple interoceptive body systems are modulated through the
hypothalamus -- it being the control centre not only for the ANS, which
makes feelings and emotions, but also for output from the brain
controlling the cortisol stress system in the body. I have spent most of
my research career looking at the cortisol stress system, pondering how
many ways the brain can zap the hypothalamus to change the way that we
feel. The hypothalamus is the final exit point to the interoceptive
body, and the flow is not just from the brain to the body, changing the
interoceptive body: it also occurs in the other direction, with the
interoceptive body changing the brain. Cortisol and stress will be the
topic of a future chapter, but for now just note that emotions and
stress have the same brain marionettist, the hypothalamus. In the
pathway from the sparkplug of the amygdala, we have now passed through
the exit door of the brain, the hypothalamus, and are travelling through
the ANS to the interoceptive body.

A Rainbow of Feeling States The strength of an emotion can be measured
by looking at ANS arousal. Visual stimuli are more likely to provoke a
bigger ANS response than auditory stimuli. This can be seen in brain
anatomy, where one sees bigger input from the visual cortex to the
amygdala compared to the other sensory cortices. This is fascinating
when you consider that the original Sensationalists of the eighteenth
century, including Locke and Molyneux, were preoccupied with sight and
visual knowledge/memory rather than other sensations. Perhaps Molyneux
and Locke and the other preEnlightenment philosophers intuited the
highly interconnected visualemotional circuitry when they selected sight
to demonstrate connections between sensation and memory. Combined visual
and auditory stimuli will provoke a larger ANS response than either
alone. Most of us feel uncomfortable telling a lie -- this uneasy
feeling is generated by ANS arousal.v The stereotypical lie-detection
needle that

oscillates in movies telling us that a person is telling a lie is
measuring ANS arousal, and specifically whether a person is sweating,
because it is a reliable measure of arousal. The ANS emotional system
can create a range of opposite feeling states: a quickened or slowed
heart rate -- arousal or relaxation; an increase or a decrease in blood
pressure -- tension or swooning; dilation or constriction of the small
blood vessels of the skin -- flushing or blanching; gut immobility or
overactivity -- bloating or rumbling. The range of opposing emotional
states can happen because there are two ANS body systems in the body --
the sympathetic and the parasympathetic systems, both controlled from
the ANS HQ in the hypothalamus. As a general rule, activation of the
sympathetic system causes increased activity in the innervated tissues
and organs, such as heart palpitations, muscle tightening, sweating,
fast breathing or increased blood pressure. This is often called the
'fight or flight' system. Activation of the parasympathetic system, on
the other hand, slows the heart, reduces blood pressure, reduces gut
movement and reduces blood flow to the skin, and it is commonly referred
to as the 'rest and digest' system. There can be a range of activation
of either the parasympathetic or sympathetic systems allowing for a
range of body system arousal and emotions. Many of the most intense
human emotions are mixed. Let us look at one of the most powerful and
well-documented emotional experiences in the large repertoire of
documented human passions. Alain-René Lesage's description in L'Histoire
de Gil Blas de Santillane, written between 1715 and 1735, of the
beginning of Seraphine's love affair with Don Alfonso is a romantic
classic. It was quite dark and the rain was pelting down; I had crossed
several alleyways and suddenly came upon the open door of a drawing
room. I went in and at once became aware of the magnificence of the
palace . . . on one side I saw a door a little ajar. I half opened it
and could see a vista of rooms, the last of which was lighted . . . Then
I noticed a bed, whose curtains were partly drawn apart because of the
heat, and my attention was riveted by the sight of a young woman who lay
asleep . . . I moved a little closer . . . I felt overpowered . . .
While I was standing there, dizzy with the pleasure of looking at her,
she awoke.¶

This description of the heady mixture of arousal and pleasure of such a
coup de foudre could have been written yesterday. Emotions are constant
across cultures and time, indicating that the biological machinery for
feeling

states is universal. When Don Alfonso saw Seraphine his attention was
riveted, he felt overpowered by emotion, dizzy with pleasure . . . the
intense sympathetic and parasympathetic synchrony of
love-at-first-sight. In 1812, Stendhal, a gifted and seemingly
dispassionate observer of the passions, wrote a wonderful book, Love, in
which he quoted this passage from Gil Blas as an example of the 'birth
of love'. The following wise words from his book say so much about the
experience of romantic love: 'Nothing is so interesting as passion;
everything about it is so unexpected; and its agent is also its
victim.'# As Stendhal observed, we may be the happy victims of a coup de
foudre, or the unhappy victims of unrequited love. We are victims
because we do not will it -- it happens. How can an overwhelming emotion
like a coup de foudre just happen? To understand at least some of the
answer to this question, we need to invoke memory. Back in the
seventeenth century, Descartes came to understand personally the effects
of memory on romantic feelings when he learned, through selfobservation,
that he was attracted to women with cross-eyes. He worked out that he
had fallen in love with a cross-eyed girl when he was a boy and that the
image of cross-eyed women was triggering the emotional response. He was
recognizing in this our tendency to be guided unknowingly by emotional
memory. Many of us, after all, do marry our 'fathers' or 'mothers'. It
is memory that partly makes us the unknowing victims of our passions.
But still, a coup de foudre, although very compelling, is a relatively
simple feeling in the sense that it is an immediate and instantly
recognizable blast of mixed interoceptive sensations. The range of
descriptions of 'heartfelt' emotions is wide and sometimes vague -- your
heart may feel heavy, or light, it may be bursting with happiness, it
may be broken, it may pound, it may feel as if it has stopped for a
moment, or something may just tug on it that you cannot immediately
identify. At other times we feel frankly 'mixed up' and complicated and
are overcome with feelings that we are unable to interpret. Our body may
be telling us something, but what is it? William James knew that human
feelings were more than body sensations when he defined the experience
of an emotion as being an interpretation of a physiological sensation
that arises in the body. An emotion is 'not a primary feeling, directly
aroused by the existing object or thought, but a secondary feeling
indirectly aroused'.\*\* To paraphrase, a

primary feeling is a physical sensation in the body (the ANS), and a
secondary feeling is the interpretation of this as a calibrated emotion
of fear, love, disgust, and so on. For example, when you are about to go
to a very important job interview, and you feel your heart racing and
butterflies in your stomach, you know that you are nervous or excited
and that you are not falling in love. The heart racing and the
butterflies are the primary feeling, and the understanding of this as
being fear and anxiety in the context of the impending interview is
James's secondary feeling. The secondary feeling is the interpretation
of phsyiological changes that have occured involuntarily in anticipation
of the interview. Now we are at the real heart of the mysteries of the
passions -- it is not just the making of the feeling that is important,
it is how we interpret it, or sometimes fail to. As alluded to in
Chapter 2, all of the interoceptive sensation coming from the inner body
-- the heart, gut, lungs, sexual organs, blood vessels -- are mapped in
a small piece of cortex hidden under the surface of the brain called the
insula. We need the body -- the ANS -- to make the feeling and the
insula to interpret the feeling.37

The Hidden Cortex, the Insula: The Rag & Bone Shop The insula is so
named from the Latin for island (plural, insulae), because it resembles
an island of cortex inverted into the brain. Try to locate your own
insula anatomically: presumably you are holding this book as you read
it, so, with your free hand, put the tips of your fingers on the side of
your head from a point starting at the upper junction of your ear and
scalp and with your other fingers at a slight angle upwards and
backwards. I want you to imagine that you can push the brain tissue
lying under your fingers into your brain, as if you were pushing in on a
deflated football, creating an indentation in the surface of the brain
cortex. The squashed-in part of the cortex is the insula (see Figure 8).
One way of examining insular function is to look at individuals who have
disorders in the insula. The study that I'll cite, following on from my
lovage story, is about the emotion of disgust, and it hails from
California.

The authors reported on the experiences of nausea, or disgust, in
patients with degenerative disease of the insula.38 Insular atrophy
occurs commonly, for example in Alzheimer's dementia. They reported that
the loss of disgust sensation in the patient with Alzheimer's was
related to reductions in insula volume on neuroimaging measures. This
seemed to be quite specific, because there was a proportional
relationship between the ability to experience feelings of disgust and
insular sizes -- the smaller the insula, the less able were the subjects
to experience disgust. People with a diagnosis of anorexia nervosa tend
to have a poor understanding of their internal states -- this can be
seen in their inability to appreciate the sensation of hunger or of
feeling satiety. Although no abnormality is present in the volume of the
brain insula in anorexia, there is reduced activity in this region in
response to changes in internal feeling states.39 Conversely, those
suffering from depression, who experience overwhelming and negative
emotional states, have been found to experience more activation of the
insula in response to facial expressions of disgust.40 Figure 8. The
insula

A cross-sectional cut through the brain at approximately the level of
the top of the ears, showing the hidden cortex of the insula.

Wilder Penfield published a paper in 1955 in which he described the
effects of stimulating the insula in conscious patients with exposed
brains who were about to undergo surgery for epilepsy.41 He noted that
patients experienced a gut sensation during stimulation of the insula.
Penfield's studies became a live clinical issue for me some years ago
when treating a patient whom I'll call Stella.

Stella Stella was referred to me by her GP following investigations by
multiple medical specialists over many years for investigation of a
'queer' sensation in her abdomen. She had consultations and opinions
from multiple disciplines, including general and gastrointestinal
medicine, neurology and gynecology. They had all reported that they
could find no abnormality with Stella's gut, either in terms of
structure or the mechanics of gut motility -- there was no tumor leaning
on her gut, no peripheral neuropathy (nerve disease) or gynecological
abnormality. She complained of a very specific and unpleasant sensation
-- a feeling of electricity in her abdomen extending to her chest. She
called this 'the electrical buzzing'. At our first meeting she told me
that the buzzing had been present for many years but was getting worse.
She was now at a point where she would try anything, including coming to
see a psychiatrist, to get rid of it. She couldn't understand how a
psychiatrist could help, but she was following her GP's advice. The
electrical buzzing had been present for so many years that she had begun
to believe that someone might be doing it to her, that it was perhaps
being planted in her body by someone or something outside of herself.
Whatever I asked Stella about her buzzing sensation, she would return to
her husband's smoking habits: she hated her husband smoking in the
house. This seemed reasonable, as Stella was not a smoker, but what had
her husband's smoking got to do with her buzzing gut sensation? She was
particularly angry because of the ashtrays, she told me. I wondered if
he was not bothering to empty them. She began to elaborate on how he
left the ashtrays around the house and the arrangement of the cigarette
butts that they contained. I persisted in trying to understand.
Eventually it

transpired, as I interpreted it, that she thought that her husband was
transmitting messages through the cigarette butts and that the pattern
of the discarded butts in the ashtrays represented some sort of coded
communication. The cigarette code was being shared by others,
particularly friends of her husband who visited the house to drink
whiskey and play cards, and who also smoked. They were conspiring to
harm her, but she did not know why or how they were doing this. There
was other evidence: the position of the furniture sometimes changed, a
magazine that she had left open would be closed when next she saw it,
the milk would be on a different shelf in the fridge, and so on. She
appeared to be misinterpreting and overinterpreting events. Stella's
husband told us that Stella had been talking about ashtrays in
mystifying ways for about fifteen years. Stella had a long-standing
psychotic disorder that was finally diagnosed because of the electrical
buzzing sensation in her abdomen. We call this a somatic hallucination
-- a sensation experienced as coming from the body that is probably
arising in the brain. A somatic hallucination, although infrequent in
psychotic states, is one of the key experiences that indicate a
diagnosis of schizophrenia. Sensation from both the exteroceptive, the
Big 5, and the interoceptive, the visceral, organs can be generated from
within the brain. I explained to Stella as best I could that the
electrical buzzing was not being caused by something in her abdomen but
that it was probably being caused by mis-firing or mis-wiring in her
brain. I also told her that we may be able to control the buzzing with
antipsychotic medication. Stella thought that this was all a bit
strange, but she was willing to try anything and commenced a trial of
antipsychotic. The buzzing faded over the following weeks and left her
completely some months later. She gradually stopped believing that her
husband was in cahoots with his friends to try and harm her, or that
they were leaving signals for her in the ashtrays, or that they were
rearranging objects to let her know that they were monitoring her. She
wasn't interested in the ashtrays any more, and if I drew her attention
to her old preoccupations she shrugged it off. It had happened, now it
did not. Stella felt no need to retrospectively reconfigure her memory
in the light of new events. She just wanted to take the medication and
remain in her familiar, uncomplicated world without torment from the
distressing

abdominal sensation. She began to come back to her old self that had
seemed long gone, communicating again with her family and neighbours,
doing domestic chores and tending to her neglected garden. I could find
no reference for Stella's peculiar somatic hallucination in the
psychiatric literature. Some time later I read a 2009 paper written by a
neurosurgical group led by D. K. Nguyen from the Notre Dame and Saint
Justine hospitals in Montreal.42 They reported on sensations experienced
by conscious patients, prior to neurosurgery, following stimulation of
the insula. They noted in one of their papers a peculiar sensation that
a patient described as a 'buzzing in the abdomen' produced by
stimulation of a particular patch of the insula. On further
investigation I found that Penfield's seminal 1955 paper had described a
similar singular 'buzzing' sensation in some of his preoperative
patients on stimulation of the insula. I was struck immediately by the
similarity of Penfield's and Nguyen's descriptions, decades apart, to
Stella's singular visceral sensation. The neurosurgical experiments show
how stimulation of the insula from within the brain can cause a buzzing
gut feeling. That the same part of the insular cortex activated manually
and deliberately by Penfield and Nguyen was being activated in Stella,
by some sort of cortical pathology, seemed, and seems, likely to me. So,
in practice the insula is a sensory cortex of inner visceral sensation
that lights up when we experience emotion. A study published in 2004 by
Ray Dolan and colleagues in London demonstrated how, in normal emotional
states, the insula lights up when the heartbeat is being subjectively
monitored.43 They looked at brain activity in subjects who were also
questioned about their awareness of their heartbeat and found that an
individual's level of interoceptive awareness was commensurate with the
size and with the activity of the insula.44 In the late 1980s Antonio
Damasio proposed that even complex human feeling states could be
'mapped' on the insula. Damasio theorized that internal body sensations
could be organized into countless combinations to give 'a range of
feeling states'. In his book Self Comes to Mind†††† Damasio has written
lyrically about his neuroimaging experiments in which his research group
demonstrated that different emotional states were associated with
different areas of insular activation, which he called 'emotion-specific
neural patterns'. The left

insula was predominantly activated in positive emotions, such as
maternal and romantic love, listening to nice music or happy voices,
smiling or watching others smile; even the positive emotional states
associated with feelings of anticipated purchases, possibly the neural
basis of 'retail therapy', are related to activation of the left
insula.45 The emotional mapping explains the range of feeling states
that can be experienced by humans, from the coup de foudre of Don
Alfonso to the mysterious ghost of an emotion stimulated by Proust's
madeleine. Figure 9. The insula as the emotional cortex

Some of the main pathways that converge on the insula from inside the
brain. The insula is a sensory cortex that records emotion states from
inside the body but can also be stimulated from inside the brain,
allowing memory pathways to cause emotional states.

Life's Memories and the Insula There are pathways connecting different
areas of the brain to the insula. If a part of the insula is fired off
by a neuron from another brain area, this will cause the experience of
an emotion. These brain pathways, forged from memory, cause feelings,
much like Penfield or Nguyen stimulated the insula

with surgical instruments to produce feeling. The neural paths from the
prefrontal biographical networks to the insula means that biographical
memory inputs can stimulate feeling states (see Figure 9). In this case,
where emotion is being stimulated from biographical memory, the amygdala
does not have to be involved: the insula is being stimulated from inside
the brain by memory neurons from the prefrontal cortex.46 The more we
learn about the insula, the more we understand not just how emotions and
past biographical memory are neutrally woven, but also how society
impacts on the emotional wellbeing of the individual. I was particularly
drawn to one study that looked at the brain activity recorded in those
who felt socially excluded, like many patients who suffer from
psychiatric disorders. The authors found that the representation of the
pain of social exclusion was mapped adjacent to that for physical pain.
Social exclusion 'hurts' . . . who says that there is no such thing as
society, or that politics is not personal?47 Life inevitably involves
loss and difficulties, and emotions during crises seem to be all
amygdala -- intense, overwhelming, certainly automatic and perhaps even
uncontrollable, like the coup d'état of psychosis or the coup de foudre
of Don Alfonso. As biographical memory goes cortical over time, so the
emotions seem to modify, perhaps reflecting the shift from a highly
aroused amygdala drive to the more considered prefrontal-insula drive.
This is speculation on my part, but it would explain immediate and more
measured feelings. The transition from the experience of raw emotional
states driven by the amygdala, to a recollected one, more likely to be
driven by the prefrontal-insula circuit, is reflected in the universal
experience of the death of a loved one. The emotions experienced
immediately following a death are intense, sometimes uncontrollably so,
distressing and painful. The grief intrudes and dominates -- the
amygdala is on fire, branding all sensory input with the searing imprint
of the loss. Everyone and everything is a reminder to the grieving
person of the loss: 'every old man I see reminds me of my father,' as
Patrick Kavanagh wrote following his father's death.‡‡ The memory over
time goes cortical, becoming represented in the prefrontal biographical
networks and the softer insular feeling. The memory is separating from
the hammerjack of the amygdala as the grief transfers

slowly to a prefrontal-insular emotion, one in which the bereaved person
is more likely to experience pity for the dead loved one . . . A pity
beyond all telling Is hid in the heart of love.§§

Living and learning is a never-ending dance of sensation, memory and
emotion. Sensation from the outside world gets woven into cortical maps
of sensory experience, and events get woven additionally into the
amygdala-- insula loom of the emotional circuitry. Ultimately, what is
memory without emotion -- an endless repertoire of experiences without
any human meaning. And emotion without memory? A shallow flitting from
one object of desire to the next. Without emotions our hearts would not
break, we would not grieve, but nor would we have memories rich with the
people that we were drawn to and lived life with, even if only
temporarily; the sort of memories evoked by meeting the cousins that you
have not seen in years. Remembering the lovage story now makes me feel
something very different from the faint amygdala-driven disgust that I
experienced all those years ago. The emotion snagged to this memory is
now a diffuse, insular one. It is a hazy coming together of cumulative
memories. I remember the balmy heat, a sense of languid anticipation, a
'pre' innocence of what was to come; and suffusing all this was the
melancholic nostalgia of remembered cherished moments. The neural magic
underlying the sense of vanished loveliness remains as something that
feels immaterial and soulful. \* Marcel Proust, In Search of Lost Time,
1, Swann's Way, trans. C. K. Scott Moncrieff and T. Kilmartin (Vintage
Books, 1996). † John Banville, 'Lupins and Moth-laden Nights in
Rosslare', in Possessed of a Past (Pan Macmillan, 2012), p. 403. ‡ W. B.
Yeats, 'The Circus Animals' Desertion'. § William Styron, Lie Down in
Darkness (Vintage Books, 2000), pp. 51--2. ¶
https://www.exclassics.com/gilblas/gilblas.pdf (p. 199). \# Stendhal,
Love, trans. Gilbert and Suzanne Sale (Penguin Books, 1975), p. 219.
\*\* William James, Principles of Psychology (1890; reprinted Dover
Publications, 2014). †† Antonio Damasio, Self Comes to Mind (Vintage,
2010). ‡‡ Patrick Kavanagh, 'Memory of My Father'. §§ W. B. Yeats, 'The
Pity of Love'.

6. A Sense of Place

In Chapter 4 we looked at the never-ending neural re-constructions of
the plastic dendrites in the hippocampus to make cell assemblies that
are then woven during the night into the more stable cortical networks,
like Rumpelstiltskin weaving straw to gold while the miller's daughter
slept. In Chapter 5 we saw how the amygdala engages in a dendritic dance
with the hippocampus, arborizing feelings to hippocampal memories,
before coming to the more restful repository of the prefrontal-insula
circuitry. Knowing about the neuronal enmeshment of feeling with memory,
and keeping this in mind, I want to return to the coordinates of memory
construction -- time, place and person. Of these coordinates, place has
historically held the dominant position. Even this word 'position' --
like 'topic' (from Latin for 'place', topos), 'commonplace', 'situation'
(Latin for 'to place', situare) -- demonstrates how language has evolved
to reflect the central importance of place in past and working memory.
'Working' memory is what neuroscientists call working things out or
thinking. A simple example of the primacy of place in memory is the
natural inclination to place oneself somewhere at the time of a
momentous event. Why do we ask where were you? when something happened?
Where were you when you heard about 9/11? At the time of writing this I
get over 500 million hits on an internet search of this question. My
first memory of where I was when a tumultuous event happened is probably
when John F. Kennedy died in 1963. I have a memory snapshot of an event
that I often suspected occurred on the day that he died. Luckily, I had
never told anyone about this snapshot, so I decided to become the
subject of my own experiment, writing down my memory and then asking my
mother about the circumstances. The memory was that I was a pre-school
child in the back garden facing the escallonia bush that separated our
garden from that of our neighbour. I was standing alone by the back
corner of the bush,

where the hedging was worn thin from our crossing into our neighbour's
garden and the wire fencing was visible. My mother was approaching from
our house. Our neighbour Mrs Begley was hurrying down her garden path
towards my mother, with her hands on the sides of her head in a gesture
of distress. The next scene is of the two women talking in an agitated
manner, embracing and comforting each other. I asked my mother if she
remembered where she had been when she heard of the death of JFK. She
remembered that we were living in Orchardstown Drive in Dublin and
hearing it on the 'wireless' in the kitchen and then going to the back
garden, where the mothers gathered spontaneously to share the shock. My
mother couldn't remember whether I was there or not, but she did confirm
that I would have been at home because I only started school in 1964.
The memory was just a moment, nothing more than an observed moment with
a queer emotion, to which no event was attached. I can now identify the
emotion I felt back then as being that of a witness to something from
the adult world that I did not understand and from which I was excluded.
I can still remember the interior of that house in Orchardstown Drive
that we left when I was six years old, fifty-five years ago. Most of us
do remember our childhood homes, in which we house our most distant
memories. Going back to one's childhood home is like exploring childhood
memory, what Gaston Bachelard called 'psychogeography'. Bachelard
(1884--1962) was a French philosopher and architect whose work explored
what he termed 'the intimate space' of the domestic home. In his best
known book, The Poetics of Space, he guides the reader through the
central idea that humans create intimate places through memory, often
the family home of origin, where they feel emotionally safe and free to
create and imagine. His work points to the centrality of place in
memory, and thus in imagination: what he called 'the poetic'. Memory, as
I will discuss in the next section of the book, is the substrate of
imagination. House-of-origin memories are not always safe, though, and
can provide a metaphor for disturbed memories -- in our dreams, and in
literature. 'Last night I dreamt I went to Manderley again' is the
famous opening line of Daphne du Maurier's Rebecca. Rebecca's memory is
literally 'housed' in Manderley -- perhaps that is why it had to be
destroyed before the new Mrs de Winter could establish herself. The
metaphor of the house burning to the

ground as a liberation from torturous memories was borrowed by du
Maurier from Jane Eyre, written by Charlotte Brontë a century
previously. The central metaphor in this book is Thornton Hall, where
the memories of Rochester's first marriage are played out in the
hauntings of the imprisoned 'mad-bad' woman in the attic. Thornton Hall
is burnt to the ground, liberating Jane and Rochester from these
memories, freeing them to pursue their own dreams. The motif of the
haunted house crosses times and cultures and is, like all myths, fertile
ground for psychosis. Anita's story, below, of her haunted home sparked
many associations in my deep and recent memory, resonating with myth and
the cruel reality of the lives of working women in pre-feminist times.

Anita Anita was in her seventies and attended our day hospital five days
a week for years. She had a long-term psychotic illness that seemed to
have commenced following the birth of one of her children. At this point
she was hospitalized, and the course of her psychosis waxed and waned
for the next twenty to thirty years. She nevertheless struggled through
mothering her children, almost as a lone parent as was the way in the
1950s for most wives. Her husband had a solid job and 'brought home a
good wage'. No more was expected of husbands and he enjoyed pints with
his mates after work a few nights a week, and had a family day on
Sundays, with roast lunch and sometimes a GAA (Gaelic Athletic
Association) match in Croagh Park. The GAA is a hugely influential
national association, built around the native Irish games gaelic
football and hurling, that engenders loyalties to local county clubs
that are as passionate as those in English football or American
baseball, except that in Ireland every parish is involved, and it is not
professional. Anita's personal history was like a social history of
Ireland, with the invisible wife/mother that no one seemed to notice
until she was no longer able to manage her domestic work. I imagine her,
face turned to the wall, washing dishes after the Sunday lunch,
seemingly quiet and content to be serving her family, while she was
really suffering, in silence, from the unending distress of a psychosis.
She was a heroic

survivor not only of the casual neglect of the women of her day, and of
her psychosis, but, it transpired when we later treated her, also of
childhood sexual abuse. Her enduring delusion was that her house was
haunted. She could hear whispers at night, and in the morning she could
see that the ghosts had moved something slightly or switched on a light
downstairs that she remembered switching off before going to bed. Once
or twice she had felt something touching her in bed. She was being
monitored in the house, being watched and listened to, and she knew that
she had to be careful about her actions. If she was not at home she did
not have these experiences. She seemed fine in the day hospital, very
reserved but not distressed, and one would get the impression of a woman
with a gentle mien dipping in and out of a benign brain disorder . . .
until you talked to her and discovered the haunting psychosis. In an
effort to remove her from the trauma of the family home, her daughter
brought her to live with her family. Over a short period of time she
came to believe that something was amiss in her daughter's home, and
became delusional about strange happenings. Anita then returned to live
in her own home and refused to move again until her sudden death at home
from a catastrophic stroke. The day hospital shut down for a day to
attend her funeral. Places, places, places . . . Why is place so
important in memory? Perhaps place memory is an evolutionary legacy from
times when remembering a location -- for example where food could be
foraged successfully or where danger lurked -- was critical to survival.
The great French sociologist Maurice Halbwachs, in 1950, put his
observations of the central importance of place in recall in his
landmark book The Collective Memory.\* Now let us close our eyes and,
turning within ourselves, go back along the course of time to the
furthest point at which our thought still holds clear remembrances of
scenes and people. Never do we go outside space. We find ourselves not
within an indeterminate space but rather in areas we know or might very
easily localize, since they still belong to our present material milieu.
I have made great efforts to erase that spatial context, in order to
hold alone to the feelings I then experienced and the thought I then
entertained. Feelings and reflections, like all other events, have to be
resituated in some place where I have resided or passed by and which is
still in existence. Let us endeavour to go back further. When we reach
that period when we are unable to represent places to ourselves, even in
a confused manner, we have arrived at the regions of our past
inaccessible to memory.

Considering this centrality of place in memory it is not surprising that
the most important cells in the hippocampus are the cells that recognize
place and are appropriately called 'place cells'.48

Place Cells I travelled to Cork by train in August 2015 to hear the
neuroscientist John O'Keefe give a lecture about his discovery of place
cells in the hippocampus. O'Keefe, along with May-Britt Moser and Edvard
Moser, won the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2014 for their
discovery of place cells.49 John O'Keefe sounds American, lives and
works in Britain and is a young-looking older man, wiry in build, with
pale blue Irish eyes that darted around as he delivered a lively
lecture. His talk was to become another dawning for me. I remember later
that day standing at a bus stop outside University College Cork with a
sense of a cognitive shift. I had known about place cells, but they only
came alive for me in an experiential way when I listened to O'Keefe's
journey of discovery. His story of the rat hippocampus and place cells
started with his experiments using live rats moving around an enclosed
space, the experimental field. Rat had had a micro-wire inserted into a
single neuron in the hippocampus -- an amazing feat in itself,
considering that there are about 180,000 hippocampal neurons in rats --
and Rat was alive and moving freely. The micro-wire was connected to a
machine that recorded the electrical activity in the punctured
hippocampal neuron. This allowed O'Keefe and his team to see what was
happening in a single memory cell in the buried hippocampus of Rat. What
would happen in this lone neuron as Rat moved around the experimental
field? The field was broken down spatially into small squares, like a
map grid. When Rat moved into a specific square a signal appeared on the
recording machine. This happened again when Rat re-entered this square,
but no other square. The neuron 'recognized' that specific square, and
no other one. O'Keefe called these neurons 'place cells'. A place cell
was the unique identifier, or cell memory, of a specific external place:
one hippocampal neuron equalled one grid

square. Remember, this is not the cortex, the visual cortex or
otherwise, it is the hippocampus -- the memory machine. This stark
demonstration in 1971 of a connection between a small and exact place
and a single memory cell in the hippocampus had profound implications.48
The function of the hippocampus as a specialized memory centre, distinct
from sensory functions, was now established. Rat was seeing, hearing,
touching and smelling, had full body sensory function mediated through
the outer cortex. All of these sensory functions were taking place in
the cortex when Rat moved around the experimental field -- seeing it,
smelling it and touching the experimental field floor -- while the
hippocampal neurons were making place memory through a meticulous
process of place-in-the-external-world-to-place-cell. Another finding
that emerged from later work using these techniques was that places that
were adjacent in the external world did not fire adjacent place cells in
the hippocampus. It became apparent that different patterns of firing
place cells represented different locations, but the patterns of firing
neurons were abstract, not geographical, representations of the external
spatial structures. Places seemed to be represented by the codes of cell
assemblies. John O'Keefe's type of intracellular recording of a
hippocampal cell cannot be done in the human hippocampus under normal
conditions, but intracellular recordings have been done
opportunistically in hippocampal cells in conscious patients prior to
them undergoing surgery for epilepsy. A clinical study published in
Nature in 2003 examined electrical responses from individual cells in
seven such patients.50 Participants underwent a test in which they were
first familiarized with a virtual town in a computer game. The second
part of the experiment involved the patients having to navigate a taxi
through the memorized town to a specific location. Certain cells in the
hippocampus responded repeatedly to specific locations, demonstrating
place selectivity. It is comforting to think that we have cells buried
in our brains that are steadfastly rooted in place, anchoring us while
the world whirls around. Studies of the hippocampus implicate the right
hippocampus in place memory. We looked earlier at the study of the
London cab drivers, who have to memorize extensive maps of the big city
before being given a cab licence. Neuroimaging demonstrated that it was
predominantly the right

hippocampus that grew with expanding geographical knowledge.18 What is
even more intriguing is the finding that, when experienced London taxi
drivers imagine a complex route around the city, the right hippocampus
selectively fires.51 Here we can see that remembering and imagining
involve the same circuits in the brain, and we will expand on this in
later chapters. Let us briefly return to MM, my patient who had lost her
memory through destruction of her hippocampi and who, although able to
navigate a room when in it, once she left this room could not find her
way back. Her hippocampal memory for place was gone, but her sensory
abilities in terms of seeing the room and so on were intact. Without the
cortical and the placememory systems working together, one is lost.
There has to be a system of sensory information feeding into hippocampal
memory for full perception to occur. The seminal experiments looking at
how sensation feeds into the hippocampus to make place-cell memory were
conducted by Edvard and May-Britt Moser, the wife and husband
neuroscience team who shared the Nobel Prize with John O'Keefe. In 2005
they published their discovery of cells in the entorhinal cortex, where
integrated sensory information from the different cortices is delivered
to the hippocampus. They discovered that neurons from the entorhinal
cortex zap the hippocampal cells with highfrequency currents, firing the
hippocampal cells to make the dendritic protein that wire the cells
together to form the cell assemblies, the place codes.52 The entorhinal
cells feed the cortical threads of sensation into the hippocampal
loom.53 And, during the night, Rumpelstiltskin-like, the hippocampal
cell assemblies weave their magic into the fabric of cortical memory.
The place cells, over the years since their discovery, have now evolved
into 'space' cells, because objects are seen in a spatial
threedimensional context, rather than just a flat two-dimensional place
location.54 We will come to this in the next chapter -- just note that
from now on I will use 'place' and 'space' synonymously. What is chosen
to be zapped from the cortical dance of sensation into the hippocampus,
or what is chosen to be zapped back to the sensory cortices, for more
permament cortical storage, or to the swelling stores of the prefrontal
cortex as your life is lived, is an infinity of possibilities. Similar

to life experience, it is a messy entanglement of sensory cortical
arousal and hippocampal memory codes enmeshed in amygdalar tangles. It
is the interconnectivity of the whole working in unison that creates
experience and memory. How can we know the dancer from the dance?†

The Amygdalar Tangles Whether we are following the psychogeography of
our home of origin through our memories, or the current home that we
don't want to leave because it houses our memories, place is navigated
primarily by images and sight. The visual cortex, as we have explored,
is more connected to the amygdala than other sensory brain areas, and
when we negotiate place in biographical memory we are also stimulating
emotional memory. The tethering of emotional memory to place is
beautifully laid out in the book Suspended Sentences, by Patrick
Modiano, who won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2014. At times, it
seems, our memories are like polaroids. In nearly thirty years, I hardly
ever thought about Jansen. We'd know each other over a very short period
of time. He left France in June 1964 and I'm writing this in April 1992.
I never received word from him and I don't know if he's dead or alive.
The memory of him had remained dormant, but now it has suddenly come
flooding back this early spring of 1992. Is it because I came across a
picture of my girlfriend and me, on the back of which a blue stamp says
'Photo by Jansen. All rights reserved'?

The beautiful novella, one of a trilogy that makes up Suspended
Sentences, from which this quote is taken, is a journey through memory
triggered by an old photo: everyone is elusive, relationships are fluid,
but the named streets and cafés in Paris where the experiences of the
summer of 1964 had been lived form the threads through which the reader
is taken on the young Jansen's emotional 'memory lane'. It is the summer
of the narrator's first loves, with a woman and with photography. The
author seems to be living and journeying through that summer in the
filtered world of memory and feelings, being navigated by place. Place
is fixed in Parisian

locations in which the ghostlike encounters are staged. The novella is,
fittingly, called Afterimage. I love this story, because it captures
that enduring sense of place that is composed of the hauntings of human
lives trapped in the glorious and inglorious conditions of their time.
The human lives come and go, leaving remembrances -- a torn lace curtain
visible through a broken window, or a street of decaying, once-imposing
houses. Film is a perfect visual medium for the coming together of place
and emotional memory. The 1949 movie The Third Man, directed by Carol
Reed, is a classic. Holly Martins, the protagonist, is not so much a
hero or an anti-hero as a regular, war-naïve American guy, who makes his
living churning out 'cowboy and Indian' novels. Through his eyes the
camera follows the memories left by his dead friend around the streets
of Vienna, as Martins tries to piece together past events. The music is
brilliantly timeless. It is all mystery: we are lost in an irretrievable
shadowy past, being guided by the streets of the city. Her streets have
witnessed the extremities of human behaviour that the Second World War
drew out, both selfless endurance and evil exploitation. The decaying
city seems to embody the morbid memories of the war. Orson Welles
appears fleetingly, suspiciously scanning the streets before
disappearing into a doorway. Emotional memory is induced through the
oblique cinematography of the buildings and doors on the seedy streets
where the phantom past is staged. The denouement is a memory that is
replayed on the streets, bringing the mystery to its grim conclusion. So
what is the magic resonance that is stirred by the Paris of Afterimage
or the Vienna of The Third Man? Patrick Modiano and Carol Reed have
entered the intuitive emotional memory systems of the reader/viewer,
using the same pathways that are employed for autobiographical memory
recall. Emotion becomes entangled with place memory through the
amygdala-- hippocampal connections. The emotional memory is knitted into
the neural connections between the hippocampus and the amygdala so that
seeing that place will subsequently fire an emotion. Neuroscientific
discoveries have now advanced to the point where the very proteins that
a rat makes in hippocampal cells following a fear response in the
amygdala have been identified.55 The magic of these works of art based
in cities is that they intuitively find and fire these sensitized loci
in one's individual brain.

I will finish with a buried place memory that was snagging at my
attention when I wrote the first draft of this chapter. It was a
fragmented memory of a 'short', a 3- to 5-minute movie. In my youth,
shorts were usually shown before the main feature in arthouse cinemas,
and it was in such a venue, the Lighthouse Cinema in Abbey Street in
Dublin, that I thought that the event had happened. I had vague
snapshots of the film . . . a man is in a barn and he is tinkering with
a car engine under a raised hood, listening to the radio. The news that
Elvis is dead comes over the airwaves. The barn is lit only by a
lantern, so that when the man and his lover begin to dance they are
dancing in a circle of warm light in the dark barn, like the lighting
around the figures in a Rembrandt painting. I didn't remember the main
feature that followed the short, nor who I was with, what the short was
called, or the year. I went in search of the lost short and eventually
tracked it down. It was called That's All Right, after the Elvis song
that the characters dance to, and it was released in 1989. I also didn't
remember that the late Mick Lally, a fêted Irish actor, was the star. I
had only remembered places: Abbey Street, the interior of the Lighthouse
Cinema, now gone . . . the lantern-lit barn . . . places within places
within places . . . in this case the place where two individuals shared
a universally remembered moment, their 'Where were you when Elvis died?'
moment. Incidentally, That's All Right had been made for a tiny sum of
money from the ends of a reel of film left over from John Huston's gem
The Dead, based faithfully on the exquisitely poignant short story of
the same name written by James Joyce in his collection Dubliners. These
famous short stories are all set in the streets of Dublin and the homes
of Dubliners. The Dead, perhaps coincidentally, perhaps not, in its
haunting denouement set in Gertrude's childhood family home that houses
her hidden heartbreak, makes us feel how the dead inhabit the living in
their memories. So . . . the magic resonance of place-evoked emotional
memories goes on and on, and back and back . . . back to the earliest
memories of the childhood home . . . deep down to your buried
hippocampal place cells and their idiosyncratic tangles with your
amygdala/insula neurons . . . your very own psychogeography. We can walk
through a city and remember 'through its avenues, the feeling I'd once
had of being light and carefree',‡ or see a small gravestone and feel
terror. Places -- the streets of Dublin, the avenues of Paris, the
doorways of Vienna, Edith's gravestone, the herb garden in

Cambridge, the childhood home, the haunted house, the barn dance of
remembrance -- are, experientally, the anchor for memory and feeling. \*
Maurice Halbwachs, On Collective Memory, ed. and trans. Lewis A. Coser
(University of Chicago Press, 1992). † W. B. Yeats, 'Among School
Children'. ‡ Patrick Modiano, 'Flowers of Ruin', from Suspended
Sentences.

7. Time and Experiencing Continuity

'Yesterday! What does that mean? Yesterday?', Hamm asks Clov in Samuel
Beckett's Endgame. Hamm is raising one of the big questions about human
memory -- what is time and what does it mean? Physicists have been
preoccupied with measuring place, space and motion for millennia and
have more recently turned their attention to time -- it is really their
Big Question. They have long known that, while place and space can be
measured as matter, time can only be measured in relation to place . . .
a 'light year', for example, is a measure of the distance -- not of the
time -- that light travels in one year. The units of time are fashioned
around the momentum of the Earth within the bigger universe,
specifically in the movement of the Earth and the stars. A day is the
measure of the time that it takes for the Earth to rotate one complete
revolution on its own axis, a year is the time that it takes for the
Earth to rotate back to the same point in its circular movement around
the Sun, and so on. Time is more like momentum and happenings -- like
the light wave moving from the star, like the Earth hurtling forwards in
a spin around the holding magnet of the Sun. 'Event physics' reflects
the new realization that time is an intrinsic part of place and
movement. The idea of an 'event' as the basis for lived memory has been
around since Brenda Milner grappled with the mystery of Henry Molaison's
memory loss in the 1950s. HM, without his hippocampi, had a memory for
neither place nor time. From then on it was understood that place and
time were memorized together as events. There is event memory and event
physics; and concepts of time, place and momentum are fundamental to
understanding both. In this chapter we will look at how time is clocked
in a similar way in the brain as it is in the world of physics, in a
dynamic pattern of shifting locations and events. In the previous
chapter we followed the place cells to explore the

psychogeography of emotional memory, and now we will explore how time is
also tethered to the compass of place in the hippocampus.

Clocking Time We often ask, 'Where has the time gone?' Nora, a patient
who suffered from bipolar disorder, had good reason to ask this question
when she was admitted to the hospital some years ago. Bipolar disorder
is an illness in which the sufferer has episodes of depression and of
mania. Along with a fathomless sadness, depression brings with it a
sense of exhaustion and cognitive slowing, in which memory is impaired
and thinking is muddled. Mania is on the opposite pole, with experiences
of emotional euphoria and uncontrolled cognitive excitement. The case of
Nora's experiences of time demonstrates the, sometimes extreme, effects
that mood disorders can have on the sufferer's sense of time and also
demonstrates how we all need some basic brain functions to clock time.
Nora had been unwell since early adulthood. She was admitted to an
inpatient unit in a manic state. She was hyperactive and had been
travelling the country, visiting people who she used to know but with
whom she had lost contact over the years. She was talking in an
uninterruptable loud voice about her grandiose and paranoid ideas. She
had multiple delusions with a superficial logic that did not withstand
much questioning. Nora would begin by telling her story in a
chronologically disjointed way, and if the listener responded and
listened for long enough she would progress to accusing them of being
part of one or several vague plots against her. Following some weeks of
escalating difficulties, Nora was brought to a psychiatric inpatient
unit for involuntary treatment. She was known to the older nurses
because years previously she had been in and out of the hospital
frequently but had been apparently in remission for many years.
(Remission means an absence of illness in a disease. A recurrence of an
episode of illness is called a relapse.) Things became clearer when it
was realized that Nora had not been in remission but had been in a 'shut
down' state for many years. She had not left the family home, had not
read a newspaper or watched TV, and had

spent most of her days in a quasi-wakeful and unresponsive state. Then,
without any warning, some weeks before her hospitalization, she 'woke
up' in a manic state. The most extraordinary aspect of Nora's
presentation was that her references for the world dated back several
years to the time when she fell into her psychic hibernation. During her
missing years Ireland had undergone an economic boom, and the
accelerated economic prosperity was evident in new building developments
and in an updated public transport system. A major city centre street
had become pedestrianized, the traffic flow had been altered and clothes
and hair fashions had changed. Nora appeared not to have laid down
memories for her years of depression. Her capacity to make new memories
was not affected by her brain hibernation and, once she had struggled
through the disorientation of the time warp, she gradually established
herself in a fresh world. Nora was in a state of under- or hypo-arousal
during her hibernation. Neurologists call this an obtunded state, which
describes a state of reduced awareness. This can happen in the sort of
depression that is experienced in bipolar disorder, although very
uncommonly for a prolonged period of years. Nora went from an obtunded
state of depression to the hyper-aware state of mania. One of the
reasons that Nora's story is so instructive is that, during her missing
years, when she was in a state of blunted awareness, she had apparently
laid down no memories. She was able to retrospectively fill the gaps of
the missing years with news from the world, but her personal narrative
memory, her own biography, did not contain lived experience for these
years. Time had not existed for Nora because it had not been recorded.
Contrast Nora's experience with that of the fictional Miss Havisham, in
Charles Dickens's novel Great Expectations (1861), who was abandoned by
her fiancé on their wedding morning. She closed the doors of her big
house, remaining in her wedding dress and veil, having stopped the clock
at the hour when she was abandoned by her betrothed. The irony is that,
try as Miss Havisham might, she could not make time stand still. Time
did not stop for her even if the clock did . . . cobwebs grew, her dress
frayed, her face and body aged, and the time that she refused to leave
moved on. Her memory-formation continued, and she did not remain
romantic, bewildered and amnesic, but as her hippocampus clocked up the
years her personal narrative sclerosed and her emotions soured,
preventing the possibility of

any future that could have saved her. We may sometimes want to stop the
clock, freeze a moment in time, pretend that 'it never happened', we may
want to forget for the rest of our life that moment when everything
changed -- there was a before and the forever after -- but time cannot
go back and the present cannot remain the present. Events happen whether
we want them to or not, but event memory will only be recorded if we are
aware and conscious.i Arousal, awareness and consciousness are key
concepts as to whether we memorize, and how we memorize. Nora's
experience may seem like an outlier compared to the average person's
experience of time. But is it? Years ago I got food poisoning abroad and
remember being very sick a few hours after eating some shellfish, and
the next thing that I remember is coming to, to my surprise, one day
later. The only thing that I had remembered from the lost day were a few
moments of an undulating wall opposite the bed and knowing that I was
delirious. Being awake and conscious are the first requirements for
experiencing time. Nora was in a state of reduced awareness and did not
experience the world around her like a normally wakeful, sensate person.
Without awareness, or consciousness of the present, events cannot be
recorded. The fictional Miss Havisham, being sensate and conscious,
could only pretend that time had stopped, but she was alert and making
memories. Essentially, time is clocked through a recording of events.
Consider the intellectual brilliance of the physicist James Clerk
Maxwell when he described this intuition in 1876: 'The idea of Time in
its most primitive form is probably the recognition of an order of
sequence in our consciousness.'ii Since time can only be experienced if
one is at a critical threshold of consciousness, let's look at
consciousness and in so doing we may find an answer to Nora's lost time.

Exploring Consciousness Exploring consciousness is a bit tricky, and if
one has any tendencies to wander into the realms of spiritual
explanations, consciousness is the most plausible way to enter these
heavens -- why do we continue to use the language of 'the soul' when we
don't understand something in the brain?

The word 'consciousness' is a problematic one because it is a catch-all
that can mean anything from being awake to being highly aroused, to
being in a state of transcendence, to seeing yourself as if you were
another person looking at you, or imagining yourself as if you were
someone else. Not only this, but you are conscious of your own
consciousness and of the consciousness of others. So, what are we
talking about when we talk about consciousness? Freud is culturally
associated with the concept of the conscious/unconscious. The
unconscious mind, in a Freudian sense, contains fantasies and memories
that have been put out of the reach of awareness, or conscious
recollection. According to Freudian principles, while unconscious
memories and fantasies influence responses to the world, this influence
is out of the bounds of immediate consciousness. People with repressed
memories are nevertheless driven to feel and act by memories of which
they have no awareness, because non-conscious memories, similar to ones
that we have awareness of, bring about emotions, and sometimes the
emotions lead to unpredictable actions. These feelings and actions may
not be consistent with an individual's beliefs about their narrativized
selves, and so the individual feels at odds with themselves and the
world. An example would be a fear of sexual intimacy, following
repressed memories of sexual abuse during childhood. This could lead to
a rejection of all forms of intimacy although the survivor of abuse,
like all of us, wishes to be loved. As I've outlined in previous
chapters, Freud theorized, in keeping with the permissive pedophilic
sentiments of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, that a
child was attracted to their parent of the opposite sex.iii Girls were
not only attracted to their fathers, but they were jealous of their
penises! Although I tend to have an unreconstructed primitive amygdalar
reaction to Freud's brand of misogyny, one of his more enduring and
important legacies is the idea that memories that lead to feeling states
are not always present at levels of conscious awareness. The experts in
pragmatism, the medics, have an entirely different view of
consciousness, and theirs is the steadfast common denominator of all
definitions of consciousness, however esoteric. In medicine,
consciousness is measured by levels of wakefulness, often referred to
clinically as 'arousal', and since there is some clarity about the
physiological substrate

of wakefulness and what this means, let's start there. We will call this
level of consciousness 'arousal consciousness'. It is evident that
without arousal to a state of wakefulness there can be no registration
of events. One may be normally awake and aroused, or may have reduced
arousal, for example when sleeping, or dozing or drowsy. Within the
normal spectrum of wakefulness a person will better remember when
moderately aroused. Outside of this normal spectrum there are
pathological states of arousal. A person may be in a non-rousable state,
unconscious, following a collision trauma or severe blood loss. A coma
is a prolonged state of unconsciousness, and it can be measured in
simple bedside-test scales, the most common one being the Glasgow Coma
Scale. A score of 15 is normal, while one between 3 and 8 indicates a
comatose state. Part of the routine examination of a patient is whether
they are 'orientated by three' -- that is, responding verbally to
indicate that they can identify time, place and person. On the other end
of the arousal spectrum a person may be highly aroused, for example if
experiencing intense emotions or trauma, or acutely psychotic or
intoxicated by a stimulant drug like cocaine. If this arousal is
extreme, registration of events may not be possible. The brain
structures involved in the coordination of wakefulness start in the
brain stem, situated between the spinal cord and the cortex, from where
discrete circuits connect to different brain regions, particularly the
sensory cortices. It seems that there is a gateway mechanism that
controls the access of sensory information from the body to the cortex,
and if this is shut -- in states of impaired consciousness such as a
coma -- then the cortex will remain in a sleeping, low-voltage state of
arousal. Cells need to be charged to fire and permit sensation and
memory processes. If the brain stem 'wake up' switch is malfunctioning,
cortical neurons will not wake up and will not fire and flare to create
sensation or to form memories of the sensate world. When the brain stem
is destroyed, a person is thought to be brain dead. Awareness
consciousness is also dependent on the integrity of multiple long
connecting tracts from the brain-stem switch to the various cortical
areas. We sometimes see states in psychiatry in which patients who are
awake have some minimal wakefulness and arousal -- for example Nora's
shutdown period -- and they will have commensurate degrees of amnesia
for the periods of reduced awareness. We need first to be awake, and
then have a requisite level of awareness, to make memories. A common
example of a

wakeful state where there is loss of awareness is being very intoxicated
with alcohol, when there may even be rowdiness and superficially
coherent speech but there is frequently amnesia for the events that have
happened -- the alcoholic 'blackout'. We often see pathologically
aroused individuals in acute psychiatry -- Nora's manic state following
her years of a semistuporous one is an example -- although we don't have
routine clinical measures for such pathological, highly aroused states.
In manic states, individuals have greatly reduced need for sleep and can
remain hyperaroused with only intermittent sleep for weeks, or even
months if severely manic. We manage the illness by titrating increasing
does of medications -- antipsychotics, sedatives or lithium -- against
arousal until the individual reaches a normal state where the sleep
desperately needed to settle the brain is possible. Hibernation presents
a naturalistic example of the cycle of sleeping and wakeful states. As a
child, I loved stories about squirrels rushing around during autumn to
gather and secrete away acorns for the long sleep of winter. This
feeling was pleasantly rekindled when reading a paper recently about
hibernating squirrels.56 The authors looked at hippocampal function
during the two states of the squirrel's annual cycle. They found that
during hibernation there are changes in a squirrel's hippocampal
activity. There is a reduced connectivity, and dendritic concentration
falls away. During the switch from the big sleep of hibernation to the
spring the process is reversed, and frenetic activity is seen in
hippocampal dendrites. I imagine the pre- to post-waking shift in
squirrel hippocampal activity as being something like the switch from
depression to mania in bipolar mood disorder. We will explore the next
level of complexity in consciousness, the representative forms of
consciousness, in the next chapter.

Time Cells Let's now look at how time is clocked and recorded in normal
states of arousal consciousness. Think of what you have done in the last
few days. You remember it in a time sequence, probably of days and
certain times of those days, perhaps a bit jumbled, but even in this you
know that you are

jumbled. If you know that you can't remember the sequence of events then
you have memory for time sequencing. This can be generalized to all
forms of memory -- knowing that you have forgotten something is a form
of memory, even if very unsatisfactory when it happens non-stop over the
age of 55 with glasses, mobile phones and keys. As you were thinking of
the last few days, you were thinking of events -- going places and being
in different locations, meeting people, personal exchanges, having
meals. One's sense of time is inseparable from events, but this is a
sense of time. Might time have something to do with place cells? In the
middle of the twentieth century Donald Hebb, who worked out how neurons
melded together to form cell assemblies, intuited that the hippocampus
could record cell assemblies of place in some sort of sequence that
would reflect what we call 'time'. Like the physicist Maxwell, he
speculated that time was somehow integrated into place memory, rather
than there being a separate time system. Experiments in the first decade
of this century in rats demonstrated that sequential cell firing in rat
hippocampal cells seemed to represent the temporal sequence of events
experienced by Rat.57 The key to understanding the modus operandi of
this idea is that events are recorded in sequence, like the reel of an
old film where each snapshot follows another in a forward-moving
temporal sequence. The images are substantial, just as external
place/space is, and it is their juxtaposition that gives a sense of
time. Time exists in a movie because the images follow one another to
create a sense of moving forward from the last snapshot -- events
continue to happen in a forward moving direction because they are
recorded in this way. It is the momentum of the images that confers the
sense of time. The sequentially firing cells in the hippocampus were
called 'time cells' and seemed to have similar properties to place
cells. It now seems that the inputs of time and place cells are
integrated into a unified cell assembly system in the hippocampus.58,59
The timespace memory thus formed is, at its most fundamental level, an
event memory.60 Let's pause for a moment to consider this and return to
the question that led the last chapter on 'place': where were you when
Elvis died/when 9/11 happened? There is a where and a when, woven
together experientally. This is what is processed in the timespace cell
assembly in the neural-memory production line of the

hippocampus. The momentous event is then projected to prefrontal
autobiographical stores. The event, consolidated in biographical memory
as a unit of connected cells, is also retrieved as a unit. Biographical
memory recall seems, although this is not definitely proven, to involve
the prefrontal biographical memory together with the video-directing
properties of the hippocampus. It seems to me that old-old memories seem
to lose the momentum of the film-like recording of recent events and
become more like snapshots of a place from the past, with only an
accompanying sense of when it occurred. We have more certainty about
place as event memories age than we have about time. You will probably
have experienced this uncertainty about the timing of events when
reminiscing with family or friends. Someone remembers an event happening
somewhere and there is a general 'Ah yes, I remember,' and then the
'When was it?' starts, and now it is a free for all . . . the
calculations follow, matching the event in question to others that
occurred before or after. In this familiar process of collective
reminiscing we 'place' the event in time through juxtaposition with
other events.

The Fluidity of the Experience of Time One can only gasp at the sheer
cleverness of it all. Space and time are being recorded together, just
as we experience it, just as we have forever narrated it, just like the
physicists have been telling us since the nineteenth century. The
relativity of time with space is built into the process of hippocampal
recording. This has been elegantly articulated by the neuroscientist
Liliann Manning, in her reflective paper on the journey from philosophy
to neuroscience in our understanding of time: 'Experienced continuity is
possible only by and through memory.'61 Manning's description of time as
being 'experienced continuity' was written from the perspective of a
neuroscientist in the twenty-first century, but it is remarkably similar
to the intuition of the nineteenth-century physicist Maxwell that time
is 'an order of sequence in our consciousness'. There is a hidden
complexity to Liliann Manning's description of time as 'experienced
continuity', demonstrated nicely by a small encounter between

Alice and the Queen in Lewis Carroll's Through the Looking-Glass. Alice
is shocked by the experience of the Queen, whose 'memory works both
ways', that is, both backwards and forwards, to which the Queen
responds, 'It's a poor sort of memory that only works backwards.' We
mostly think of memory as only working backwards, because we experience
time as going forwards; but it is not the queen who is daft, it is Alice
and the reader. Time seems to go in one direction, from the past to the
present to the future, but is this really how we consciously experience
it? At some point in your life you will have had the feeling that a
memory of what you are experiencing right now will remain with you for
the rest of life. This can happen when we have experienced intense
emotion, either happiness or sadness, perhaps during your first romance
or at your wedding, or following your child's birth. You can feel as if
you are in the present and in the future. Or it may be a day like any
other day that contains a perfect moment -- a moment that rouses the
deep sense of familiarity that is contentment. I recall feeling, as I
experienced a beautiful hot day on the beach on Ireland's Eye, a small
island off Howth, with my friends and our children, that I would in the
future always remember that moment of that day. Maybe I decided to take
an amygdalar-hippocampal timespace snapshot, but it is more likely that
the moment chose me. In such moments the experience involves the present
and the future because you are travelling forward in your biographical
life. I call this experience a 'prescient memory' -- it is a
consciousness of memory formation, a feeling that one will recall this
moment for the rest of one's life. The term 'prescient memory' is one
that is used in computational models of prediction in AI, but I use it
here in an experiential context. Prescient memories occur during moments
of intense experience of the present. There is a particular heightened
consciousness of self, a slight hyper-perceptiveness, an awareness of
oneself as a separate sensate being in time in the world and in your own
memory. This familiar human feeling again reflects the principle that
the more aware and attentive we are, the more likely we are to form
lasting memories. If you are a parent with adult children you will be
familiar with the conscious sense of the past merging with the present
when your watch your children, even if adults. When my 18-year-old son
was leaving home to attend college in Galway, I had a rapid succession
of visual memories as I

waved him off. The milestones of his life ran through my mind, flitting
images in quick succession, like an old-fashioned slide projector,
illuminated in a background of a diffuse emotional tone: bringing him
home in a white cotton blanket to our house in Cambridge following his
birth . . . leaving him at the creche on my first day back to work . . .
standing outside our front door in Howth with the seascape to his back,
holding his younger sister's hand with their little lunch boxes on her
first day at Montessori school . . . taking a photo of him on his first
day in secondary school looking like a little boy beside his friend who
had sprouted . . . and now his sad face as he left us. Where had all the
time gone? We can go one stage further -- you can sometimes have the
subjective experiences of time as simultaneously going forwards and
backwards, with full awareness that you are in the present. I remember
having this sense of time moving in both directions one evening when
holidaying with my family in Vancouver. I jogged around the sea front
with my brother in the early evening, and later we all rambled to a
local restaurant, regressed with our children back to own childhoods.
Our long-term memories were merging with the formation of our current
memories: past and present came together and there was a sense of
continuity into the future looking at our own children horsing around as
we once had. During that evening time felt like it was proceeding in two
directions -- from the present to the past, and from the present to the
future. We were back in time and yet in a conscious and present
experience of a prescient memory. This is the familiar feeling that we
have with old friends, who are the best, when we get a contented glowing
feeling of the continuity of one's life lit from the past and projecting
into a warm future. In 1899 the philosopher Henri Bergson wrote that
'Time is invention and nothing else.' The fact is that the concept of
time as commonly understood is unsuited to understanding what is
happening in dynamic existence. Events happen and are recorded in
biographical memory in sequence, and it is the recall of these events in
some sort of sequence that forms a sense of time. Proust's search for
lost time -- À la recherche du temps perdu -- was an immersion in his
memory. It is clear that the past does not exist except in memory.
Perhaps the popularity of the 'time machine' fantasy, in spite of it
requiring a suspension of all reason and the rejection of existential
experience, lies in the fantasy that the past is not lost.

The idea that there is no time as such, no past and no future, has
existed since the fourth century, when St Augustine of Hippo identified
three times: 'a time present of things past; a time present of things
present; and a time present of things future.' Augustine seemed to be
saying that only the present exists, from which position one slides
either to the past or to the future. His contemplations were reflected
fifteen centuries later in the work of Endel Tulving, a Canadian
neuroscientist whose life's work has explored time and memory.62 His
influential work has looked at how the past and the future exist in the
consciously experienced present. Daniel Schacter, who worked with
Tulving, made big inroads into understanding the experience of time in
his neuroimaging experiments. He showed that the same brain circuits are
employed when thinking about the past and when planning for the
future.63 But of course this is not surprising when you consider that we
make decisions about the future based on experience, on memory. We can
only fantasize, or predict, with the experience that is woven into
memory. Memory is more than a record of the past -- it is also the
template for an imagined future. The past--future fusion of neural
circuitry involves multiple integrated areas and, in particular, the hub
of the memory machine -- the hippocampus -- and the integrative
storyteller -- the prefrontal cortex.63, 64 This all means that the
future, as well as the past, resides in memory circuitry. In
Alzheimer's, the hippocampus becomes damaged early on, leading to the
first symptoms of the disease, memory loss. Those with Alzheimer's lose
their sense of time as the disease progresses. In one experiment, a
group of individuals with mild Alzheimer's were compared to age-matched
controls with normal cognitive function. Those with Alzheimer's had an
equally impaired ability to remember past events and to envision future
events, 'providing further evidence of the close linkages between the
mental representations of past and future'.65 In Alzheimer's disease,
past memories, stored in the prefrontal cortex, remain relatively intact
in the early stages of the disease, when the plastic hippocampus is more
quickly destroyed, but the disease gradually destroys autobiographical
memory in later stages of the illness when the frontal lobes become more
eroded.

There is one more aspect of the fluidity of past and future time that is
worthy of mention because it is a subjectively fascinating and universal
human experience. Time seems to stand still during childhood, in fact it
doesn't exist experientally. The time is all 'present', days seem
endless and events just end and move on to the next one. Children are
not so much adaptable as partly amnesic -- we will be exploring this in
Part 2. Dylan Thomas put this vividly in his poem 'Fern Hill', that
lilting ballad of the hurtling sensory flow of childhood: 'Time held me
green and dying / Though I sang in my chains like the sea'. As one gets
older, the subjective sense of time gradually accelerates, and, as you
move into older adulthood, time flies by.iv

Is Time Really Consciousness? As we have seen, place is based in
physical matter that is apparent through the senses and can be measured
objectively, while memory may be the only yardstick of time. We have
also established that the past and the future reside in memory
circuitry. If time exists only in past memory or in future imaginings,
what of the present? The present has been the common fulcrum in ideas of
time from St Augustine's musings in the fourth century to Edel Tulving's
neuropsychology of the twentieth. Is the present the real 'time'? The
whole concept of time is generally unhelpful in understanding science,
be it physics or neuroscience. It is more coherent conceptually to shift
'the present' away altogether from a time concept and reassign it to the
concept of consciousness. From the perspective of the recording of
events, the present is consciousness. In a seemingly ironic twist, I
myself think that the only place that time does not exist is in the
moment of consciousness. The past and the future are more like what we
conceive as 'time', but the present belongs to consciousness. The
intellectual convergence between the disciplines of physics and
neuroscience in our understanding of time and memory is truly
fascinating, but memory is less like big physics, and more like particle
physics, in which precise localization of an event cannot be achieved
because of inherent uncertainty, a concept called indeterminism. Just as
tiny matter becomes

less predictable as it is removed from the holding force of gravity,
memory becomes less certain as it recedes from the relative certainty of
present consciousness. Events continue to happen and the dendrites
continue to rearrange, making the original memory less exact. The
restless neural activity, the non-stop momentum of the electrochemical
and matter exchange in the neuron and among neurons, the growing and
fading entanglements of dendritic arborizations as the neurons flare one
into the next and the signal fizzles, is never-ending. There is an
infinite possibility of direction for our 68 billion neurons from the
constant input of exteroceptive sensation from the world and
interoceptive sensation from the body. The only certainty is that there
will continue to be events that will reshape the cell assemblies. Our
brain, like the universe, is a cauldron of entropy. Sean Carroll, a
contemporary physicist and writer, brings neuroscience and physics
together succinctly: 'time cannot be measured in physics, unlike place
or matter, it can only be understood subjectively.' In his book The Big
Picture: On the Origins of Life, Meaning and the Universe Itself,v he
looks at time as experience rather than as a potential concept of the
outthere physical world. But for me there is an even more fundamental
point in Sean Carroll's observation about subjective understanding of
time. We understand ourselves and others, the world and the universe,
through the only system that we have available to us -- the cellular and
network organization of memory. The neurons that make memory -- the
hippocampal, amygdalar and cortical cells -- have a four-sided shape
like a pyramid -- four triangular surfaces -- and, for this reason, are
called pyramidal cells. Is it a coincidence that the timespace concept
is fourdimensional, with the three dimensions of space interrelated to
the fourth dimension of time?vi Maybe the timespace understanding of
physics is based on the only way that we can see or learn about patterns
in the physical world through our four-sided pyramidal neurons that
interpret and memorize three-dimensional space and time as integrated
events. Are the physicists -- in their elegantly reduced science -- in
fact looking at how we memorize? This speculation will, if nothing else,
help you to remember the four-sided pyramidal neurons beavering away and
reflecting the fourdimensional timespace of life in motion. It is
staggering that the organ that

psychiatrists tend to and mend, containing timespace cells, embodying
our individual narratives, working beyond the most sophisticated
understandings of the physical world, is often not considered physical.
Let's finish our discussion where we began, with Hamm asking Clov what
'yesterday' means. A scientist might say that it is the events that
occurred between now and the preceding full rotation of the Earth on its
own axis, and a neuroscientist could say that it is the difference in
the dendritic arborizations caused by the events that occurred during
this rotation. But maybe the important question is not what yesterday or
tomorrow means, but what the present means, because it is this that will
determine the memories of past events and the fantasies and strategies
for projects to come. Conscious experience, where time does not really
seem experientially to exist, is where we make the past and shape the
direction of events that have not yet happened. As St Augustine wrote,
and as the physicists are on the verge of explaining to us, 'we measure
time as it passes', and it is only in memory that our sense of time
exists. But it is also only in the present where we can really
experience the world and that is the gift of consciousness, of being
alive. We have to cram both memory and sensory awareness into the
conscious moment, and in all of this 'time past and time future' it is
only too easy to miss what St Augustine called the 'present of the
present or attention', the glorious sensate now of the conscious moment.
Or as Pooh Bear tells children, 'Yesterday is history, tomorrow is a
mystery, but today is a gift. That is why we call it the present'.

8. Stress: Remembering and 'Forgetting'

There is no state of mind, however simple, which does not change every
moment. Henri Bergson (1859--1941)

As established in the preceding chapter, we need to be conscious to the
level of being awake to record the present, and to make memories. This
means that the brain-stem switch for wakefulness needs to be on, and
neural activity in the hippocampal and cortical neurons needs to be at a
requisite level of arousal. The level of arousal of recording neurons is
fundamental to what is memorized. What we are aroused by is individual
and varies for each event within any individual's life, but is dependent
on the same mechanisms in all of us. Arousal involves the two
hypothalamic exit systems -- the ANS and the cortisol stress system.
This means that your neurons are aroused when you feel aroused, which
makes it easy to establish whether you are recording and can memorize or
not. I was once very excited by the science of stress and the
relationship of stress to depression -- it has formed the bulk of my
life's research work. During the 1980s and 1990s there was limited
interest in stress research, and we were quite a small group. The
research discipline was called psychoneuroendocrinology, and it has
remained as a specialist research discipline forming a foundational
knowledge-base that has now been applied to most diseases. Scientific
stress literature originated in endocrinology, because cortisol is a
hormone, and in psychiatry, because severe brain stress is present in
mental illnesses and may be germane to the cause of depression. Back
then, the idea that the stress hormone cortisol is a proxy measure of
physiological and psychological stress, which is now common knowledge,
had not yet been established.

In this chapter we will look at the effects of stress on memory, best
understood through the pathology of depressive illness. In 2003 I had
the good fortune to debate on the same side as Lewis Wolpert in one of
the Maudsley Series of public debates. We were opposing the motion,
'This house believes that antidepressants cause dependence'. Lewis is
better known for his crystal-clear writings on science than for his
experience of depression, but his book Malignant Sadness: The Anatomy of
Depression focused his scientific brilliance on the topic of depression
and is well worth reading. I remember Lewis telling the audience that
his depression had been a worse experience for him than the death of his
beloved wife. He found, as most people who have experienced depression,
that one of the most disabling aspects of this grim experience is that
it scrambles your memory and your thinking. This is often the reason
that people present for treatment: they may struggle on through the
despair and self-loathing, the fatigue and the sleeplessness, even the
suicidal urges, but they seek treatment when they find themselves unable
to concentrate and memorize, and unable to work. I will now tell you
about Sally, who was a patient of mine.

Sally A colleague from the medical wards asked me to give an opinion on
Sally, who had been admitted from the ER a few days previously with an
abrupt and generalized deterioration in her health. She had not left her
bed at home for about a week and had stopped eating and drinking. She
had stopped responding to her family and had gradually fallen into a
mute state, and then a comatose one. I interviewed Sally's husband, who
gave a clear history of normal function up until a few days prior to her
hospitalization, although he remarked that she had been quieter and less
active than usual in the preceding weeks. Sally appeared to have a
stable emotional and personal life. She had a history of depression,
having become depressed for the first time five years previously. During
her first episode she had become withdrawn socially and fatigued, and
was non-communicative, but she made a full recovery. She had remained on
antidepressants for some years

following the first depression and had stopped the medication about four
months prior to her current presentation. Since admission to the
hospital, she had deteriorated further, and this deterioration seemed to
be rapidly progressive. She eventually fell into a comatose state and
was not responding even to mildly painful stimuli, such as a light
pinprick. The medical team had conducted multiple laboratory and
radiological investigations but nothing abnormal was discovered. What
was strange was that, although her vital signs, her blood pressure, her
pulse and even her temperature were in a higher range, and fluctuating
in an unusual way, there seemed to be no medical illness. She was
aroused physiologically -- her ANS was overactive -- but she was also
comatose. ANS arousal usually gives rise to a feeling of being generally
aroused. There was some major pathology at play but it could not be
identified. Her clinical picture suggested the possibility of an
encephalitis, an infection of brain tissue, but an electrical recording
from her scalp (EEG: electroencephalogram) indicated low-voltage but
normal electrical brain activity. Her brain imaging scan was also
normal. A lumbar puncture yielded spinal cord fluid that had no
detectable signs of infection or any immune disorder. There was no other
source of infection that could be identified. She had very high cortisol
levels, but this was considered a nonspecific finding because she was so
ill. We stood at the end of the bed looking at Sally. She was lying on
her back, motionless, eyes shut, with her lips slightly parted. She was
occupying the bed closest to the nurses' station because she required
fifteen-minute observations of her vital signs, and they reported that
she did not seem to have moved for the preceding twenty-four hours.
Sally was being hydrated with an IV line and had not had food for many
days. I held her hand and spoke to her: there was no response to a
gentle squeezing of her hand. I held her elbow with my other hand and
lifted her arm from the bed, and then slowly disengaged my hands. Her
arm remained aloft and did not move downwards for a few seconds, and
then slowly descended to rest tensely on the bed. Looking closely at
Sally's face I saw a salt track coming from her eye, down the curve
between the nose and face, to her upper lip. We had our diagnosis: this
was catatonia. Catatonia refers to abnormal motor activity, specifically
in movement and speech. There are particular movements that identify
catatonia, one of

which is the maintenance of unusual or uncomfortable postures. Sally's
arm remaining suspended in an awkward position is an example of this.
This maintenance of odd positions is known as 'waxy flexibility'.
Another clinical sign of catatonia, related to uncomfortable postures,
is called the 'psychological pillow': here, the sufferer keeps their
head not resting on the pillow but raised slightly off it. It is
difficult to imagine the extreme muscular tension and the mental
suffering that is present in catatonia. Sally's abrupt and extreme form
of catatonia is rare. It usually evolves more slowly from an untreated,
or under-treated, mood disorder. The proposition that catatonia is the
human equivalent of the animal state of being frozen in fear resonates
with psychiatrists. Being 'scared stiff' may be a mechanism to fool a
predator by feigning death and may be a hardwired behaviour that is
generally buried in the human's more elaborate soft wiring of
experience.66 The treatment for catatonia is benzodiazepines --
Valium-like drugs -- in high doses. This brings down the level of
arousal and seems to unfreeze the catatonic state. We administered
diazepam intravenously through a small bag of saline, and one hour later
Sally came to and later that night had tea and toast. We were then able
to administer benzodiazepines orally, and we recommenced her
antidepressants. She was fully mobile but very slowed down within
twenty-four hours and was discharged from the hospital some days later.
I spoke to Sally in more detail when she recovered from her trauma. She
had no memory of the days before her hospitalization or of most of her
inpatient stay. She remembered her head had been in a spin for a few
weeks before the onset of her amnesia, and her last memories before this
were of feeling down and anxious. Various degrees of amnesia are
experienced during severe depression, usually proportional to the
severity of the depression. This amnesia extends from poor biographical
memory to complete amnesia and can be seen in the poor general
biographical memory in those who suffer from recurrent depression.
Day-to-day memory difficulties are apparent to sufferers during the most
rudimentary tasks: even following a movie plot or reading the newspaper
can become impossible. An inkling of this experience that is probably
familiar to you is if you have been so stressed that you are not able to
think and you keep forgetting things. The amnesia is not caused by the

drugs given to treat the depression, as is sometimes proposed, because
memory actually returns following administration of medication. A
commonly cited experience of stress-induced amnesia is when someone is
given bad news by a doctor. Most individuals can remember very little of
what the doctor has said about the disease or the management plan. Being
aware of this inability to memorize when in an emotionally shocked state
is a basic principle in learning how to break bad news. How does this
amnesia fit in with the idea that we have already established, of higher
arousal or better attention leading to better memory formation? Should
it not be the case that the more aroused a person is the more they
should theoretically memorize? Memory, like many physiological systems,
works best at moderate levels of arousal, and at the extremes of
arousal, either hypo- (low), or hyper- (high) levels of arousal, memory
function is impaired. A very loose rule of thumb is that low levels of
cortisol cause low levels of arousal and poor memory formation, but high
levels of cortisol causing high levels of arousal will also impede
memory formation. Learning is thus less efficient at low or high levels
of cortisol, and most likely to occur with a moderate level of
arousal.67 We know intuitively that we cannot learn if we are not paying
attention or, at the other extreme, if we are over-aroused and
anxious.68 Nora, in the previous chapter, lost years of memorizing the
world because she was so under-aroused that she registered almost
nothing. Sally's story, on the other hand, demonstrates how severe
arousal can also cause amnesia. Sally's autonomic nervous system (ANS)
had been in hyperdrive, and her cortisol levels were very high. She had
been locked inside her body, as I imagine the experience, paralysed with
fear. Over the last few decades it has been established that depression
is associated with high levels of cortisol and that this is more
pronounced in more severe forms of depression. To understand Sally's and
Nora's experiences we need to look at the cortisol stress system,
specifically the effects of the stress hormone cortisol on neuronal
activity -- what I and my clinical science pals call 'brain stress'.

The Hypothalamic--Pituitary--Adrenal Axis

The literature on the physiology of stress goes back to the origins of
medicine as a discipline, to Hippocrates, who lived and died four
centuries BC. The first theoretical suggestion of a stress system came
from this great philosopher and medical pioneer whose altruistic
principles remain the foundation principles of modern medicine. These
principals are based in his belief that there is a system in the human
body that is at work all the time keeping us well and which becomes more
active to counteract illness and disease. This is what we now know as
the stress system. An important doctrine of Hippocrates was maintenance
of health, which can be translated into modern medical-speak as
'reduction of excessive stress' -- a concept that we have only worked
our way to in the last century. We seem to have lost the foundational
Hippocratic idea that some level of stress is necessary for healthy
functioning, that stress is good, and the word 'stress' now is almost
synonymous with illness caused by excessive stress. Stress is not just
good but necessary for sustaining life, and it is only in chronic, or
long-term, overexposure to stress that it can be destructive.69 In the
1990s I led a series of studies in chronic fatigue syndrome, a
difficult-to-diagnose condition characterized by body and brain --
called 'central' -- fatigue. We found that cortisol levels were lower
than average in this disorder -- in contrast to the opposite findings in
depression, where cortisol levels were higher than average.70 I think of
cortisol more as an activating, rather than a stress, hormone, one that
keeps us alive and alert. The system that Hippocrates intuited was first
identified physiologically over 2,000 years later, by Hans Seyle. In the
1930s, Seyle first described the body's stress system and identified
cortisol as the body's main stress molecule. The stress system is
ultimately controlled by the brain and is called the
hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal (HPA) axis, in reference to the brain
centre and the body organs that are involved in the control of cortisol
release. The hypothalamus -- the headquarters of the autonomic nervous
system that makes the rainbow of our emotional states -- makes a hormone
(CRH) that is carried in the blood system from the brain. This brain
hormone ultimately causes the release of cortisol from the adrenal
glands.i As we have explored in a previous chapter, memory pathways can
activate the ANS, leading to emotional experiences. The web of inputs to
the hypothalamus has been sculpted by the dendritic growths of memory,
and in

this way memories, built into brain networks, can also cause cortisol
stress responses through the secretion of CRH that will go on to
activate the HPA axis. Cortisol secretion into the blood system is
controlled by the brain and, once released from the adrenal glands, is
carried to all organs in the body, including the brain. The most
important finding in relation to understanding the effects of cortisol
on brain function and memory was the discovery in 1968 of cortisol
receptors in the hippocampus.71 The late Bruce McEwan, who co-authored
the landmark paper showing cortisol receptors in the rat hippocampus,
went on to lead a stress research group in the Rockefeller University in
Manhattan, a hive of productivity during these early exciting years.ii
But it was many years before the brain-stress research community
understood the significance of this discovery. For this part of the
story we need to return to Leiden -- the intellectual haven for the
Sensationalists during the religious persecutions of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries -- to Ron de Kloet's lab. De Kloet is Academy
Professor of the Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences. His
work demonstrates how excellent science is about paring down, as far as
possible, a single question and finding the answer through staged
experiments that adhere to the central question, until the answer to
that question is revealed in a coherent and undeniable simplicity. One
of the most difficult tasks is adhering to the central question and not
moving off on one of the many interesting tangents that present
themselves. Ron looked at how cortisol works in individual neurons in
the rat hippocampus.72 Neurons have to be charged to a minimum level to
transmit a current to an adjacent neuron. A critical period of neuronal
arousal is needed to achieve the requisite electrochemical energy to
form the proteins required for new synapses that make the cell
assemblies that constitute a memory. Ron demonstrated that cortisol
fires neurons for the period of time required for dendritic growth.73
This provides an explanation of why memory cannot be coded if levels of
cortisol are below a certain threshold. The neuron, like the brain, is
sleeping, or maybe dozing . . . remember that whatever is happening
globally in the brain is happening at a cellular level ultimately. A
minimum threshold of cortisol is necessary for memory formation, and we
will call this 'good' stress.

If, conversely, cortisol levels are constantly high, then the
hippocampal neurons, like the catatonic patient, are in a constant state
of over-arousal. You might think that this would result in super memory
formation, but that is not the case, because a neuron has to return to a
lower level of electrical activity before it can be recharged to form
another memory. The overaroused neuron is stuck in a hyper-fired state
and is unavailable for new stimulation. This is why unremitting high
levels of cortisol, or 'bad' stress, inhibit memory formation. The same
is true for ANS arousal, also needed to fire up neurons: low levels of
noradrenaline will not fire neurons adequately, while high levels will
not allow the neuron to baseline and recharge, that is, it will be
refractory to charge. I will now tell you about another patient whom I
treated some years after Sally, when Ron was publishing his animal work
on the inhibitory effects of high cortisol levels on hippocampal firing.
I was working as a psychiatrist in a Dublin hospital, following the
return of my family from Cambridge, when I was asked to see a young man,
Daniel. It was very exciting to find that I could translate Ron's
laboratory findings to real-life psychiatry.

Daniel Daniel was admitted under the Endocrinology team. His family
doctor had found, during routine blood tests, that Daniel had a raised
blood glucose level and new-onset hypertension. His metabolic
instability was progressing rapidly, a very rare occurrence in a young
man, and he was admitted to the hospital for investigation. The
endocrinologist suspected that he may have a cortisol-secreting tumor,
because cortisol also controls the release of glucose to the blood
circulation -- acting as a physiological antagonist to insulin -- and
laboratory findings demonstrated very high cortisol levels, consistent
with a possible tumor. His family gave a history of escalating
strangeness in his behaviour and increasing remoteness over quite a
short period of time, a few weeks at most. His mental state was rapidly
deteriorating, and I was asked for advice in relation to this aspect of
his care.

Daniel sat at the edge of the bed rocking to and fro. His hands were
clasped in front of him, as if he was holding some imaginary object. I
gathered after a few minutes that the phantom object was a rose. He was
repeating '. . . smell the rose, rose, rose . . . smell the rose, rose,
rose . . .'. When I spoke to him, he would repeat the last word of my
sentence over and over. Once or twice his eyes flickered when I passed
in the line of his vision, but he seemed generally oblivious to the
psychiatry and endocrinology team assembled around his bed. He was
staring past us all. I asked him to stand up, and after repeated
requests he did so very slowly and stopped in an awkward semi-erect
position, standing absolutely still and staring, for several minutes.
Daniel was in a classical catatonic state. In addition to the strange,
uncomfortable postures, and the immobility, patients with catatonia may
repeat words or repeat the last word of your sentence. Usually,
individuals in this extreme state are unresponsive to other people, and
even if they make eye contact it is glazed and unfocused. Daniel,
contrary to what was expected, did not have a cortisol-secreting tumor,
but had extremely high cortisol levels because he was suffering from a
catatonic depression. We treated him with benzodiazepines and
mood-stabilizing medication, and he improved within days, returning to
his normal state within a few weeks. As his mental state returned to
normal his cortisol levels reduced and his metabolic systems stabilized.
His blood pressure returned to normal and healthy glucose regulation
returned. Daniel remembered nothing from his admission to the hospital
to a few days following commencement of treatment. His case confirmed
what I had suspected about other cases of catatonia that I had seen.
Individuals who were catatonic, although mute and/or immobile, were in a
highly aroused state of ANS and cortisol overdrive.

Bad Stress and the Brain Although there have been, and continue to be,
many books written about managing stress, many of the stressors that
people are exposed to are unremitting -- for example poverty,
socioeconomic deprivation, violence,

racism. Life can be brutally hard on some, especially those born into
socioeconomic disadvantage or exposed to abuse during childhood. The
scientific literature on the negative effects of early-life adversity on
the body, including the brain, has grown in tandem with the stress
literature. There is now evidence, including my own research, that this
process may start during fetal life.74 Academic reports from the
Rockefeller Institute published in the 1980s showed how rat pups who
were shown affection -- licking and grooming by Mother Rat -- had calmer
responses and lower cortisol stress outputs when exposed to a severe
stressor in adulthood, compared to pups exposed to low mothering.75
These findings showed how important very early events are in determining
subsequent stress responses, and therefore general health. It emerged
that cells in the hippocampus lost their dendritic complexity and
synaptic connections fell away if Rat Pup was exposed to constant high
levels of cortisol.76 Bruce McEwan wrote quite beautifully of this
process as being 'a dynamic brain architecture that can be modified by
experience'.77 The 'biological imprinting' of childhood neglect in
humans, both in abnormal stress responses and in the hippocampal
dendritic richness, is now well established.78 Whatever the cause of the
chronic brain stress -- childhood adversity, ongoing socioeconomic
stress, genetically driven skewed stress responses, major mental illness
-- the hippocampus will suffer the toxic effects of chronic cortisol
exposure, and memory systems will be damaged.79 I have already mentioned
the visible effects of hippocampal damage in human neuroimaging research
in depression. The international collaboration ENIGMA (Enhancing
Neuro-Imaging Genetics through Meta-Analysis), which brings together
research from fifteen centres worldwide, including neuroimaging data
from 1,728 depressed patients and 7,199 healthy individuals, has
provided the most indisputable evidence to date that the hippocampus is
damaged, or visibly shrunken, in human depression.19 In our group we
have found, in common with other groups, that it is the left hippocampus
that is particularly shrunken and that the damage seems to be confined
to the layers where the memory-making process occurs.20 Depression, if
untreated, is now known to be a disease that damages the memory
production line in the hippocampus.

This all sounds very gloomy -- childhood trauma seems prophetic of adult
brain disorder. But all is not lost because, although fragile and
relatively easily damaged, the hippocampus is plastic and can be
repaired. There is increasing evidence that antidepressants and talking
therapies can help restore a fecund dendritic interconnectivity in the
hippocampus. Agents such as antidepressants may be able to cause
'reversible remodelling' of neuronal connections in the hippocampus,
prefrontal cortex, and amygdala.80 This happy finding that dendritic
atrophy may be reversed can give us all hope about the potential
therapeutic effects of pharmacological and psychological treatments on
the brain. People often say that they can't remember something. They
have 'forgotten' events that others, who may have shared the experience,
remember. This discrepancy in individual experience probably happens
because the event was of no real significance to one person but may have
had emotional resonance for the other. If we are not paying attention we
do not mount the arousal required to memorize. One of the most densely
investigated areas in neuroscience is why we pay attention to certain
cues and are uninterested in others. Neuroscientists call this selective
attention 'salience'. Arousal and attention provide mechanisms whereby
we can remember individually important, or salient, information and
discard more trivial sensory input. We are interested in things that
'excite' our curiosity, neurally speaking. In research led by my
collaborator Thomas Frodl, we found that those suffering from depression
had abnormal coupling of attention to emotional stimuli.81 Most of my
friends are over fifty-five, and they often ask me, 'Why do I forget
things?' If we can learn any lessons from Nora, Sally and Daniel, the
answer is that they probably did not forget something: they never laid
down a memory for it in the first place. Our memory systems will not
function below, or above, a certain level of arousal. If the question
'Why do I forget things?' sounds familiar to you, you can first of all
reassure yourself that remembering that you have forgotten something is
a form of memory. Next, you need to question whether you registered the
event. Activities that get one's attention, and paying attention, will
increase lagging cortisol levels and improve registration of
information. In common with other groups, we have found that exercising
will stimulate arousal and improve memory

function, and may even grow the hippocampus.82, 83 Or, your hippocampal
neurons may be in a state of fixed overdrive because of toxic stress. In
this case, a therapeutic holiday in the sun may be the only cure. The
HPA axis, like all physiological systems, can only work effectively to
bring the body into equilibrium within a range of conditions determined
sometimes by the environment and sometimes by the individual.

To Summarise Part 1 So far, I have torn a pathway through an eclectic
mix, starting with the origins of neuroscience in the philosophy of the
Sensationalists, and finishing with the recent convergence of
neuroscience and physics in concepts of time and memory. The theme
followed was that of experience, starting with the trials of the
philosophers way back as they moved from divine explanations of
Knowledge to the imprinting of knowledge from the world through
sensation. We have followed the neural rush of sensory experience from
the exteroceptive world and the interoceptive body as it gets woven into
hippocampal and amygdalar memory, and is then consolidated, or not, in
cortical memory. We have explored how neural input is organized into
cell assemblies that will fire as a unit, and how these units connect up
to allow an understanding of the world to develop. We have followed the
oldest and most intuitive structure for recalling event memory -- the
time-place-person format of the story -- to the depths of the
hippocampus, to look at how this organic memory machine records time and
place. Place is the solid thing around which the moving film reel of
life events are recorded. As in physics, we record three-dimensional
space with an intrinsic dimension of time, in the four-dimensional
architecture of the hippocampal and cortical cells. We have followed the
experience of arousal and awareness -- mediated by the ANS emotional and
the HPA stress systems -- from the level of the neuron, where
electrochemical energy is required for the formation of dendritic
projections, to individual salience, or what gets one's attention.
Memories are made in the non-stop neural buzzing that is the living
brain. Sensory signals come at us headlong, flaring the neurons like
lights on a christmas tree, flashing on and off and in all directions,
creating in each human an individual 'www' representation of their world
in their cortex. An important point here is that there is no agency
involved in where the sensory currents go, because signals are simply
taken where the neuron assemblies have been laid down in the web of
memory lattices. Does this mean that human experience is the product
only of memory, that the

particular memory maps of the neurons in any given brain will go on and
on to interpret the world in an increasingly deterministic way? Yes, in
the sense that we only have the network fashioned from the basic
hardware and from previous experience; but this infinitely complex
network of 68 billion neurons is in a dynamic, never-ending state of
change. New experience arriving from the world through our senses will
follow the 'best match', but will also forge new connections leading to
an alteration of cell-assembly pathways. There is arrangement and
rearrangement, lattices arborizing and being disrupted, memories being
woven, being augmented, and being disassembled. Yes, humans are a
construct of their own memories, but these memory systems are, at any
moment of consciousness, in a dynamic neverto-be-repeated balance of the
entropy of the incoming world making its neural impression within the
relative stability of cortical memory maps. In this neural momentum an
individual lays down fluid neural pathways woven from experience and,
somehow or other, forms a narrative framework that becomes 'them'. Let
us now look at how this narrative framework is fashioned from the neural
chaos . . . the story of how memory makes us.

PART TWO

How Memory Makes Us The neural networks in our brain change from infancy
to old age. Ideally suited to sensation gathering and discrimination,
the infant brain develops into an organ adapted for abstract reasoning.
The knowledge we imbibe and the events we experience become interwoven
in the dendritic tangles of the ever-changing brain, shaping our sense
of self and identity. We will explore how current experience constantly
takes apart and reconstructs memory. A culture's collective memory
ensures both an ever-expanding knowledge base and a sense of a shared
past. In the final chapter I sort through some of our oldest collective
memories as passed down in fairy stories, as well as through my
childhood steeped in folklore and the stories of my patients, who taught
me that the real matter of memory is experience.

9. Self-Recognition: The Start of Autobiographical Memory

Our memory is our coherence, our reason, our feeling, even our action.
Without it we are nothing. Luis Buñuel\*

Once Below a Time . . . Although humans learn so much more during
infancy compared to any other period of life, very little from this
period can be recalled. They acquire a vast amount of knowledge that
becomes automatic, or implicit, such as learning language or walking,
but they do not seem to have narrative memory. What is your first real
memory? What age were you: two, three, perhaps four? For me it is
sitting on a box looking down at an orange hand-knitted cardigan with a
translucent orange button. I have retrospectively assigned the memory to
our first house move, when I was almost three years old -- the first
memory of my mother's hand-knitted woollen cardigans that went on to
mark successive stages of my childhood. This snapshot memory is typical
of a first memory, which is usually recalled as a simple sense of
oneself somewhere. Before the orange-button moment my world is
prehistory. Infantile amnesia is universal, whatever claims an
individual may make. The coordinates of any story, as we've established,
including one's own life, are time, place and person. 'Person' cannot be
remembered until a person, starting with oneself, has been registered as
existing. I have assigned the first moment of registration of myself to
the orange-button moment. It seems to me that one's first conscious
memory is one's first moment of self-

recognition, or self-awareness. One has to see oneself before memory of
oneself can begin. In this part of the book we will look at how
awareness of self develops in the brain and how this allows one's life
to be memorized, and subsequently organized into a story of sorts. Let's
start at the beginning of personhood with how humans, and some few
animals, develop awareness of self.

Evolving Consciousness of Self When I write at home I am often cheered
up by my garden robin making his presence apparent with his chirrups. He
has attention consciousness, he is bright as daylight and he is alert,
and he has memory because, luckily for me, he returns to my back garden,
as the constitutionally plucky defender of his memorized territory. But
he is unlikely to have any form of selfrecognition. By extrapolation we
intuit that he does not have higher forms of consciousness, such as
being able to consciously experience emotions, or to see himself in
action fending off potential invaders with his singing, or to see other
birds as possessing consciousness. Although Robin almost certainly does
not have consciousness of himself, and therefore conscious biographical
memory, he has a rudimentary consciousness of other robins, because he
wards them off from trespassing in his territory. Robin needs to be
aware of other birds, but not of himself, in order to survive. A useful
way of understanding the development of a human trait, such as
self-awareness, is through evolution of this trait in older species of
animals, a process known as phylogenetics. A rule of thumb is that human
development from embryonic life onwards follows evolutionary
development.84 i Robin's working memory, in phylogenetic terms, remains
at the level of the preconscious infant. In humans, as you might predict
from phylogenetic principles, and from Robin, awareness of others is
present before awareness of oneself. At about 6--7 months, babies begin
to understand that their parent is an-other person, a person separate
from them, and they begin to experience their first anxieties of being
separated. Distress on being separated from the parent begins to show at
this age because Baby is feeling this sense of being separate. Baby has
to be coaxed

gently from the unitary bond with Mother that starts during fetal life
-- 'the yolk and white of the one shell'† -- to being independent. If
Baby is left alone too long, or if they are not soothed to reduce the
anxiety, or if they are of a very sensitive disposition, difficulty in
forming trustful relationships -- what is called 'insecure attachment'
-- may start at this point, leading to lifelong patterns of emotionally
insecure attachments to other people. About eighteen months later Baby
begins to become aware of themself. A rudimentary form of self-awareness
-- visual self-recognition -- can be evidenced by a simple test called
the mirror recognition test, now accepted as being a proxy measure for
basic self-recognition.85 The test involves the application of a patch
of rouge to the nose, after which the participant, an animal or an
infant, is placed in front of a mirror. The rouge spot on the nose
cannot be seen except through reflection. If an animal or infant reaches
to their own nose to wipe away the rouge it implies that they recognize
the reflection in the mirror as being a representation, but not the
substance, of their self. They have passed the test and are considered
to have selfrecognition. The infant human has a sense that they are in
their private interospective world and not in the mirror. If, on the
other hand, they reach to their image in the mirror to wipe the rouge
away they are considered not to possess self-recognition, that is, the
mirror image, rather than being a reflection of themself, is them. Human
infants learn, over time and in the following step by step sequence,
that, first, what they see in a mirror is not another infant, second,
that the mirror mimics all the infant's own motor movements, third, that
the mirror does not have someone else behind it, and finally, that they
are looking at a reflection of themself. If you have a dog, you will
know that they don't get beyond the first step. They don't know that
their own reflection in a glass door is not themself and may, like our
very sociable dog Nelly, scrape their paw on the glass back door to get
out and play with the reflected dog who appears to be in the garden.
Nelly, unable to recognize herself in her reflection, will bound out
enthusiastically to play with the other dog. She looks around surprised
at the absence of another dog and, after a few moments with her ears and
tail cocked, goes off nonplussed to do something else. In spite of her
highly tuned other-awareness, and her sensitivity to our feelings and

even our intentions, she does not have this form of self-recognition.
She cannot learn it, either: she simply does not have the neural
machinery. A limited number of animals do pass the mirror awareness
test, for example orangutans, bonobos, chimpanzees, elephants and big
sea mammals such as whales and dolphins.86 These mammals are considered
to have advanced forms of self-awareness, and we give them the respect
that they are considered to merit because they are more like us. More
recently, magpies when placed in front of a mirror were shown to pick
away at a red spot put on their necks.87 In order to remove it they try
to peck the spot with their beaks and with their claws. Maybe it is not
that surprising when you consider how clever magpies are, and how they
tend to wait until you are out of sight before they get up to mischief.
The magpie discovery is an indication that self-recognition -- the basis
of autobiography and higher consciousness -- is not exclusive to humans
or even to our immediate evolutionary ancestors.

Separation from Others In The Myth of Sisyphus, Albert Camus writes: If
I were a tree among trees, a cat among animals, this life would have a
meaning or rather this problem would not arise, for I should belong to
this world. I should be this world to which I am now opposed by my whole
consciousness . . . And what constitutes the basis of that conflict, or
that break between that world and my mind, but the awareness of it?

Camus was, like many existential philosophers of the last century,
grappling with the concept of self-awareness and consciousness. We are
none of us a tree among trees or a cat among animals. We intuit a break
between that world and \[our\] mind. The world is out there, and you,
the person, are behind the door of the exteroceptive world in your
private interoceptive world, looking out. You see yourself as separate
not only from the world but from other persons. It may sound obvious
that if you feel and think of yourself as just you and no one else, then
others have to be separate, but it is also a profound point. It is only
when this is absent, as it is sometimes in psychotic disorders, that one
can see that self-awareness, and

the consequent awareness of separation from others, is a process in
itself. Most of us automatically know this at an experiential level. You
know that when you think, do or feel something, that it is you who have
had that thought, experienced that feeling or done that act. Your
thoughts or feelings may have been influenced by many things, but you
know that they originated in your own head and your own body.
Schizophrenia is an illness in which the affected individual frequently
feels that their sensations, emotions, and even actions are not their
own. Because experiences seem to not come from oneself, they are usually
attributed to someone or something else. Awareness of self is so
fundamental to human experience that you may consider it to be
inevitable and automatic. It may seem superfluous to put the adjective
'subjective' before experience, because all experience is subjective,
but this absence in schizophrenia provides a stark illumination of the
phenomenon. Hannah was a patient of mine with a diagnosis of
schizophrenia whom I treated many years ago and who felt as if her
internal experiences belonged to someone else. Her story has stayed with
me for reasons that will become obvious.

Hannah Hannah was a young woman who had begun to behave in an eccentric
way some years prior to her admission. She moved away from her friends
and family to fringe cultures, and gradually moved from this to
reclusivity. She had come to believe, and was firmly convinced when I
began treating her, that she was experiencing the pain and suffering of
a child who was locked in a basement. She had strange and unpleasant
inner feeling states, sometimes physically painful, sometimes a choking
sensation and sometimes distressing emotions that she came to understand
as belonging to a girl child who was imprisoned. She believed that she
was telepathically feeling the physical and emotional pain of the child,
and she went to the police on many occasions to tell them about the
girl. The allegations were investigated more than once, and no evidence
was found to corroborate her

story. One day she spotted one of her neighbours across the road and had
an instant realization that he was the pedophile torturer. A sudden
realization like this, similar to the one experienced by Edith (in
Chapter 1) on seeing the small gravestone and realizing that her baby
was buried there, is characteristic of experiences in psychosis. We call
this a 'delusional perception': a person sees something as it is, be it
a gravestone or a neighbour, and simultaneously experiences a sudden
transformative realization that is delusional . . . the gravestone
marked the baby's grave, the neighbour was the evil pedophile. Back to
Hannah's story: Hannah told the neighbours and the police about the
identity of the 'pedophile'. At this point her distress was
uncontainable and her family and community were no longer able to cope;
she was involuntarily detained to be treated in our hospital. On
admission, Hannah insisted that what she was experiencing -- the voices,
the emotional distress, the internal sensations -- were the experiences
of the child, and she was deeply angry and frustrated that no one would
believe her. She refused medication because it would take away her
telepathic experiences and leave the child completely cut off. Hannah
had been involuntarily detained with the same delusional system a few
years previously. On her previous admission, the antipsychotics, from
our point of view, had worked and had put an end to her abnormal sensory
experiences. Following her discharge home from this admission, she
stopped taking the medication, believing that it had removed her psychic
ability to communicate with the child. As the medication left her
system, the child, as she thought, began to communicate with her again.
Hannah now believed that she had a 'sixth sense' that the antipsychotics
suppressed. There were endless negotiations with Hannah during the first
few hours of this current admission about taking the medication, but to
no avail. The child needed her, and the pedophile needed to be exposed
-- taking the medication would put the child in danger. We decided that
it would be in Hannah's best interest to administer her medication
involuntarily and keep her in the hospital for a prolonged period so
that she would have a better chance to recover and re-engage in a world
without a delusional system. We were in the ward office discussing her
care plan, starting with the immediate intramuscular administration of
an antipsychotic, when a nurse, an ashen faced young man, rushed in to
tell us that Hannah had been cut

down from the curtain rail around her bed. Hannah had tricked the staff
into thinking that she was in the bathroom, and while the nurse waited
for her outside the bathroom door she had returned to the ward and had
hanged herself. She was dead when cut down. We found a note on her bed
written in a quick scribble: 'Now do you believe me, help her.' As the
months passed, I reconstructed Hannah's subjective experiences in my
imagination many times. She died, as she saw it, trying to save the
child. How could she forget the years of the powerful sensate experience
that had been transmitted to her from the child -- it had been her every
waking moment, the focus of all her attention, and the fodder of her
memories. Treatment and a possible cure would lead to her abandoning the
girl's one line of communication. Would her life be worth living if she
abandoned the prisoner child? Could she live with that? She may have
thought that there was no way to make the world believe her except
through suicide. She may also have had a ghastly suspicion, on this her
second involuntary admission, that she had a severe and enduring mental
illness. If that was the case, she would have felt, as patients have
said to me following recovery from psychotic episodes, that she had lost
her mind. Either possibility may have been unbearable. Hannah again
demonstrates that antipsychotic medication is indeed effective in
controlling abnormal exteroceptive and interoceptive sensations, but it
does not erase one's world view laid down by chronic psychotic
experiences; something that I didn't appreciate the importance of at
that time. Antipsychotics can control psychosis, but not memory. Hannah
also shows how personal experience becomes a person's only filter
through which they can understand the present world. Hannah attributed
her interoceptive feeling states to someone else, the phantom girl, as
if they belonged to the girl and not to Hannah herself. In psychiatry we
call these experiences 'made emotions', or 'alien emotions'. As we have
already established in Part 1, we interpret our emotions through the
hidden cortex of the insula in a vague body-in-insula map. A group of
scientists in Toronto were testing pain sensation in patients who were
conscious and about to undergo neurosurgery for epilepsy when they
discovered something extraordinary about how humans feel pain.88 Pain is
often used to examine emotional/feeling circuitry in the brain because
it is a

relatively simple feeling to recognize and therefore to measure in
experiments. The Toronto group did single-cell recordings in patients
who were about to have a part of the big neural pathway that connects
everything else to the prefrontal brain removed neurosurgically. This
pathway is called the cingula: it is a big 'sweep up' circuit that
connects the hippocampus, the amygdala, the insula and the cortices to
the prefrontal cortex to be assimilated into a coherent whole. The
Toronto group applied mildly painful stimuli to the patients' skin and
found that pain sensations predictably fired neurons in the insula. This
was to be expected. What astonished them was that the 'pain neurons'
also ignited when the patient watched the pinprick being applied to the
examiner's fingers. Neuroimaging studies since have determined that
there is a pain pathway within the brain going from the insula, where
pain experienced in onself is mapped, and this circuits to the cingula
system where pain for others is mapped, before being transferred to the
prefrontal cortex.89 ii Pain neurons represented one's own pain and the
same pain in others. Because the neural system of recognition of
emotions in oneself is the same one that is used in the recognition of
feelings in others, it is referred to as the 'emotional mirror
system'.90 We literally do feel for others, and this comes from our
feelings for ourselves.91 The insula--cingula mirror emotional circuit
is more active in individuals who are empathic and, as you may be
predicting, is less active in those who have difficulty feeling for
others, those who have anti-social or psychopathic personalities.92, 93
We often blame psychopaths for their behaviour, but it would be more
productive to teach them to learn what they are not wired to experience.
The key role played by the insula in understanding the feelings of
others fits with the evolutionary development of the insula, which
increases in size and complexity from robins to dogs to humans, as
emotional awareness and the ability to feel for others develops.94 Even
among mammals there is substantial variability in the anatomy and
organization of the insula.95 The networks involved in mirror emotional
systems are sometimes referred to as the social brain. I'm not keen on
the parcellation of brain functions into 'social brain', 'emotional
brain', 'thinking brain', and so on, because of the interconnectivity of
the circuitry underlying experiences such as emotions, memory and
cognition. These experiences are not

separable in terms of brain circuitry but form a dense network that
delivers a unified experience. Nevertheless, it is a convention that may
help one to understand the fact that key constituent circuits within the
whole brain network can be invoked to explain problems with specific
functions, in this case emotional misattribution. The strongest evidence
for involvement of the insula-prefrontal circuitry in mediating self and
social awareness is in the brain disease called frontotemporal
dementia.96 Here there is a dramatic decline in self-awareness and
social skills that is accompanied by a fairly specific and commensurate
atrophy of the insula-cingula neural path. Compared to schizophrenia,
there is more general awareness of, and sympathy for, the difficulties
in understanding feeling states that occur in autistic spectrum
disorders (ASD). ASD is a very broad diagnosis, and many clinicians,
including me, think that it has become overinclusive, extending to
individuals with these personality traits who do not have a disorder. In
any case, impaired socio-emotional awareness is a key element in real
ASD, with difficulties recognizing one's own feelings and reading the
feelings and intentions of others. There is evidence for reduced
activity in insula-cingula areas in those with this diagnosis, as would
be expected given the importance of this circuit in interpreting
emotions in oneself and others.97 It needs to be emphasized that
something fundamentally different from the poor emotional awareness seen
in ASD happens in schizophrenia. In ASD there is an overall impairment
of socio-emotional awareness, while there is a total mixing up of one's
own and others interoceptive experiences in schizophrenia. The tangle of
made emotions experienced by a psychotic individual should not be
confused with empathy for others, which is an almost invariable human
experience. The misattribution to others of feelings originating in
oneself in schizophrenia, as experienced by Hannah, suggests that there
may be problems with the emotional mirror circuitry in schizophrenia.
Ray Dolan, a neuroscience psychiatrist from University College London,
hypothesized about twenty years ago that there may be pathology in this
circuitry in those with schizophrenia.98 Since then, research has
confirmed his idea, and there is now some more specific evidence that
neuron function in the pathway from the insula to the prefrontal cortex
may be disrupted.99, 100 The finding that a specific familial

gene in some people with schizophrenia is associated with reductions in
this pathway supports this idea.80, 88 This hypothesis, like most
neuromechanisms of psychiatric disorders, remains speculative and is
likely to be only one of many mechanisms that cause the psychotic
experiences in schizophrenia. Made feelings, like those that Hannah had,
form part of a pattern in a more general experiential problem in those
who suffer from the acute psychosis of schizophrenia, where not only
feelings, but also thoughts and actions, can be experienced as being
implanted by other people or forces, and not originating in oneself.

Through a Looking-Glass Through the Looking-Glass (1871) is a fantastic
description of confused self--other systems. Whether Lewis Carroll was
writing from his experiences after taking a consciousness-altering drug,
or from unprovoked psychotic experiences, or from a brilliant
introspective exploration of the feverish dawnings about consciousness
in the late nineteenth century, has been the subject of much
speculation. It is difficult to see how Carroll could have produced such
an authentic description of psychotic experiences without having
experienced them himself in some way. Alice seems to be subject to the
agency of others as she is tossed around the imaginary chessboard,
sometimes moving as a pawn, at other times being carried zigzag by the
knight's movements, being prevented from expressing herself coherently
by the queens, and so on. She worries that she may only exist as an
imaginary figure in the Red King's dream and that she will cease to
exist when he wakes up. She exists as a sort of reflection of others,
like Hannah was for the imprisoned child. What would happen next to
Alice? Would the knight lift her up and gallop away, forwards or
backwards, and then sideways to the right or left? Would the Queen be so
vexatious, stealing her thoughts and replacing them with her own, that
Alice will throttle her? Or has she been directed by the King to
throttle her? It is easy to see how a person can become paranoid and
angry with others in such states. Alice's experience of her actions
being controlled -- in her case by the anthropomorphized chess pieces --
is called

'made actions'. Lewis Carroll's choice of a looking-glass as a metaphor
for systems of made thoughts and actions was brilliant. He wrote the
book 100 years before the first clue to the neural pathways of
self--other discrimination came in the form of mirror neurons, although
it was to be some time before the impact of this discovery was
understood. The seminal 1992 study that led to the understanding that
other people's actions may be represented in one's own brain came from a
group led by Giacomo Rizzolatti in Parma, Italy.101 Their experiment,
conducted on monkeys, looked at electronic recordings over the motor
cortex part of their brains as they moved their hand muscles to form a
grasp. The motor cortex is in front of the sensory cortex on the surface
of the brain and is similar in design to the sensory cortex, the body
being represented as a homunculus. The firing of specific cells in the
motor cortex corresponded to the movement of matched hand muscles and
gave the scientists a moving map of the motor cortex of Monkey's hand
movements. During the experiment they observed something unexpected --
as well as the motor neurons firing in a predictable pattern in the
motor cortex when Monkey grasped an object, specific neurons in the
premotor cortex, in front of the motor cortex, also fired. These
premotor 'grasp' neurons were firing at the same time as their matched
neurons in the motor cortex. What was the function of these neurons?
They then discovered that, extraordinarily, if Monkey watched the
experimenter grasping the object in a similar way to them, the same
premotor grasp neurons fired, without the motor neurons. The pre-motor
neurons seemed to represent the motor movement without Monkey actually
moving, essentially allowing the brain to imagine a movement. The Parma
group called these neurons 'mirror neurons' because they mirrored the
actions of matched motor neurons involved in the grasp, the imagined
grasp movement in Monkey and the movement in others. The motor mirror
neurons 'represent' one's own and other people's motor function, and
also form part of a system in which one can distinguish self from other
movement. Dysfunction in self--other distinction would make it difficult
to know whether you yourself were doing something or whether someone
else was doing it to you. It is subjectively terrifying, because the
person so affected will experience their actions as being out of

their own control, similar to Alice experiencing her movements as being
at the mercy of anthropomorphized chess pieces.

Mirroring, Memory and Prediction There is a further layer to the mirror
motor neuron story related to memory. Mirroring is learned, and this
memory is retrieved if stimulated by similar current experience. The
motor mirror neurons fire not just in response to actual movements in
oneself and others, but to predicted or imagined movements and
feelings.102 I think of mirror motor neurons firing off when I watch
goalkeepers moving between the goalposts. They are highly trained to
project from observation of motor movements to prediction of motor
intention. Will the small movement of the striker's foot, thigh or eyes
predict a kick to the left or right, high or low . . . or is the striker
faking a movement to send the goalkeeper in the wrong direction? In a
penalty kick, both the striker and the goalkeeper are playing with each
other's mirror motor systems, predicting in the here and now, through
intense observation, and in the abstracted representation of predicted
movements, the others' mirror predicting systems. It is a dizzying
mirroring of mirrored predictions. It is now known that the motor mirror
system allows athletes to improve their performance through mental
rehearsal -- imagining movements leads to improved motor performance!
The same prediction applies to emotional mirroring. Adolescents learn
that the emotions they experience are also experienced by others; this
knowledge is not innate. The emotional mirroring system is brought to
the prefrontal cortex and becomes a part of integrated, working memory
systems. The Toronto scientists observed that if pain was applied more
than once to the preoperative patients with the exposed cingulae, then
the pain neuron in the cingula response preceded contact of the pin with
the skin -- they lit up in prediction of a sensation of pain. This is
why we recoil at the anticipation of pain in ourselves and squirm at the
idea of pain in others.

'Made Thoughts' While through the looking-glass, Alice also had the
experience that the Queen was stealing her thoughts and replacing them
with her own. This experience happens frequently in schizophrenia and is
called 'thought withdrawal' -- the stealing of Alice's thoughts -- and
'thought insertion' -- the replacement of Alice's thoughts with the
Queen's. There is a misattribution of the thoughts arising in one's own
brain to another person or agency. I once treated a young man, Eoin, who
believed that his thoughts were implanted by someone or something. He
was never sure who the persecutors were, although he usually attributed
the thoughts to anyone who was nearby. The thoughts were very unpleasant
and were themed around sexual perversions. If someone was looking at
him, he had the experience that they could read these thoughts. Eoin
used to avoid making eye contact with anyone because, by keeping his
eyes averted, he was protecting himself from others gaining access to
the strange, disturbing thoughts. Using the metaphor of Alice's world on
the other side of the looking-glass, Eoin not only thought that the King
or Queen could implant thoughts in his head, but also that the thoughts
so implanted could be accessed by all and sundry if they made eye
contact. His mother told me that he would become agitated and perplexed
when he looked in the mirror and would shout at and attack his own
image. I asked him about this when he was better, and he told me that it
was horrible to look at his mirrored image because he didn't feel that
it was he himself. As he looked at his reflection, he was simultaneously
experiencing auditory hallucinations -- hearing out loud the implanted
thoughts saying shameful derogatory things. Eoin lived in this confusion
of distressing 'alien thoughts' -- as it is sometimes called in
psychiatry -- during the first years of his psychosis, refusing help. It
was only when he attacked a stranger at a bus stop that he was detained
and treated in a hospital. It took him years before he could make eye
contact with others. Having particular types of auditory hallucinations
-- hearing voices speaking out loud, usually about you as if you are not
there, or at you -- is the most common pathological experience in
schizophrenia. There is an interesting idea that the voices in psychosis
may be caused by the

misattribution of inner speech as coming from an external source.85 If
inner speech is a new idea to you -- and I had some intuitive difficulty
with the concept years ago, because it is not a prominent part of how I
experience the world; some of us are more 'feeling' and/or visual than
'thinking' -- just ponder what you are doing now when reading this book.
You are, as you read this sentence, using inner speech to understand. It
is estimated that 25 per cent of average waking time is spent engaged
with inner speech. Speech and language are so complex, and sometimes so
limiting, that even a brief exploration of the topic is beyond the scope
of this book, so I'll not go there, except to say that inner speech is a
representation of thinking processes. The theory of auditory
hallucinations being the person's own inner speech attributed to some
outside agency again points to the confusion about what is and what is
not originating in oneself in psychotic states. I have artificially
broken down the integrated experience of awareness of oneself and of
others into different domains -- awareness of one's own and others'
emotions through the emotional mirror system, awareness of one's own and
others' movements through the motor mirror system, and awareness of
one's own thinking as being a subjective experience. It is the
integrated experience of these systems together that forms a sense of
oneself -- one's sense of self -- in the world in the present and in
memory. The relevance of this to biographical memory is that a biography
can only start when an infant can experience awareness of themself. Self
has to be recognized before it can be recorded as an entity. What we can
learn from those with experiences of misattribution in schizophrenia is
that the neural processes that are used to represent one's own
movements, feelings and thoughts are the same as those used to identify
these experiences in others, and that self- and other-experience need to
be distinguished in order to have coherent experience and memory.
Somehow there is an inbuilt neural mechanism that codes 'self' -- as
distinct from 'other' -- experiences, and this neural mechanism seems to
be broken in schizophrenia. Of all the psychotic experiences, the most
difficult to understand is the belief that one's subjective experiences
-- one's feelings, thoughts and actions -- originate in someone else.
You know that you, and not another force, is turning the pages of this
book -- you have motor selfconsciousness. You can see or hear the words,
knowing that the words have

been written by the author -- you have sensory self-consciousness. You
do not believe that someone can put their thoughts as internal dialogue
into your brain, or that you can put your thoughts into someone else's
brain, or that everyone can access your private thoughts, sometimes to
the extent that the thoughts are spoken out loud. You may have good
emotional intuition, but you do not believe that your feelings are
actually implanted by someone or something else. Although I have tried
many times to vividly imagine experiences such as Hannah's and Eoin's, I
find myself unable to do so. I have done the next best thing, I hope,
and become familiar with this pattern of disordered experience and how
it reveals itself to the observer. I can usually now quickly glean from
what I observe that these experiences are present or not. Like all
psychiatrists, as a patient once said to me, I am like a detective.

An Anarchy of Experience One of the best descriptions of states of
misattribution and confused boundaries comes from the psychiatrist R. D.
Laing. In his famous book The Divided Self (1960), he articulated how
the language of conventional psychiatry focused on symptoms, from the
clinician's objective viewpoint, rather than the experiences of the
psychotic patient. This wooden objectification of psychotic experience
is something that is still evident in the discipline of psychiatry
today, but I think that we are gradually moving to subjective experience
as being the primary clinical focus. Laing's move from a symptom-based
approach to an experiential one was radical, and he described for the
first time the lived experiences of psychosis. 'It is often difficult
for a person with a sense of his integral selfhood and personal identity
. . . to transpose himself into the world of an individual whose
experiences may be utterly lacking in . . . self-validating
certainties.' One of the most basic of those 'self-validating
certainties' is knowing that you are you, and therefore that you are.
Laing's insights into the experiential aspects of psychosis have been
overshadowed in his legacy by his misguided beliefs about schizophrenia
and his reckless treatment of patients. He became a cause célèbre
because

he revolted against conventional psychiatry, leading what later came to
be called the anti-psychiatry movement. He believed that psychosis was a
journey of personal exploration that could lead to a resolution with an
improved sense of self. The belief that schizophrenia was caused by a
past trauma was fashionable during the 1960s and the 1970s. If you could
'work through' the psychosis, it was reasoned, then you could find a
cure for the psychosis. This was similar to Freud's belief that a range
of psychiatric disorders, such as depression, anxiety and OCD, which he
collectively called the 'neuroses', were caused by some past trauma and
that, once the trauma was unveiled, then the disorder would disappear.
To this end, Laing opened up a therapeutic house in central London in
1965 for those who had psychosis. Residents were taken off their
antipsychotic medicines. There were no rules or personal boundaries, and
patients, staff and visitors (often famous and always fashionably
anti-psychiatry) frequently partied together. Patients took LSD and
other psychedelics to enable what was seen as a journey of enlightenment
from psychosis to sanity. In the ensuing chaos, which Laing himself
called 'an anarchy of experience', two patients died by throwing
themselves off the roof. Following these suicides the centre was closed.
The tragic end of his therapeutic experiment was entirely predictable.
What is actually needed in those who are psychotic is a reinforcement of
their own boundaries, a construction of their absent 'self-validating
certainties', rather than further disintegration of the broken
self--other boundaries caused by the psychosis. It is worth knowing that
there are still a few psychiatrists, and many shaman-like
self-proclaimed healers, who are opposed to treating schizophrenia with
antipsychotics in spite of all the scientific and empirical evidence to
the contrary. This oppositional stance occurs in all branches of
medicine -- oncology, for example -- but it is more prevalent in
psychiatry because of cultural bias and also the difficulties that a
person has when psychotic of seeing themselves as being psychotic. None
of us can be outside of our own brain; we can only try to make sense of
the sensory information that is delivered to the sensory cortices, and
thence to the higher brain for integration. In hindsight it is now
apparent that Laing was able to describe the fractured world of
psychosis because he was a brilliant observer of his own experiences of
psychotic disintegration. He experienced the melted

boundaries that he wrote about possibly through substance abuse, notably
the psychedelic drugs that the counterculture movement of the 1960s
endorsed, and alcohol. In any case, his experiment in London, like those
of the shamanic therapists, only heaped further and unnecessary
suffering, sometimes unbearable, on those already lost in psychosis.

Mirroring and Memory In the absence of functioning mirror systems, there
can be no coherence in putting together input from the world and there
is no coherence in the story that follows. The brain will continue to
make dendrites and connect up neurons even if there is no resulting
real-life meaning, because this is how neural mechanisms operate. The
brain does not stop organizing because the input will have no rational
overall meaning. Memory will continue to be formed because cell
assemblies will be put together in the hippocampus and will be
transported to the cortex in the dynamic functional connectivity that is
the biological life of the brain. Usually, the person with chronic
psychotic experiences will, over time, form some sort of narrative to
explain their experiences. Hannah's narrative to explain her alien
emotional experiences was that it was a telepathic implant from a
captured child. Sometimes this putting together of experiences to make a
narrative has some superficial plausibility, but this usually falls away
quickly on closer scrutiny. Whether psychotic or not, subjective
experience becomes biologically embedded in the messy web of neural
connections that is memory. The basic principle that current experience
gets laid on to memory networks through association applies as much to
psychotic as to non-psychotic experience, and as time goes by the
psychotic individual's memory and way of being in the world will become
increasingly estranged from common reality. As the delusional web of
experience becomes elaborated, the more difficult it will become to
bring them back to the shared reality of normal experience. In this
chapter we have followed the origins of biographical memory from the
amnesic infant to the dawnings of self-recognition, and of how
self-recognition has evolved phylogenetically and is reflected in infant
neurodevelopment. Self-recognition is just the start of consciousness of

'self' and the beginning of the separation of self that continues to
develop throughout life. How the infant with inklings of
self-recognition will eventually develop a sophisticated system of
self-awareness and a sense of others possessing that same quality is not
yet clear, but it happens in concert with the increasing complexity of
memory organization. We will now look at this developing complexity. \*
Luis Buñuel, My Last Sigh (University of Minnesota Press, 2003). † W. B.
Yeats, 'Among School Children'.

10. The Tree of Life: Arborizations and Prunings

To exist is to change, to change is to mature, to mature is to go on
creating oneself endlessly. Henri Bergson (1859--1941)

A person's way of being in the world changes as they age, a process that
starts at birth. This is because the brain develops an increasingly
complex way of understanding the world -- the outer world and one's
inner interoceptive world. Developments in the organization of memory
systems can be seen in changing patterns of subjective perception that
mark the different stages of life. The general life-cycle pattern of
human memory is reflected in the changing patterns in overall brain
anatomy. The structural and functional changes in brain systems continue
throughout life, but there has been more emphasis on early brain changes
because these are foundational and generally have a reliable trajectory
into adult life. Let us start by looking at a relatively simple
development in brain memory systems, what I call the Beethoven
phenomenon.

The Beethoven Phenomenon Beethoven (1770--1827) began to lose his
hearing during his twenties but continued to compose music until he
died. Some of those compositions considered to be his greatest were
created during the period of his most profound deafness.i How did he
write music when he could hardly hear sounds? The answer lies in the
location of his deafness, which was found at autopsy to be in the
auditory nerve -- the sensory nerves conducting sound from the outside
world to the auditory cortex of the brain. Beethoven's

auditory nerve was diseased, but his auditory cortex, which had
memorized sound, notes, tunes, music, had remained intact. When
listening to music, the auditory cortex lights up. When we imagine
music, in addition to the auditory cortex the prefrontal cortex also
lights up.103 Imagined tunes are sound memories projected from the
prefrontal to the auditory cortex. Following the gradual loss of sound
from the outer world, Beethoven was hearing through neural
representations. The auditory cortex--prefrontal dance was the composer
of the virtual music. Beethoven provides an amazing example of auditory
sensory experience being transformed into cortical memory systems, and
of how the cortical memory can then be played out in the prefrontal
cortex as a sort of 'inner' sensory experience. His creative genius
derived from some form of staggeringly complex cortical representation
of musical notes and their configuration into beautiful sound patterns.
The Beethoven phenomenon is a highly developed example of a universally
experienced phenomenon. In his rigorous musical training from a very
young age, Beethoven had created a neuronal labyrinth of musicality in
his auditory cortex. The process of gathering and organizing sensory
memory takes place at a galloping pace in the expanding cortical
networks during childhood. Children are immersed in the sensory world,
relatively free of the abstract 'short cuts' that develop with the more
organized cortex. The absence of abstract thinking is apparent in the
way that children tell a story. Events follow events without being
assigned meaning . . . they have memorized images in chronological order
and they recall them in the same sequence. Their output of
non-assimilated imagery, the absence of context and meaning, is
delightfully naïve and sometimes illuminating, because it gives us an
insight into our learned ways of looking at the world. Because of this,
the world of the child is constantly new and more immediately sensate
than it is for adults. Dylan Thomas's dazzling description of the
sensate experience of childhood in his poem 'Fern Hill' needs to be
heard in his sonorous Welsh voice to be fully appreciated. You can feel
the vivid sensate excitement of childhood through the melodic images. It
is all movement. All the sun long it was running, it was lovely, the hay
Fields high as the house, the tunes from the chimneys, it was air

And playing, lovely and watery And fire green as grass.

Every time I read this dancing romp of a poem I am back in my own Fern
Hill -- my mother's family farm in rural Kerry, where we spent our
childhood summers. I can almost smell the cut hay, feel the itch of it,
and see my Uncle Jim looking down like a giant with a huge hand around a
jam jar of heavily sugared cold tea. What is happening in the neural
circuits during the expansion of sensate learning during childhood? We
do know that there are changes, visible to the eye, in brain structures
that reflect the sequential stages of development in cognition and
behaviour. Cognitive and behavioural changes are more culturally
familiar than memory systems, but it is the changes in memory
organization that underlie the cognitive and behavioural changes. The
developing infant is taught in ways that are appropriate to their stage
of brain development. The infant, immersed in a sensory world of
tactile, visual and auditory learning, where everything from their
mother's nipple to their own feet are tested and tasted in their mouths,
is taught simple sensory information -- naming objects and people,
colours and sounds. This is the period of rapid change in brain sensory
systems, which can be seen in the expansion of the volume of the sensory
cortical brain. In a foundational study from UCLA in California and the
National Institute of Mental Health in Maryland that tracked changes in
the child's brain, researchers followed up thirteen children ranging in
age from four to twenty-one years.104 Cortical development from
childhood to young adulthood was mapped every two years with sequential
brain neuroimaging scans. While they found great variation among the
children, there was also a common pattern of development that followed
the evolutionary development of the brain from phylogenetically older to
younger animals. The general pattern started with increases in the size
of the sensory and motor cortices. This growth reflects the rapid
expansion of relatively simple sensory and motor learning. Neural
connections are then elaborated among the different sensory cortices,
allowing multisensory perception to develop so that sound, sight, touch,
taste and smell can become integrated. A child will eventually be able,
on hearing a bark, to turn their head in the direction of the sound,

expecting to see a dog. Visual depth perception, 3-D vision, is a good
example of the organization of multiple cortical areas, including visual
and directional intelligence. Individuals without sight from birth
cannot imagine in 3-D because they do not get the necessary input from
the seeing world to elaborate 3-D perception. As in the history of
visual art, as with individual neurodevelopment, perspective is learned.
The second important aspect of brain development is the process of
'pruning' of the dendritic connections among the neurons. It is called
'pruning' because it is a similar process to cutting back a fruit tree
to maximize fruit production. Neurons are pruned to maximize precise
output.61 You might have thought that the dendrites expand as knowledge
expands, but, counterintuitively, we are born with too many dendrites
and continue this process of overproducing dendrites during the first
year of post-birth life. At a cellular level, the tiny baby's neurons
are overconnected, and they are susceptible to being overloaded easily
by too much sensory input, because their neurons are firing off in all
directions in a haphazard way. So we soothe, and we teach simple sensory
information; we direct and contain. Sensory neurons are the first to be
pruned following this brief expansion. This is reflected in the
experience of sensory learning, which is really a process of
discrimination. For example, a child will come to recognize a tree as a
tree, and not just another plant, and then will learn whether it is, for
example, a big or a small tree. Later they may learn that some trees
lose their leaves in winter, and others are evergreens. They may come to
know their trees and identify the genus from the leaves, the size, the
way the branches grow, the bark, the flower or fruit or a combination
thereof. At this point they have developed good cortical networks that
allow patterns of recognition, and more importantly discrimination,
among trees. They no longer need to scrutinize the constituent parts:
the tree can be identified at a glance. The real becomes represented,
filed away in the cortex as an increasingly precise abstract
representation that can then be automatically processed. These shortcuts
are necessary in order to process more refined information, otherwise we
would spend unnecessary time having to process all the pieces of
information that had been learned throughout one's life each time we
identified a tree. In this part of the world, most people would identify
a

holly tree at a glance. You may hear a rustling in a holly tree in
winter and predict that it is a mistle thrush, nested there for winter
because the berries provide food and the prickly leaves protection. I
intuited that the rustling in my holly bush this winter was a mistle
thrush because I saw a larger than average thrush, which I learned was a
mistle thrush, in a holly tree in my garden during previous winters. One
is carried by multisensory perceptions -- the sound of a rustling, the
movement of holly branches -- to immediate perceptions based on prior
knowledge. A dendritic connection has formed between a rustling in a
holly tree and a thrush to form a perception, facilitating a
connected-up experience of these sensations to a shortcut conclusion.
One may look at a distant tree in Africa with white flowers, and be
prepared to see, as I was, not white blossoms but a fluttering of white
butterflies. The memory of a 'butterfly' tree had been laid down years
previously, but I had not seen many trees in Africa with white blossoms.
We expect to see a car when we hear the sound of a car, a truck when we
hear the loud growl of a big diesel engine, a racing car when we hear
that velvety growl. These automatic perceptions and predictions are the
'ways of seeing' that Berger described, alluded to in Chapter 3. As an
infant learns about the world, the connections among the neurons in the
cortex become less dense. Pruning in the sensory cortices peaks at about
three years of age but continues throughout childhood at a declining
pace. The prefrontal brain develops at a later and slower pace, because
it is the principal brain area where inputs from the cortical sensory
areas, from the amygdala-insula and from the hippocampus, come together
to be sorted out. It is where information from multiple areas is 'held'
to be manipulated. It is the expert juggler that can, stealthily in
silent mode, or in active working memory, transcend the external sensate
world, to imagine or to predict, to create or to manipulate. The ratio
of prefrontal brain to total brain volume is biggest in humans compared
to all other species, and as human development tends to follow
evolutionary development -- the principle underpinning phylogenetics --
this area undergoes substantial development during adolescence and early
adulthood.

Prefrontal Pruning

The development in the prefrontal brain can be seen in changes in the
prefrontal cortex that commence during late childhood, when the synapses
are being pruned to form stable neural patterns for understanding the
world.105 Pruning cuts over-expansive spread of signals and creates
neural pathways for discriminating between signals, allowing the
development of systematic thinking, or abstract reasoning. Pruning
facilitates the organization of vast amounts of input, enabling the
developing brain to take shortcuts through learned pathways of
knowledge. Prefrontal pruning is the neurodevelopmental signature of the
adolescent brain, but it continues to occur throughout the twenties and
thirties, something that has been discovered only relatively recently.
The second major change is a growth in the white matter that also takes
place during brain development. The brain is made up of patterns of grey
and of white matter: grey matter is composed of clusters of neurons, and
white matter is composed of the axons that emerge from the neurons to
carry the signal down to the dendrites and into the next neuron. The
axons are white because of an important process called 'myelination', in
which fatty spirals of myelin -- which look like microscopic swiss rolls
-- are wound around neurons. These fatty cells provide insulation that
speeds up the signal transmission, up to 100 times that of an
unmyelinated neuron. Myelination halts the promiscuous firing of neurons
with each other as the signals pass down the axons and is part of the
process of targeting signals to go in key directions. What previously
was a relatively dissipated signal becomes directed because, firstly,
some synapses are reinforced and others wither, and, secondly, improved
neural insulation speeds up the signal transmission.ii The development
of discrete pathways through pruning and neural insulation means that
some connections between neurons are sacrificed at the cost of
reinforcing others. The general scheme during early development is that
neurons arborize in a promiscuous way during prenatal and early
postnatal brain development to maximize foundational information, and
then become pruned to discriminate and sharpen sensory input during
childhood. In later childhood the prefrontal dendritic shoots get pruned
to provide cognitive and emotional ways of understanding the world. Some
interneural pathways are strengthened because of being

frequently fired, while others fade, leading to relatively fixed and
automatic networks of interpretation.106 The pattern of initial
over-elaboration of new information occurs with all new information and
throughout life, and it will be familiar to anyone who has tackled a new
area of knowledge, and not just lifted information from the internet.
There is an initial period of being lost and overgeneralizing in the sea
of novel information, before emerging with an organized, contextual
understanding of the new subject: knowledge expansion followed by
knowledge discrimination.

Neurodevelopmental Disorders Cognitive brain development in the
prefrontal circuitry that occurs during adolescence and early adulthood
may not proceed as it should, and there is a focused interest in recent
years in how pathology in pruning processes may lead to developmental
disorders, such as ASD and schizophrenia. The experiences and behaviours
typical of schizophrenia generally emerge during adolescence and early
adulthood. An adolescent does not wake up with schizophrenia -- it
develops over years. As might be predicted, if brain processes do not
get organized in the normal way, working memory will be disorganized.
Some researchers have hypothesized that there may be excessive pruning
in schizophrenia, and reduced pruning in ASD.107 A group working in
Cambridge have shown that the genes involved in pruning and myelination
are known to be risk genes for schizophrenia.108 While highly
speculative, these lines of inquiry have evolved into what is called
'network pathology', as distinct from the single pathway pathology in
dopamine neurotransmission that was naively believed to give rise to
schizophrenia, which we will examine later. Rachel was a patient of mine
who had onset of psychosis during childhood and did not have normal
integration of sensory input. Her world was incoherent to others, and
her thinking and speech had no continuity of meaning. She had minimal
autobiographical memory.

Rachel Rachel had been very psychotic since childhood and had, for her
own safety, lived in a psychiatric institution since she was a child. In
addition to severe treatment-resistant schizophrenia, she had bad
epilepsy. She had been referred to me during a period in my career when
I worked in a general hospital alongside neurologists. Her family wanted
to trial her on clozapine, which still remains the best antipsychotic
available. Clozapine can only be given when all other treatments fail,
because it can cause serious side effects, one of which is to
destabilize epilepsy. She was already on olympian doses of both
antipsychotics and antiepileptics but remained very ill, and her family
were desperate. We decided to admit her to the acute neurology ward,
where her epilepsy and psychosis could be monitored continuously, to
commence her on a trial of clozapine. Rachel is one of the few people
whom I have treated who held conversations with herself but not with
others. She sat in a chair by the bed, or in the bed, talking to herself
in different voices while the nursing staff chatted away to her as they
brought her through the daily ward routine. We spoke to her every day
and never received an acknowledgement that we had said anything, except
for an occasional hostile tone in her speech and a glowering expression.
We were of course rudely interrupting her hallucinatory conversations.
She spoke in the voices of whoever she was on the day, sometimes having
a deep male voice and sometimes a female voice. Her conversations made
no sense, but an occasional glimpse of a connection with the world would
peep through her ramblings. She told us once that she was Julius
'Seizure' -- a pun referencing her epilepsy that made us smile and
wonder whether an underlying innate character had formed in spite of her
crippling psychosis. Sometimes she was Marie Antoinette or some other
European royalty. On one occasion she told us that she was Grainne
'Whale'. This was no doubt a reference to the sixteenth-century Irish
pirate Grainne Uaile (pronounced 'wail'), a legendary female in Irish
mythology. We were into a few weeks of treatment with clozapine when the
scene that I remember, reinforced by my frequent recollections,
happened. We walked into her room and she made eye contact with me for
the first time,

said good morning and smiled shyly. I remember holding myself very
still. We were transfixed, hardly daring to believe what seemed to have
happened. I conducted a short conversation with her about what she had
eaten for breakfast . . . was she comfortable? . . . had she slept well?
. . . did she like the ward? She responded appropriately, and we slid
from the room when I felt that she may have had enough normal talk for
day one. I remember the team standing in the corridor of the neurology
ward immediately afterwards looking at each other, not speaking, sharing
a few emotional moments. In my early career I didn't allow much through
emotionally, but that has changed. It may seem to an outsider that the
drift would go in the opposite direction -- from one of struggling to
deal with one's subjective emotional responses to such suffering, to one
of objectivity. What happened actually is that it took me about a year
to cope with the emotional intensity of the work. That first year was
exhausting, and then I learned, as clinicians do, to get on with it and
do my best. Now I find myself, after thirty-seven years in the field of
clinical psychiatry, at unpredictable moments being hit viscerally in a
way that I used not to be. We may bow down in respect at the sheer human
endurance that we see in the very ill, but to suffer in a world that is
hostile to this suffering . . . that is what hits the punch now. Rachel
went on to emerge with a charming, child-like quality from the
psychosis. Her coming into herself did not appear complex, and she made
no reference to fictional identities once the psychosis resolved. She
had little autobiographical memory and only spoke in a vague way about
having been in the hospital. Although her event memory was very sparse,
she had a good vocabulary, was literate, seemed smart and recognized
everyone. Shortly after her psychosis resolved, Rachel was discharged
back to her local psychiatric hospital and we didn't get a chance to
observe her full emergence from the shut-off chaos of her lost childhood
to the brain organization that was, somehow or other, released by
clozapine treatment. Her mother wrote to me until I left that consultant
post. Rachel continued to improve, and a few months after discharge from
us to her local hospital she returned to live with her family. Rachel's
brain was scrambled by the confusions of psychotic sensation, and/or by
disorganized integration of sensory signals. Her memory networks were
not being organized in a way that could lead to a coherent

processing of the neural input from the world, or to a coherent
narrative, to any narrative. The absence of normal organization of
memory in Rachel demonstrates how the developmental organization of
brain networks, absent in her, is the foundation for biographical and
working memory. Rachel did not really know who she was until she was
able to record experience in a way that made sense. Although we do not
understand how, her response to clozapine liberated her dramatically
from the chronic and crippling experiences of thought disorder and
hallucinations. When asked how antipsychotics work, the inquirer
frequently follows with, 'Has it something to do with dopamine?'
Dopamine is probably familiar to most people as the 'reward'
neurotransmitter. At one point in popular culture, dopamine release was
being invoked for almost everything enjoyable and seemed to be a common
neural pathway for all human pleasures. The dopamine omni-pleasure
oversimplification is highly unlikely, if only because dopamine
constitutes about 1 per cent of neurotransmitter content in the brain.
Generalizations about neurotransmitter function may be attractive to
explain experience and behaviour, but they are usually wrong. The
dopamine circuit does have a role in reward, because it is probably the
final common pathway for many brain-reward processes, but there are a
myriad of circuits that converge on the dopamine circuit, all of which
could mediate the reward and any of which could be problematic. Dopamine
does not cause the 'hit' -- the chocolate pleasure, the heroin high, the
orgasm, the alcohol buzz -- but it is the neurotransmitter in the
pathways that get laid down to memorize the hit. A common mechanism of
action across all antipsychotics is the reduction of dopamine
transmission, which explains why for decades the dominant theory in
schizophrenia was that dopamine systems were overactive. Our thinking on
how reduction in dopamine neurotransmission relates to the therapeutic
effects of antipsychotics is very speculative as yet, but it can be
conceptualized for ease of remembering as a process in which there is a
filtering out of sensory information being transmitted through to the
prefrontal cortex. The filtered information coming through to the
integrative brain can then be put together in a more coherent way. As
neuroscience expands to an understanding of the brain as an indivisible
connected-up mega-tangle of neurons, schizophrenia has now

moved away from a simple explanation of overactive dopamine
neurotransmission to that of disorganized network pathology that usually
starts during brain development.108 I was introduced into pioneering
neurodevelopmental research in the 1990s by Robin Murray, a world leader
in bringing ideas about neurodevelopment into the neuroscience of
psychiatry and subsequently into mainstream psychiatry. The experiences
and behaviours typical of schizophrenia generally emerge during
adolescence and early adulthood. An adolescent does not wake up with
schizophrenia -- it develops over years. I was lucky enough to be a
lecturer in the Department of Psychiatry during Robin's tenure as Head
of the Institute of Psychiatry. He carried a small notebook in the
breast pocket of his jacket in which he recorded the dates of birth of
our patients. He was particularly interested if a patient had been born
in 1958, because this was a year of a big influenza. He had hypothesized
that the flu virus, or a protein from the mother's immune system, may
have entered the developing brain of the fetus causing a neural
mis-wiring, in particular in the prefrontal neural circuits that use the
neurotransmitter dopamine. Prefrontal circuits using dopamine develop
significantly during early adulthood, and consequently the brain
problems, he reasoned, would not become really apparent until dopamine
circuitry was being reorganized in adolescence, potentially leading to
schizophrenia-like illnesses.109 The idea that a uterine virus may cause
some forms of schizophrenia was considered far-fetched back then, but
research since has confirmed that the prenatal environment is a
foundational one in terms of neural wiring, and that schizophrenia is
probably a neurodevelopmental disorder of brain wiring. An important
point is that mis-wiring and misfiring in integrative circuitry can
follow from multiple causes, including infection in the pregnant mother,
brain injuries acquired during early development or childhood abuse or
neglect, or substance abuse during childhood or adolescence. The effects
of the immune system, inflammation and antibody formation on neural
systems have since become mainstream subjects in neuroscience.iii
Psychosis can also follow inevitably from an inherited genetic DNA
sequence that codes for a faulty brain protein. Or, probably more
likely, psychotic disorders may follow from a combination of multiple

causes with small effect sizes that cumulatively fail to bring a
developing brain to a critical level of coherent networking.110, 111

Abstraction and Imagination Sometimes we are aware of our own layering
of patterns of discriminatory learning, like learning about trees, and
sometimes we are not aware of the knowledge upon which our sometimes
correct, sometimes approximate, sometimes incorrect intuitions are
derived. Henri Bergson believed, based on subjective observation and
introspection, that intuition was grounded in memory, and he was
correct. Intuitive knowledge may seem to be speculative, but it is not a
wild guess -- it is grounded in hidden information that has become
automatic. You know that you know something but you may not be sure of
how or why you know it. The immediate intuition that the rustling in a
holly tree may be a mistle thrush is built on the layers of cortical
association memory that are activated when I see and hear this
combination. The intuitions that one has are the outputs from current
brain inputs pitched against neural patterns in working memory. The
ability to reason, to use information in an abstract way, develops in
tandem with prefrontal brain pruning. Information becomes more
permanently organized into neural patterns as myelination progresses
during early adulthood and relatively fixed ways of thinking, imagining
and feeling, of generally being in the world, progress. With prefrontal
myelination comes the ability to take shortcuts through abstract
information. In older adulthood, reasoning and prediction improve, and
sensory function but not, importantly, sensory appreciation, declines.
Little is known as yet about the brain changes that occur from middle to
late adulthood, except that hippocampal volume and hippocampal
efficiency decline, as part of the heave from the exteroceptive to an
abstract inner world. An important caveat is that today this slide is
far less likely to happen in early old age because of improved
treatments for sensory deficits, such as routine cataract removal and
more sophisticated hearing aids.

The Older Adult and Deep Knowledge The changes in thinking patterns and
ways-of-being-in the-world that occur in the transition from adulthood
to older age reflect shifts in memory dynamics from the all-consuming
sensory expansion of youth to the intuitions, sophisticated creativity
and wisdom of older adults. The cortex continues to thin as adulthood
proceeds.112 The advantages of this shift do not as yet receive much
attention, but it is likely that this will change as longevity extends.
As we age, sensation is no longer knocking down the door to swarm the
brain: it is being increasingly deftly processed without much attention
being applied. Adults may even get to the point where they automatically
process, and fail to appreciate, the over-familiar beauty in the natural
world or the sensory vitality in a city lived in for decades. Yes, it
would be nice, one may sometimes think, to return to the days of
childhood, to the simplicity of experiencing, rather than interpreting,
the living world. But we inevitably fall out of the relatively
uncomplicated interpretations of childhood to the more layered
interpretations of maturity. One could take a sentimental view of what
is often called 'innocence' -- the Romantic era in literature was
steeped in the idealization of lost innocence -- but the refining of
prefrontal networks in adulthood brings with it an improved ability to
understand and to predict, and overall greater self-efficacy and
selfrealization. This wisdom, if it develops, can bring great peace of
mind, and stability for society. In folklore, as in life, the wise are
usually old. Pushing into older age, sensory systems go into decline.
Memory as a neurophysiological process becomes less efficient. Older,
compared to younger, people have poorer short-term memory but are better
at problem solving and guessing. There is a trade off between abstract
prefrontal facilities improving while the capacity to make memory
deteriorates. This allows individuals, from early to later adulthood, to
process information in different ways that are both successful. The
perspectives, one derived from better working memory, and one derived
from deep knowledge, are complementary to a functional society.
Observations from the natural world can be pared down in physics to
universally applicable laws of gravity, matter, sound and motion,
entropy and events, and so on. It takes unimaginable cleverness to pare
down the

entropy of the natural world to equations and principles, but this is
the essential process that we, each of us, use to understand life as
lived. There is a point where, in the putting together of information, a
filigree of networks emerges from years of input and successive
dendritic refinement. This is the point where deep knowledge is
possible. Contrast this deep knowledge acquired through the layering and
refinement of vast amounts of experience with a situation that commonly
arises today, in which readily available information can apparently make
one into an expert overnight. If one lives to old old age, having not
been felled by disease, some sort of final sensory and experiential
slide from the world often happens. The person, progressively cut off
from the world by the decline of sensory systems, seems to come to a
point where there is a relinquishing of the sensate world. Thankfully
this is being warded off more effectively and for longer as sensory aids
improve. Fragility leads to reduced mobility, and there is a distancing
from the momentum of the world. Sándor Márai in his novel Embers\* has
described, with exquisite pathos, the final life slide from the sensate
world to an abstract one: . . . everything gradually becomes so real, we
understand the significance of everything, everything repeats itself in
a kind of troubling boredom . . . That is old age . . . Gradually we
understand the world and then we die.

Perhaps this passage resonated with me because I had a hovering sense
for many years, a subliminal dreaded anticipation as the years passed
and I began to understand patterns in life, that I would switch from a
sense of the possibilities in life to inevitable prediction, into 'a
kind of troubling boredom'. And then one day, somehow or other, I was
not anticipating the dreaded staleness but instead was appreciating the
rich sensate world in the present. One returns to the world of sensation
-- not the headlong hurtle of youth, but a richly nuanced one that you
want nothing from, except to be in it. I will finish with a word about
imagination and creativity. As Patrick Kavanagh wisely wrote,
'imagination is the blossom on the stem of memory',† bringing us back to
where we started, the Beethoven phenomenon. His astonishing gift of
creating some of the most beautiful music ever composed when deaf
resulted from a highly developed auditory

memory interacting with a highly functioning prefrontal conductor. At
the end of the day we are, even if imagining at the level of Beethoven,
individual constructs of sensory-memory systems of infinite complexity.
One may feel that that the experience of living is more than an unending
shifting network of highly sophisticated, infinitely arborized neurons,
that there is something beyond oneself, outside of memory and even
imagination. The fact is that this feeling is created by neural networks
that make you feel as if you are more than 'just your brain'. This is
the ultimate feat of abstraction -- the representation of oneself, a
consciousness of oneself as an integrated extant being in a world of
other similarly wired humans. In the chapter that follows we will
explore these higher states of consciousness. \* Sándor Márai, Embers
(1942; Viking, 2001), pp. 193--4. † Patrick Kavanagh, Collected Prose
(MacGibbon & Key, 1967).

11. A Sense of Self

One of the concepts most fascinating to humans is that of 'higher
consciousness'. We think of higher conscious experience as being the
holy grail of human exclusivity. We tend to think of memory as something
separate from consciousness, but, as Henri Bergson wrote, 'there is no
consciousness without memory.' In any individual life, all going well,
consciousness will evolve hand-in-hand with memory, and, as memory
systems become more complex and integrated, so too will systems of
awareness and consciousness. As we've seen, self-recognition is the
start of autobiographical memory, so from the very start of life
awareness of oneself is bound up with memory of oneself. Systems of
awareness then develop from self-recognition to complex representations
of oneself, usually referred to as 'higher consciousness'. Eventually, a
person will become aware of their own consciousness: this is called
'meta-consciousness'. Meta-consciousness is, in essence, looking at
yourself looking at yourself. Science does not always provide the best
language for understanding complex, integrative brain function,
particularly in the domain of higher levels of consciousness. This is
not helped by the scientific parcelling up of brain functions into
memory, cognition, emotions and so on. It can be more instructive to
look at what the arts have to say if we are to understand memory in the
broader context of human experience. Indeed, in the historical journey
towards an understanding of higher levels of conscious experience, in
the last 150 years or so the sciences, through piecemeal discoveries,
and the arts, through alterations in formal expression, have danced
around the same theme of consciousness. The James brothers, who lived
during the transition from the nineteenth to the twentieth centuries,
are a rare and beautiful example of an intimate dialogue between the
arts and the sciences in the area of memory and consciousness. The great
novelist Henry was among the first to move from event narration to
'narrative

consciousness', where the narration comes directly from the perspective
of the character's inner experiences.i His brilliant psychologist
brother William moved the psychological concept of memory from one of
flat knowledge to one of live streaming the dynamic inner world of
conscious experience. It was William the psychologist, and not his
novelist brother, who coined the phrase 'stream of consciousness' that
was to become a key phrase for the modernist literature of the twentieth
century, culminating in the famous stream-of-consciousness portrayal of
a day in the life of Leopold Bloom in James Joyce's Ulysses. What is a
stream of consciousness if not a record of present interospective
experience understood in the context of past experience? Psychiatrists
were also navigating the new waters of consciousness during the fin de
siècle of the nineteenth century. Although Freud is seen as the giant of
psychiatry in expanding our understanding of consciousness, his concept
of consciousness was generally limited to past memory, and he failed to
incorporate the ongoing vital momentum of present experience into
concepts of consciousness. His theories of conscious and unconscious
memory, of repressed memory, lack the immediacy of the rush of present
experience that marked the intellectual excitement of the James
brothers' writings or later existential literature. Freudian
consciousness was more a structure than a dynamic form: he wrote about
consciousness as if it were layered, from the depths of the unknown
unconscious through the subconscious to consciousness, like a
bathymetric map in which darker blue shades indicate greater depths. The
immediacy of consciousness in which experience moves from one moment to
the next, the stream of time, is what the Jameses explored with great
flair, and what Freud missed. The movement of consciousness is easily
overlooked because of the obvious fact that it is only in the present
that consciousness exists. We have explored the theme of the present in
Chapter 7, and concluded that the past and the future only exist in
memory, while what we call the present is really consciousness. Higher
consciousness is a living process, in which there is an exchange between
live-streaming systems of sensory input and memory networks.

Abnormal States of Consciousness Expanded states of consciousness
provide a unique insight into normal states of consciousness. Even
before the James brothers, Dostoevsky (1821--81) was writing about
consciousness, particularly abnormal states of consciousness. For me,
Dostoevsky brings a sense of amplified consciousness, a rushing
immediacy, an uncomfortable excitability, a profusion of sensations that
is like a manic state. He wrote, in Crime and Punishment, '. . . to be
overly conscious is a sickness, a real thorough sickness.' When I first
read Dostoevsky, I was aware that his descriptions of subjective states
were distorted, but I, like countless readers, found this compelling, in
the way a horror movie might be. How could one describe this stream of
distorted consciousness so convincingly without having had the
experience of abnormal states? And Dostoevsky did in fact experience
abnormal mental states: he suffered from epilepsy, in which psychotic
experiences frequently occur because bits of the brain are randomly
firing off.113 Before his seizures he sometimes had a few moments of
ecstatic, heightened consciousness, in which he felt that he transcended
time. He describes such states in many of his novels -- for example in
The Idiot, in which he writes of Myshkin, 'His sensation of being alive
and his awareness increased tenfold.' Arav was a patient of mine who
experienced this 'real thorough sickness' in an episode of mania. He has
a Dostoevsky-like gift for vividly describing, orally and in writing,
his subjective experiences. Arav was twenty-one years old when he was
brought by the police to our hospital. He had been depressed for what
seemed to him most of his life. When he became manic, some weeks before
his admission, he 'thought that the psychosis was a cure for the
depression,' as he told me when he was admitted. It had been for him an
overwhelming experience: '. . . the best time in my life, and I wanted
to communicate this to everyone. I was in the middle of a big revelatory
experience, and if I didn't communicate it, it would be as if it hadn't
happened.' He began talking in an uninterruptable way about what was
happening to him. He felt that barriers to others were melting away,
that he could communicate telepathically and that he was 'filled with
power from other people'. Everything from the world was 'so

fascinating and I was in hyper-space'. He said that it was very strange
to be 'too aware', and that everything that was coming into his head had
a special significance. He believed that he could change people and fix
all the problems in the world . . . 'cure the dying, get scientists to
figure out why people don't optimise each day . . .' He had a 'multitude
of ideas that were always whispering in the back of my head and I was
trying to find the rhythm'. He followed people around trying to tell
them about his hyper-perceptive experiences and his 'tangents of
insight', so that they could share his new knowledge. He did not sleep
for the week prior to presentation. In the police station he was
examined by a doctor who directed him to our service. Arav found himself
in the bizarre situation where he was in a euphoric state of heightened
consciousness and the doctors were telling him that he was ill. He was
told that he lacked insight, whereas he felt that he had 'too much
insight'. He did accept medication because he saw that the experiences
were getting out of control and that he needed some medical help to
sleep and become less stimulated. He gradually, over some weeks, became
less overactive and less overtalkative. Arav remained preoccupied with
the powerful experience of his mania, and would talk about little else
during his admission. Shortly before his discharge from our inpatient
unit to the day hospital, he told me . . . 'Why do we see colours and
dogs see in black and white? We see because we build things up . . . it
is all just sensory input.' He went on to explain that the heightened
sensory input that he had during his psychosis was a gift that had got
out of hand, but that he became 'so aware that he \[I\] was scared'.
Arav's wonderfully vivid descriptions of the hyper-conscious state of
mania provide an example of heightened experiences of sensation, called
'hyperperception'. As well as the stream of heightened neural input
coming from the outside (exteroceptive) world, there was another
heightened stream of neural input coming from his body -- the
interoceptive stream. Arav told me that when manic he 'had a new
consciousness' of his body. Along with exteroceptive hyperperception, he
was experiencing intense interoceptive sensations being delivered from
his body. Just to recap, interoceptive sensation is first brought to the
insula to be 'mapped' in the body -- the insula will identify pain and
the location of pain. From the insula

the neurons go to the prefrontal brain to integrate one's feeling states
into working memory. The insula-prefrontal drive is Yeats' 'rag and bone
shop of the heart', containing one's unique history, which can give
voice to the most finely calibrated emotions, the muted pleasures and
pains of one's remembered, or one's imagined, life. It is what is left
when all the trappings of vanity and self-deception have evaporated in
older age. Raw feeling states are introduced to consciousness, although
this interoceptive awareness may be ignored. In mania there is an
uncontrolled gushing of activity in this system, a highly sensitized
self- and other-feeling system that leads to the experience of melted
boundaries between oneself and the world, and an exaggerated feeling of
connectedness. This stage of mania is usually short-lived and evolves
into a state of frenetic, uncomfortable overactivity and over-arousal.

Psychedelics Arav's 'real and thorough' sickness of consciousness was
preceded by feelings of euphoria. People have sought out such euphoric
states for thousands of years. An expanded sense of connectedness --
with oneself, with other people and with the material world -- is
typically experienced when tripping on psychedelic drugs. The writer
Aldous Huxley took the psychedelic mescaline in 1953, before
psychedelics were controlled drugs, and subsequently wrote a book about
his experiences called The Doors of Perception. It remains probably the
most famous account of how psychedelics heighten self-awareness,
perception and connectedness with the world. These experiences are
commonly spoken about as being religious, spiritual or mystical. I want
to emphasize that there is a fundamental difference between the expanded
consciousness of psychedelic-induced mental states and the uncontrolled
hyperconsciousness of mania, and I am only using both to exemplify
heightened experiences of consciousness and not to make comparisons.ii
It is not surprising that the ability to reach states of heightened
consciousness improves as we age, because the ability to represent all
types of information develops as the prefrontal cortex develops.

At this high reach of consciousness there is a heightened appreciation
of the experience of being conscious -- meta-consciousness.
Metaconsciousness involves seeing yourself as a separate whole conscious
person. In other words, we are, at our most conscious, aware of our
consciousness. You are probably now having the somewhat vertiginous
experience of meta-consciousness -- it is like trying to watch yourself
from without, or looking at yourself looking at yourself. Have you ever
inadvertently stood between two mirrors and seen your image reflected to
a diminishing tiny blob? If not, you can do so easily by putting a
hand-held mirror behind you while looking into in your bathroom mirror.
You can manipulate the hand-held mirror to reflect your own reflection
in the bathroom mirror to smaller and smaller images. Your consciousness
is like an infinity mirror system -- your reflection goes from your real
self to your image, and this image is then reflected in the opposing
mirror, and this is then reflected in the opposing mirror, and so on.
You see repeatedly diminishing frames containing the more diminished
frames, to infinity. When we say that we are looking at ourselves in a
mirror we are not -- we are looking at our reflection. Perhaps this is
why the word 'reflection', as a process of thinking about memories and
thoughts, is such an apposite one. We cannot physically see the whole of
ourselves except through reflection in a mirror or through
representation (a photograph, a portrait): if you look down you can only
see from the shoulders down. The very thing that we are trying to
conceptualize, consciousness, is what also defines our limitations. We
are trapped within our own consciousness, within our own mirrors. It is
only through a representation, a reflection, of the whole that we can
see ourselves in full. We cannot be, that is, exist or experience,
beyond these mirrors of our consciousness. This is why it is simply not
possible for those with severe psychosis or those with profound
depression or mania to appreciate that they are ill. One would need to
be outside one's own brain to be able to see these disruptions of inner
experience. In the moment of consciousness the brain is in the process
of working memory networks, and the integrative system of neurons,
predominantly in the prefrontal brain, is processing the flaring inputs
in the pruned lattices of learned organization to arrive at a pared-down
output: the thought, the conclusion, the intuition, the prediction, the
knowledge, the understanding. Without the integrative networks, input
would not be assimilated, and the

world would be incoherent. In working memory, all of the systems of
representation in the brain that we have previously explored --
sensation, motor and feeling -- are integrated to form a living picture
of oneself and the world in this present conscious moment. The idea of
connectedness, of being 'at one with the world', can be experienced in
normal life. I experience this sort of transcendent consciousness when
swimming in the sea. I and the other swimmers in our local bay go into
the water, whether cold, or colder -- the sea is never warm in Ireland.
We get stung by jellyfish in the summer and beaten by cold easterly
waves in winter, and tangled in seaweed by the shore, and return for
more. There is only the sea and the sky as we swim out, nothing more.
There is no gravity, only an immersion and a suspension, and we are
live, integrated beings moving in the flow of something very big that is
also alive. Connected with the elements -- sea and sky -- and completely
selfdirected, we pitch our bodies into the momentum of the sea and wind.
At some point I begin to calculate how long more my body can take before
the cold starts slowing me down, before I turn to swim back to shore. I
emerge freezing and euphoric, feeling at one with myself, entire, and
reconnected with the world. Sea swimmers share these moments of entirely
private and common transcendence like an open secret.

Network Neuroscience The late neuroscientist Gerald Edelman knitted
together ideas of consciousness and memory that have resonated through
to the most recent discoveries, and I will finish the chapter with some
of his insights. Edelman was a molecular biologist who won the Nobel
Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 1972 for uncovering the way that
antigens recognize and remember immune cells.114 During the latter part
of his career, he looked at past and working memory, in particular how
the brain 'recognizes' the present through memory. He saw this
recognition as taking place in the conscious present, and that
consciousness was the process involved in a reworking of the memory
networks -- what he called 're-entry'. Edelman intuited that there were
multiple brain networks involved in any conscious

experience and that these networks were forged by experience and
reworked by present input. Today, Edelman's intuitions have evolved into
what is called 'network neuroscience' and 'connectomics' -- how the
brain is connected up. Some of the work that young neuroscientists like
Danielle Bassett from the University of Pennsylvania, also a physicist,
undertake uses the principles of physics and mathematics to understand
patterns in the neural networks that underlie learning and memory. In
Bassett's work she 'matches' brain neural connections and activity,
recorded through multiple techniques including fMRI and EEG, to
particular subjective experiences and behaviour. Her graph theory has
provided a novel method for understanding the patterns of brain
disorganization in schizophrenia, where there is more random firing and
fewer hubs of concentrated activity in the prefrontal areas. I see her
elegant and precise search for brain maps of experience as being similar
to Proust's introspective search to find past experience. Bassett and
her contemporaries are thinking big, on the shoulders not just of the
preceding giants of neuroscience, but also on the shoulders of our great
introspective artists, who got there first.

12. Sex Hormones and Songbirds

While in the first two decades of life the brain is pruning and
connecting up in patterns that reflect the learned exteroceptive world,
great changes are afoot in the interoceptive world of feelings and
emotions. After the sensate explosion of childhood comes the emotional
implosion caused by the sex hormone deluge of puberty. In this chapter
we will look at the brain changes that underpin romantic longings,
sexual desire, partnerships and reproduction; and the memory systems
involved in emotional learning and emotional regulation. What the
developing adult will attend to and memorize will change for ever
following the changes that sex hormones have on brain architecture.
Nature provides a wonderful example in the male starling of what sex
hormones can do in the brain, and how this changes behaviour.

Starling Song I hope that you are as lucky as I am to be exposed to the
beautiful sound of starling birdsong during summer. I once heard a
spectacular volume of birdsong in late autumn but, glancing out the
window, couldn't see immediately what must have been a massive gathering
of birds. I then saw that the big sycamore tree in my front garden,
almost denuded of leaves, was covered by a murmuration of probably more
than three hundred starlings. They were perched on the branches,
silhouetted by the backlight of a bright rose-orange sunset, and
camouflaged to look like black leaves. The cause of the orchestra of
starling birdsong is that a 'song cortex' grows in the starling brain
during the summer season. The song cortex develops because the sunlight
triggers the release of testosterone in the male starling, and the
testosterone latches on to testosterone receptors that are

present in a part of the starling brain promoting the development of
neurons that will eventually form the song cortex. The
testosterone-induced song cortex grows with the increasing exposure to
the light of the lengthening summer days, and their singing intensifies
as the weather improves. This attracts the female starling, and
courtship commences.115 When the days shorten, testosterone levels drop
because of reduced exposure to daylight, and the song cortex atrophies
in the male starling. With the demise of the song cortex, the starling
song fades from the landscape. The female starling brain does not
elaborate a song cortex because she does not produce testosterone, and
so her songs remain very low-key compared to the courting male. If the
female is given testosterone, however, she too will develop an
elaborated song cortex. Cleverly, the testosterone receptors are present
in both sexes but require the presence of testosterone to activate them
and promote neural growth. The presence of both the hormone and their
receptors is required. The brain is a-buzzing with life in which endless
chemicals are floating in inter-synaptic gaps attaching only to their
own specific receptors and activating them. This is an important point:
while any sex hormones or neurotransmitters may flood the brain, they
are only active where there are receptors for them to latch on to. I
used to think that the starlings left us for the winter, but it is only
their rich song that leaves us, to return again in the spring with the
light-induced testosterone surge. A similar sex-hormone-mediated process
occurs in the human brain. The exact set of circumstances for triggering
puberty are complex but are known to involve nutrition, genetics and
also, in the case of girls, what they have experienced during childhood.
In a fascinating body of research during the 1980s and 1990s, Jay Belsky
noted that an absent father, but not an absent mother, was associated
with earlier puberty in girls.116 He posited that the explanation lay in
human evolutionary history, when adverse conditions of survival, likely
to be associated with an absent hunter-gatherer father, would
necessitate earlier reproduction and independence in female offspring.
There is a common physiological trigger for puberty, regardless of the
multiple converging influences, such as weight and genetics, that
impinge on the onset of puberty -- a hypothalamic hormone, aptly named
KiSS, or kisspeptin.117 Brain hormones are made in the hypothalamus and

released into the body where they direct further hormone release from
different glands in the body. Remember the HPA axis, where the
hypothalamic hormone CRH ultimately causes the release of cortisol from
the adrenal gland? The KiSS hormone kickstarts the hypothalamus into
producing a brain hormone that goes into the body to cause the
production of male sex hormones called androgens, primarily
testosterone, in the testes, and female sex hormones, primarily estrogen
and progesterone, in the ovaries. The male and female sex hormones then
latch on to their matched receptors to cause body and brain changes
during puberty. Importantly, in terms of brain function, the sex
hormones are carried back in the blood circulation to the brain. Here
again you can see how the brain directs activity in the body and vice
versa. Within the endocrine systems, hormones produced in the
hypothalamus bring about the synthesis and secretion of hormone in the
glands of the body, and these hormones return to the brain to influence
brain activity. This dynamic is analogous to the hypothalamus directing
the ANS to cause body sensations, from which neural signals are returned
to the brain to map emotions in the insula. What the sex hormones do in
the brain is important in understanding what the developing brain
attends to and memorizes. Alice was a patient of mine many years ago who
only began menstruating in her late twenties. The effects of the monthly
ebb and flow of the sex hormones on her adult brain created novel
experiences for her, and her story remains for me a unique illumination
of the mood-altering effects of female sex hormones on a sexhormone
naïve brain.

Alice Alice had suffered from anorexia nervosa since her early teens,
and her life revolved around the amount of calories that she ingested
each day. She only ate food that she made from basic ingredients,
weighing the ingredients in ounces, preparing all her food in a strict
routine before she went to work each day. She ate with a discipline that
was extraordinary. Alice kept her weight at a constant 38 kg (84 lb or 6
stones). Because of her consistently low weight she had menstruated only
once before she developed anorexia at

the age of thirteen years, and had not menstruated in the intervening
years. A female has to be of a critical weight to ensure menstruation --
this is probably a mechanism to prevent reproduction in the very young
and to shut down reproduction in a situation of poor nutrition, where a
pregnancy is not sustainable or an infant might die. Alice exercised
with the same measured exactness as she ate: swimming X number of
lengths of the pool Y times per week, and so on. There was almost
nothing else in her life that engaged her. Although underachieving
relative to her impressive abilities, she performed her work with the
same meticulous care that she brought to her eating and exercise habits.
In an ideal healthy pattern of eating, food intake is regulated by
appetite and terminated by feelings of satiety. We reasoned that this
would not be a realistic goal, because Alice had not developed any
knowledge of appetite and satiety, and she may always be beyond the
regulation of more natural food intake mechanisms. We worked out a
strategy in which, rather than trying to suspend her obsessional eating
habits, we would use them to help her make modest incremental increases
in her food intake. So, rather than going for the standard
appetite-satiety-driven model, or the eat-to-a-targetweight therapy, we
planned that she would use her obsessional patterns to regulate her food
intake. She would, for example, add an extra one or two ounces of
wholemeal flour in the making of her bread. Alice meticulously adhered
to her new regime, and very slowly, over a period of months, made modest
weight gains. She suffered immense anxiety during her weigh-ins, often
not sleeping the night before and requiring small doses of
benzodiazepines to contain her feelings of panic. When she reached her
target of 47 kg she began to feel strange and irritable. She felt as if
she was out of control, and she was insistent that this was a feeling
different from that of the anxiety related to her weight gain. She felt
as if she had been colonized by an uncontrollable emotional virus. She
became tearful, unusually sensitive and irritable, and she experienced,
for the first time in her life, fleeting suicidal thoughts. Then she got
a period -- her first in adulthood, although she was in her late
twenties. Her sex-hormone system had been kickstarted, as it is in
adolescents, by reaching a critical weight, leading to the production of
sex hormones and the activation of novel emotional experiences through
hormone-induced brain pathways.

Alice was overwhelmed by her emotional instability and became unable to
function. She was aghast that all girls and women went through these
feelings on a monthly basis. We decided that a trial of antidepressants
might help to control the emotional turmoil, and that she should try to
ride it out with pharmacological and psychotherapeutic help. She and I
were stunned by the effects that her hormonal awakenings had on her
emotional systems. Her emotional brain did adapt, and we were able to
discontinue her antidepressants about a year later. Following this
orientation to the adult emotional and sexual world, Alice began to
socialize. The following year she fell in love with a man, and I moved
on to work elsewhere. She wrote to me the following Christmas with the
news that she had married her man and was pregnant. She wrote to me a
few Christmases later telling me that she had had another child. I moved
on again and we lost touch. Alice bears witness to the tyrannical world
of anorexia. She triumphed over this with iron discipline and managed to
manipulate herself to health by exploiting her own vulnerabilities. To
return to the topic at hand, Alice was an adult observer of the mood
instability that is an intrinsic part of normal puberty. Her story
demonstrates the emotional experiences of all adolescent girls as the
effects of sex hormones kick in. At first, the heightened emotionality
brings a period of emotional turbulence, before improved socio-emotional
skills emerge to allow courtship, partnership and reproduction. The sex
hormones released during puberty contribute to many of the impulsive and
emotionally uncontrolled behaviours that occur universally during
adolescence and account for most of the mortality -- traffic accidents,
suicide and drug abuse. These emotional changes should eventually lead
to new emotional awareness in oneself and in others. Once Alice found
her feet in a new emotionally complex world, she went on to develop a
more nuanced understanding of herself and others and to change the
course of her own history. The emotional changes caused by sex hormones
bring about fundamental shifts in what a young person will attend to,
how they will interpret it and how it will be memorized. An example of
this, returning to the courting starlings, can be seen in the female
starling response to the competing singing males. If she has low
estrogen levels, she ignores the male songs and doesn't bother to select
a mate. They simply do not have her attention -- she is not aroused.
When her estrogen levels are high, as

they would be during the mating season, she will attend to their songs
and choose a mate.118 It was only when Alice's brain became estrogenized
that she paid attention to courting men. The arousal of body and brain
has lifechanging consequences for the young adult. How many times have
we heard romantic stories of the beginnings of relationships end with
the line '. . . the rest is history'?

Sex Hormones and the Brain The sex hormones latch on to specialized
receptors that are present in specific brain areas, as with the song
cortex of the starling. In humans, sex hormone receptors are present in
prolific amounts in the memory and emotional hubs -- the amygdala, the
insula and the hippocampus.119 Like the starling, we have estrogen and
testosterone receptors in our brains regardless of birth sex or gender.
Both the sex hormones and the sex hormone receptors in the brain are
necessary to have changes in brain structure and changes in emotional
responses and behaviour.i This is why the administration of male or
female sex hormones to individuals of the opposite sex changes not only
the external secondary sexual characteristics but also feeling states
and behaviour. A simple example of this is that administration of
testosterone to trans males generally increases sexual desire, while
reduction of testosterone to trans females generally reduces sexual
desire.120 Both the trans males and the trans females have androgen and
estrogen receptors from birth, but these receptors are only activated
following androgen and estrogen therapy respectively. There is a rare
disorder in which a person born with a male set of chromosomes -- that
is, XY, rather than XX -- and who produces testosterone normally has
nonfunctioning testosterone receptors. This is called 'androgen receptor
insensitivity', and in spite of there being lots of circulating
androgens they do not work. This leads to the person developing like a
female sexually because the female is the default sex. Like the body,
the brain also develops like a female brain, because the male and female
brain, as with the starlings, develop differently under the influences
of the male and female sex hormones. The brain of the XY person who has
not been exposed to

testosterone will be just like a female brain, with reduced amygdala
responses to sexual images compared to the male brain.121 The hormonal
effects on the brain can be seen in the higher emotional hubs in the
brain, particularly the insula. In women, increased activity in the
insula has been found to fluctuate in synch with levels of estrogens.122
A human fMRI study from Germany that looked at how estrogens affect the
emotional circuitry in healthy women demonstrated this nicely. The
participant women, who had either high or low estrogen levels, viewed a
movie with traumatic emotional content.123 The authors reported that
there was increased activation of the insula and the cingula in the
high-estrogen women, compared to low-estrogen women. In this way the sex
hormones, through activation of hippocampal-amygdala and insula
circuitry, modify what we attend to, how we feel and what we memorize.ii

The Prefrontal Cortex and Emotional Development If the years of
emotional disquiet in adolescence can be managed, most young adults will
emerge into states of improved emotional control. This occurs because of
development in the prefrontal cortex that facilitates emotional
regulation, in keeping with the fact that the prefrontal cortex is an
integrative region where thinking and feeling states are processed
consciously. The famous and unfortunate case of Phineas Gage from the
midnineteenth century is taught to all medical students when learning
about socio-emotional aspects of prefrontal function. He was a working
as a railway construction worker in Vermont when a horrible accident
resulted in an iron bar being blown into his head in an upward direction
from under his cheek and coming out through the top of his skull. He did
not die immediately but, astonishingly, was conscious and orientated
within a few minutes. He went on to regain motor function, but his
personality thereafter was fundamentally changed. Before his accident he
had been an unremarkably agreeable man; following the accident he became
callous, rude, socially inappropriate and unpredictable. This was one of
the first clear demonstrations that the brain's social and emotional
control centre

was located in the frontal lobes of the brain, the region selectively
severed in Phineas Gage. Severe frontal lobe damage usually changes
personality, and the individual becomes more socially crude,
disinhibited, indifferent to others and apathetic.\* I once saw a young
man who had tried to kill himself by shooting an arrow through his head.
The arrow went through his eye and out through the top of his skull. We
were bewildered that he denied feeling depressed and that he was so
blasé about his situation. I remember him telling us that he didn't care
about anything and that he tried to kill himself, not because he was
emotionally distressed, but because he had no interest in life. Young
adults can present with 'boredom', but this is usually an expression of
their inability to enjoy life. This young man had something different --
a sort of pathological ennui. I had never seen someone who had used such
lethal methods to kill themselves and were not depressed, nor have I
since. Because of this, his case has remained with me. I often wonder if
the arrow might have changed his frontal lobe function, as it did with
Phineas Cage, and made him apathetic and indifferent, as happens
frequently when the frontal lobe is damaged. Had he been depressed
before the suicide attempt, and did his presentation change because of
the brain damage? Did he perhaps sever some connections to his
prefrontal cortex, in other words, give himself a lobotomy?iii Once
better from his physical brain injury, he was discharged to his local
psychiatric hospital for observation and treatment, and to my regret I
did not follow up on what happened. Joseph LeDoux is a neuroscientist
from New York who, when off duty, fronts a band whose name, The
Amygdaloids, will give you an indication of his research passions. He
offers some interesting insights into the processes of prefrontal
emotional development. His research has demonstrated how connections
from the prefrontal cortex to the amygdala and to the insula are
critical to developing emotional control.124 Part of the prefrontal
development that occurs during early adulthood involves strengthening
connections between the prefrontal and the emotional networks. LeDoux
makes the profound point that, 'Contrary to common wisdom, extinction
\[of uncontrolled emotional states\] is not similar to forgetting but
instead represents new learning.' The prefrontal circuits that grow down
to the amygdala lead to a growing inhibition of the amygdala output,
giving a less

intense amygdala hammer-gong of emotional experience and more measured
feeling states. Inhibition is new learning. This can be visibly seen in
increased brain activity in the prefrontal--hippocampal--amygdala
systems.125 Developments in memory systems of self- and other-awareness
allow the developing adult to see things in perspective and not to react
impulsively. In psychiatry and neurology, and increasingly in common
language, it is said that emotionally disinhibited people are 'frontal'.
The way that this term is used is counterintuitive, for me at any rate,
because the person said to be 'frontal' is really frontally impaired, or
hypofrontal. Gender identity or sexual orientation may change, one's
affiliative allegiances may switch . . . everything is up for grabs
during the biological upheavals of emerging adulthood, depending on your
genes, your environmental stability, your match to your environment,
your childhood and the interactive effects among all of these factors.
We are inimitably complex in our eccentric mixes of genes and
development, and we are wiser to note the various influences and the
amalgam of these influences for each individual rather than trying to
generalize and weigh one against the other. Genes sometimes trump
environment and vice versa: it is all a mix. We can be the emotionally
balanced inheritors of experiences during development that have been
directed in a caring and contained adult environment, or the emotionally
uncontained victim of a chaotic environment during development. One may
have kind and emotionally containing parents but be the unfortunate
inheritor of genetic processes that unfold during brain development in
adolescence, leading to psychotic or mood disorders.122 Yet other
adolescents have to negotiate the interoceptive disquiet of puberty in
bizarre systems of social organization. Saddest of all are the
individuals who have to unlearn responses to an abusive world and
reformulate foundational memories to enable healthy maturation of
personality. The disruption of adult emotional equilibrium because of
childhood abuse is most evident in the clinical diagnosis of borderline
personality disorder (BPD). Abuse and neglect, like all biographical
events, will modify brain architecture and memory pathways. Early life
adversity results in an increase in most psychiatric disorders in
adulthood -- depression, anxiety, substance abuse, psychosis, death by
suicide -- but BPD is most specifically related to childhood abuse and
neglect.

Borderline Personality Disorder (BPD) BPD is a stigmatized disorder
characterized by high levels of emotional distress and anger, rapidly
fluctuating moods, a poor and shifting sense of identity, intense but
unstable relationships, frequent substance abuse and recurrent
self-harm. This pattern of feeling and behaving frequently follows upon
childhood abuse or neglect, in which the child cannot learn to contain
their emotions because they have not had the stabilizing influence of an
emotionally mature adult. Parents need to initially contain the infant's
emotions through soothing: the parent provides the soothing that then
allows the infant to develop skills to self-soothe. Following infancy,
when the child is developing the skills to learn through reason, they
need to be guided behaviourally and verbally to contain their emotions,
or they may become emotionally dysregulated adults. Martin Teicher, who
works in Harvard Medical School, has written that the brain alterations
that occur in those who have been abused 'are adaptations to an
anticipated stress-filled malevolent world'.126 Anticipations and
predictions are based in childhood experience, and while hostility and
anger may be appropriate responses for a child who is being abused, they
become self-defeating and maladaptive in adulthood. A person becomes
overly defensive because they have been abused, isolating themselves
further from the human contact that they have been denied and crave.
There is evidence that the changes in brain systems brought about by
abuse are probably specific for the type of abuse and for the timing of
the abuse in relation to brain development. Verbal abuse or witnessing
violence at home seems to cause changes in the auditory and visual
cortical pathways, that is, the sensory memory pathways.127 Emotional or
physical neglect results in differences in amygdala-hippocamus, and in
the higher integrative brain involved in emotional regulation -- the
cingula and the prefrontal networks.128, 129 Neuroimaging reports of
individuals who have a diagnosis of BPD show that, in keeping with their
experiences of intense and uncontrollable emotional states, their
amygdala reactivity to cues is prolonged.130 The prefrontal inhibitions
that should grow down from the prefrontal to the amygdala-hippocampal
region seem not to happen in an average way. As

you might expect, given the absence of the brake of the prefrontal
inhibition, the person with BPD has poor impulse control and will
frequently abuse substances.130 BPD is like living in an arrested state
of emotional development. All of the neurodevelopment that should
proceed -- impulse control, social manipulation, emotional regulation,
identity formation -- gets halted somehow. It is natural for emerging
adults to feel emotionally unstable and to have poor impulse control and
faulty judgement, but in BPD these feeling states and behaviours are
ingrained and outlast young adulthood. It can seem sometimes to those
working in psychiatry that individuals with BPD never learn, but
research and longevity of experience in clinical practice indicates that
this is not the case. Inner feeling states and measured behavioural
responses tend to improve with age.131 It has been found that those with
BPD respond most effectively to a psychological therapy called
dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT). DBT is based on the dialectical
position that one has both to accept oneself as one is, while
simultaneously moving towards change.132 This therapy was founded by
Marsha Linehan, who herself suffered from BPD for which she was
hospitalized for many years when young. It is similar, I often think, to
parenting for adults. I am not suggesting that all people with BPD or
traits of BPD have been poorly parented, because some people are simply
more emotionally unstable, have poorer impulse control, are more likely
to become addicted to particular or any substances, experience more
anger, or possess a weak inherent sense of themselves as an exigent
human in the world. Research has shown that there are innate personality
traits that seem to be constant over time, and stability in these traits
leads to easier maturation.133 It is not always related to parenting. In
DBT, behavioural boundaries are negotiated, such as not self-cutting or
threatening suicide, and the person is simultaneously given intense
support and insight-oriented psychotherapy. Similar to firm parenting,
this allows the person to feel safe within the boundaries of agreed
behaviours while they learn about emotional regulation. LeDoux's model
of prefrontal inhibition as representing new learning, and the success
of DBT in modifying emotional states, all lead to hope for healthy
change in those with BPD and for those whose memory and emotional
networks are skewed

by adversity. A neuroimaging study in individuals who underwent DBT has
demonstrated that there is growth in inhibitory pathways from the
prefrontal cortex to the amygdala with improved emotional regulation.134
All things going well, and in the absence of early life adversity, the
prefrontal neurons grow down during early adult life to inhibit
amygdalar output, and an emotional equilibrium is reached. This shift
allows a stable sense of self to emerge that forms the foundation for a
stable personality and identity. Understanding the emotional experiences
and intentions of oneself -- emotional insight -- and of others,
improves with age and in line with prefrontal developments.121 Emotional
maturity is more likely to lead to a successful and happy relationship
than the romantic yearnings of youth when sexual attraction is not
balanced by experience. This is not the only advantage to being older in
the romantic domain. Although we are constantly being given the message
that a youthful appearance will make one more attractive, this is not
always the case. We'll finish the chapter by returning to starlings, who
provide a wonderful example of how memory and learning can confer
advantage in the romantic arena. Starlings, similar to humans, are
socially cooperative but are also competitive at an individual level.
They travel in huge broods, murmurations, undulating in the sky in
swarms into beautiful changing rounded shapes. And there is no leader,
just their brilliant radar that keeps them perfectly spaced from the
surrounding starlings in flight. When it comes to breeding, they are
less communal, and once their testosteronefuelled songbird cortex is
primed by sunlight the males stand at the entrance to the buried nests
competing with other males to attract the resident female. Female
starlings will go for the best singer, and the best singer in the female
starling's world is the one with the longest and most complex song.
Because starlings are brilliant mimics, they learn songs from listening,
building up a varied repertoire as they age. This gives the advantage to
the older males, who, because of their song memory, win the females.
Meanwhile, the young male starlings learn new tunes from their elders,
creating melodic memories that will give them the advantage for breeding
seasons to come. Reassuringly, it is not only youth and beauty, but
experience and memory, that brings about romantic success.

\* A less well-known fact about Gage is that his social skills improved
over time.

13. The Shifting Narratives of Life

This is what fools people: a man is always a teller of stories, he lives
surrounded by his stories and the stories of others, he sees everything
that happens to him through them; and he tries to live his life as if he
were recounting it. Jean-Paul Sartre\*

In preceding chapters we have looked at the neurodevelopment of
integrative memory systems in the brain and how this leads to a point
where understanding of the exteroceptive world, and of oneself and
others, is possible. Essentially, prefrontal development allows
representation of complex sensory information that can then be assembled
to create a coherent story of events that, if biographical, probably
involve the hippocampus. Pruning and myelination of memory networks in
the prefrontal areas allow this to happen, and as the networks evolve we
learn to predict, to imagine and to create. We have examined emotional
neurodevelopment and how a young person learns to become aware through
mirroring of themself and others and to regulate their emotions through
prefrontal growth, leading to some sort of equilibrium with the world.
The journey to the formation of a stable way of being in the world is a
life-long one that is always shifting as the present changes, as it has
to, and new events and insights modify existing memory networks. During
some periods of history there have been immense and lasting changes in
the world order -- during wars and plagues -- that required individual
changes in memory networks. Boris Pasternak's novel Doctor Zhivago is
set during the years of the seismic societal changes of the First World
War and the Russian Revolution. The novel is as much about individual as
societal change: 'Everyone was revived, reborn, changed, transformed.
You might say that everyone had been through two revolutions

-- his own personal revolution as well as the more general one.'† If the
function of biographical memory is to make a coherent story of one's
life with the time, place and person coordinates of the neural
cell-assembly lattices, then the story being spun must be a shifting
one. In this chapter we will look at how the individual, as Henri
Bergson wrote, creates 'oneself endlessly', or how we narrativize our
lives. Although the words 'story' and 'narrative' are used synonymously,
narrative goes beyond the bare bones of a story. A story will always
form because human neural networks will assemble into patterns: that is
what they are designed to do. But we usually go beyond this to ascribing
meaning to the story. Self-narrativization best describes the process of
ascribing meaning to one's own experience and one's life story.
Self-narrativization often involves the ladders of vanity that the older
Yeats had to climb down from in older age, the ladders that held him
aloft from the rag-and-bone shop of his heart, where we will all
eventually lie down. We do this too in social and cultural memory, which
we will look at in the next chapter. My first experience of changing
self-narrativization was a vicarious one, when I read Jean-Paul Sartre's
novel Nausea in my late teens. You could say that the novel is simply
about a young adult individualizing in a world that does not make sense
to him, and so he feels alienated and disconnected. At the time I did
not see this, and I was blown away by the power of the protagonist's
visceral experiences and how they seemed to represent his intellectual
struggles. Having recently re-read it I am even more astonished at its
scope and originality. Although not really being able to understand it
years ago on my first reading, I identified with the protagonist,
Antoine Roquentin. The interoceptive depth of the novel hit me before I
had any intellectual insights into how feeling states are a part of how
we integrate and memorize the world. Roquentin is 'every' young adult
person, disaffected and dysphoric, and he is also the embodiment of the
upheavals in society at the turn of the twentieth century, as awareness
of new levels of consciousness were bursting though. The book gets its
title from the unpleasant interoceptive feelings, in particular the
nausea, that the protagonist experiences. Roquentin was living in a
world to which he felt no affiliation, by which he was viscerally
repulsed. He not only sees others as alien, he experiences himself as
alien. Through his unpleasant hyper-perceptive experiences, the reader
feels his

morbid depersonalization. It feels as if the stream of present sensation
from the external world is disconnected from his memory, leaving him
adrift in a shifting and capricious consciousness that has no coherence.
The reader is told that Roquentin had lived a normal life of old
certainties, one of contented connection to others: 'I was inside it
\[my life\]; I didn't think about it.' His world slowly falls apart
leaving him 'rejected, abandoned in the present . . . '.‡ I see it as if
there was no neural fit in his memory to process incoming sensation. One
of Sartre's achievements in Nausea for me is that he disassembled the
building blocks of consciousness -- the coherence of a continuous sense
of self that is the outcome of integrating present events with memory.
Biographical memory knits the present to the past and future giving us a
sense of 'being inside' our own lives. Roquentin is living in a
continuous, suspended present, imploding with sensate experience that he
is unable to process. He resolves the crisis by deciding to create a new
life, moving from provincial France to a new life in Paris. He would
henceforth 'build \[his\] memories with the present'. Sartre and his
fellow existential travellers, notably Simone de Beauvoir as a
first-wave feminist, individually left their own lives of lived-in
certainties to bravely create a new world view. This book resonated with
me and some of my young adult peers in the Ireland of the 1970s and
1980s probably because many of us were leaving a set of discredited
belief systems and the stability of a shared cultural identity. This did
not bring with it the liberating sense of freedom that I, at any rate,
was expecting. It often felt strange and disorientating, as described by
the Roquentin of 1938. Everything was blown apart before it could be
reconstructed. The experience of constructing one's sense of self, one's
identity, may be more difficult when society is in rapid change, but it
is always challenging for young adults. Life-as-lived in any culture
generally guides one, initially unsteadily, into conceptual frameworks
for understanding the culture and one's place in it. For some, like
Sartre and de Beauvoir, there was a dissonance between how they
experienced themselves and how they understood the world that they
ultimately could resolve only by changing the world.

Trauma

Sartre's book is so deeply embedded in my memory that I was jolted when
my patient Araf -- the clever young man with mania -- told me,
paraphrasing the character of Roquentin, 'I have to rebuild what I
learned about myself,' followed by, 'It is only human to change memory.'
In most of the individuals that I treat there is a dissonance between
themselves and the world, but not usually because of existential angst
or seismic social and political changes, but because of childhood trauma
and/or serious mental illness. Trauma often requires the individual to
create an almost new self and a new set of memories. Frances is a
patient of mine who was ensnared by an enmeshment of toxic childhood
memories and psychotic misinterpretations, and she has given me many
insights into how trauma and/or psychosis can lead to a monstrous
self-narrative that can destroy someone. It is important to establish
that individual trauma, such as death and illness, does not have meaning
in itself, and that it is dangerous to ascribe meaning to trauma, but
we'll return to this. Frances, as you will see, is a remarkable person,
and hers is a rich story that goes back to the days of the old asylums.

Frances Frances's childhood had been very bleak indeed. She was born the
third child in a sibship of four. Their father was alcoholic and
abusive, frequently physically violent, and although he had a steady job
he drank his wages. Mother spent most of her time outside the home
looking for food and means to support the children. All the children
were neglected physically and emotionally. Frances was sexually abused
by her father and by men, traders and visitors, who came to their home.
She often did not attend primary school and was generally left to her
own devices during the day with her younger brother, the only person
with whom she had a loving relationship. She had no peer friendships and
no confidant. Her attendance at school became less frequent as her
childhood progressed until she stopped going altogether. There is no
record of her attending secondary school. She frequently ran away from
home. When she was eleven years old she started living on the streets,
learning to survive by shoplifting and begging.

She slept in doorways and phone boxes. Occasionally the police would
pick her up and her mother would come to the police station to bring her
home temporarily. Street life exposed her to further violence and abuse.
She lived according to whatever means she found and learned how to fight
and to defend herself. When she was thirteen Frances found shelter with
a fortuneteller for about one year. She had fallen into a pattern of
addiction to substances, mostly alcohol, by her mid-teenage years. She
was sixteen when she was first admitted to a psychiatric hospital in
Dublin city. A brief diversion from France's story is necessary to give
you a sense of this hospital. The hospital was colloquially known as
Grangegorman, and if that name brings to mind Mervyn Peake's Gormenghast
you are getting the picture. It was a prototypical Victorian asylum: a
big granite structure, grey and desolate and crumbling. I asked to be
placed in Grangegorman for a six-month stint during my training because
it was one of the few remaining old asylums in Dublin. It was a very
grim place, almost derelict in parts. At this point in its history
patients were being moved out to live in the community and Grangegorman
was in an accelerating state of disrepair. There were endless long
corridors, with rows of rooms on one side that looked like prison cells
facing large barred sash windows on the other side of the wide
corridors. Some of the residents would rest on the deep, long window
sills with their back against one set of folded shutters, which had not
been opened in years. Their feet rested on the opposite shutter of the
ample sills. Once when I was walking one of the long corridors at night
when on call -- lit only by outside light coming from the huge windows
-- a patient darted out from one of the window sills frightened at
having been woken from sleep. I learned over the six months that the
asylum was more complex and less harsh than the stereotype that I had
expected. I was full of the predictable indulgent indignation when I
started . . . the residents had had their agency taken away by a cruel
system that was centred around institutional efficiency rather than the
needs of individual patients . . . psychiatric institutions were
inhumane . . . patients were objectified and wandered around in circles,
sedated and drooling. Some of this was true, but the system of care was
more layered than the abject stereotype of the Victorian asylum.

One event from this time sticks in my memory. An older consultant
brought me on a ward round one day that took us to a hidden quarter of
the hospital. This island of habitation was situated within a bigger,
almost abandoned, granite building. We entered through a door in the
gable wall and went up a few flights of stairs. This led to a big, open,
Florence Nightingale-type ward, with two long rows of beds, separated by
curtains, lined up on opposing walls. Most of the room was taken up by a
big central open space. Someone jumped up from a bed on our arrival and
hurried over to us: to my surprise it was a male nurse. The other
occupants of the beds were lying fully dressed on their tidy beds
waiting for the consultant's regular weekly visit. They rose from their
beds when we arrived in the ward. He spoke to his patients like one
would to a fellow villager, passing the time of day with pleasantries.
There were no queries about hallucinations, delusions or medication. I
followed him around asking him about the different illnesses of the
individual patients and their medications. He more or less ignored me in
an affable way. When these pedestrian exchanges were concluded with the
patients, I followed him, a bit bewildered, down a long corridor that
emerged from the other end of the ward. This corridor spanned the length
of the building, having the typical cell-like rooms on one side and the
large windows on the other. In one of these rooms lived a man who was a
watchmaker. It was the time of mechanical, wind-up watches, and every
surface of his room was covered with the paraphernalia of his trade: cog
wheels, cases, glass covers, chain straps, oil cans. The watchmaker
fixed everyone's watch in the institution -- patients and staff. They
had a chat about the consultant's watch that he had fixed, as I'm sure
they did every week. In the early years of his illness the watchmaker
had been a 'revolving door' patient in Grangegorman, being admitted
again and again believing that his family and neighbours were trying to
kill him. Finally, it was decided that it would be best for everyone if
he stayed in the hospital. Looking back on those six months I remember
the corridors and the watchmaker's room and now can see that the old
asylum system was a flawed form of care, but not a cruel one. We have
swapped it for a system that almost excludes residential care, and
patients and mental health workers, instead of struggling with the
restrictions of institutionalization, struggle with poverty,
homelessness and the criminalization of behaviour

resulting from psychosis. Over the years I have come to appreciate the
style of the older consultant from Grangegorman, and the power of
simple, normal human inclusion. The asylum system, when functional,
provided a protected village. So-called 'community care' has brought
vulnerable psychotic people into the outside world, where there is often
no asylum. The whole community psychiatry concept was based on the
assumption that everyone with a psychiatric illness could be brought to
a level of functioning compatible with the open world, and that the
world would have sheltered niches for them. Psychiatry was wrong on both
counts. As far back as 1939 the psychiatrist and mathematician Lionel
Sharples Penrose noted that there was an inverse numerical relationship
between the number of psychiatric beds and the number of prisoners. This
remains true today.135 Whatever city one travels to, however affluent or
however functional the healthcare system, however respectful the state
claims to be of individual rights, the psychotic are on the streets
living rough, being ignored and neglected.136 They are too ill to
negotiate social welfare systems, and when they become too much of a
public nuisance they are jailed. This demonstrates again that, despite
the improvements in public awareness and concern about mental health,
this has not permeated to the mentally ill who have brain diseases.
Grangegorman is where Frances spent her later childhood years. Following
her first admission until she reached legal adult status, she had about
twenty short admissions. There were no inpatient treatment facilities
for children or adolescents in the 1980s. When not in the psychiatric
hospital, she seems to have been in prison, on one occasion serving a
sentence of four months for drunk and disorderly behaviour. She was
seventeen years old at the time. Thankfully, some of her clinical notes
from her time in Grangegorman followed her to our service. They are
illuminating, not least because of the kindness that her psychiatrist,
Dr F, revealed in his clinical notes and summary letters. His care and
understanding of her situation and his efforts, and those of the nursing
team, to provide respite from the horror of her developmental years
shines through. When she was eighteen Frances disappeared from the
psychiatry services, and for the next eight years we have no notes on
her. This

coincides with her meeting Kieran, with whom she fell in love, and he
'took me home', as she put it. She wound up back in a psychiatric
inpatient unit in her late twenties. In the intervening years,
Grangegorman had been closed down, staff had been transferred to
suburban hospitals and patients had been transferred to what was being
uncritically lauded as a more humane system of care in the community. As
life and luck would have it, Frances met with Dr F again, who became her
treating psychiatrist. This was fortunate, because Dr F was now able to
elicit descriptions of psychotic experiences that Frances would or could
not volunteer during her teens. Over the next few years her course
fluctuated, but there was a pattern: she seemed to go from the florid
psychosis of hallucinations and delusions to a less psychotic but
self-destructive state. It seemed that when the terror of the psychotic
experiences receded, another terror rushed in. This led to a pattern
that is referred to as 'sabotaging treatment'. The explanation, I
believe, is not that a person doesn't want to be well, but that they
don't understand how to live without their psychosis -- they have no
normal memory networks. Frances had never processed real-world
experiences, and she would have to learn to do this much like a newly
sighted adult if exposed to a flood of visual images. Over a long
admission she appeared to connect with the outside world in a tentative
way and was finally discharged. When I took over her care about two
decades later, her life, on the surface, appeared to have settled. Over
the years she had done a rehabilitation course in art, and this led to
her successfully completing a degree in fine art. She was attending
psychotherapy with an experienced psychologist and was abstinent from
drugs and alcohol. She had only selfharmed during times of significant
stress. On our first consultation, she was dressed carelessly in
multiple layers of clothes, her head was lowered and she only made
darting eye contact. She told her story to me in a very low voice,
automatically, as if she had told it hundreds of times, seeming to be
disconnected from the emotional experience of traumatic past events. She
was also immersed in psychotic beliefs and experiences, believing that
she felt other peoples' emotions in the concrete sense of individuals
transferring their experiences into her body; 'I can take on other
people's emotions . . . on their behalf.' The confusion of self--other
boundaries happened routinely, particularly if she became close to
someone. The converse, that

someone else was inhabiting her, was also happening, and, in her case,
it was 'the devil'. I got the impression of someone who was intensely
introspective and that her inner world consisted of a confusion of
psychotic ideas. I was unsettled by her biography, having rarely heard a
personal history of such grim pervasive abuse. There had been no
redeeming adult figure in her childhood, no reprieve from the
unrelenting abuse, and no social stability apart from the Victorian
asylum of Grangegorman. Somehow in all this chaos, but exactly when was
not clear, she had developed a serious psychiatric illness. I wanted to
spend at least some time contemplating what she had told me, to pay some
tribute, if only for a few private moments, to her unimaginable young
life. But a waiting room of patients in a public psychiatry clinic does
not allow for even such a modest tribute. Her main problems at this time
related to her reclusive behaviour. She spent most of her days lying in
bed, immersed in psychotic experiences in which her abusive past was
intruding into her present consciousness. Everything that she could
possibly experience outside of the care and love provided by Kieran, and
the sanctuary provided by the psychiatry services, provoked toxic
memories. It was less painful to live in a world of sensory and
emotional deprivation, reclusive in her room, than to constantly
experience the continuous toxic memories provoked by input from the
world. I altered her meds to try and better manage the psychosis, and we
implemented a programme to try to bring Frances into a sheltered social
world that would be less threatening, hoping that we could gradually
shift her paranoid interpretations. We coaxed her into attending our day
hospital so that she would have a daily structure in a social
environment -- a sheltered microcosm of normalized human encounter,
along with individualized therapy. The journey into her past, and how
this had formed her present perceptual filter, was negotiated with skill
and sensitivity with our psychologist over several years. Sometimes,
psychosis has been the individual's world for so long that they don't
want to leave the familiar. Do any of us? Individuals with psychotic
experiences, even severely grotesque experiences, may be terrified of
leaving this behind, because they could be exposing themselves to the
threats that still remain present but are now invisible to them.
Sometimes they are comforted by their voices and feel lost without them.

Sometimes they do not want to leave grandiose beliefs that they have of
their special powers. Sometimes acknowledging chronic mental illness is
too painful. Only very rarely has a patient confided to me when free
from psychotic experiences that they want their psychosis back, but I
suspect that this happens much more than we realize. It is the
individual's choice to refuse treatment and to be psychotic, unless they
become a threat to themselves or to others because of their persecutory
delusional beliefs. In this latter situation, psychiatrists are legally
obliged to treat, involuntarily if necessary and regardless of the
person's personal wishes. Individuals who have been psychotic for long
periods of time require a decent interval free from psychotic
experiences to test out the 'shared' world of common experience and
adapt to it. Following the resolution of the immediate experiences of
psychosis, the provision of a safe world in which to create new networks
based in a shared common reality, to 'build memories in the present', is
just as important as the pharmacological treatment of psychosis. Our
team in the day hospital became Frances's social world, her village. She
contributed to the life of the hospital through her soft personality and
her art. Trusting relationships with the treating team members provided
a helpful challenge to Frances's belief that she was not able to manage
relationships outside of that with Kieran. Over time she developed warm
relationships with us and with other patients, which sustained her, even
through the later tragedy of Kieran's death. We were also enriched by
our relationships with Frances, who engaged us with her individual
combination of stoicism and vulnerability, and her emerging wry sense of
humour.

Trauma Frances's memory networks had been formed, to repeat Martin
Teicher, as adaptations to an anticipated stress-filled malevolent
world. Her brain had been wired to survive in a hostile, and not a
benevolent, world. One of the most basic necessities of survival, either
individually or as a species, is the ability to adapt to one's
environment, even if this is in a world of pervasive abuse. Humans have
immense social adaptability -- we leave our families in

young adulthood and move to peer-group identification, before moving
usually to monogamous relationships from which we may detach in the
future, or not. We form new bonds and attachments, loved ones die, we
grieve and adapt. Frances had adapted to a profoundly disturbed world
and was deeply traumatized. Trauma is defined in DSM 5 as 'actual or
threatened death, serious injury or sexual violence', all of which
Frances experienced during her childhood. In less extreme circumstances,
life trauma may result from happenings that are not life-threatening but
lead to such emotional distress that they cannot be integrated
emotionally. In the language of psychotherapy, the experience cannot be
emotionally digested. Following trauma, time seems to freeze into a few
scenes that are played and replayed with the hammer-jack emotions of
amygdalar circuitry. The past is intruding, reverberating, in the
consciousness of the present. Nick Cave, the Australian songwriter, who
sings melancholy as if he is playing tunes on the listener's insula, has
put this beautifully in a documentary about his son's death at fifteen
years of age. He says that his son's death is like an elastic band. He
can move and stretch into the present, but at a certain distance of
stretch he is pulled back. What is called 'moving on' can sometimes feel
impossible. While a traumatic event is unique to an individual, the
replay with intense associated emotions and the inability to
'understand' is universal. I have heard the phrase 'I don't understand'
so often from traumatized individuals. I've heard it from a soldier who
returned from war having witnessed one child soldier kill another, from
a woman who delivered a stillborn baby having felt it kicking in utero
pre-delivery, from a parent whose teenage child died from suicide, from
a mother whose son lost his life to a casual act of violence. It is as
if there are no prefrontal groundwork lattices into which the event or
events can be integrated, and this has to be built, one painful
connection at a time, while others are withering away. The intrusion of
grief into present experience reduces as the memory networks shift and
slowly the person moves forward to inhabit the present. Do we sometimes,
somehow, in our grief and love following loss, try to inhibit the
changes in network configuration that occur inevitably with being alive?
Is it unconscionable to put the memory to rest? Does the bereaved person
feel that without the dead they would become an even more alien intruder
in the

now estranged and seemingly carefree world that they are so still
within? Is it resisted as a sort of conscious trade-off for the feeling
of the departed in the present, however painful? Whatever and whichever,
trauma 'takes time'. Edith's flashback memory that we opened with shows
how the original memory of the traumatic psychotic experience had been
activated and vividly replayed. But this experience, the recall, was
probably restored, on the second occasion, less proximate to the
emotional experience of the psychosis. With each future sighting of the
gravestone, or imagined sighting, the psychosis would be one more step
removed from the image, until all that might remain on seeing the little
gravestone again would be a sense of feeling disturbed. This is not a
repressed memory, it is the best that can be done with traumatic
memories -- it is 'resolution'. Frances also taught me the importance of
what may seem to be casual social exchanges. This is sometimes the only
communication that individuals have with the social world. In the world
of damaged memories and over-sensitized interpretation, the quality of
simple human interchanges cannot be overestimated. Most conversations in
Ireland start with comments about the weather; there is an inestimable
amount of emotional and cultural communication exchanged in what could
appear to be formulaic exchanges. It is, more than anything else, our
shared reality -- there is great joy if we have a warm sunny day and
much sharing of misery on rainy and windy days. The stereotypical,
hopefully fading, idea of the psychiatrist cleverly breaking down speech
content over hours of uninterrupted non-directional therapy could not be
further from the workaday reality of the average clinical psychiatrist.
We are more healers than people who break down, more interested in
coaxing our patients back to the shared world than trying to plunge them
into interospective chaos, more practical than theoretical. In this
process of coaxing a chronically psychotic individual back to the shared
world, exchanges are kept simple and unambiguous. The mental health
gains in a person who has lived with long-term untreated psychosis and
their participation in the world may sometimes seem modest to an
outsider, but it was a triumph for Frances to have a chat with a nurse
about the weather, the journey to the day hospital, her new dress or the
price of cigarettes. I now think that we are all like Frances to some
extent, living our lives in an equilibrium between a potentially
threatening outside world and our

sometimes sensitized memories. The crucial issue is to continue to try
to develop a more healthy equilibrium. Frances is not raging against the
world, she is not destroying herself or the world around her; she is
endeavouring to participate. Frances and other patients with psychotic
disorders have taught me that the key issue for a human being is not to
be highly functional on an abstract scale of functionality, but to be in
equilibrium. If there is anything that I have learned from my work with
mentally ill patients it is that the achievement of an easy equilibrium
between oneself and the world is what determines one's happiness. I was
struck by a phrase in a Michael Cunningham novel, A Home at the End of
the World, in which he describes a group of psychologically fragile
individuals as being 'held together by duct tape'. They evolve to live
as an eccentric ensemble in a houseshare, negotiating an emotionally
delicate dance around each other with mutual laconic sensitivity. Not
necessarily happy, and certainly dysfunctional, they find their own
home, albeit one at the end of the world. We all need a home in the
world, wherever that might be. One's state of normality, as Hippocrates
would have called it, is for each of us to find, and none of us to
judge. \* Jean-Paul Sartre, Nausea, trans. Robert Baldick (Penguin,
2000), p. 63. † Boris Pasternak, Doctor Zhivago (Pantheon, 1997). ‡
Sartre, Nausea, p. 61.

14. False or True?

'I have done that,' says my memory. 'I cannot have done that,' says my
pride, and remains adamant. At last -- memory yields. Friedrich
Nietzsche\*

In 1899 Madison Bentley conducted studies in which he observed and
recorded the recall of simple images of coloured cards. He found that
the accuracy of the recall of the first colour presented was reduced by
the presentation of subsequent colours. The recall was made fuzzy by the
competing sensory input that followed. In this, Bentley showed how
subsequent memories change previous ones, an observation that may seem
banal and obvious, but is actually neither. We may intuit that our past
drives the present, but the events of the present also change past
memories, as we've explored. Present experience and memory are in a
never-ending dance of construction and reconstruction. Bentley's studies
reflect how concepts of memory had shifted from one of fixed
impressions, like the wax imprints of the ancient philosophers or the
mechanical concepts of Descartes in the seventeenth century, to an
organic associative process involving sensory experience, physiological
arousal and emotion, by the end of the nineteenth. Bentley's experiments
were superficially modest, but ideologically sophisticated. He is a
largely unsung pioneer in his meticulous observations of memory and his
clever intuitions. We now know that we do not have a fixed store of
memory that may or may not be available for recall and that new input
from the world is not simply augmenting established networks, but that
there is a plastic network of connectivity between present input and
memory. Even a new colour, if quickly presented, will shift the cell

assembly that represented the previous colour, and this will be
disrupted again if a further colour is quickly presented. This principle
holds in relation to the more organized and complex process such as
biographical memory. The hippocampus is engaged in putting together
incoming sensory experience to create new biographical memory, but this
putting together of current cell assemblies with existing prefrontal
lattices will of course change the pre-existing lattices. One may be
aware of the processes of working memory -- thinking, actively recalling
or imagining -- but we are always silently processing information, what
I think Baudelaire meant when he wrote about la parnasse fecund --
'fertile laziness'. Neural currents are always at play, swirling about
in response to the zaps from the body and the world, regardless of
whether the brain process is one of intellectual concentration or of
fertile laziness. The Bentley paper is a delight to read because his
simple observations have remained consistent with the unending
complexities that neuroscience continues to reveal, and because of his
lyrical writing. He also found, incidentally, that bright colours are
more easily remembered with accuracy. This is because bright colours
cause more physiological arousal, and when we're aroused so too are the
brain neurons, being pitched to fire and flare into their neighbours and
forge cell assembly memories. Perhaps this is why the sun seems to have
always been shining during childhood. In the final paragraph of the
paper he wrote, 'From this standpoint are explicable the partial passage
of memory into phantasy, and the weakening of memory fidelity.'i

Biographical Memory If simple sensory cortical memory, like colour
recognition, can be so easily manipulated, what are the possibilities
for biographical memory? The only thing that is certain about
biographical memory is that it has to change -- an event only occurs
once, as James Clerk Maxwell told us. Although there is little fidelity
in biographical memory, as we've seen, in this infidelity there are many
degrees of betrayal. On one pole there is fibbing, when one is
deliberately telling a lie. Telling lies was a sin in my day, and when
we

trooped into the confession box to confess our sins to the priest every
month we all said the same thing: 'I have told lies and have been
disobedient to my parents.' Even then it was seen as something benign.
This may sound uncomplicated, but a deliberate lie, or an obfuscation,
can transmute into something more like an ambiguous memory, which can
then become more like a real memory. Author's Miller's play The Crucible
is a clever exposition of how deliberate lying can transmute into
belief. The play centres on the Salem witch trials that took place in
Massachusetts in the seventeenth century. Some girls start off by lying
about another girl but, as the deceit progresses and they become more
emotionally invested in it, they appear to come to believe in the
reality of the deception. These histrionic elaborations of emotion now
seem fake to us, but in the emotionally unaware landscape of the
seventeenth century, and in communities that inhabit emotionally
repressive worlds, latent unexpressed emotions will find an out in some
socially permissible way. Salem was a cruel and unhappy community,
brimming with unspoken lies, and ripe for mass hysteria. In the end, the
lie seems to become part of a collective belief because it fits with the
emotional catharsis required by the group.

False Memory Moving into the non-conscious territory of memory
infidelity, we fall into the rabbit hole of 'false memory'. False memory
is generally understood to be remembering events differently from how
they happened, or remembering things that may not have occurred at all.
The main problem with this framework is that 'true' event memory is a
contradiction in terms. The adjective 'true' is usually not used for
memory, with good reason, but there seems to be a general acceptance
that events can be recalled as they originally occurred, in spite of
what science has described since the nineteenth century. Memory, as
Bentley proved in 1899, is not reproducible as a stream of sensory
experience. All biographical memory is false to some degree, because of
the imperative of change, the changing networks caused by ongoing events
and experience, and the human drive to self-narrativize.

One of the most loved writers, Nobel Laureate in Literature Alice Munro,
put this so well: 'Memory is the way we keep telling ourselves our
stories -- and telling other people a somewhat different version of our
stories.' As she says, we first tell ourselves our \[own\] stories. Then
we polish it up a bit, or a lot, and tell 'other people a somewhat
different version', and the different version becomes the new version
that we 'keep telling ourselves' and subsequently change again for
others. Selfnarrativization transforms your story into your narrative,
and is what you want yourself to be and how you want others to see you.
It is all, ultimately, driven by vanity. One of the most striking and
attractive features of a humble person is their lack of a need to
self-narrativize. The world has been exposed to some spectacular
narcissists, whose vanity and sense of selfimportance is equalled only
by their deluded self-narrativization. We can hide behind our
narratives, we can place ourselves complacently, sometimes almost
comically, in the world as a made-up person. An individual's capacity to
erase, reconstruct, selectively forget, selectively remember, is
endless. So, if past memory, whether it be of a card colour, or of
autobiographical events, is being constantly reconstructed by the
demands of current experience and our changing self-narratives, is there
any such thing as 'false' memory?

What Are We Talking About When We Talk About False Memory? There are a
tangle of ideas and terms related to the phrase 'false memory'.
Psychiatry was in the thick of speculations about repressed/suppressed
memory in the era of psychiatry dominated by Freudian thinking for most
of the twentieth century and which only ended when brain science began
to come of age in the latter decades of the century. The concept of
repressed as opposed to suppressed memory was taught to us in earnest --
suppressed memory was when a person deliberately pushed a memory from
consciousness, and repressed memory was when this was not done
deliberately, that is, when it was an unconscious process. I have been
at case conferences -- where individual patient cases are discussed
among colleagues -- and the issues of fabrication versus suppression
versus

repression have been discussed ad nauseam. Was the patient 'genuinely'
totally amnesic? Was the patient feigning memory loss for secondary
gain, perhaps because he didn't want to return home and face his
gambling debts? The case conference discussions were, inevitably,
circular. The usual course of psychogenic amnesia described in case
studies in the psychiatric literature is that the amnesia resolves
gradually if the treating team enables memory function to return without
loss of face. Exploring the reasons, the dirty secrets of Salem, the
domestic conflicts, the secret addictions, the avoidance, is more
fruitful than exploring whether the story is true or false. For the
record, I have never seen a case of so-called 'psychogenic' amnesia.
Freud is the inventor of the befuddling concepts of repressed and
suppressed memory, and the subsequent confusions about false memory.
This was based on his ideas about child sexual abuse. Freud moved from a
theory that female neuroses -- an umbrella term used to describe mental
ill health -- were caused by childhood sexual abuse to the theory that
this was fantasy. He theorized that 'infantile sexuality' led to girl
children being attracted to their fathers. Childhood sexual abuse, he
went on to theorize in increasingly obscure language, was not an event
that had occurred but a fantasy in the girl's mind. In 1933 Freud wrote
about 'memory being transformed into fantasy', fantasy being the sexual
abuse.ii Was Freud aware that he had borrowed Bentley's phrase about
memory passing into fantasy, or was his action unconscious, repressed or
suppressed? The societal denial of incest and child sexual abuse fell
away in the closing decades of the twentieth century, and it became
apparent that childhood sexual abuse was sadly common. Then something
quite bizarre occurred, and, in a strange contortion of Freudian theory,
Freudian techniques of hypnosis and suggestion were used to 'recover'
memories of childhood abuse. The practice of recovering memories of
childhood sexual abuse using Freudian techniques of stimulating
repressed memory then developed into another monster.137 Memories of
past abuse were being induced by psychotherapeutic techniques of
suggestion, by encouraging patients who had 'blocked' memories to attend
survivors groups and try to recover the memory, or by giving them
suggestive books. A debate about whether recovered memories were 'false'
or 'true' followed. An argument about a recovered versus a false versus
a true

memory might as well be about how many angels can dance on the head of a
pin. Elizabeth Loftus has been an important figure in bringing some
reality to the area of false memory and, importantly, in removing
techniques of memory manipulation from mainstream clinical practice.138
So-called recovered memory is no longer allowed as evidence in court in
most jurisdictions. It is important, and often left unsaid, that
unfortunately the victims and survivors of child sexual abuse do not
need memory stimulation techniques to recall the ugly events that
poisoned their childhood, their foundational memories and their mental
health for the rest of their lives.

The Neuroscience of 'False' Memories Although psychiatry has abandoned
the idea of false memory, it persists as a term in the neuroscience
literature. Given the disservice that was done to the countless
'hysterical' women who were victims/survivors of sexual abuse in the
post-Freudian era, I feel that it is regretful that the adjective
'false' should precede 'memory' in any discipline but, adjective aside,
the neuroscience of false memory is a fascinating coming together of
discoveries with potentials that are far-reaching for human memory
systems. The new neuroscience of false memory started in the biology of
algae, something that is a familiar sight in my life. I live in a
village called Howth, on an island joined to the mainland only by a
road, on the northern tip of Dublin Bay. The road to Howth from the city
hugs the coastline, passing miles of sea. We have had so much sun in
recent summers that when I drive or cycle home from the city, and when
the tide is out, the sea is transformed into a massive field of a
neon-green algal explosion. On first sighting the fluorescent green left
glowing on the strand, I experience a memory tug of an amazing
scientific experiment by Susumu Tonegawa. Tonegawa is a scientist who
crosses multiple disciplines and who has won a Nobel Prize for his work
in immunology.iii His story starts with the development of a techniques
called optogenetics, which was called the great discovery of the
twenty-first century.139 To understand the rudiments of the
extraordinary scientific story of optogenetics, we need to start with
the neon-green alga. The green colour

comes from pigmented proteins, called rhodopsins, on the surface of the
algal cells. The rhodopsin protein is really a channel that allows
sunlight to enter the cell, and this light energy is then transformed
into cellular energy that allows the alga to move and divide. This
process is similar to what chlorophyll does in leaves -- transforming
light into cellular energy -- and to what retinal pigment does in the
eyes -- transforming light energy into electrical neurotransmission. The
human retina produces rhodopsin as one of several light-sensitive
proteins. In all of these examples, light energy is converted to
cellular energy through pigmented molecules that bring the light energy
into the cell, be it a green rhodopsin molecule in an alga, a green
chlorophyll molecule in a leaf, or a red, blue or green retinal cell.
This is the basis for one half of the new science of optogenetics. The
other half of the story involves genetic engineering, manipulating human
cells to produce the rhodopsin protein, hence the name optogenetics. How
was this achieved? As evolution would have it, rhodopsin is produced in
retinal cells, as we've already noted. The protein is only produced in
the eye, but the rhodopsin DNA is present in a latent form in all cells:
the DNA is present in brain cells but it is not made into proteins
except in the eye. A scientist in Detroit, Zhuo-Hua Pan, had been
working for years on trying to insert rhodopsins into non-functioning
retinal cells in blind mice. He eventually succeeded in doing so using a
microbe that carried the genetic code for the rhodopsin protein.140, 141
Blind Mouse began to produce the rhodopsin protein, allowing light to
activate the retina and giving Mouse sight. Simultaneously,
collaborating scientists from the US and Germany published a study of
how hippocampal neurons in the brain could be genetically manipulated to
produce rhodopsin proteins and then be activated by shining a light on
the neuron.142 iv Optogenetics has allowed neuroscientists to activate
an electron by shining a light on it. This genetic engineering allows
scientists to see real-time memory at play at the level of the neuron.
This technique has been exploited by Tonegawa to look at memory
formation and, more recently, what he has called 'false' memory. Tomás
Ryan, who recently returned from Tonegawa's lab in Boston to our Trinity
College Institute of Neurosciences, has provided us with a vivid
first-hand account of an experiment that he worked on with Tonegawa.143
In this

mouse experiment they labelled the memory of an object -- a bland and
unremarkable blue box -- by introducing rhodopsin into the hippocampal
neurons that composed the cell-assembly memory of the blue box. Next,
they put Mouse into a red box in which she was frightened by electrical
shocks delivered through the floor of the box, and she exhibited the
typical fear response of freezing. Mouse now had an emotionally neutral
memory for the blue box and an emotionally charged memory for the red
box. The next stage of the experiment involved putting Mouse back in the
blue box while simultaneously activating the red box cell-assembly by
light. When Mouse was then returned to the previously emotionally
neutral blue box she froze with fear. Fear had been transferred from the
red box to the blue box memory. They had manipulated the blue box memory
by tagging an emotion to it. This brilliant experiment has just one
problem for me as a psychiatrist -- its title: 'Creating a false memory
in the hippocampus'.143 v The title interested me because I had not
considered that inserting an emotion into an emotionally neutral memory
was creating a false memory, because this is what we do all the time.
For example, a parent could be gentle and benign to a child almost all
the time, except when they get drunk. The fear induced by the experience
of a capriciously aggressive and out-of-control parent changes the
memory of the parent for the child, because it is now tagged with
emotion. The second issue that one could question is whether a memory
that is made artificially is a false one. Regardless of how a memory is
induced, whether through internal stimulation of Mouse neurons or
through exteroceptive perception, the neural matter of the experience is
formed. Is an auditory hallucination of voices, when voices are heard
from outside the person, not as real an experience as a real person
speaking? One can say the event did not happen in a shared common
reality, but the experience of either an auditory hallucination or of a
real person speaking are both grounded in the neural matter of memory.
What one can say definitively from the Tonegawa experiments is that
memory can be modified by artificial means, and this is far more
fascinating than whether the modified memory is true or false. There are
many potential clinical applications for optogenetic techniques in
treating human brain disorders, although this is some way away as yet.

An optogenetic technique could hypothetically be used to make a brain
implant that could be activated with a light, like a light-activated
pacemaker, to modify brain function. Optogenetic techniques can now also
be used to turn off neural activity. A study conducted in the Institute
of Neurology at University College London has used optogenetic
techniques to successfully control epileptic seizures in a rat
cortex.144 Epilepsy is due to excessive indiscriminate firing of cells,
and in this study inhibitory neurons were genetically modified to fire
when exposed to light, thereby inhibiting firing in the damaged rat
cortex.145 Medical science has gone from a surgical resection of HM's
hippocampus for the treatment of intractable epilepsy in 1953, to
light-controlled inhibition of seizure activity in 2012 . . . in only
fifty-nine years. Another important research application for
optogenetics is using the technique to see what specific parts of the
memory circuitry may be affected by particular treatments.146 Will
optogenetic stimulation of damaged hippocampal neurons allow repair and
regeneration in depression and dementias?147 Will it be possible one day
to attend a brain clinic to regenerate in a targeted way damaged memory
circuitry? Trauma, perhaps? The optogenetic story shows how the bringing
together of disparate expertise -- genetics, physics, natural sciences,
neuroscience, optics, medicine, bioengineering -- can lead to phenomenal
leaps in applied knowledge. In the new connected-up era of the worldwide
web and interdisciplinary scientific collaborations, this can now
happen.

New Ideas on Balanced Inhibition of Memory Of relevance to memory
retrieval is the new science of exploring what we remember and what we
forget. Sensory input is always pushing its way through relatively
stable tangled synaptic organization. The dynamic between the
consolidated existing structures and the disruption caused by current
experience is now being explored and is called 'competitive
maintenance'.148 I have been given insights into the dynamics of memory
excitation and inhibition by my colleague and friend in our neuroscience
institute, Mani Ramaswami, who investigates the molecular mechanisms of

this dynamic through his work on drosophila, the common fruit fly, whom
I no longer swat.149 The lesson that I have learned from Mani's work is
that neural inhibition is an active and necessary process in filtering
out sensory information, without which there would be chaotic sensory
overload. I also find it fascinating that the complex process of
selectively attending to and remembering can be measured at the level of
brain cells, and even molecules. What can be intuited through
self-awareness and introspection can be explored and measured
psychologically and can also be gleaned through measuring behaviour. At
the same time, it is always occurring at a cellular level, even if what
emerges is a sum of millions of positive and negative charges.
Attempting to answer any one question in neuroscience research seems to
throw up more and more questions, often opening up whole systems of high
complexity that have not been explored at all. In the process of
examining what is memorized, a new process of inhibitory balance is
opened up: there are so many possibilities in neural physiology, a
staggering possibility of outcomes in neural connectivity and network
formation! All we really know is that there is an immediate sensate
world that enters the brain through sensory pathways carrying signals
that jostle within synaptic tangles of inhibition and disinhibition,
within circuits, within networks, and which may lead to temporary or
permanent changes in neural architecture. Although the individual neural
processes are ultimately determined by laws of science, even if we
understood these laws the range of outcomes would always be infinite.
How can memory ever be true to events?

Lost Domains Tonegawa believes that one day it may be possible, through
optogenetic stimulation of the amygdala, to reactivate happy memories.
Neuroscience is now encompassing the neural dynamics of time, but
Tonegawa's dream of finding Proust's lost time of past happy memories
is, I think, an illusion. Is there ever a boundaried memory untouched by
the present, like a walled cement garden? It may feel as if there is
something that lingers

almost undisturbed in personal memory: a place that exists but which
cannot be re-entered, a place that we intuit, a 'vanished loveliness', a
lost domain.vi One of the great classics of French literature -- written
in the early twentieth century, in the same decade as Proust's In Search
of Lost Time -- is Le Grand Meaulnes (The Great Meaulnes). Also
translated as The Lost Domain, it is a search for a mysterious lost
world in the woods. The domain is remembered with a dream-like
consciousness, in which vivid images shift with little sense of temporal
connection, and childhood memories merge with the beginnings of sexual
awakenings. The dream-like images and feelings that Meaulnes recalls as
being located somewhere in a maze of woods and fields seem to me to be
in the forests of the arborized roots of dendritic connectivity . . .
remembered as a vanished loveliness. Franz, the narrator, tries to warn
Meaulnes that you cannot travel back to the past but the hero fails to
realize this, with tragic consequences. Searches for lost times and lost
domains can never yield the same experience, however reluctant young
hopeless romantics may be to accept this. \* Friedrich Nietzsche, Beyond
Good and Evil, trans. Marion Faber (OUP, 1998), p. 58.

15. The Oldest Memories

Is the past ever really past? . . . ancestral zones are not contemplated
as relics of a past that is over, but are rather intuited as persistent
energies animating events, relations, and subjectivities in the present.
Anne Mulhall\*

Collective Memory It is obvious that it is from others that the ideas
and contexts within which we understand the world are learned.
Collective memory is usually conceptualized as cultural memory, but much
of our deep collective memory is also biological. Although we are born
as a relatively blank slate to be imprinted by experience, humans are
first and foremost the biological product of living things that preceded
them in evolution. All life forms on Earth share a genetic collective.
One's unique genome is composed of the genetic material not only of
one's family but of the collective genetic pool of our genetic
ancestors, from algae to apes.i It is the organization of the cells in
an organism that determines the sort of life that will emerge from
clusters of cells.

Brown Bear and Matrilinear Memory Paula Meehan, a much-treasured Irish
poet, and an alumna of Trinity College Dublin, has written a poem, 'The
Solace of Artemis', that explores deep biological memory. The poem was
inspired by an academic paper authored by a research collaboration
between TCD, Oxford and Penn State

universities, and concerns an Irish brown bear.150 Brown bears have been
extinct in Ireland since the ice age, some 20,000 to 50,000 years ago.
The remains of one of these brown bears, a female, were discovered in
1997 in a cave in the Sligo mountains, in the west of Ireland. Finding
Brown Bear's DNA in Sligo was exciting, but what was even more exciting
was that a particular part of Irish Brown Bear's DNA, mitochondrial DNA,
is present in all polar bears in the Arctic. Mitochondria are present in
all cells and make the energy for the cell. They are often called the
powerhouses of the cells, and are like independent little organelles
within the cell that have their own DNA. Mitochondrial DNA code is
inherited, unmodified, from the mother, in most species, including
humans. This is called matrilineal inheritance. This means that Irish
brown bears were the ancestors of all polar bears. Somehow, one or
several female Irish brown bears made their way to the Arctic -- the
land masses of the Arctic and Europe were connected then -- and mated
with a native Arctic bear. Mitochondrial DNA, spreading unmodified from
the west of Ireland for more than 40,000 years, is still firing cells
with living fuel in all female polar bears. Paula contemplates the
eternal deeply embedded biological female memory, comparing it to the
superficial memories of the 'children of the machine', the first
internet generation: their talk of memory, of buying it, of buying it
cheap, but I, memory keeper by trade, scan time coded in the golden hive
mind of eternity. I burn my books, I burn my whole archive: a blaze that
sears, synapses flaring cell to cell where memory sleeps in the waxed
hexagonals of my doomed and melting comb.†

Something persists in the depths of the eternal female memory, perhaps
romantic and maternal love . . . waiting in the cave mouth for her lover
loping across the vast ice field . . . 'dreaming my cubs about the den,
my honied ones, smelling of snow and sweet oblivion.' In a further
twist, mitochondria themselves were probably once bacteria that became
incorporated into animal cells and became subverted to the purpose of
survival of the cell that engulfed it.151 The mutated bacteria continued
to have semi-independent life, nestled in the cellular machinery of
every human cell. Viruses have identical structure to RNA, the code

assembly in humans that translates DNA into proteins. Viruses, too, are
interlopers that fall into the human cell's DNA machinery, and they
would not have any effect on us if we did not share the same molecular
biology. It is because COVID-19 can trick human cells into producing the
COVID proteins that humans become diseased. This can sometimes be put to
our advantage, and viruses are now used as carriers to change DNA
production in living human cells that are diseased. We also embody our
evolutionary predecessors in memory and emotional experiences. For
example, as we've explored, humans are wired to immediately respond
emotionally to smell memory. This is because older evolutionary species,
in the absence of conscious reflection, needed to recognize and respond
immediately and automatically to danger. The short-circuit from smell to
response keeps Rat, who has a relatively huge olfactory cortex compared
to us, alive; and we are the lucky inheritors of this emotional
experience. Place probably has a central role in the human memory system
because of the importance for predators and food gatherers of returning
to places where food is plentiful and avoiding places that might be
dangerous. A lot of hard-wiring in the human brain is present, because
of the demands not of the human world, but that of phylogenetic
predecessors.

Cultural Memory While deep biological memory is humming away in the
background, cultural memory is to the fore in the way we construct new
memories and put it all together in order to understand the world. Paul
Baltes and Tania Singer from the Max Planck Institute in Berlin have
summarized the inseparable contributions of biological and cultural
memory to individual memory systems: There is general agreement that the
mind is the bio-cultural co-construction of two interactive systems of
influences: internal genetic-biological and external
material-socialcultural. The brain is a joint outcome of these two
systems of inheritance.ii

While recognizing the inseparability of biological and cultural memory,
they conclude that socio-cultural influences are more dominant in the

modern world. What I see and perceive leads me to believe that, in an
average life, nothing is more important to what we attend to and
memorize than our osmotic relationship with socio-cultural memory. The
term collective memory, mémoire collective, was first coined in 1925 by
the French sociologist Maurice Halbwachs. Halbwachs' core thesis was
that an individual's private memory existed within the framework of
collective memory, without which private memory could have no meaning
and no context: 'Yet it is in society that people normally acquire their
memories. It is also in society that they recall, recognize, and
localize their memories.'‡ He believed that one set of cultural beliefs
or memories, which he called 'frameworks', are gradually colonized by
others as societies change. The gradual introduction of a new set of
ideas into a pre-existing framework means that the whole can maintain a
stability while constituent ideas gradually transmute. One can see this
in a simple form in the preservation, and renaming, of rituals from
pre-Christian to Christian times, the prototypic example being the
takeover of the pre-Christian celebration of the winter solstice by the
Christian Christmas. Perhaps you are noticing that the dynamics of
cultural memory are similar to those of individual memory -- not fixed
or unchanging, but in a process of being continually reconstructed by
the present. It is as if there is a collective human cortical web of
organization, sometimes disorganization, that is loosely consolidated
but is being modified constantly by vast streams of sensory input. As
Halbwachs observed, the past is not preserved but is reconstructed based
on present beliefs. His description of this process of revisionism is
the same as that for individual memory, where a disruption of memory
occurs because of shifting self-narrativization: '. . . we choose among
the store of recollections . . . to an order conforming with our ideas
of the moment.' The fragile stores of collective memory seem to be just
as mutable as those of personal memory.

The Oldest Stories One constant, however, in the ever-shifting heave of
human culture is the fairy tale. They are the oldest stories, universal
but woven into the local,

and handed down through the spoken word from generation to generation. I
was reared in the culture of the local fairy stories because, surprising
as it may seem, my generation in rural Ireland were still very close to
the tradition of transmission of stories by the spoken word. I was, and
remain, embedded at a deep level of memory in the power of the fairy
story. It took me some years to recognize the hidden motif of postpartum
psychosis in fairy stories. You were probably jolted, as I was, not only
by Edith's terrifying psychotic delusions but also because it was
redolent of culturally familiar stories of the possessed infant/child.
Edith's experience had a more distant sense of familiarity for me than
the booming resonance of Hollywood movies, more like a grumbling
undertow. Irish fairy stories, similar to those elsewhere in Europe,
were generally only committed to paper at the turn of the twentieth
century. At this time, a movement developed in Ireland, the Celtic
Twilight -- similar to that led by the Grimm Brothers in Germany a few
decades previously -- to preserve indigenous national culture.iii The
penning of Irish folklore had a special significance because Irish
language, history and religion had been outlawed for several hundred
years during British rule. Hiberno-English was spoken in most of the
country, which was a fusion of the grammatical structure of the Irish
language with English words. Spoken Irish did, and does, remain the main
language in small areas on the western, northern and southern seaboard,
where the fairy stories were most likely to be told. The laconic Irish
language, with its relatively fewer words and subsequent greater
ambiguity, is a perfect language for the pithy fairy tale. Douglas Hyde
provided the first unadulterated written account of Irish fairy tales
and folklore in 1890, using the 'exact language' of the people (W. B.
Yeats's description). Hyde was a leader in the illuminati of the Celtic
Twilight, some of whom, neither Yeats nor Hyde though, went on to become
revolutionaries in the war for independence that started with the 1916
Rising. Hyde collected the stories as he heard them, in Irish, and wrote
an English translation on the facing page.§ I have, open beside me, an
original edition of Beside the Fire that belongs to my neighbour Mary,
who was married to Douglas Hyde's grandson. Douglas Hyde, the passionate
penner of the bilingual Irish fairy story, went on to become the first

president of the new Irish republic in 1938. Small surprise, then, that
fairy stories were so interwoven into my young imagination.iv My
siblings and I grew up steeped in the magic of Irish fairy tales. We
spent our summers on the small farm where my mother's family had lived
for several generations in County Kerry, in the southwest corner of
Ireland. We moved house several times when growing up, but summer
holidays in Rathoran were a constant. The prefix 'Rath' -- common to
many Irish place names -- is the Irish/Gaeilge for a raised, circular
area of land with a flat top rimmed with trees, usually hawthorns, that
were considered to possess magical powers. It was said that fairies
lived under the raths. Uncle Jim -- Mother's brother, who ran the farm
with his sister Aunty May -- told us that a neighbour who was trying to
dig up a hawthorn had his tractor repeatedly pushed back by the hawthorn
tree. Uncle Jim himself did not have a tractor and continued to rely on
a horse and cart for the transport of the milk pails to the creamery
each morning, until the horse died. Some of my most precious memories of
these summers are of getting up early and sneaking quietly out of the
bedroom so that I would be the only sibling to go to the creamery, being
lifted on to the back of the cart by Uncle Jim, my legs rattling to the
bumps on the dirt road that led from the farm to the main road to
Abbeyfeale.

'Simply Life' W. B. Yeats also fell under the spell of the Irish fairy
story, and in the Introduction to his book Irish Folk Stories and Fairy
Tales he describes Douglas Hyde's work as 'neither humorous nor
mournful: it is simply life'. Yeats's well-known short poem 'The Stolen
Child' is probably related to the common occurrence of death from
unknown causes in children: Come away, O human child! To the waters and
the wild With a faery, hand in hand. For the world's more full of
weeping than you can understand.

This brings us back to Edith and her psychotic belief that her baby had
been substituted by an identical double. This motif of the changeling
child

is universal. The changeling was believed to have been left by the
fairies, who stole the real child. In one version of the changeling
fairy tale, set down by Yeats, a woman, Mrs Sullivan, believes that her
baby has been exchanged in a 'fairies' theft'. As is typical, she takes
advice from a local wise woman. The wise woman advises her to boil egg
shells in a big pot on the fire. Boiling shells would have been
considered absurd -- one would boil eggs, but never shells. If the baby
is an innocent without any knowledge, they would not be surprised by the
boiling of egg shells. If they were a cunning changeling, it was
reasoned, they would be prompted to respond to the tomfoolery of boiling
eggshells. As Mrs Sullivan boils the eggshells, the baby/changeling
asks, '. . . in the voice of a very old man, "What are you doing, Mammy
. . . what are you brewing, Mammy?" ' The gift of speech 'now proved
beyond question that he was a fairy substitute'. Mrs Sullivan's talking
changeling is redolent of the auditory hallucinations that women with
postpartum psychosis experience and frequently attribute to a substitute
baby. It is Mrs Sullivan, not the wise woman, who then kills the baby --
an outcome that is common in untreated postpartum psychosis. What in
folklore was known as a changeling is probably, in the nomenclature of
psychiatry, a delusion of substitution.v The delusions of substitution
in postpartum psychosis can involve everyone around the woman but most
commonly her baby, her husband/partner or, if hospitalized, the medical
staff. When working in the Bethlem I became so accustomed to delusions
of substitution that I would approach the idea in a gingerly way if
women were in a shut-down state, reassuring them that their possible
suspicions of substitution were part of the illness. One woman memorably
believed that her husband had been substituted by the devil on the night
that she conceived her baby. He was now her husband again, but for the
night of the conception the devil had taken him over. In about half the
cases of postpartum psychosis, a woman has never previously had a
psychotic episode and it strikes like a bolt of lightning from the blue.
It is a bewildering experience for her, and for those close to her. In
fairy stories dramatic changes in women who have given birth are
ascribed to substituting the mother with an identical double. A fairy
tale describing such a substitution was among those recorded by the
Grimm Brothers:

When the queen gave birth to a handsome prince the next year and the
king was out hunting, the witch appeared in the form of a chambermaid
and entered the room where the queen was recovering from the birth . . .
The witch led the queen into the bathroom and locked the door behind
her. Inside there was a brutally hot fire, and the beautiful queen was
suffocated to death . . . Now the witch had a daughter of her own, and
she endowed her with the outward shape of the queen and laid her in bed
in place of the queen.

In other versions, the recently delivered mother is stolen by the
fairies to suckle the fairy infants. When returned, possibly years
later, she would often be greatly changed. Another motif is that of a
woman who has given birth and becomes sleepless, and who eventually
closes her eyes in exhaustion, whereupon a changeling is laid in the
crib by the waiting fairies. This may reflect the sleeplessness of
psychosis followed by delusions of substitution. The Fairy Doctor, the
Irish version of the wise oracular woman, is another important aspect of
fairy lore, and the Fairy Doctor often gave advice around birth. Writing
about the Fairy Doctor in a small county in Ireland, the folklorist Erin
Kraus has written: The in-between world inhabited by fairies could be
glimpsed at the boundary of states of time -- at dusk or at midnight, on
Hallowe'en or May Eve; and the boundary of states of place -- at the
town's edge, between tides, at the garden's end . . . Likewise,
transition states, such as birth, sexual maturation, and death, were
associated with access to the fairy world.vi

The traditional spoken word of the local fairy story has morphed into
universal narratives of Walt Disney wholesomeness, in which the Good
prevail, the Innocent are rewarded, the Inept and Lazy have their
comeuppance, and the Evil ones perish or are punished. These derivations
do no justice to the largely unreconstructed stories of life,
particularly female life, that were the subject matter of the
unsanitized original versions. Marina Warner, a scholar of fairy
stories, in her intriguing book Once Upon a Time: A Short History of
Fairy Tale (2014) recounts the journey of the Brothers Grimm to a
hospital in the German university town of Marburg, where they had
travelled to meet an old woman, famous for her repertoire of folklore.
The old woman refused to give the Brothers Grimm her stories. The
brothers eventually acquired her story -- that of Cinderella -- through
hoodwinking a young girl to get the old woman to tell her the story. The
old

woman of Marburg told the girl child and the Grimms then took the story
of Cinderella down from the girl. Warner writes, 'perhaps the old woman
did not want the elite young men to see into the secret thoughts and
dreams of revenge' that women experience?¶ In the original version of
Cinderella, the 'ugly' sisters selfmutilate, cutting off their heels and
toes to fit the perfect shoe of the hypothetically perfect female foot.
Doves, the bird of romantic love and hope, peck out the eyes of the
sisters through the vengeful spirit of Cinderella's dead mother. The
subject matter of the original fairy stories is usually brutal, but it
is difficult to feel anything because there are no subjective emotions
written into the texts. As Yeats put it, they are neither humorous or
mournful. One reads about children being expelled from home by filicidal
parents, grandmothers being eaten by wild wolves because the wolf wants
to eat the granddaughter, girls camouflaging themselves as goats to
avoid being raped by their fathers, babies and children being kidnapped
and held imprisoned for years, children being eaten . . . and yet there
is no emotion in the telling of the story, and we feel little emotion
when we read the original versions. The story moves from one event to
the next as a child would tell a story. The stories were transmitted in
this way I think because the information that they contained,
transmitted from woman to girl, was too important to be distorted by
subjective feeling. It is not the interpretation of the story that
matters, or how one may feel, or whether something is right or wrong; it
is the fact that incest and rape and murder and sexual rivalry exist and
the girl needs to know this and learn to protect herself. The stories
were too valuable for life and survival to be transformed by
narrativization. The power of the female transmission of these stories,
the raw earthiness of the non-idealized objectified female, is for me
the real deep female collective memory, the dark side of the eternal
Brown Bear as mother and lover.

Some Concluding Thoughts I have lived through a period in medicine that
has gone from medical students being taught about the brain in terms of
separate, functionally

defined pathways with psychiatry 'located' somewhere in the black hole
of the emotional-memory circuit, to the beginnings of the scientific
understanding of the connected brain. There were no neuroscience
departments in the 1980s and few in the 1990s -- all this brain
knowledge is new and has happened in the blink of an eye in historical
terms. I have learned about the brain as this knowledge has unfolded,
but my reference points for this new knowledge, my foundational
memories, are rooted in personal experiences, in the experiences of my
patients and in the great creative thinkers who intuited what we are now
coming to understand scientifically -- great artists who, immersed in
introspection, wrote about the experience of memory before we could name
the processes involved. I have learned, as we all do, through both
knowledge and experience. Foundational memories may be based in
established scientific knowledge or in the collective wisdom of the
unmodified fairy tale, or the genius of highly creative observers. The
merging of knowledge and experience can happen because we have a
multi-tiered brain memory system, where new experience is held in the
plastic hippocampus, the memory maker, and gradually integrated into the
less plastic, more consolidated cortex. Current experience and memory
are integrated in the complicated networks of the prefrontal cortex, the
storyteller. At the highest pinnacle of this complexity, memory is
consciously manipulated in imagination. At this level, memory can be
worked without external sensory input, and this faculty can be used to
form new patterns of thinking, to imagine and create, to modify one's
understanding of the world. It is through this representative memory
that we develop self-awareness, and the appreciation of others as being
self-aware in the same way. Through this we come to accept the singular
human state, common to everyone, of existential aloneness and
inseparability from others. The appreciation of others as being mirrored
humans is the neural basis for the virtue of human kindness. The core
expertise in psychiatry is in understanding experience and naming it.
That is why individuals with psychiatric illnesses have a great deal to
tell neuroscience, and the larger world, about the processes involved in
the organization of memory. Psychiatric illnesses probably involve
disruptions in integrative brain processes, in network brain function,
which we are only coming to understand now through network neuroscience
and

connectomics. As this science develops, psychiatric illnesses will
become a major target of investigation, and I believe this will be the
beginning of the ending of the stigmatization of psychiatric illness. An
important caveat here is that most of my patients do not feel similarly
optimistic. They are not immune to the stigma of mental illness, because
they suffer from it, and, even if they have overcome their own
internalized stigma, they know that, in general, others have not. Some
pain is inevitable in life, from sickness, separation, death, failure,
and some is unnecessary -- perhaps this is the most painful of all
suffering. Back in the days of the Bethlem woods and the badger sett,
what I really learned, although I didn't know it until years later, was
that Edith's flashback, a memory of an event, was also an experiential
event. Her experience on her first sighting of the small gravestone had
been translated into a specific neuronal imprint that coded for the
gravestone and the associated terror. The re-sighting of the gravestone
the second time ignited the arborization of neurons like a flash of
lightning that lights up a tree in a storm, creating a fresh experience.
Edith brought home to me how memory is, in essence, neurally coded
experience. This experience can be reactivated like a dramatic
reenactment and cause emotional distress, or it may tweak a subterranean
intuition from the buried rag and bone shop of the past. Neuroscientists
may talk about memory as a process, psychiatrists may talk about it as a
repository of experience, and neurologists may talk about pathology in
specific brain areas leading to specific deficits in memory function.
But memory derives from the infinite jostling and flarings of neurons in
a vast, pervasive connectivity of present experience interacting with
memory networks. All the microscopic synaptic activity flashing on and
off like fairy lights has a whole-brain effect and it is the whole-brain
effect that presents itself as a conscious experience. In Edith's words
'the memory was real', an irrefutable experience. Ideas come and go,
adrift on a sea of cultural zeitgeists, but living human experience, at
the end of the day, is bigger than ideas -- just like the brain,
experience is irreducible. \* Anne Mulhall, 'Memory, Poetry, and
Recovery: Paula Meehan's Transformational Aesthetics', in An Sionnach: A
Journal of Literature, Culture, and the Arts, Vol. 5, Nos. 1 and 2
(spring and autumn 2009), p. 206.

† Paula Meehan, 'The Solace of Artemis', from Imaginary Bonnets with
Real Bees in Them (University College Dublin Press, 2016), p. 30. ‡
Maurice Halbwachs, On Collective Memory, ed. and trans. Lewis A. Coser
(University of Chicago Press, 1992), p. 38. § Douglas Hyde, Beside the
Fire: A Collection of Irish Gaelic Folk Stories (David Nutt, 1890). ¶
Marina Warner, Once Upon a Time: A Short History of the Fairy Tale (OUP,
2014).

Postscript

At the end of every scientific article the authors write a section,
titled 'Limitations', about how their study is flawed. Small details are
listed explaining why the findings may not be correct or generalizable,
and the authors usually conclude by saying that the study needs to be
replicated, addressing the stated limitation of their work, before the
findings can be confirmed. This ambiguity and hesitation is the opposite
of what the world outside of science desires. There is a general desire
for neat, simple information and a general intolerance of ambiguity.
Medics have to embrace ambiguity and often take an educated guess based
on experience, and will continue to do so until we have machines that
can precisely evaluate the various stages of function or failure in body
systems, the causes of the failures, and we have developed biological or
pharmacological therapies specifically targeting the pathology.
Psychiatry will be last to arrive at this point, because it deals with
the most complicated aspects of the most complicated organ. So I will
end on a note of caution by emphasizing that the contents of this book
reflect the state of current knowledge that is advancing as I write, and
you read, the book. I have a headful of anticipated events as I emerge
from this lovely summer of 2018. I will not -- for as long as I will
remember -- forget this long hot summer heralded by the joy of the Irish
referendum. The sea shadowed by the cliff in our north-facing swimming
bay in Howth was spared the algae bloom at the cost of the chill.
Following a swim to the far buoy I would often spread myself out on the
stones, warmed by the heat, and feel the prescient memories being fired
by whatever it was that made the happiness come together that summer. I
swam in the sea and I swam in memory. The warm stones, the late evening
swims in mad rose-orange sunsets and the early morning ones of still
luminescence, the swimming community

chatting during the ritual of drying and dressing, no detail of the swim
too small to elaborate upon, the heightened awareness of the
comings-andgoings of my eldest's last summer at home, and the daily
writing. I must now leave these immersions and face the shortening days.
Gaston Bachelard called winter 'the oldest of the seasons . . .
confer\[ring\] age on our memories, taking us back to a remote past'.
Thank you for reading the book, or parts of it, and I hope that you have
enjoyed reading it with even a small fraction of the pleasure that I had
in the writing of it.

Thank you . . . Esther and Sean, mother and father, and siblings, Joe,
Myra and Therese, for the memories. A special thanks to Joe, who read
one of the original drafts and gave detailed feedback. Ted (Dinan), my
first mentor and a friend who allowed me to learn by paring down
concepts that were obtuse to piecemeal information that I could
reconstruct. Robin (Murray), my second mentor, who demonstrated to me
how to follow your own questions. My patients, all of them. I feel an
enormous sense of gratitude to those who have generously agreed to let
me share anonymized extracts from their case histories for others to
learn from. The scientists who have given the world so much clarity
about how it all works. I have mentioned only some of my favourites, a
small fraction of the many great scientists. A big thanks to my
neuroscience colleagues in the unique Trinity College Institute of
Neuroscience, where psychiatrists, neurologists and laboratory
scientists work side by side in an atmosphere of happy and excited
knowledge-sharing. In particular I would like to thank the
neuroscientist-author Shane O'Mara, who introduced me to the world of
trade publishing. My fellow psychiatrists, whose collegiate exchanges
and knowingness about our shared experiences gives us a unique bond.

Mary (Cosgrove), with whom I collaborated in a neuro-humanities project
called Melancholia and the Brain. I hope that Mary learned half as much
from me as I did from her during our conversations on 'calcified
dichotomies'. Paula (Meehan), the poet. We have a special place for the
poet in Ireland, going back to Celtic times. Among the many
illuminations that followed from conversations with Paula was an
understanding of the calling of the poet to be an authentic memorialist
of the times. Paula, like Proust, holds close to the centre: an observer
of her own, and other people's, experiences. The visual artist Cecily
Brennan, whose creative insights have led me to places that I would not
otherwise have gone. Daire, for helping me organize the original
illustrations. Sorca (O'Farrell) for doing the illustrations, and her
husband Chris (Cawley) for reading the manuscript. My friends, for the
laughs and fun, for sharing the ups and downs, the traumas and the
memories. Cian and Rowan, who have given me great joy and the loveliest
memories. Bill Hamilton, my wise and clever agent and part-editor, who
saw the manuscript in its original unformed state and helped me to
understand what I was writing about. Josephine Greywoode, my editor,
without whose sharp eye and ear there would have been little sense of
the entirety of the book. My swimming community, especially the Orcas 2,
for the daily restorations to equanimity.

Notes

1.  Dawnings

<!-- -->

i.  There are several traditional classifications of memory, but these
    fall into two main categories. One is based in time: short-, medium-
    and long-term memory. These distinctions are useful clinically when
    trying to grossly evaluate memory function: for example, short-term
    memory becomes more impaired as dementia advances, while there is
    relative preservation of long-term memory; in a very severe brain
    injury there may also be immediate loss of long-term memory. The
    other major classification uses type of memory and is generally
    divided into implicit (also known as 'non-declarative') and explicit
    (also known as 'declarative', or 'biographical'). 'Implicit' relates
    to things that are automatic to us, for example motor function;
    while 'explicit' relates to conscious recall, for example event
    memory. I think that these divisions make it more difficult for
    non-specialists to understand the common processes involved in
    memory formation and recall, and for this reason I have not
    classified memory into separate categories.

<!-- -->

2.  Sensation

<!-- -->

i.  Charlotte Perkins Gilman wrote 'The Yellow Wallpaper' in 1892,
    although she suffered her mental breakdown during her pregnancy and
    following the birth of her daughter in 1885. She did not write again
    until 1890. She ascribed her illness to her unhappy marriage in 1884
    and the subsequent birth of her daughter Katharine in 1885. The six
    missing years between 1884 and 1890 were a mystery that was given
    some explanation by the publication in 2005 of a letter that
    Charlotte wrote to Silas Weir Mitchell in 1887 requesting a
    consultation for treatment with the 'rest cure'. In this letter,
    which Charlotte kept secret until close to her death, she reveals
    the experiences of her lived psychotic depression. Weir Mitchell was
    a prominent neurologist who treated neuroasthenia -- a catch-all
    diagnosis that included what we would now call post-traumatic stress
    disorder, depression, anxiety and bipolar disorder. He was
    fashionable in contemporary American society and treated well-known
    figures such as Walt Whitman and Franklin D. Roosevelt. (Denise D.
    Knight, ' "All the Facts of the Case": Gilman's Lost Letter to
    Dr. S. Weir Mitchell', American Literary Realism, 37:3 (spring,
    2005), pp. 259--77.)
ii. Copernicus (1473--1543) had ignited a scientific revolution with the
    explosive idea of a heliocentric model of the planets in the early
    sixteenth century. Galileo Galilei (1564--1642), born twenty-one
    years after Copernicus's death, expanded on this idea and was tried
    by the Roman Inquisition in 1615, found to be heretical and put
    under house arrest for the rest of his life.

Copernicus and Galileo demonstrated laws of nature, and these were not
compatible with God's Law. Exile and often death was the fate of many of
the few who followed and explored a scientific explanation for the
world. iii. Autoimmune diseases are common and occur in most body
tissues: joints (rheumatoid arthritis); thyroid gland (thyroiditis); gut
(Crohn's disease); heart (cardiomyopathy), and so on. NMDA encephalitis,
like many autoimmune diseases, responds to immunosuppressive therapies,
and this may be the end of it, or it may recur again, as with most
autoimmune diseases. iv. The members and followers of these salons lived
very 'alternative' lives, charged with passionate exploration of the new
order that was emerging scientifically and politically. Women wrote,
studied and argued alongside their male counterparts. One such salon,
led by Madame Helvétius, was a much-coveted retreat for the intellectual
outcasts who were becoming increasingly threatening to the ancien
régime. She was the widow of the Claude-Adrien Helvétius, author of De
l'esprit -- a French compilation of ideas that combined sensationalism
and sensibility -- in which he argued for the equivalence of all minds,
regardless of race or class and, more radically, of women with men.
Following her expulsion from society and her husband's death, Anne
Helvétius bought a small estate in Auteil, a suburb of Paris, and lived
the life of a free woman. Some followers of her salon became permanent
residents. Interestingly, Benjamin Franklin regularly visited her salon
and seems to have fallen in love with her, before carrying back the
French Enlightenment ideas to America. If you would like to read more
about the lively debates that shook the world view, and the characters
who populated these salons in France, I would recommend George Makari's
book Soul Machine: The Invention of the Modern Mind (W. W. Norton,
2015). v. This quote is from Sylvia Siros of Babylab, a unit set up in
2005 at the University of Manchester to look at cognitive development in
infants. In Trinity College Dublin we are doing a longitudinal study of
100 babies born in Dublin in 2014--15 to women who were either depressed
or not depressed during pregnancy, to look at the effects, if any, of
depression during pregnancy on detailed measures of infant
neurodevelopment.74 This study is being done in collaboration with
colleagues in the Department of Psychology, in their Infant and Child
Laboratory. It is fascinating to see how the behaviour of the infant and
the infant--parent interaction can be micro-analysed. Even glances are
measured. A broad general finding is that childhood abuse or neglect in
pregnant women is likely to lead to depression during pregnancy; if this
resolves the infant has no developmental disadvantage, but if the
depression is recurrent the infant is vulnerable to a poorer
neurodevelopmental trajectory.152 We have not yet completed testing our
infant cohort at year 3.

3.  Making Sense

<!-- -->

i.  MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) is an imaging tool used to measure
    volume of body structures. The MRI machine is basically a very
    powerful magnet that pulls some brain atoms in a particular spin,
    giving patterns of 3D structure. These patterns are read in
    comparison to standard brain anatomical maps of structure volumes.
    Functional MRI uses the same principle of magnetic stimulation of
    atomic particles to give patterns of blood flow in the brain over
    short periods of time. Blood theoretically flows to areas that are
    more active, and so will indicate that certain areas are being used
    when a particular activity is underway. In the Villringer study
    cited, the touch

cortex had increased blood flow when the digits were moved, indicating
that digit movement was controlled by certain regions of the touch, or
sensory, cortex. ii Fiona Newell, a neuroscientist colleague, has shown
how what might previously have been thought to be sensory learning in
one domain, say sight, is actually spread around the different sensory
cortices, both visual and auditory.153

4.  The Story of the Hippocampus

<!-- -->

i.  Freud's theorizing, like that of other landmark thinkers, did not
    escape the sexist, genderist and racist prejudices of his era.
    Freud's hypotheses about the repressed universal envy of females
    towards male sexuality reflects the prevailing misogynistic views.
    Freud's sexualization of childrens' drives, however, does seem to go
    beyond commonly held beliefs of the era.
ii. http://www.richardwebster.net/freudandhysteria.html. This URL will
    take you to a succinct and comprehensive overview of the history of
    hysteria. Essentially, hysteria was a catch-all diagnosis for
    neurological and psychiatric disorders that could not be diagnosed.
    One of the most fascinating and famous studies looking at hysteria
    was that by Eliot Slater, in which he examined eighty-five
    middle-aged patients who had been given this diagnosis in the early
    to mid 1950s and followed them up over a period of nine years.
    Twelve patients had died, fourteen had become totally disabled and
    twelve had become partially disabled.15 Most of these patients had
    been suffering from neurological disorders and had been misdiagnosed
    with hysteria. Slater wrote that 'The diagnosis of "hysteria" is a
    disguise for ignorance and a fertile source of clinical error.'
iii. One common term used for hysterical disorders, 'conversion
     disorder', derives from Freud's idea that emotional distress or
     conflict could be 'converted' into neurological symptoms, such as
     amnesia or paralysis. A diagnosis of 'conversion disorder' exists
     to this day in DSM 5 and continues to be used in clinical practice.
     Sometimes, conversion disorders are called 'functional
     neurological' disorders. The use of the term 'functional disorder'
     supposes the occurrence of an event in the brain, such as a
     thought, as being separate from the brain matter that is involved
     in that function. It has been known since the early twentieth
     century that structure and function cannot be separated, even at a
     molecular level. This was demonstrated in humans by Christian
     Anfinsen in the 1950s, when he showed that a change in the
     structure of a protein transformed the protein chemically to do
     something different: structural change meant functional change. He
     won the Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1972 for this discovery.
     'Structure means function' is a basic principle of all sciences,
     including clinical neuroscience. For example, we interpret brain
     neuroimaging of structures as an indication of brain function, and
     fuzzy white coloured connecting paths are interpreted as
     representing poor axon formation, and hence poor connectivity. Even
     the size of a brain part is interpreted as being important --
     smaller areas imply poorer function. Dementia cannot be
     definitively diagnosed without a brain scan that shows atrophy of
     the brain. At a microscopic level, fewer receptors implies poorer
     function of their matched neurotransmitters, and so on. The
     division into neurological and functional persists in spite of all
     this knowledge.
iv. Molecular defects in memory formation in the hippocampus in
    depressed/anxious models of mice are now being examined. In a Korean
    study published in 2019, the authors conducted some spectacular
    experiments in mice in which they changed a 'memory' gene in the
    mouse and this led to depression.154 The memory gene is involved in
    synapse formation, and when you make it

defective in mice, hippocampal growth is impaired. Not only did this
group make a depressed mouse with a shrunken hippocampus, they went on
to 'fix' the gene by giving the mice the protein that they were missing.
This resulted in restoration of synapse formation and the curing of the
depressed/anxious behaviours. v. Biographical, or event, memory is
'stored' in the prefrontal cortex. It is not known whether the
hippocampus is also involved in all event-memory recall. What is known
is that the more vivid the memory, the more the involvement of other
cortical areas -- for example, if the recall is particularly vivid
visually, then the visual cortex is more likely to be shooting signals
through to the prefrontal cortex; if sounds or the emotion are part of
the memory, then the auditory or the emotional cortex is more likely to
be engaged; and so on.155 vi. The Unnamable is a stream of disjointed
sentences in which the words create a feeling of existential terror
because the person speaking does not seem to exist to themself. The
narrator is lost, does not seem to exist except in the words, and is
grappling to find some sense of being alive and coherent in the world.
It seems like a fragmented state of mind brought about by trauma that
has not been acknowledged by either the narrator or by the world. This
sense of not being in the world is not dissimilar to some aspects of
psychosis. The Beckett play Not I is largely drawn from Unnamable.
Billie Whitelaw was individually coached by the demanding Beckett in her
gripping and famous performance of Not I. This is easily accessed
online.

5.  The Sixth Sense

<!-- -->

i.  Willian Styron suffered from severe depression, probably bipolar
    disorder. His familiarity with extreme emotional states may have
    contributed to his exceptionally vivid descriptions of emotional
    experiences: '. . . casting a reluctant glance behind to the place
    where he had lain, and at the river and the cedars, too -- disturbed
    about something: loveliness vanished, or perhaps merely the sense
    that one bright instant of his youth would always, mysteriously, be
    bound up in the invisible and fugitive smell of cedar trees.'
ii. Linda Buck and Richard Axel won the Nobel Prize in Medicine or
    Physiology in 2004 by demonstrating that each odour receptor, of
    which humans are estimated to have about 350, recognizes only one
    scent. Smell memory is much more important in mammals that are
    phylogenetically younger than humans, and the volume of brain matter
    dedicated to smell in rats is huge compared to humans. They remember
    through smell and therefore recognize and react secondary to smell.
    Mice have about a 1,000 odour receptors.
iii. Another theorist, Carl Lange, proposed a similar explanation for
     emotions around the same time (On Emotions: A Psycho-Physiological
     Study, 1885). Lange's theory, however, was less complex, proposing
     that the actual change in the body, the primary feeling, was the
     emotion; whereas James proposed that there was a secondary feeling
     generated in the brain from the primary feeling. Because the
     theories were similar in that both held that emotions were somatic,
     they were merged and it became known as the James--Lange theory of
     emotion. James's theory of emotion, over the years, came to be
     reduced to the less complex definition of Lange's: that emotion is
     the physiological changes, most of which are visceral. James, as we
     can now see, intuited that body feeling states were only part of
     the complex emotional feeling states of humans, and that body
     states would be modified by brain/memory responses.
iv. We do not have much control over autonomic or visceral responses,
    but individuals can, with various psychological techniques and
    intensive medative work, learn to modify or even control

autonomic or visceral responses. In Daniel Goleman's Destructive
Emotions (Bloomsbury, 2003) the author recounts neuroscience experiments
with Oser, a Buddhist of more than thirty years. Oser had worked with
some of the greatest teachers of Buddhism in Tibet and, in a
collaborative exploration between Goleman and the Dalai Lama, agreed to
be monitored by MRI as he was practising medatitive techniques. Oser,
during one form of meditation, rather than having an increase in blood
pressure and heart rate in response to being startled, had the reverse
ANS response -- a decrease in blood pressure and heart rate. But, unless
we practice very hard, ANS and visceral responses are involuntary. v.
Increases in ANS arousal in the sympathetic system are accompanied by an
increase in sweating. Having wet skin will cause a change in the ability
of the skin to conduct an electrical current. This is the physiological
basis for the electrodermal activity (EDA) test, used in lie detection.
The electrodermal activity test conductance change can reflect feelings
that one is trying to disguise. Most of us will have a transient
negative feeling, a slight arousal, when telling a lie, unless one does
not have feelings. One can consciously disguise feelings in facial
expression, but one will get an increase in the automatically mediated
sympathetic ANS activity, a component of which is sweating. This
dampening will then alter the electrodermal activity test conductance.
ANS arousal is also measured using heart-rate variability, respiratory
rate and sometimes temperature. Those with a relatively unemotional
personality, for example a psychopath, may not have these ANS changes
and so do not have changes in their electrodermal activity test.

7.  Time and Experiencing Continuity

<!-- -->

i.  There are rare instances in which a person may be awake, have a
    normal sleep--wake cycle but not be responsive to their
    environment.156 Persistent vegetative or locked-in states are
    examples of these tragic human disorders of what is often called
    'awareness' consciousness, the next order of consciousness up from
    wakefulness that we will explore in coming chapters.
ii. This is a quote from J. Clerk Maxwell's timeless gem Matter and
    Motion (1876). He was first a professor of natural philosophy, and
    was later appointed Professor of Physics and Mathematics in
    Cambridge University. He was a dazzlingly broad thinker who saw that
    the brain could not be left out of our understanding of the physical
    world, hence his observations about place and memory.
iii. It is worth clarifying Freud's complicated stance on childhood
     sexual abuse and memory. Up until 1897 Freud believed that
     patients, mostly women, developed neuroses or hysteria because they
     had been sexually abused during childhood. He elaborated his
     clinical observations in a theory called the 'seduction theory'.
     Although the name 'seduction theory' implies some sort of
     adult-like consent on the part of the child, the suggestion that
     fathers might be abusing their daughters went far beyond societal
     ideas at a time when incest was vehemently denied. The seduction
     theory was received with outrage by the medical establishment, and
     in 1897 Freud announced that he had been misguided about the cause
     of hysteria and neuroses in female patients and began to ascribe
     female neuroses to theories of masturbation and excessive menstrual
     bleeding; he even went on to consider the role of witchcraft. After
     abandoning seduction theory, Freud was committed to the idea that
     sexual abuse of girls was a fantasy. References for Freud's change
     of direction can be found at
     https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/1984/02/freudand-the-seduction-theory/376313/.
iv. If you would like to explore this topic further I recommend Douwe
    Draaisma's book The Nostalgia Factory: Memory, Time and Aging (Yale
    University Press, 2013), in which he explores

the increasing sense of the rapidity of time passing as one ages. v. In
Sean Carroll's book The Big Picture: On the Origins of Life, Meaning and
the Universe Itself (Dutton, 2016), the author assumes that the natural
world is the basis for everything. It is refreshing to read, because he
invokes the brain in what may have been previously investigated by
physicists. Quantum physics principles are now being incorporated into
molecular biology, and I believe that we will move eventually towards an
understanding of the quantum physics principles that underlie the
behaviour of neurons. vi. Two-directional place cells were first found
in the hippocampus, then head-orientation cells brought memory to the
three-dimensional level of space, and then time cells were discovered
that integrated with space memory, giving us a four-dimensional
timespace continuum. 'Henceforth space by itself, and time by itself,
are doomed to fade away into mere shadows, and only a kind of union of
the two will preserve an independent reality.' With these lines Hermann
Minkowski famously opened his ground-breaking lecture on relativity in
1908. Minkowsky was the maths teacher to the more-famous Einstein.
Minkowsky realized that inputs from the human senses, which seem
subjectively to represent a spatial three-dimensional world, are mapped
on to the inseparable entity of the moments of time to form a higher
four-dimensional reality (spacetime). Einstein, interestingly, did not
agree with Minkowsky, but later incorporated Minkowsky's ideas into his
own theories of how time is woven into space. Einstein was the rock star
of the timespace relativity principle, and he makes a great quote, but
his work was grounded, as are all advances, on the work of other
visionary physicists.

8.  Stress

<!-- -->

i.  CRH is carried in small blood vessels from the hypothalamus, near
    the frontal part of the base of the brain, to the pituitary gland
    that sits in a bony indentation just below it but outside the brain.
    Here, CRH stimulates the release of ACTH. ACTH is carried in the
    blood circulation and brings about the release of cortisol from the
    adrenal glands that lie on top of the kidneys. Cortisol is released
    into the blood stream and brought around to different organs in the
    body, where it causes changes in DNA production intracellularly (in
    individual cells) and alters the protein production in these cells.
ii. Bruce McEwan died in January 2020. In 2019 I had the greatest of
    pleasures, after a decade of admiration, of his co-authoring an
    editorial in Biological Psychiatry on my MRI paper on hippocampal
    size in depression.20 He worked right up until his death aged
    eighty-two years.

<!-- -->

9.  Self-Recognition

<!-- -->

i.  Everything about us exemplifies how we humans have embodied our
    phylogenetic ancestors. The evidence of this seeps out in a
    particularly spectacular way during fetal development. Although it
    is too crude to say that the human embryo as it develops mirrors our
    phylogenetic development from our ancestors, there are key points in
    embryonic development where a structure could theoretically develop
    into several different species. The structure could, for example,
    evolve into the gills of a fish, a huge reptilian jaw or the ear,
    nose and throat of a human. This area of science

is known as evo-devo (evolutionary developmental biology), and it
examines the development of life from embryo to adult as it has evolved
genetically. ii. One of the most amazing things about the brain is the
existence of big neurons that are only present in the anterior insula,
the cingula, and the extreme prefrontal cortex, on the frontal edge of
the brain. The neurons in this circuit were first described, before
there was any inkling of their functional importance, by a psychiatrist
and neurologist called Constantin von Economo back in 1929. The neurons
had a specific and quite primitive design -- big, long and with simple
connections -- and are often now referred to as 'spindle' neurons. These
von Economo neurons (VENs) allow emotional signals from the body mapped
on to the insula to be projected in real-life time, like an emotional
projector, to the integrative prefrontal brain. The VENs give the
prefrontal integrative brain moment-to-moment awareness of an emotional
state. A hint of the importance of the VENs in the experience of being
human is that they are only present in a limited number of younger
species -- humans, some apes, elephants, some whales and dolphins -- all
of whom have advanced forms of self-awareness. Animals who possess VENs
pass the mirror self-awareness test. Consistent with the pattern of
infant human development mirroring that of evolutionary development,
VENs only appear in the later stages of gestation and grow during
infancy -- the period when infants develop self-awareness.

10. The Tree of Life

<!-- -->

i.  There is some uncertainty about whether Beethoven was fully without
    hearing during his thirties and forties, and this was a very
    sensitive issue for him. He denied his hearing impairment, but his
    deafness was evident from his problems with hearing others and with
    his difficulty hearing live music.
ii. Myelin is formed from non-neuronal cells, adjacent to neurons, that
    also form a scaffold for the neurons.
iii. An example of autoimmune disease is NMDA encephalitis, as discussed
     in Chapter 2 (p. 17). Inflammatory markers, such as cytokines, are
     probably more prevalent in depression.

<!-- -->

11. A Sense of Self

<!-- -->

i.  I have taken the phrase 'narrative consciousness' from Amnesiac
    Selves: Nostalgia, Forgetting, and British Fiction, 1810--1870
    (Oxford University Press, 2001), by Nicholas Dames. He is Theodore
    Kahan Professor of Humanities in Columbia University and has written
    extensively on the development of modern psychology from the
    Victorian novel in the nineteenth century to modern literature.
ii. Psychedelics are now being tested for possible therapeutic use in a
    variety of psychiatric disorders. There is good evidence for the use
    of ketamine in depression, although it remains to be seen whether
    the anti-depressant effects will be long-lasting in individual
    patients. I am involved in the first international multi-centre
    trials of using psilocybin -- the psychoactive compound in magic
    mushrooms -- in treating severe depression.157

12. Sex Hormones and Songbirds i. One theory, which incidentally was the
subject matter of my PhD in the early 1990s, was that estrogen and
progesterone may affect feeling circuitry by bringing about changes in
brain neurotransmitter function.158, 159 We were interested in the
possible effects of estrogen and progesterone on serotonin function,
because the drugs that are used to treat depression increase serotonin
function. My work is now dated, but the theory has been investigated
with more sophisticated methods in subsequent years. A group from
Copenhagen has looked at brain serotonin neuroimaging function in women,
measured through labelling serotonin with radioactive atoms and then
looking at the patterns of illuminated serotonin.160 They reported that
fluctuations in estrogen levels cause changes in the seretonin-mediated
circuitry, in both the amygdala and the hippocampus. ii. The effect of
estrogens on the emotional circuitry probably underlies the heightened
emotionality commonly experienced during periods of fluctuating estrogen
hormone levels -- adolescence, pregnancy and following childbirth, and
during the menopause.74 This effect is reflected in the mood disorders
in women that cluster around times of fluctuating female sex hormones.
iii. A lobotomy, also known as a leucotomy, is a neurosurgical procedure
where connections to the prefrontal cortex are severed. It was quite a
common procedure to treat serious mental illness in the 1950s, before
the discovery of psychiatric drugs. Such neurosurgery for the treatment
of psychiatric disorders is very rarely used.

14. False or True?

<!-- -->

i.  Bentley's paper from 1899 can be read in full at
    https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/1412727. Many of the concepts
    theorized about in his paper could be translated into a psychology
    journal today. The language has changed, but there is a freshness of
    thought and an expansiveness in manuscripts from this period because
    of the freedom from today's specialization within the neurosciences.
    The physicist James Clerk Maxwell put this very well twenty years
    prior to the Bentley paper, when he wrote, 'It is of great advantage
    to the student of any subject to read the original memoirs on that
    subject, for science is always most completely assimilated when it
    is in the nascent state.' (From the Preface to A Treatise on
    Electricity and Magnetism (1873).)
ii. The following quote describes Freud's conversion from the idea that
    sexual abuse was a recalled memory to the idea that the memory was
    an unconscious fantasy based on infantile sexuality, that is,
    attraction of the girl child to the father: the neurotic symptoms
    were not related directly to actual events but to wishful fantasies,
    and that as far as the neurosis was concerned psychical reality was
    of more importance than material reality. I do not believe even now
    that I forced the seduction-fantasies on my patients, or that I
    'suggested' them. I had in fact stumbled for the first time upon the
    Oedipus complex, which was later to assume such an overwhelming
    importance, but which I did not recognize as yet in its disguise of
    fantasy . . . When the mistake had been cleared up, the path to the
    study of the sexual

life of children lay open. (An Autobiographical Study (1925):
http://www.mhweb.org/mpc_course/freud.pdf) iii. Tonegawa worked out one
of the most difficult puzzles in immunology -- how an immune cell makes
multiple antibodies -- and won the Nobel Prize in Physiology in 1987 for
this discovery. A few years later, in 1990, he changed tack and steered
his restless razor-sharp mind to one of the most challenging questions
in neuroscience: the puzzle of memory. How a limited number of
hippocampal cells can make, store and recall so many memories is perhaps
not such a different puzzle from that of how immune cells produce such a
diverse range of antibodies. You may remember that in the 1970s and
1980s Edelman made the same transition from immunity to neuroscience,
perhaps reflecting the fact that immunity requires cellular memory. iv.
Channel rhodopsins (what I refer to in the text as rhodopsins) were
first isolated by Georg Nagel's lab in the Max Planck Institute, where
scientists were searching for the proteins that cause photocurrents in
the unicellular green alga. Then Nagel collaborated with Edward Boyden
(at the time a PhD student at Stanford University, California) and Karl
Deisseroth (also from Stanford University) and used this method to tag
on to the dormant rhodopsin-like DNA in neurons and produce channel
rhodopsins. Remarkably, this feat of genetic engineering was predicted
by Francis Crick -- the Crick of Crick and Watson fame, who unwound the
hidden helical structure of DNA -- in a series of lectures in 1999 at
the University of California in San Diego. v. Tomás Ryan also thinks
that this was not a false, but a manipulated, memory. The term was being
used loosely within the generally confused understanding of what
constitutes a false memory.

15. The Oldest Memories

<!-- -->

i.  The human genome project laid out all of the genes in the human
    cell, 30,000 or so, which are collectively called the genome. It was
    the biggest scientific collaboration up to that time, commencing in
    1990 and completed ahead of its anticipated finishing date in 2003.
    All living organisms are derived from cells that store genetic
    information using the same huge DNA molecule. DNA is stored in a
    complex ladder-like zip structure, twisted on its own axis, and then
    scrunched up into a bundle. It is all composed of four molecules
    that contain the code for life: A, C, G and T. There are three
    billion of these 'letters' in the human genome, organized in
    sequences that form unique codes for each protein, and most of these
    proteins are common to all forms of life. Approximately 99 per cent
    of our working DNA is the same as that of chimpanzees. We share 60
    per cent of our DNA with that of the banana. One of the most
    striking scientific stories recently is about the microorganisms
    that inhabit one's gut, called the gut microbiome. The story of how
    the microbiome in the human gut can influence brain function
    involves my good friend Ted Dinan, a psychiatrist and brain
    researcher from University College Cork, with whom I did my PhD, and
    John Cryan, a lively and clever scientist. The gut microbiome
    consists of about 100 trillion cells -- about three times more cells
    than the human body -- that work in a symbiotic way with the body.
    Humans have incorporated, literally, these simple microorganisms
    unchanged, and they have been transformed into a living human
    physiological system that lives side-by-side with other human
    physiological systems.161
ii. From 'Plasticity and the Ageing Mind: An Exemplar of the
    Bio-cultural Orchestration of Brain and Behaviour', European Review,
    9:1 (2001), 59--76.

iii. I fell, delighted, upon the re-publication in 2014 of the original
version of the Brothers Grimm Folk and Fairy Tales (Princeton University
Press, 2014). These pithy stories are shockingly different from the ones
that children read and are certainly only for adult consumption. They
demonstrate that these stories reflect real life, rather than nice
fantasies. Charles Perrault's collection of fairy tales from France that
he put together at the end of the seventeenth century is the first
European collection of oral folk tales and has been translated in its
authentic rawness. (Oxford, 2009). One notorious story is about a man
who is a serial wife murderer (Bluebeard). Many stories involve incest
and infanticide. iv. One of my favourite books when I was a child was a
collection of fairy stories by Sinead de Valera (Irish Fairy Stories
\[Pan Books, 1973\]), who was married to the third president of Ireland,
Eamon de Valera, also a revolutionary in the War of Independence. v. The
delusion of substitution has a special name, Capgras syndrome, after the
French psychiatrist (1873--1950) who first identified it. It is more
frequently associated with cognitive impairment in the elderly, and not
with postpartum psychosis. vi. This is a quotation from Erin Kraus's
book Wise-woman of Kildare: Moll Anthony and Popular Tradition in the
East of Ireland (Four Courts, 2011). The book is about 'wise women', or
fairy doctors, who were renowned locally in Ireland.

References

1.  Kuppuswamy P. S., Takala C. R., Sola C. L., 'Management of
    psychiatric symptoms in antiNMDAR encephalitis: a case series,
    literature review and future directions', General Hospital
    Psychiatry, 2014; 36:388--91.
2.  Sansing L. H., Tuzun E., Ko M. W., Baccon J., Lynch D. R., Dalmau
    J., 'A patient with encephalitis associated with NMDA receptor
    antibodies', Nature Clinical Practice Neurology, 2007; 3:291--6.
3.  Jezequel J., Johansson E. M., Dupuis J. P., et al., 'Dynamic
    disorganization of synaptic NMDA receptors triggered by
    autoantibodies from psychotic patients', Nature Communications,
    2017; 8:1791.
4.  Bassett D. S., Sporns O., 'Network neuroscience', Nature
    Neuroscience, 2017; 20:353--64.
5.  Scott J., Martin G., Bor W., Sawyer M., Clark J., McGrath J., 'The
    prevalence and correlates of hallucinations in Australian
    adolescents: results from a national survey', Schizophrenia
    Research, 2009; 107:179--85.
6.  van Os J., Linscott R. J., Myin-Germeys I., Delespaul P., Krabbendam
    L., 'A systematic review and meta-analysis of the psychosis
    continuum: evidence for a psychosis proneness--persistence--
    impairment model of psychotic disorder', Psychological Medicine,
    2009; 39:179--95.
7.  Kurth R., Villringer K., Curio G., et al., 'fMRI shows multiple
    somatotopic digit representations in human primary somatosensory
    cortex', NeuroReport, 2000; 11:1487--91.
8.  Ortiz-Teran L., Ortiz T., Perez D. L., et al., 'Brain plasticity in
    blind subjects centralizes beyond the modal cortices', Frontiers in
    Systems Neuroscience, 2016; 10:61.
9.  Haigh A., Brown D. J., Meijer P., Proulx M. J., 'How well do you see
    what you hear? The acuity of visual-to-auditory sensory
    substitution', Frontiers in Psychology, 2013; 4:330.
10. Berger J., 'Raising the portcullis: some notes after having
    cataracts removed from my eyes', British Journal of General
    Practice, 2010; 60:464--5.
11. Shergill S. S., Brammer M. J., Williams S. C., Murray R. M.,
    McGuire P. K., 'Mapping auditory hallucinations in schizophrenia
    using functional magnetic resonance imaging', Archive of General
    Psychiatry, 2000; 57:1033--8.
12. Plaze M., Paillere-Martinot M. L., Penttila J., et al., ' "Where do
    auditory hallucinations come from?" -- a brain morphometry study of
    schizophrenia patients with inner or outer space hallucinations',
    Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2011; 37:212--21.
13. Luo Y., He H., Duan M., et al., 'Dynamic functional connectivity
    strength within different frequency-band in schizophrenia',
    Frontiers in Psychiatry, 2019; 10:995.
14. Hurst L. C., 'What was wrong with Anna O?', Journal of the Royal
    Society of Medicine, 1982; 75:129--31.
15. Slater E. T., Glithero E., 'A follow-up of patients diagnosed as
    suffering from "hysteria" ', Journal of Psychosomatic Research,
    1965; 9:9--13.

16. Scoville W. B., Milner B., 'Loss of recent memory after bilateral
hippocampal lesions', Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry,
1957; 20:11--21. 17. Vargha-Khadem F., Gadian D. G., Watkins K. E.,
Connelly A., Van Paesschen W., Mishkin M., 'Differential effects of
early hippocampal pathology on episodic and semantic memory', Science
1997; 277:376--80. 18. Maguire E. A., Gadian D. G., Johnsrude I. S., et
al., 'Navigation-related structural change in the hippocampi of taxi
drivers', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA,
2000; 97:4398--403. 19. Schmaal L., Veltman D. J., van Erp T. G., et
al., 'Subcortical brain alterations in major depressive disorder:
findings from the ENIGMA Major Depressive Disorder working group',
Molecular Psychiatry, 2016; 21:806--12. 20. Roddy D. W., Farrell C.,
Doolin K., et al., 'The hippocampus in depression: more than the sum of
its parts? Advanced hippocampal substructure segmentation in
depression', Biological Psychiatry, 2019; 85:487--97. 21. Viard A.,
Piolino P., Desgranges B., et al., 'Hippocampal activation for
autobiographical memories over the entire lifetime in healthy aged
subjects: an fMRI study', Cerebral Cortex, 2007; 17:2453--67. 22. Squire
L. R., Alvarez P., 'Retrograde amnesia and memory consolidation: a
neurobiological perspective', Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 1995;
5:169--77. 23. Daselaar S. M., Rice H. J., Greenberg D. L., Cabeza R.,
LaBar K. S., Rubin D. C., 'The spatiotemporal dynamics of
autobiographical memory: neural correlates of recall, emotional
intensity, and reliving', Cerebral Cortex, 2008; 18:217--29. 24. Preston
A. R., Eichenbaum H., 'Interplay of hippocampus and prefrontal cortex in
memory', Current Biology, 2013; 23:R764--73. 25. Piefke M., Weiss P. H.,
Zilles K., Markowitsch H. J., Fink G. R., 'Differential remoteness and
emotional tone modulate the neural correlates of autobiographical
memory', Brain, 2003; 126:650--68. 26. Wamsley E. J., 'Rhythms of sleep:
orchestrating memory consolidation (commentary on Clemens et al.)',
European Journal of Neuroscience, 2011; 33:509--10. 27. Batterink L. J.,
Creery J. D., Paller K. A., 'Phase of spontaneous slow oscillations
during sleep influences memory-related processing of auditory cues',
Journal of Neuroscience, 2016; 36:1401--9. 28. de Sousa A. F., Cowansage
K. K., Zutshi I., et al., 'Optogenetic reactivation of memory ensembles
in the retrosplenial cortex induces systems consolidation', Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 2019; 116:8576--81. 29.
Buck L. B., 'Olfactory receptors and odor coding in mammals',
Nutritional Reviews, 2004; 62:S184--8; discussion S224--41. 30. Siebert
M., Markowitsch H. J., Bartel P., 'Amygdala, affect and cognition:
evidence from 10 patients with Urbach--Wiethe disease', Brain, 2003;
126:2627--37. 31. Bechara A., Tranel D., Damasio H., Adolphs R.,
Rockland C., Damasio A. R., 'Double dissociation of conditioning and
declarative knowledge relative to the amygdala and hippocampus in
humans', Science, 1995; 269:1115--18. 32. Adolphs R., Tranel D., Damasio
H., Damasio A., 'Impaired recognition of emotion in facial expressions
following bilateral damage to the human amygdala', Nature, 1994;
372:669--72. 33. Feinstein J. S., Adolphs R., Damasio A., Tranel D.,
'The human amygdala and the induction and experience of fear', Current
Biology, 2011; 21:34--8. 34. Phelps E. A., LeDoux J. E., 'Contributions
of the amygdala to emotion processing: from animal models to human
behavior', Neuron, 2005; 48:175--87.

35. Dilger S., Straube T., Mentzel H. J., et al., 'Brain activation to
phobia-related pictures in spider phobic humans: an event-related
functional magnetic resonance imaging study', Neuroscience Letters,
2003; 348:29--32. 36. James W., 'The physical basis of emotion',
Psychological Review, 1894; 101:205--10. 37. Craig A. D., 'How do you
feel -- now? The anterior insula and human awareness', Nature Reviews
Neuroscience, 2009; 10:59--70. 38. Verstaen A., Eckart J. A., Muhtadie
L., et al., 'Insular atrophy and diminished disgust reactivity',
Emotion, 2016; 16:903--12. 39. Ehrlich S., Lord A. R., Geisler D., et
al., 'Reduced functional connectivity in the thalamoinsular subnetwork
in patients with acute anorexia nervosa', Human Brain Mapping, 2015;
36:1772--81. 40. Surguladze S. A., El-Hage W., Dalgleish T., Radua J.,
Gohier B., Phillips M. L., 'Depression is associated with increased
sensitivity to signals of disgust: a functional magnetic resonance
imaging study', Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2010; 44:894--902. 41.
Penfield W., Faulk M. E., Jr, 'The insula: further observations on its
function', Brain, 1955; 78:445--70. 42. Nguyen D. K., Nguyen D. B.,
Malak R., et al., 'Revisiting the role of the insula in refractory
partial epilepsy', Epilepsia, 2009; 50:510--20. 43. Critchley H. D.,
Wiens S., Rotshtein P., Ohman A., Dolan R. J., 'Neural systems
supporting interoceptive awareness', Nature Neuroscience, 2004;
7:189--95. 44. Critchley H. D., Tang J., Glaser D., Butterworth B.,
Dolan R. J., 'Anterior cingulate activity during error and autonomic
response', NeuroImage, 2005; 27:885--95. 45. Knutson B., Rick S., Wimmer
G. E., Prelec D., Loewenstein G., 'Neural predictors of purchases',
Neuron, 2007; 53:147--56. 46. Namkung H., Kim S. H., Sawa A., 'The
insula: an underestimated brain area in clinical neuroscience,
psychiatry, and neurology', Trends in Neurosciences, 2017; 40:200--207.
47. Eisenberger N. I., Lieberman M. D., Williams K. D., 'Does rejection
hurt? An FMRI study of social exclusion', Science, 2003; 302:290--92.
48. O'Keefe J., Dostrovsky J., 'The hippocampus as a spatial map.
Preliminary evidence from unit activity in the freely-moving rat', Brain
Research, 1971; 34:171--5. 49. Colgin L. L., Moser E. I., Moser M. B.,
'Understanding memory through hippocampal remapping', Trends in
Neurosciences, 2008; 31:469--77. 50. Ekstrom A. D., Kahana M. J., Caplan
J. B., et al., 'Cellular networks underlying human spatial navigation',
Nature, 2003; 425:184--8. 51. Maguire E. A., Mummery C. J.,
'Differential modulation of a common memory retrieval network revealed
by positron emission tomography', Hippocampus, 1999; 9:54--61. 52.
Rowland D. C., Roudi Y., Moser M. B., Moser E. I., 'Ten years of grid
cells', Annual Review of Neuroscience, 2016; 39:19--40. 53. Hafting T.,
Fyhn M., Bonnevie T., Moser M. B., Moser E. I., 'Hippocampus-independent
phase precession in entorhinal grid cells', Nature, 2008; 453:1248--52.
54. Jacobs J., Weidemann C. T., Miller J. F., et al., 'Direct recordings
of grid-like neuronal activity in human spatial navigation', Nature
Neuroscience, 2013; 16:1188--90. 55. Hall J., Thomas K. L., Everitt B.
J., 'Cellular imaging of zif268 expression in the hippocampus and
amygdala during contextual and cued fear memory retrieval: selective
activation of hippocampal CA1 neurons during the recall of contextual
memories', Journal of Neuroscience, 2001; 21:2186--93. 56. Horowitz J.
M., Horwitz B. A., 'Extreme neuroplasticity of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal
neurons in hibernating mammalian species', Frontiers in Neuroanatomy,
2019; 13:9.

57. Eichenbaum H., 'Memory on time', Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2013;
17:81--8. 58. Tsao A., Sugar J., Lu L., et al., 'Integrating time from
experience in the lateral entorhinal cortex', Nature, 2018; 561:57--62.
59. MacDonald C. J., Lepage K. Q., Eden U. T., Eichenbaum H.,
'Hippocampal "time cells" bridge the gap in memory for discontiguous
events', Neuron, 2011; 71:737--49. 60. Deuker L., Bellmund J. L.,
Navarro Schroder T., Doeller C. F., 'An event map of memory space in the
hippocampus', eLife, 2016; 5. 61. Manning L., Cassel D., Cassel J. C.,
'St. Augustine's reflections on memory and time and the current concept
of subjective time in mental time travel', Behavioral Sciences (Basel),
2013; 3:232--43. 62. Rosenbaum R. S., Kohler S., Schacter D. L., et al.,
'The case of K.C.: contributions of a memory-impaired person to memory
theory', Neuropsychologia, 2005; 43:989--1021. 63. Addis D. R., Pan L.,
Vu M. A., Laiser N., Schacter D. L., 'Constructive episodic simulation
of the future and the past: distinct subsystems of a core brain network
mediate imagining and remembering', Neuropsychologia, 2009; 47:2222--38.
64. Buckner R. L., Andrews-Hanna J. R., Schacter D. L., 'The brain's
default network: anatomy, function, and relevance to disease', Annals of
the NY Academy of Sciences, 2008; 1124:1--38. 65. Addis D. R., Sacchetti
D. C., Ally B. A., Budson A. E., Schacter D. L., 'Episodic simulation of
future events is impaired in mild Alzheimer's disease',
Neuropsychologia, 2009; 47:2660--71. 66. Moskowitz A. K., ' "Scared
stiff": catatonia as an evolutionary-based fear response', Psychological
Review, 2004; 111:984--1002. 67. Lupien S. J., Wilkinson C. W., Briere
S., Menard C., Ng Ying Kin N. M., Nair N. P., 'The modulatory effects of
corticosteroids on cognition: studies in young human populations',
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2002; 27:401--16. 68. Juster R. P., McEwen B.
S., Lupien S. J., 'Allostatic load biomarkers of chronic stress and
impact on health and cognition', Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews,
2010; 35:2--16. 69. Pariante C. M., Lightman S. L., 'The HPA axis in
major depression: classical theories and new developments', Trends in
Neurosciences, 2008; 31:464--8. 70. Cleare A. J., Bearn J., Allain T.,
et al., 'Contrasting neuroendocrine responses in depression and chronic
fatigue syndrome', Journal of Affective Disorders, 1995; 34:283--9. 71.
Sarrieau A., Vial M., McEwen B., et al., 'Corticosteroid receptors in
rat hippocampal sections: effect of adrenalectomy and corticosterone
replacement', Journal of Steroid Biochemistry, 1986; 24:721--4. 72. de
Kloet E. R., Joels M., Holsboer F., 'Stress and the brain: from
adaptation to disease', Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2005; 6:463--75.
73. Joels M., de Kloet E. R., 'Effects of glucocorticoids and
norepinephrine on the excitability in the hippocampus', Science, 1989;
245:1502--5. 74. O'Keane V., Lightman S., Patrick K., Marsh M.,
Papadopoulos A. S., Pawlby S., Seneviratne G., Taylor A., Moore R. J.,
'Changes in the maternal hypothalamic--pituitary--adrenal axis during
the early puerperium may be related to the postpartum "blues"',
Neuroendocrinology, 2011; 11:1149--55. 75. Meaney M. J., Aitken D. H.,
Bodnoff S. R., Iny L. J., Sapolsky R. M., 'The effects of postnatal
handling on the development of the glucocorticoid receptor systems and
stress recovery in the rat', Progress in Neuropsychopharmacology and
Biological Psychiatry, 1985; 9:731--4. 76. Magarinos A. M., Verdugo J.
M., McEwen B. S., 'Chronic stress alters synaptic terminal structure in
hippocampus', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
USA, 1997; 94:14002--8.

77. McEwen B. S., 'Allostasis and allostatic load: implications for
neuropsychopharmacology', Neuropsychopharmacology, 2000; 22:108--24. 78.
Ouellet-Morin I., Robitaille M. P., Langevin S., Cantave C., Brendgen
M., Lupien S. J., 'Enduring effect of childhood maltreatment on cortisol
and heart rate responses to stress: the moderating role of severity of
experiences', Development and Psychopathology, 2019; 31:497-- 508. 79.
Frodl T., O'Keane V., 'How does the brain deal with cumulative stress? A
review with focus on developmental stress, HPA axis function and
hippocampal structure in humans', Neurobiology of Disease, 2013;
52:24--37. 80. Warner-Schmidt J. L., Duman R. S., 'Hippocampal
neurogenesis: opposing effects of stress and antidepressant treatment',
Hippocampus, 2006; 16:239--49. 81. Tozzi L., Doolin K., Farrel C.,
Joseph S., O'Keane V., Frodl T., 'Functional magnetic resonance imaging
correlates of emotion recognition and voluntary attentional regulation
in depression: A generalized psycho-physiological interaction study',
Journal of Affective Disorders, 2017; 208:535--44. 82. Frodl T., Strehl
K., Carballedo A., Tozzi L., Doyle M., Amico F., Gormley J., Lavelle G.,
O'Keane V., 'Aerobic exercise increases hippocampal subfield volumes in
younger adults and prevents volume decline in the elderly', Brain
Imaging and Behaviour, March 2019. 83. Tozzi L., Carballedo A., Lavelle
G., Doolin K., Doyle M., Amico F., McCarthy H., Gormley J., Lord A.,
O'Keane V., Frodl T., 'Longitudinal functional connectivity changes
correlate with mood improvement after regular exercise in a
dose-dependent fashion', European Journal of Neuroscience 2016;
43(8):1089--96. 84. Carroll S. B., 'Evo-devo and an expanding
evolutionary synthesis: a genetic theory of morphological evolution',
Cell, 2008; 134:25--36. 85. Lewis M., Ramsay D., 'Development of
self-recognition, personal pronoun use, and pretend play during the 2nd
year', Child Development, 2004; 75:1821--31. 86. Plotnik J. M., de Waal
F. B., Reiss D., 'Self-recognition in an Asian elephant', Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 2006; 103:17053--7. 87.
Prior H., Schwarz A., Gunturkun O., 'Mirror-induced behavior in the
magpie (Pica pica): evidence of self-recognition', PLoS Biology, 2008;
6:e202. 88. Hutchison W. D., Davis K. D., Lozano A. M., Tasker R. R.,
Dostrovsky J. O., 'Pain-related neurons in the human cingulate cortex',
Nature Neuroscience, 1999; 2:403--5. 89. Swiney L., Sousa P., 'A new
comparator account of auditory verbal hallucinations: how motor
prediction can plausibly contribute to the sense of agency for inner
speech', Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 2014; 8:675. 90. Bastiaansen
J. A., Thioux M., Keysers C., 'Evidence for mirror systems in emotions',
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B:
Biological Sciences, 2009; 364:2391--404. 91. Carr L., Iacoboni M.,
Dubeau M. C., Mazziotta J. C., Lenzi G. L., 'Neural mechanisms of
empathy in humans: a relay from neural systems for imitation to limbic
areas', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA,
2003; 100:5497--502. 92. Singer T., Seymour B., O'Doherty J., Kaube H.,
Dolan R. J., Frith C. D., 'Empathy for pain involves the affective but
not sensory components of pain', Science, 2004; 303:1157--62. 93.
Meffert H., Gazzola V., den Boer J. A., Bartels A. A., Keysers C.,
'Reduced spontaneous but relatively normal deliberate vicarious
representations in psychopathy', Brain, 2013; 136:2550-- 62. 94. Wiech
K., Jbabdi S., Lin C. S., Andersson J., Tracey I., 'Differential
structural and resting state connectivity between insular subdivisions
and other pain-related brain regions', Pain, 2014;

155:2047--55. 95. Butti C., Hof P. R., 'The insular cortex: a
comparative perspective', Brain Structure and Function, 2010;
214:477--93. 96. Seeley W. W., Carlin D. A., Allman J. M., et al.,
'Early frontotemporal dementia targets neurons unique to apes and
humans', Annals of Neurology, 2006; 60:660--67. 97. Allman J. M., Watson
K. K., Tetreault N. A., Hakeem A. Y., 'Intuition and autism: a possible
role for Von Economo neurons', Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 2005;
9:367--73. 98. Dolan R. J., Fletcher P. C., McKenna P., Friston K. J.,
Frith C. D., 'Abnormal neural integration related to cognition in
schizophrenia', Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica, 1999; s395:58--67. 99.
Brune M., Schobel A., Karau R., et al., 'Von Economo neuron density in
the anterior cingulate cortex is reduced in early onset schizophrenia',
Acta Neuropathologica, 2010; 119:771--8. 100. Costain G., Ho A., Crawley
A. P., et al., 'Reduced gray matter in the anterior cingulate gyrus in
familial schizophrenia: a preliminary report', Schizophrenia Research,
2010; 122:81--4. 101. Rizzolatti G., 'Multiple body representations in
the motor cortex of primates', Acta Biomedica Ateneo Parmense, 1992;
63:27--9. 102. Maranesi M., Livi A., Fogassi L., Rizzolatti G., Bonini
L., 'Mirror neuron activation prior to action observation in a
predictable context', Journal of Neuroscience, 2014; 34:14827--32. 103.
Herholz S. C., Halpern A. R., Zatorre R. J., 'Neuronal correlates of
perception, imagery, and memory for familiar tunes', Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience, 2012; 24:1382--97. 104. Gogtay N., Giedd J. N.,
Lusk L., et al., 'Dynamic mapping of human cortical development during
childhood through early adulthood', Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the USA, 2004; 101:8174--9. 105. Zhou D., Lebel C., Treit
S., Evans A., Beaulieu C., 'Accelerated longitudinal cortical thinning
in adolescence', NeuroImage, 2015; 104:138--45. 106. Storsve A. B.,
Fjell A. M., Tamnes C. K., et al., 'Differential longitudinal changes in
cortical thickness, surface area and volume across the adult life span:
regions of accelerating and decelerating change', Journal of
Neuroscience, 2014; 34:8488--98. 107. Boksa P., 'Abnormal synaptic
pruning in schizophrenia: Urban myth or reality?', Journal of Psychiatry
and Neuroscience, 2012; 37:75--7. 108. Whitaker K. J., Vertes P. E.,
Romero-Garcia R., et al., 'Adolescence is associated with genomically
patterned consolidation of the hubs of the human brain connectome',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 2016;
113:9105--10. 109. O'Callaghan E., Sham P., Takei N., Glover G., Murray
R. M., 'Schizophrenia after prenatal exposure to 1957 A2 influenza
epidemic', Lancet, 1991; 337:1248--50. 110. Murray R. M., 'Mistakes I
have made in my research career', Schizophrenia Bulletin, 2017;
43:253--6. 111. Weinstock M., 'Alterations induced by gestational stress
in brain morphology and behaviour of the offspring', Progress in
Neurobiology, 2001; 65:427--51. 112. Salat D. H., Buckner R. L., Snyder
A. Z., et al., 'Thinning of the cerebral cortex in aging', Cerebral
Cortex, 2004; 14:721--30. 113. Elliott B., Joyce E., Shorvon S.,
'Delusions, illusions and hallucinations in epilepsy: 2. Complex
phenomena and psychosis', Epilepsy Research, 2009; 85:172--86. 114.
Edelman G. M., Gally J. A., 'A model for the 7s antibody molecule',
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 1964;
51:846--53. 115. Hall Z. J., Macdougall-Shackleton S. A., 'Influence of
testosterone metabolites on song-control system neuroplasticity during
photostimulation in adult European starlings (Sturnus vulgaris)', PLoS
One, 2012; 7:e40060.

116. Draper P., Belsky J., 'Personality development in the evolutionary
perspective', Journal of Personality, 1990; 58:141--61. 117. Plant T.
M., 'The role of KiSS-1 in the regulation of puberty in higher
primates', European Journal of Endocrinology, 2006; 155 Suppl 1:S11--16.
118. Ball G. F., Ketterson E. D., 'Sex differences in the response to
environmental cues regulating seasonal reproduction in birds',
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series B:
Biological Sciences, 2008; 363:231--46. 119. Bean L. A., Ianov L.,
Foster T. C., 'Estrogen receptors, the hippocampus, and memory',
Neuroscientist, 2014; 20:534--45. 120. Wierckx K., Elaut E., Van Hoorde
B., et al., 'Sexual desire in trans persons: associations with sex
reassignment treatment', Journal of Sexual Medicine, 2014; 11:107--18.
121. Hamann S., Stevens J., Vick J. H., et al., 'Brain responses to
sexual images in 46,XY women with complete androgen insensitivity
syndrome are female-typical', Hormones and Behavior, 2014; 66:724--30.
122. Henningsson S., Madsen K. H., Pinborg A., et al., 'Role of
emotional processing in depressive responses to sex-hormone
manipulation: a pharmacological fMRI study', Translational psychiatry,
2015; 5:e688. 123. Miedl S. F., Wegerer M., Kerschbaum H., Blechert J.,
Wilhelm F. H., 'Neural activity during traumatic film viewing is linked
to endogenous estradiol and hormonal contraception',
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 2018; 87:20--26. 124. Sotres-Bayon F., Bush D.
E., LeDoux J. E., 'Emotional perseveration: an update on
prefrontalamygdala interactions in fear extinction', Learning and
Memory, 2004; 11:525--35. 125. Choudhury S., Blakemore S. J., Charman
T., 'Social cognitive development during adolescence', Social Cognitive
and Affective Neuroscience, 2006; 1:165--74. 126. Teicher M. H., Samson
J. A., 'Annual research review: enduring neurobiological effects of
childhood abuse and neglect', Journal of Child Psychology and
Psychiatry, 2016; 57:241--66. 127. De Bellis M. D., Keshavan M. S.,
Shifflett H., et al., 'Brain structures in pediatric
maltreatment-related posttraumatic stress disorder: a
sociodemographically matched study', Biological Psychiatry, 2002;
52:1066--78. 128. Pechtel P., Lyons-Ruth K., Anderson C. M., Teicher M.
H., 'Sensitive periods of amygdala development: the role of maltreatment
in preadolescence', NeuroImage, 2014; 97:236--44. 129. Whittle S.,
Dennison M., Vijayakumar N., et al., 'Childhood maltreatment and
psychopathology affect brain development during adolescence', Journal of
the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, 2013;
52:940--52 e1. 130. Cullen K. R., Vizueta N., Thomas K. M., et al.,
'Amygdala functional connectivity in young women with borderline
personality disorder', Brain Connectivity, 2011; 1:61--71. 131. Linehan
M. M., Heard H. L., Armstrong H. E., 'Naturalistic follow-up of a
behavioral treatment for chronically parasuicidal borderline patients',
Archive of General Psychiatry, 1993; 50:971-- 4. 132. Stoffers J. M.,
Vollm B. A., Rucker G., Timmer A., Huband N., Lieb K., 'Psychological
therapies for people with borderline personality disorder', Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews, 2012:CD005652. 133. Roberts B. W., Caspi
A., Moffitt T. E., 'The kids are alright: growth and stability in
personality development from adolescence to adulthood', Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 2001; 81:670--83. 134. Goodman M.,
Carpenter D., Tang C. Y., et al., 'Dialectical behavior therapy alters
emotion regulation and amygdala activity in patients with borderline
personality disorder', Journal of Psychiatric Research, 2014;
57:108--16.

135. Mundt A. P., Chow W. S., Arduino M., et al., 'Psychiatric hospital
beds and prison populations in South America since 1990: does the
Penrose hypothesis apply?', JAMA Psychiatry, 2015; 72:112--18. 136.
Gulati G., Keating N., O'Neill A., Delaunois I., Meagher D., Dunne C.
P., 'The prevalence of major mental illness, substance misuse and
homelessness in Irish prisoners: systematic review and meta-analyses',
Irish Journal of Psychological Medicine, 2019; 36:35--45. 137. Follette
V. M., Polusny M. A., Bechtle A. E., Naugle A. E., 'Cumulative trauma:
the impact of child sexual abuse, adult sexual assault, and spouse
abuse', Journal of Traumatic Stress, 1996; 9:25--35. 138. Cochran K. J.,
Greenspan R. L., Bogart D. F., Loftus E. F., 'Memory blindness: altered
memory reports lead to distortion in eyewitness memory', Memory and
Cognition, 2016; 44:717--26. 139. Deisseroth K., 'Optogenetics', Nature
Methods, 2011; 8:26--9. 140. Bi A., Cui J., Ma Y. P., et al., 'Ectopic
expression of a microbial-type rhodopsin restores visual responses in
mice with photoreceptor degeneration', Neuron, 2006; 50:23--33. 141.
Nagel G., Ollig D., Fuhrmann M., et al., 'Channelrhodopsin-1: a
light-gated proton channel in green algae', Science, 2002; 296:2395--8.
142. Boyden E. S., Zhang F., Bamberg E., Nagel G., Deisseroth K.,
'Millisecond-timescale, genetically targeted optical control of neural
activity', Nature Neuroscience, 2005; 8:1263--8. 143. Ramirez S., Liu
X., Lin P. A., et al., 'Creating a false memory in the hippocampus',
Science, 2013; 341:387--91. 144. Wykes R. C., Heeroma J. H., Mantoan L.,
et al., 'Optogenetic and potassium channel gene therapy in a rodent
model of focal neocortical epilepsy', Science Translational Medicine,
2012; 4:161ra52. 145. Wykes R. C., Kullmann D. M., Pavlov I., Magloire
V., 'Optogenetic approaches to treat epilepsy', Journal of Neuroscience
Methods, 2016; 260:215--20. 146. Fan Z. L., Wu B., Wu G. Y., et al.,
'Optogenetic inhibition of ventral hippocampal neurons alleviates
associative motor learning dysfunction in a rodent model of
schizophrenia', PLoS One, 2019; 14:e0227200. 147. Barnett S. C., Perry
B. A. L., Dalrymple-Alford J. C., Parr-Brownlie L. C., 'Optogenetic
stimulation: understanding memory and treating deficits', Hippocampus,
2018; 28:457--70. 148. Fonseca R., Nagerl U. V., Morris R. G.,
Bonhoeffer T., 'Competing for memory: hippocampal LTP under regimes of
reduced protein synthesis', Neuron, 2004; 44:1011--20. 149. Barron H.
C., Vogels T. P., Behrens T. E., Ramaswami M., 'Inhibitory engrams in
perception and memory', Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the USA, 2017; 114:6666-- 74. 150. Edwards C. J., Suchard M. A.,
Lemey P., et al., 'Ancient hybridization and an Irish origin for the
modern polar bear matriline', Current Biology, 2011; 21:1251--8. 151.
Heinz T., Pala M., Gomez-Carballa A., Richards M. B., Salas A.,
'Updating the African human mitochondrial DNA tree: relevance to
forensic and population genetics', Forensic Science International:
Genetics, 2017; 27:156--9. 152. O'Leary N., Jairaj C., Molloy E. J.,
McAuliffe F. M., Nixon E., O'Keane V., 'Antenatal depression and the
impact on infant cognitive, language and motor development at six and
twelve months postpartum', Early Human Development, 2019; 134:41--6.
153. McGovern D. P., Astle A. T., Clavin S. L., Newell F. N.,
'Task-specific transfer of perceptual learning across sensory
modalities', Current Biology, 2016; 26(1):R20--21. 154. Noh K., Lee H.,
Choi T. Y., et al., 'Negr1 controls adult hippocampal neurogenesis and
affective behaviors', Molecular Psychiatry, 2019; 24:1189--205.

155. Frankland P. W, Bontempi B., 'The organization of recent and remote
memories', Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 2005; 6:119--30. 156. Laureys
S., Owen A. M., Schiff ND., 'Brain function in coma, vegetative state,
and related disorders', Lancet Neurology, 2004; 3:537--46. 157. Kelly J.
R., Baker A., Babiker M., Burke L., Brennan C., O'Keane V., 'The
psychedelic renaissance: the next trip for psychiatry?', Irish Journal
of Psychological Medicine, 2019:1--5. 158. O'Keane V., O'Hanlon M., Webb
M., Dinan T., 'd-fenfluramine/prolactin response throughout the
menstrual cycle: evidence for an oestrogen-induced alteration', Clinical
Endocrinology (Oxford), 1991; 34:289--92. 159. O'Keane V., Dinan T. G.,
'Sex steroid priming effects on growth hormone response to
pyridostigmine throughout the menstrual cycle', Journal of Clinical
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 1992; 75:11--14. 160. Frokjaer V. G.,
Pinborg A., Holst K. K., et al., 'Role of serotonin transporter changes
in depressive responses to sex-steroid hormone manipulation: a positron
emission tomography study', Biological Psychiatry, 2015; 78:534--43.
161. Dinan T. G., Cryan J. F., 'The microbiome--gut--brain axis in
health and disease', Gastroenterology Clinics of North America, 2017;
46:77--89.

Index

Page numbers listed correspond to the print edition of this book. You
can use your device's search function to locate particular terms in the
text. abstract reasoning, 157, 164 ageing, 165--7 Alain-Fournier, Le
Grand Meaulnes, 216 algae, 211 Alice (case study), 179--82 'alien
emotions', 140 'alien thoughts', 146--7 alienists, 16 Alzheimer's
disease, 112 amnesia, 105, 119--20, 126--7 see also dissociative
amnesia; hysterical amnesia amygdala: and borderline personality
disorder, 187, 189; and the emotions, 68--9, 70--74, 85--6, 185; and
sense of smell, 68--70; and sex hormones, 182; and the visual cortex, 95
androgens, 179, 182--3 Anfinsen, Christian, 238 Anita (case study),
89--90 Anna O. (Freud's patient), 49--50 anorexia nervosa, 79--80,
179--81 anti-psychiatry movement, 149--50 antipsychotic medicine, 161--2
arachnophobia, 72--3 Arav (case study), 170--72 arousal, 104, 116,
120--21, 123 asylum system, 197--8 auditory cortex, 34, 39, 153 auditory
hallucinations, 5, 29--33, 41, 146--7, 213, 224 auditory nerve, 152--3
Augustine of Hippo, 111 autism spectrum disorder (ASD), 42, 142, 159
autoimmune disorders, 17, 236 autonomic nervous system (ANS), 74, 75--6,
116, 120, 123, 240--41 Axel, Richard, 239 axons, 157--8 Bachelard,
Gaston, 88, 232

Baltes, Paul, 220 Banville, John, 66 Bassett, Danielle, 25, 175--6
Baudelaire, Charles, 206 Beauvoir, Simone de, 193, 194 Beckett, Samuel,
9; Endgame, 99, 114; Not I, 239; The Unnamable, 63--4, 239; Waiting for
Godot, 44--5, 52, 63 Beethoven, Ludwig, 152--3, 167, 243 Belsky, Jay,
178 Bentley, Madison, 205--6, 209, 245 bereavement, 85--6, 202--3
Berger, John, Ways of Seeing, 40, 62, 156 Bergson, Henri, 12, 27, 29,
111, 116, 152, 164, 192 Bethlem Royal Hospital (Bedlam), 3, 45
biographical memory: and depression, 120; and emotional stimulation, 85,
95; and event memory, 48, 107--8, 111; formation and storage of, 59--62,
239; and self-awareness, 147; and selfnarrativization, 192, 193; and
sense of smell, 66; unreliability of, 206--7, 208 biological memory,
218, 220 bipolar disorder, 100, 101 Blade Runner (film, 1982), 43
borderline personality disorder (BPD), 186--90 brain circuitry, 25, 109,
141 brain development, 154--8, 164 brain mapping, 34, 36--8 brain
plasticity, 39 brain stem, 105 Breuer, Josef, 49, 50 Brontë, Charlotte,
Jane Eyre, 89 brown bears, 218 Buck, Linda, 239 Bucy, Paul, 71 Buddhism,
240 Buñuel, Luis, 133 Camus, Albert, The Myth of Sisyphus, 136--7
Capgras syndrome, 6, 247 see also delusion of substitution Carroll,
Lewis, Through the Looking-Glass (1871), 109, 143, 146 Carroll, Sean,
The Big Picture, 113--14, 242 catatonia, 119, 124--5 Cave, Nick, 202
Celtic Twilight, 222 changeling babies, 6, 224 child sexual abuse, 50,
103--4, 209--10, 241, 245 childhood, and sensory memory, 153--4
childhood abuse/neglect, 125--6, 163, 186--8 chronic fatigue syndrome,
121 cingula, 140--41, 145, 183, 187

clozapine (drug), 159--61 cognitive-behaviour therapy, 50 collective
memory, 217, 220, 227 comatose state, 104, 105 community care, 197--8
competitive maintenance, 214 connectomics, 175, 228 consciousness:
abnormal states, 170--75; and Freud, 103--4, 169; medical view of,
104--6; and memory, 168, 175; and the present, 169--70; of self, 134--7,
147--8, 151, 167; and time, 112--15 conversion disorder, 238 Copernicus,
15, 236 cortex, 33--4, 36--7, 39, 60--62, 165 cortical memory, 153, 206
cortisol, 116--17, 120--23, 122--3, 124--5, 126 coup de foudre, 77--8
Covid-19, 219 CRH (corticotropin-releasing hormone), 122, 179, 242
Cryan, John, 247 cultural memory, 220--21 Cunningham, Michael, A Home at
the End of the World, 204 Damosio, Antonio, Self Comes to Mind, 83
Daniel (case study), 124--5 Dead, The (film, 1987), 97--8 delusion of
substitution, 224--5, 247 see also Capgras syndrome delusional
perception, 138 delusions, 33, 42 dementia, 235, 238 dendrites, 57--8,
113, 126, 155 depression: and amnesia, 119--20, 126; and bipolar
disorder, 100--101; and the hippocampus, 59--60; and the insula, 80;
during pregnancy, 236--7; and stress, 116--17 Descartes, René, 20--21,
77--8 dialectical behaviour therapy (DBT), 188--9 Dickens, Charles,
Great Expectations, 101--2 Dinan, Ted, 247 discrimination, and
sensation, 39 dissociative amnesia, 48 see also hysterical amnesia DNA,
163, 218, 246 Dolan, Ray, 83, 142 dopamine, 162 Dostoevsky, Fyodor:
Crime and Punishment, 170; The Idiot, 170 DSM (Diagnostic Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders), 50n, 202 Du Maurier, Daphne, Rebecca, 89
dualism, 20--21, 25 Ebbinghaus, Hermann, Über das Gedächtnis (On
Memory), 62--3 Edelman, Gerald, 175, 246

Edith (case study), 3--9, 223--4, 229 Einstein, Albert, 242
electrodermal activity (EDA) test, 240 emotion: and the amygdala,
70--74; and the autonomic nervous system (ANS), 75--9; and sense of
smell, 66--70 emotional mapping, 83--6 emotional memory, 66, 69, 78, 95,
100, 240 emotional mirror system, 141, 142 emotional regulation, 183--90
encephalitis, 17 ENIGMA (Enhancing Neuro-Imaging Genetics through
Meta-Analysis), 126 entorhinal cortex, 94 epilepsy, 16, 55, 80, 170,
213--14 estrogen, 179, 182, 183, 245 euphoria, 172 event memory, 48, 52,
56, 60--62, 72, 99, 102, 106--8, 109, 207--8, 239 event physics, 99
expanded consciousness, 173 'experienced continuity', 108--9 fairy
tales, 221--7, 247 false memory, 207--14 fear, 71--3 Frances (case
study), 195, 198--201, 203--4 Franklin, Benjamin, 236 free association,
49, 50 Freud, Sigmund, 49--50, 103--4, 149, 169, 209--10, 237, 238, 241,
245 Frodl, Thomas, 127 frontotemporal dementia, 141 Gage, Phineas, 184
Galen, 19 Galileo Galilei, 15, 236 General Paralysis of the Insane
(GPI), 16 Gilman, Charlotte Perkins, 'The Yellow Wallpaper' (1892),
12--15, 27--8, 235 Goleman, Daniel, Destructive Emotions, 240
Grangegorman hospital, Dublin, 195--8 grey and white matter, 157 Grimm
Brothers, 222, 225, 226, 247 gut microbiome, 246--7 Halbwachs, Maurice,
On Collective Memory, 91, 220--21 hallucinatory experiences, 27--8
Hannah (case study), 138--40, 142, 151 hard wiring, in the brain, 38--9,
43 Havisham, Miss (fictional character), 101--2 Hebb, Donald, 57--9, 107

Hebbian process, 57--9 Helvétius, Anne, 236 hibernation, 106 higher
consciousness, 168, 170 hippocampus: and ageing, 164; in Alzheimer's
disease, 112; anatomy of, 52--4; cortisol receptors in, 122--3; and
depression, 238--9; and event memory, 239; and memory, 44--5, 51--2,
55--64, 92--4; and sex hormones, 182; in squirrels, 106; and stress,
126, 127; and time cells, 107--8, 242; and working memory, 206
Hippocrates, 121, 204 human genome project, 246 Huston, John, 97 Huxley,
Aldous, The Doors of Perception, 172--3 Hyde, Douglas, 222, 223
hyperperception, 172 hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, 122,
127, 179 hypothalamus, 74--5, 179 hysteria, 49, 50--51, 52, 238
hysterical amnesia, 48, 49--52 imagination, 167, 228 Inception (film,
2010), 43 indeterminism, 113 infantile amnesia, 133 influenza epidemic
(1958), 163 inhibition, 185, 187--9, 214--15 inner speech, 147 insecure
attachment, 135 insula (cortex), 79--80, 83--6, 141, 172, 182, 183, 185
insular atrophy, 79 interoceptive sensation, 37, 66, 75, 78--9, 82, 83,
172 intuitive knowledge, 26, 164 James, Alice, 74 James, Henry, 11, 74,
168--9 James, William, 11, 74, 78, 168--9, 240 James--Lange theory, 240
Joseph (case study), 30--33 Joyce, James: Dubliners, 97--8; Ulysses, 169
Kavanagh, Patrick, 86, 167 Kilroy, Thomas, Over the Backyard Wall, 40
KiSS (kisspeptin hormone), 179 Kloet, Ron de, 122--3 Klüver, Heinrich,
71 Klüver-Bucy syndrome, 71 Kraus, Erin, 225

Laing, R. D., The Divided Self (1960), 148--50 Lange, Carl, 240 LeDoux,
Joseph, 185, 189 Leonardo da Vinci, 19 Lesage, Alain-René, L'Histoire de
Gil Blas de Santillane, 76--7 lie-detection, 76, 240 Lineham, Marsha,
188 lip reading, 39 lobotomy, 185, 245 Locke, John, 22--3, 36, 75
locked-in state, 241 Loftus, Elizabeth, 210 London taxi drivers, 59, 93
lovage, 66--8 'made actions', 143--4 'made emotions', 140, 142--3 'made
thoughts', 146--8 mania, 172 Manning, Liliann, 108--9 Márai, Sándor,
Embers, 166 matrilinear memory, 217--19 Maudsley Hospital, 3, 52
Maxwell, James Clerk, 102--3, 108, 207, 241, 245 McEwan, Bruce, 122,
125, 242 Meehan, Paula, 'The Solace of Artemis', 217--18 melatonin, 20
memory: and ageing, 165; classifications of, 235; and consciousness,
168, 175; and the cortex, 60-- 63, 153; and the hippocampus, 57--60; and
mirroring, 150--51; and psychosis, 140; and sensation, 15, 25--8; and
sleep, 62--3; and time, 113--15 meta-consciousness, 168, 173--4 Miller,
Arthur, The Crucible, 207 Milner, Brenda, 56, 99, 106--8 mind/ brain
divide, 16--19, 51 mindfulness, 74 Minkowski, Hermann, 242 mirror
neurons, 144--6 mirror recognition test, 135--6, 243 mirroring, 145--6,
150--51 Mitchell, Silas Weir, 13, 28, 235 mitochondrial DNA, 218--19 MM
(case study), 46--8, 51--2, 93--4 modernist literature, 169 Modiano,
Patrick, Suspended Sentences, 95--6, 98 Molaison, Henry (HM; case
study), 55--6, 99, 214 Molyneux, William, 22--4, 36, 46, 75 Molyneux's
Question, 23--4

moral insanity, 16 Moser, Edward, 91, 94 Moser, May-Britt, 91, 94 motor
cortex, 144 MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), 38, 59, 72, 236--7
Mulhall, Anne, 217 multiple personality disorder, 50 Munro, Alice, 208
Murray, Robin, 162--3 music, listening to, 153 myelination, 157--8, 159,
164, 191 narrative consciousness, 169, 244 network neuroscience, 175
network pathology, 159 neural networks, 175 neuroasthenia, 235
neurodevelopmental disorders, 158--9, 162--3 neuroimaging, 38, 51, 72,
126 neurons: and arousal, 116; and cortisol, 123; and dendritic growth,
57--9, 113; and hypothalamus, 74; myelination, 157--8; 'pruning', 155;
sensory, 34--5; VENs, 243; and working memory, 174 neuroscience: and
dualism, 51; and false memory, 210--14; Molyneux's Question, 24; and
network pathology, 162--3; and physics, 113--14, 175; recent development
of, 227; and sensation, 22 neurotransmitters, 35, 162, 178 Newell,
Fiona, 237 Nguyen, D. K., 83, 85 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 205 NMDA
encephalitis, 17, 236, 244 Nora (case study), 100--103, 105, 120
obtunded state, 101 OCD (obsessive compulsive disorder), 42 O'Keefe,
John, 91--3, 93, 94 olfactory cortex, 69 olfactory nerve, 68--70
optogenetics, 211--14, 215 Paine, Thomas, Common Sense (1776), 24 Pan,
Zhuo-Hua, 212 Pasternak, Boris, Doctor Zhivago, 192 Penfield, Wilder,
36--8, 57, 62, 80--81, 83, 85 penicillin, 16 Penrose, Lionel, 198
perception, and sensation, 40--42 perinatal psychiatric illness, 3
Perrault, Charles, 247 persistent vegetative state, 241

phantom-limb pain, 38 phenomenology, 10 Philosophical Society, Dublin,
23 phylogenetics, 134, 157, 243 physics, and neuroscience, 113--14, 175,
242 pineal gland, 19--20 place, sense of, 87--98 place cells, 91--5, 94,
242 place memory, 90--98, 107 plasticity, 59 Plato, 16 postpartum
psychosis, 4--8, 13--14, 221, 224--5 prefrontal cortex, 61, 85, 86,
107--8, 111, 112, 140--41, 145, 153, 157, 183--6, 239 prenatal
environment, 163 prescient memory, 109 progesterone, 179, 244 proteins,
163 Proust, Marcel, 65--6, 69, 111, 176, 215 'pruning', in the brain,
155--8, 164, 191 psychedelic drugs, 150, 172--3, 244 psychiatry, 50,
148--9, 162--3 psychics, 29 psychoanalysis, 49--50 psychogenic amnesia,
50, 209 psychogeography, 88, 95, 98 psychoneuroendocrinology, 116
psychopaths, 141, 241 psychosis: as brain disorder, 16--17; causes, 163;
and delusional thinking, 138; and haunted houses, 89--91; and inner
speech, 147; and memory, 140; psychotic belief systems, 32--3, 43; R. D.
Laing on, 149--50; and self-other discrimination, 148; and sensory
experience, 27--8, 41--2; symptoms, 4-- 8; treatment, 200--201 see also
postpartum psychosis puberty, 177--9, 181--2 pyramidal cells, 114 Rachel
(case study), 159--61 Ramaswami, Mani, 214 rapid eye movement (REM)
sleep, 63 recovered memory, 210 Reed, Carol, 96 repressed memory, 49,
103, 209--10 rhodopsin, 211--12, 246 Rizzolatti, Giacomo, 144 RNA, 219
Rockefeller Institute, 122, 125 Ryan, Tomás, 212, 246 Sacks, Oliver, 24,
26; The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat, 62

salience, 127 Sally (case study), 117--19 salons, 18th century, 24, 236
Sartre, Jean-Paul, Nausea, 191, 192--4 Schacter, Daniel, 111
schizophrenia: auditory hallucinations, 30--33, 147; and autoimmunity,
17; delusional beliefs, 43; misattribution of feeling, 137, 142--3, 148;
and network pathology, 159, 162--3, 175; neural wiring, 41--2, 163; and
R. D. Laing, 149--50; somatic hallucinations, 82; stigma of, 42; thought
withdrawal, 146 scientific revolution, 15, 20, 236 Scott, Ridley, 43
self, sense of, 63, 147, 149, 189, 193, 194 self-awareness, 134--7,
147--8, 151, 228, 243 self-narrativization, 192, 208, 221 self-other
discrimination, 144--5, 147--8 self-recognition, 134--6, 151, 168
sensation: interpretation of, 33--5; and memory, 15, 25--8; multimodal,
38--40; and perception, 40--42; touch, 36--8 Sensationalists, 21--2, 25,
75, 122 sensory cortex, 38, 83, 84, 144 sensory homunculus, 36, 38
sensory memory, 53--4, 62, 153 sensory systems, decline of, 165--6
separateness, 136--7 sex hormones, 177--9, 181--3 Seyle, Hans, 122
short-term memory loss, 47--8, 235 Singer, Tania, 220 Siros, Sylvia, 236
skin, and sensation, 36 Slater, Eliot, 238 sleep, and memory, 62--3
smell, sense of, 65--70, 239--40 social brain, 141 social exclusion, 85
soft wiring, in the brain, 38--9, 43 somatic hallucinations, 82 soul,
15--16, 19 space cells, 94 see also place cells squirrels, 106 St
Patrick's Hospital, Dublin, 45--6 starling birdsong, 177--8, 182,
189--90 Stendhal, Love, 77 stream of consciousness, 169 stress, and
memory, 116--29 stress system, 121--3 Styron, William, 68, 239 Swift,
Jonathan, 45--6

synapses, 35, 158 syphilis, 16 tabula rasa, 22, 26 talking therapies,
49--50 Teicher, Martin, 187, 201 temporal lobe epilepsy, 49
testosterone, 177--9, 182--3 That's All Right (short film, 1989), 97
Third Man, The (film, 1949), 96 third-eye phenomenon, 18--19 Thomas,
Dylan, 'Fern Hill', 112, 153--4 thought withdrawal/ insertion, 146 time:
and consciousness, 112--15; and event memory, 100--103, 106--8; fluidity
of, 108--12; measurement of, 99--100; and place memory, 107 time cells,
106--8, 242 time-place-person format, 44--5, 52, 87 Tonegawa, Susumu,
211--13, 215, 246 touch cortex, 36--9, 237 trauma, 48, 194--5, 201--4
Trinity College Dublin, 22, 236 Trinity College Institute for
Neuroscientists, 23, 212 tubercular meningitis, 49 Tulving, Endel, 111
Urbach--Wiethe disease, 72 Villringer, Arno, 38, 237 viruses, 163, 219
visceral responses, 74, 82--83, 240 visual cortex, 61--2, 69, 73, 75,
95, 239 von Economo, Constantin, 243 Warner, Marina, 226 Wolpert, Lewis,
Malignant Sadness, 117 Woolf, Virginia, 28, 41--2 working memory, 174,
175, 206 Yeats, W. B., 66, 86, 95, 135, 192, 222, 223--4, 226

A Sense of Self is a work of nonfiction. Names and potentially
identifying details, including patient diagnoses, have been changed.
pages 218 and 219: Lines from Paula Meehan's "The Solace of Artemis"
used by her permission. pages 112 and 154: By Dylan Thomas, from The
Poems of Dylan Thomas, copyright ©1945 by The Trustees for the
Copyrights of Dylan Thomas. Reprinted by permission of New Directions
Publishing Corp. The interior illustrations are by Sorca O'Farrell and
used by her permission. Copyright © 2021 by Veronica O'Keane First
American Edition 2021 Originally published in Great Britain under the
title The Rag and Bone Shop: How We Make Memories and Memories Make Us
All rights reserved For information about permission to reproduce
selections from this book, write to Permissions, W. W. Norton & Company,
Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10110 For information about special
discounts for bulk purchases, please contact W. W. Norton Special Sales
at specialsales@wwnorton.com or 800-233-4830 Jacket design: Sara Wood
Jacket artwork: Martin O'Neill Jacket photos: (woman) Peter Glass /
Design Pics / Getty Images; (monarch butterflies) Butterfly Hunter /
Shutterstock; (peacock feather) juliet / DepositPhotos; (lily) Elen11 /
iStock Photo; (marigold) ksena32 / iStock Photo The Library of Congress
has cataloged the printed edition as follows: Names: O'Keane, Veronica,
author. Title: A sense of self : memory, the brain, and who we are /
Veronica O'Keane. Description: First American edition. \| New York :
W.W. Norton & Company, 2021. \| Includes bibliographical references and
index. Identifiers: LCCN 2021005133 \| ISBN 9780393541922 (hardcover) \|
ISBN 9780393541939 (epub) Subjects: LCSH: Brain. \| Memories. \|
Neurosciences. \| Mind and body. Classification: LCC QP376 .O34 2021 \|
DDC 612.8---dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021005133
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc., 500 Fifth Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10110
www.wwnorton.com W. W. Norton & Company Ltd., 15 Carlisle Street, London
W1D 3BS


