Copyright Â© 2021 by Ethan Kross All rights reserved. Published in the
United States by Crown, an imprint of Random House, a division of
Penguin Random House LLC, New York. CROWN and the Crown colophon are
registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Names: Kross, Ethan,
author. Title: Chatter / Ethan Kross. Description: First edition. \| New
York : Crown, \[2021\] \| Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2020025201 (print) \| LCCN 2020025202 (ebook) \| ISBN
9780525575238 (hardcover) \| ISBN 9780593238752 (international edition)
\| ISBN 9780525575252 (ebook) Subjects: LCSH: Self-talk. \| Thought and
thinking. \| Communication---Psychological aspects. Classification: LCC
BF697.5.S47 K76 2021 (print) \| LCC BF697.5.S47 (ebook) \| DDC
158.1---dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020025201 LC
ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2020025202 Ebook ISBN

9780525575252

randomhousebooks.com Book design by Elizabeth Rendfleisch, adapted for
ebook Cover design: Anna Kochman ep_prh_5.6.1_c0_r1

The biggest challenge, I think, is always maintaining your moral
compass. Those are the conversations I'm having internally. I'm
measuring my actions against that inner voice that for me at least is
audible, is active, it tells me where I think I'm on track and where I
think I'm off track. ---BARACK OBAMA The voice in my head is an asshole.
---DAN HARRIS

Contents Cover Title Page Copyright Epigraph Introduction

Chapter One: Why We Talk to Ourselves Chapter Two: When Talking to
Ourselves Backfires Chapter Three: Zooming Out Chapter Four: When I
Become You Chapter Five: The Power and Peril of Other People Chapter
Six: Outside In Chapter Seven: Mind Magic Conclusion The Tools
Dedication Acknowledgments Notes About the Author

Introduction

I

stood in the darkness of my living room, my knuckles white, my fingers
tense around the sticky rubber handle of my Little League baseball bat,
staring out the window into the night, trying desperately to protect my
wife and newborn daughter from a madman I had never met. Any
self-awareness about how this looked, or about what I might actually do
if the madman appeared, had been washed away by the fear I was
experiencing. The thoughts racing through my head kept repeating the
same thing. It's all my fault, I said to myself. I have a healthy,
adorable new baby and wife upstairs who love me. I've put them both at
risk. What have I done? How am I going to fix this? These thoughts were
like a horrible carnival ride I couldn't get off. So there I was,
trapped---not just in my dark living room, but also in the nightmare of
my own mind. Me, a scientist who directs a laboratory that specializes
in the study of self-control, an expert on how to tame unrelenting
negative thought spirals, staring out the window at three in the morning
with a tiny baseball bat in my hands, tortured not by the boogeyman who
sent me a deranged letter but by the boogeyman inside my head. How did I
get here?

e Letter and the Chatter That day began like any other day.

I woke up early, got dressed, helped feed my daughter, changed her
diaper, and quickly downed breakfast. Then I kissed my wife and headed
out the door to drive to my office on the University of Michigan's
campus. It was a cold but tranquil, sunny day in the spring of 2011, a
day that seemed to promise equally tranquil, sunny thoughts. When I
arrived at East Hall, the mammoth brick-covered building that houses the
University of Michigan's storied Psychology Department, I found
something unusual in my mailbox. Sitting atop the stack of science
journals that had been accumulating was an envelope hand addressed to
me. Curious about what was inside---it was rare that I received
hand-addressed mail at work---I opened the letter and began reading it
as I walked toward my office. That's when, before I even realized how
hot I was, I felt a rush of sweat slide down my neck. The letter was a
threat. The first one I had ever received. The previous week I had
appeared briefly on CBS Evening News to talk about a neuroscience study
that my colleagues and I had just published demonstrating that the links
between physical and emotional pain were more similar than previous
research had suggested. In fact, the brain registered emotional and
physical pain in remarkably similar ways. Heartbreak, it turned out, was
a physical reality. My colleagues and I had been excited about the
results yet didn't expect them to generate more than a handful of calls
from science journalists looking to file a brief story. Much to our
surprise, the findings went viral. One minute I was lecturing to
undergraduates on the psychology of love, and the next I was receiving a
crash course in media training in a television studio on campus. I
managed to get through the interview without tripping on my words too
many times, and a few hours later the segment on our work aired---a
scientist's fifteen minutes of fame, which in fact amounted to about
ninety seconds. What exactly our research had done to offend the letter
writer wasn't clear, but the violent drawings, hateful slurs, and
disturbing messages that the text contained left little to my
imagination about the person's feelings toward me while at the same time
leaving much to my imagination about what form such malice could take.
To make matters worse, the letter didn't come from a distant locale. A
quick Google search of its postmark revealed

that it was sent from just a dozen miles away. My thoughts started
spinning uncontrollably. In a cruel twist of fate, I was now the one
experiencing emotional pain so intense it felt physical. Later that day,
after several conversations with university administrators, I found
myself sitting in the local police station, anxiously awaiting my turn
to speak to the officer in charge. Although the policeman I eventually
shared my story with was kind, he wasn't particularly reassuring. He
offered three pieces of advice: Call the phone company and make sure my
home telephone number wasn't listed, keep an eye out for suspicious
people hanging around my office, and---my personal favorite---drive home
from work a different way each day to ensure that no one learned my
routine. That was it. They were not deploying a special task force. I
was on my own. It was not exactly the comforting response I had hoped to
hear. As I took a long, circuitous route home that day through Ann
Arbor's tree-lined streets, I tried to come up with a solution for how
to deal with the situation. I thought to myself, Let's go over the
facts. Do I need to worry? What do I need to do? According to the police
officer, and several other people I had shared my story with, there were
clear ways I could answer these questions. No, you don't need to stress
out over this. These things happen. There isn't anything else you can
do. It's okay to be afraid. Just relax. Public figures receive empty
threats all the time and nothing happens. This will blow over. But that
wasn't the conversation I had with myself. Instead, the despairing
stream of thoughts running through my head amplified itself in an
endless loop. What have I done? my inner voice shouted, before switching
into my inner frenzy maker. Should I call the alarm company? Should I
get a gun? Should we move? How quickly can I find a new job? A version
of this conversation repeated itself again and again in my mind over the
next two days, and I was a nervous wreck as a result. I had no appetite,
and I talked endlessly (and unproductively) about the threatening letter
with my wife to the point that tension between us began to grow. I
startled violently each time I heard the faintest peep escape from my
daughter's nursery, instantly assuming that the worst fate was upon her
rather than a more obvious explanation---a creaky crib, a gassy baby.
And I paced.

For two nights, while my wife and daughter slept peacefully in their
beds, I stood watch downstairs in my pajamas with my Little League
baseball bat in my hands, peeking out the living room window to make
sure no one was approaching, with no plan for what I would do if I
actually found someone lurking outside. At my most embarrassing, when my
anxiety peaked on the second night, I sat down in front of my computer
and considered performing a Google search with the key words "bodyguards
for academics"---absurd in hindsight but urgent and logical at the time.

Going Inside I am an experimental psychologist and neuroscientist. I
study the science of introspection at the Emotion & Self Control
Laboratory, a lab I founded and direct at the University of Michigan. We
do research on the silent conversations people have with themselves,
which powerfully influence how we live our lives. I've spent my entire
professional career researching these conversations---what they are, why
we have them, and how they can be harnessed to make people happier,
healthier, and more productive. My colleagues and I like to think of
ourselves as mind mechanics. We bring people into our lab to participate
in elaborate experiments, and we also study them "in the wild" of daily
human experience. We use tools from psychology and other
disciplines---fields as diverse as medicine, philosophy, biology, and
computer science---to answer vexing questions like: Why are some people
able to benefit from focusing inward to understand their feelings, while
other people crumble when they engage in the exact same behavior? How
can people reason wisely under toxic stress? Are there right and wrong
ways to talk to yourself? How can we communicate with people we care
about without stoking their negative thoughts and emotions or increasing
our own? Do the countless "voices" of others we encounter on social
media affect the voices in our minds? By rigorously examining these
questions, we've made numerous surprising discoveries.

We've learned how specific things we say and do can improve our inner
conversations. We've learned how to pick the locks of the "magical" back
doors of the brain---how certain ways of employing placebos, lucky
charms, and rituals can make us more resilient. We've learned which
pictures to place on our desks to help us recover from emotional
injuries (hint: photos of Mother Nature can be comforting just like
those of our own mothers), why clutching a stuffed animal can help with
existential despair, how and how not to talk with your partner after a
hard day, what you're likely doing wrong when you log on to social
media, and where you should go when you take walks to deal with the
problems you face. My interest in how the conversations we have with
ourselves influence our emotions began long before I considered a career
in science. It began before I really understood what feelings were. My
fascination with the rich, fragile, and ever-shifting world we carry
around between our ears dates back to the first psychology lab I ever
set foot in: the household where I grew up. I was raised in the
working-class Brooklyn neighborhood of Canarsie to a father who taught
me about the importance of self-reflection from an oddly early age. When
I suspect the parents of most other three-year-olds were teaching their
kids to brush their teeth regularly and treat other people kindly, my
dad had other priorities. In his typically unconventional style, he was
more concerned with my inner choices than anything else, always
encouraging me to "go inside" if I had a problem. He liked to tell me,
"Ask yourself the question." The exact question he was referring to
eluded me, though on some level I understood what he was pushing me to
do: Look inside yourself for answers. In many ways, my dad was a walking
contradiction. When he wasn't flipping off other drivers on noisy,
traffic-choked New York streets or cheering on the Yankees in front of
the television at home, I could find him meditating in his bedroom
(usually with a cigarette dangling beneath his bushy mustache) or
reading the Bhagavad Gita. But as I grew up and encountered situations
more complex than deciding whether to eat a forbidden cookie or refusing
to clean my room, his advice took on more weight. Should I ask my high
school crush out? (I did; she said no.) Should I confront my friend
after witnessing him steal someone's wallet? Where

should I go to college? I prided myself on my coolheaded thinking, and
my reliance on "going inside" to help me make the right decision rarely
faltered (and one day one of my crushes would say yes; I married her).
Perhaps unsurprisingly, when I went off to college, my discovery of the
field of psychology felt preordained. I had found my calling. It
explored the things my dad and I had spent my youth talking about when
we weren't talking about the Yankees; it seemed to both explain my
childhood and show me a pathway into adulthood. Psychology also gave me
a new vocabulary. In my college classes, I learned, among lots of other
things, that what my father had been circling around during all those
years of his Zen parenting, which my markedly not-eccentric mother had
put up with, was the idea of introspection. In the most basic sense,
introspection simply means actively paying attention to one's own
thoughts and feelings. The ability to do this is what allows us to
imagine, remember, reflect, and then use these reveries to problem
solve, innovate, and create. Many scientists, including myself, see this
as one of the central evolutionary advances that distinguishes human
beings from other species. All along, then, my father's rationale was
that cultivating the skill of introspection would help me through
whatever challenging situations I encountered. Deliberate
self-reflection would lead to wise, beneficial choices and by extension
to positive emotions. In other words, "going inside" was the route to a
resilient, fulfilling life. This made perfect sense. Except that, as I
would soon learn, for many people it was completely wrong. In recent
years, a robust body of new research has demonstrated that when we
experience distress, engaging in introspection often does significantly
more harm than good. It undermines our performance at work, interferes
with our ability to make good decisions, and negatively influences our
relationships. It can also promote violence and aggression, contribute
to a range of mental disorders, and enhance our risk of becoming
physically ill.Â Using the mind to engage with our thoughts and feelings
in the wrong ways can lead professional athletes to lose the skills
they've spent their careers perfecting. It can cause otherwise rational,
caring people to make less logical and even less moral decisions. It can
lead friends to flee

from you in both the real world and the social media world. It can turn
romantic relationships from safe havens into battlegrounds. It can even
contribute to us aging faster, both in how we look on the outside and in
how our DNA is configured internally. In short, our thoughts too often
don't save us from our thoughts. Instead, they give rise to something
insidious. Chatter. Chatter consists of the cyclical negative thoughts
and emotions that turn our singular capacity for introspection into a
curse rather than a blessing. It puts our performance, decision making,
relationships, happiness, and health in jeopardy. We think about that
screwup at work or misunderstanding with a loved one and end up flooded
by how bad we feel. Then we think about it again. And again. We
introspect hoping to tap into our inner coach but find our inner critic
instead. The question, of course, is why. Why do people's attempts to
"go inside" and think when they experience distress at times succeed and
at other times fail? And just as important, once we find our
introspective abilities running off course, what can we do to steer them
back on track? I've spent my career examining these questions. I've
learned that the answers hinge on changing the nature of one of the most
important conversations of conscious life: the ones we have with
ourselves.

Our Default State A widespread cultural mantra of the twenty-first
century is the exhortation to live in the present. I appreciate the
wisdom of this maxim. Instead of succumbing to the pain of the past or
anxiety about the future, it advises, we should concentrate on
connecting with others and oneself right now. And yet, as a scientist
who studies the human mind, I can't help but note how this
well-intentioned message runs counter to our biology. Humans weren't
made to hold fast to the present all the time. That's just not what our
brains evolved to do. In recent years, cutting-edge methods that examine
how the brain processes information and allow us to monitor behavior in
real time have

unlocked the hidden mechanics of the human mind. In doing so, they have
uncovered something remarkable about our species: We spend one-third to
one-half of our waking life not living in the present. As naturally as
we breathe, we "decouple" from the here and now, our brains transporting
us to past events, imagined scenarios, and other internal musings. This
tendency is so fundamental it has a name: our "default state." It is the
activity our brain automatically reverts to when not otherwise engaged,
and often even when we are otherwise engaged. You've no doubt noticed
your own mind wander, as if of its own volition, when you were supposed
to be focusing on a task. We are perpetually slipping away from the
present into the parallel, nonlinear world of our minds, involuntarily
sucked back "inside" on a minute-to-minute basis. In light of this, the
expression "the life of the mind" takes on new and added meaning: Much
of our life is the mind. So, what often happens when we slip away? We
talk to ourselves. And we listen to what we say. Humanity has grappled
with this phenomenon since the dawn of civilization. Early Christian
mystics were thoroughly annoyed by the voice in their head always
intruding on their silent contemplation. Some even considered these
voices demonic. Around the same time, in the East, Chinese Buddhists
theorized about the turbulent mental weather that could cloud one's
emotional landscape. They called it "deluded thought." And yet many of
these very same ancient cultures believed that their inner voice was a
source of wisdom, a belief that undergirds several millennia-old
practices like silent prayer and meditation (my dad's personal
philosophy). The fact that multiple spiritual traditions have both
feared our inner voice and noted its value speaks to the ambivalent
attitudes to our internal conversations that still persist today. When
we talk about the inner voice, people naturally wonder about its
pathological aspects. I often begin presentations by asking audience
members if they talk to themselves in their heads. Invariably, many
people look relieved to see other hands shoot up alongside theirs.
Unfortunately, normal voices that we hear in our heads (belonging, for
example, to ourselves, family, or colleagues) can sometimes devolve into
abnormal voices characteristic of mental illness. In such cases, the
person doesn't

believe that the voice issues from their own mind but thinks it comes
from another entity (hostile people, aliens, and the government, to name
a few common auditory hallucinations). Importantly, when we talk about
the inner voice, the difference between mental illness and wellness is a
question not of dichotomy---pathological versus healthy---but of culture
and degree. One quirk of the human brain is that roughly one in ten
people hear voices and attribute them to external factors. We are still
trying to understand why this happens. The bottom line is that we all
have a voice in our head in some shape or form. The flow of words is so
inextricable from our inner lives that it persists even in the face of
vocal impairments. Some people who stutter, for example, report talking
more fluently in their minds than they do out loud. Deaf people who use
sign language talk to themselves too, though they have their own form of
inner language. It involves silently signing to themselves, similar to
how people who can hear use words to talk to themselves privately. The
inner voice is a basic feature of the mind. If you've ever silently
repeated a phone number to memorize it, replayed a conversation
imagining what you should have said, or verbally coached yourself
through a problem or skill, then you've employed your inner voice. Most
people rely on and benefit from theirs every day. And when they
disconnect from the present, it's often to converse with that voice or
hear what it has to say---and it can have a lot to say. Our verbal
stream of thought is so industrious that according to one study we
internally talk to ourselves at a rate equivalent to speaking four
thousand words per minute out loud. To put this in perspective, consider
that contemporary American presidents' State of the Union speeches
normally run around six thousand words and last over an hour. Our brains
pack nearly the same verbiage into a mere sixty seconds. This means that
if we're awake for sixteen hours on any given day, as most of us are,
and our inner voice is active about half of that time, we can
theoretically be treated to about 320 State of the Union addresses each
day. The voice in your head is a very fast talker. Although the inner
voice functions well much of the time, it often leads to chatter
precisely when we need it most---when our stress is up, the stakes are
high, and we encounter difficult emotions that call for the utmost
poise.

Sometimes this chatter takes the form of a rambling soliloquy; sometimes
it's a dialogue we have with ourselves. Sometimes it's a compulsive
rehashing of past events (rumination); sometimes it's an angst-ridden
imagining of future events (worry). Sometimes it's a free-associative
pinballing between negative feelings and ideas. Sometimes it's a
fixation on one specific unpleasant feeling or notion. However it
manifests itself, when the inner voice runs amok and chatter takes the
mental microphone, our mind not only torments but paralyzes us. It can
also lead us to do things that sabotage us. Which is how you find
yourself peeking out the window of your living room late at night
holding a comically small baseball bat.

e Puzzle One of the most crucial insights I've had during my career is
that the instruments necessary for reducing chatter and harnessing our
inner voice aren't something we need to go looking for. They are often
hidden in plain sight, waiting for us to put them to work. They are
present in our mental habits, quirky behaviors, and daily routines, as
well as in the people, organizations, and environments we interact with.
In this book, I will lay bare these tools and explain not only how they
work but how they fit together to form a toolbox that evolution crafted
to help us manage the conversations we have with ourselves. In the
chapters ahead, I will bring the lab to you while also telling stories
about people who combat their chatter. You'll learn about the mental
lives of a former NSA agent, Fred Rogers, Malala Yousafzai, LeBron
James, and an indigenous South Pacific tribe called the Trobrianders, as
well as many people just like you and me. But to begin this book, we
will first look at what the inner voice really is, along with all the
marvelous things it does for us. Then I will take us into the dark side
of the conversations we have with ourselves and the truly frightening
extent to which chatter can harm our bodies, damage our social lives,
and derail our careers. This inescapable tension of the inner voice as
both a helpful

superpower and destructive kryptonite that hurts us is what I think of
as the great puzzle of the human mind. How can the voice that serves as
our best coach also be our worst critic? The rest of the chapters will
describe scientific techniques that can reduce our chatter---techniques
that are rapidly helping us solve the puzzle of our own minds. The key
to beating chatter isn't to stop talking to yourself. The challenge is
to figure out how to do so more effectively. Fortunately, both your mind
and the world around you are exquisitely designed to help you do
precisely that. But before we get into how to control the voice in our
head, we need to answer a more basic question. Why do we have one in the
first place?

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï¯ï®ï¥

Why We Talk to Oursel es

T

he sidewalks of New York City are superhighways of anonymity. During the
day, millions of intent pedestrians stride along the pavement, their
faces like masks that betray nothing. The same expressions pervade the
parallel world beneath the streets---the subway. People read, look at
their phones, and stare off into the great invisible nowhere, their
faces disconnected from whatever is going on in their minds. Of course,
the unreadable faces of eight million New Yorkers belie the teeming
world on the other side of that blank wall they've learned to put up: a
hidden "thoughtscape" of rich and active internal conversations,
frequently awash with chatter. After all, the inhabitants of New York
are nearly as famous for their neuroses as they are for their gruffness.
(As a native, I say this with love.) Imagine, then, what we might learn
if we could burrow past their masks to eavesdrop on their inner voices.
As it happens, that is exactly what the British anthropologist Andrew
Irving did over the course of fourteen months beginning in
2010---listened in on the minds of just over a hundred New Yorkers.
While Irving hoped to gain a glimpse into the raw verbal life of the
human mind---or rather an audio sample of it---the origin of his study
actually had to do with his interest in how we deal with the awareness
of death. A professor at the University of Manchester, he had done
earlier fieldwork in Africa analyzing the vocalized inner monologues of
people

diagnosed with HIV/AIDS. Unsurprisingly, their thoughts roiled with the
anxiety, uncertainty, and emotional pain produced by their diagnoses.
Now Irving wanted to compare these findings with a group of people who
surely had their woes but weren't necessarily in aggrieved states to
begin with. To carry this out, he simply (and bravely!) approached New
Yorkers on the street and in parks and cafÃ©s, explained his study, and
asked if they would be willing to speak their thoughts aloud into a
recording device while he filmed them at a distance. Some days, a
handful of people said yes; other days, only one. It was to be expected
that most New Yorkers would be too busy or skeptical to agree.
Eventually, Irving gathered his one hundred "streams of internally
represented speech," as he described them, in recordings ranging from
fifteen minutes to an hour and a half. The recordings obviously don't
provide an all-access backstage pass to the mind, because an element of
performance might have come into play for some participants. Even so,
they offer an uncommonly candid window into the conversations people
have with themselves as they navigate their daily lives. As was only
natural, prosaic concerns occupied space in the minds of everyone in
Irving's study. Many people commented on what they observed on the
streets---other pedestrians, drivers, and traffic, for example---as well
as on things they needed to do. But existing alongside these
unremarkable musings were monologues negotiating a host of personal
wounds, distresses, and worries. The narrations often landed on negative
content with utterly no transition, like a gaping pothole appearing
suddenly on the unspooling road of thought. Take, for example, a woman
in Irving's study named Meredith whose inner conversation pivoted
sharply from everyday concerns to matters of literal life and death. "I
wonder if there's a Staples around here," Meredith said, before
shifting, like an abrupt lane change, to a friend's recent cancer
diagnosis. "You know, I thought she was going to tell me that her cat
died." She crossed the street, then said, "I was prepared to cry about
her cat, and then I'm trying not to cry about her. I mean New York
without Joan is just...I can't even imagine it." She started crying.
"She'll probably be fine, though. I love that line about having a 20
percent chance of being cured. And how a friend of hers said, 'Would you
go on a plane that had a 20 percent chance

of crashing?' No, of course not. It was hard to get through, though. She
does put up quite a wall of words." Meredith seemed to be working
through bad news rather than drowning in it. Thoughts about unpleasant
emotions aren't necessarily chatter, and this is a case in point. She
didn't start spiraling. A few minutes later, after crossing another
street, her verbal stream circled back to her task at hand: "Now, is
there a Staples down there? I think there is." While Meredith processed
her fear about losing a beloved friend, a man named Tony fixated on
another kind of grief: the loss of closeness in a relationship, and
perhaps even the relationship itself. Carrying a messenger bag down a
sidewalk scattered with pedestrians, he began a self-referential riff of
thoughts: "Walk away...Look, suck it up. Or move on. Just walk away. I
understand the thing about not telling everybody. But I'm not everybody.
You two are having a goddamn baby. A phone call would have been good."
The sense of exclusion he felt obviously cut him deeply. He seemed to be
poised on a fulcrum of sorts, between a problem in search of a solution
and pain that could lead to unproductive wallowing. "Clear, totally
clear. Move forward," Tony then said. He used language not just to give
voice to his emotions but also to search for how best to handle the
situation. "The thing is," he went on, "it could be an out. When they
told me they were having a baby, I felt a bit out. I felt a bit pushed
out. But now maybe it's an escape hatch. I was pissed before but, must
admit, not so pissed anymore. Now it could work to my advantage." He
released a soft, bitter laugh, then sighed. "I am certain that this is
an out...I am looking at this positively now...I was pissed before. I
felt like you two were a family...and you two are a family now. And I
have an out...Walk tall!" Then there was Laura. Laura sat in a coffee
shop in a restless mood. She was waiting to hear from her boyfriend, who
had gone to Boston. The problem was, he was supposed to be back to help
her move to a new apartment. She had been waiting for a phone call since
the day before. Convinced that her boyfriend had been in a fatal
accident of some sort, the night before she sat in front of her computer
for four hours, every minute refreshing a keyword search of the words
"bus crash." Yet, as she reminded herself, the eddy of her compulsive
negative worrying wasn't just about a possible bus crash

involving her boyfriend. She was in an open relationship with him, even
though this wasn't something she ever desired, and it was turning out to
be very hard. "It's supposed to be open for sexual freedom," she told
herself, "but it's something that I never really wanted for myself...I
don't know where he is...He could be anywhere. He could be with another
girl." While Meredith processed upsetting news with relative equanimity
(crying at a friend's cancer diagnosis is normal) and Tony calmly
coached himself to move on, Laura was stuck with repeating negative
thoughts. She didn't know how to proceed. At the same time, her internal
monologue dipped back in time, with reflections about the decisions that
took her relationship to its current state. For her the past was very
present, as was the case for Meredith and Tony. Their unique situations
led them to process their experiences differently, but they were all
reckoning with things that had already occurred. At the same time, their
monologues also projected into the future with questions about what
would happen or what they should do. This pattern of hopscotching
through time and space in their inner conversations highlights something
we have all noticed about our own mind: It is an avid time traveler.
While memory lane can lead us down chatter lane, there's nothing
inherently harmful about returning to the past or imagining the future.
The ability to engage in mental time travel is an exceedingly valuable
feature of the human mind. It allows us to make sense of our experiences
in ways that other animals can't, not to mention make plans and prepare
for contingencies in the future. Just as we talk with friends about
things we have done and things we will do or would like to do, we talk
to ourselves about these same things. Other volunteers in Irving's
experiment also demonstrated preoccupations that jumped around time,
braiding together in the patter of the inner voice. For example, while
walking across a bridge, an older woman recalled crossing the same
bridge with her father as a girl just as a man threw himself off and
committed suicide. It was an indelible memory, in part because her
father was a professional photographer and snapped a picture of the
moment, which ended up in a citywide newspaper. Meanwhile, a man in his
mid-thirties crossed the Brooklyn Bridge and thought about all the human
labor it took to build it, also telling himself that

he would succeed at a new job he was about to start. Another woman,
waiting for a late blind date in Washington Square Park, recalled a past
boyfriend who cheated on her, which ended up sparking a reverie about
her desires for connection and spiritual transcendence. Other
participants talked about economic hardships that might await them,
while the anxieties of others centered on a looming event from a decade
earlier: 9/11. The New Yorkers who generously shared their thoughts with
Andrew Irving embody the wildly diverse, richly textured nature of our
default state. Their inner dialogues took them "inside" in vastly
different ways, leading them down myriad streams of verbal thought. The
specifics of their private conversations were as idiosyncratic as their
individual lives. Yet structurally, what happened in their minds was
very similar. They often dealt with negative "content," much of which
sprang up through associative connections, the pinging of one thought to
another. Sometimes their verbal thinking was constructive; sometimes it
wasn't. They also spent a considerable amount of time thinking about
themselves, their minds gravitating toward their own experiences,
emotions, desires, and needs. The self-focused nature of the default
state, after all, is one of its primary features. The New Yorkers had
these things in common, but their monologues also emphasized something
else universally human: The inner voice was always there with something
to say, reminding us of the inescapable need we all have to use our
minds to make sense of our experiences and the role that language plays
in helping us do so. While we undoubtedly have feelings and thoughts
that take nonverbal forms---visual artists and musicians, for instance,
pursue precisely this kind of mental expression---humans exist in a
world of words. Words are how we communicate with others most of the
time (though body language and gestures are clearly instrumental too)
and how we communicate with ourselves much of the time as well. Our
brain's built-in affinity for disconnecting from what is going on around
us produces a conversation in our minds, one that we spend a significant
portion of our waking hours engaged in. This begs a critical question:
Why? Evolution selects qualities that provide a survival advantage.
According to this rule, you wouldn't expect humans to have

become such prolific self-talkers if doing so didn't add to our
"fitness" for survival. But the inner voice's influence is often so
subtle and fundamental that we are rarely if ever aware of all that it
does for us.

e Great Multitasker Neuroscientists often invoke the concept of neural
reuse when discussing the operations of the brain---the idea that we use
the same brain circuitry to achieve multiple ends, getting the absolute
most from the limited neural resources at our disposal. For example,
your hippocampus, the sea-horseshaped region buried deep within your
brain that creates long-term memories, also helps us navigate and move
through space. The brain is a very talented multitasker. Otherwise, it
would have to be the size of a bus to be large enough to support every
one of its countless functions. Our inner voice, it turns out, is
likewise a prodigious multitasker. One of the brain's essential tasks is
powering the engine of what is known as working memory. Humans have a
natural tendency to conceptualize memory in the romantic, long-term, and
nostalgic sense. We think of it as the land of the past, teeming with
moments, images, and sensations that will stay with us forever and
constitute our life's narrative. But then there's the fact that every
minute of the day, amid an ongoing rush of stimulation that can be quite
distracting (sounds, sights, smells, and so on), we have to constantly
recall details to function. That we'll likely forget most of the
information after it's no longer useful doesn't matter. For the brief
time that information is active, we need it to function. Working memory
is what allows us to participate in work discussions and have impromptu
dinner conversations. Thanks to it, we're able to remember what someone
said a few seconds earlier and then incorporate it into the evolving
discussion in a relevant way. Working memory is what allows us to read a
menu and then order food (while also keeping up one of those
conversations). It's what allows us to write an email about something
urgent but not meaningful enough to get filed away in long-term storage.
In short, it's what allows us to function as people out in the world.
When it

stops working or operates suboptimally, our capacity to perform even the
most ordinary daily activities (like bugging your kids to brush their
teeth while making them pack lunches and also thinking about what
meetings you have later that day) fails. And connected to working memory
is the inner voice. A critical component of working memory is a neural
system that specializes in managing verbal information. It's called the
phonological loop, but it's easiest to understand it as the brain's
clearinghouse for everything related to words that occurs around us in
the present. It has two parts: an "inner ear," which allows us to retain
words we've just heard for a few seconds; and an "inner voice," which
allows us to repeat words in our head as we do when we're practicing a
speech or memorizing a phone number or repeating a mantra. Our working
memory relies on the phonological loop for keeping our linguistic neural
pathways online so that we can function productively outside ourselves
while also keeping our conversations going within. We develop this
verbal doorway between our minds and the world in infancy, and as soon
as it's in place, it propels us toward other milestones of mental
development. Indeed, the phonological loop goes well beyond the realm of
responding to immediate situations. Our verbal development goes hand in
hand with our emotional development. As toddlers, speaking to ourselves
out loud helps us learn to control ourselves. In the early twentieth
century, the Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky was one of the first
people to explore the connection between language development and
self-control. He was interested in the curious behavior of children who
talk to themselves out loud, coaching themselves along while also doling
out self-critiques. As anyone who has spent significant time around kids
knows, they often have full-blown, unprompted conversations with
themselves. This isn't just play or imagination; it's a sign of neural
and emotional growth. Unlike other leading thinkers of the time who
thought this behavior was a sign of unsophisticated development,
Vygotsky saw language playing a critical role in how we learn to control
ourselves, a theory that would later be borne out by data. He believed
that the way we learn to manage our emotions begins with our
relationships with our primary caretakers (typically our parents). These
authorities give us instructions, and we repeat

those instructions to ourselves aloud, often mimicking what they say. At
first, we do this audibly. Over time, though, we come to internalize
their message in silent inner speech. And then later, as we develop
further, we come to use our own words to control ourselves for the rest
of our lives. As we all know, this doesn't mean that we always end up
doing what our parents want---our verbal stream eventually develops its
own unique contours that creatively direct our behavior---but these
early developmental experiences influence us significantly. Vygotsky's
perspective doesn't merely explain how we learn to use our inner voice
to control ourselves; it also provides us with a way of understanding
how our internal conversations are "tuned" in part by our upbringing.
Decades of research on socialization indicate that our environments
influence how we view the world, including how we think about
self-control. In families, our parents model self-control for us when
we're children, and their approaches seep into our developing inner
voices. Our father might repeatedly tell us never to use violence to
resolve a conflict. Our mother might repeatedly tell us to never give up
after a disappointment. Over time, we repeat these things to ourselves,
and they begin to shape our own verbal streams. Of course, our parents'
authoritative voices are themselves shaped by broader cultural factors.
For example, in most Asian countries, standing out is frowned upon,
because it threatens social cohesion. In contrast, Western countries
like the United States place a premium on independence, leading parents
to applaud their children's individual pursuits. Religions and the
values they teach likewise bleed into our household norms. In short, the
voices of culture influence our parents' inner voices, which in turn
influence our own, and so on through the many cultures and generations
that combine to tune our minds. We are like Russian nesting dolls of
mental conversations. That said, the influence among culture, parents,
and children doesn't go in just one direction. The way children behave
can likewise impact their parents' voices, and we human beings of course
play a role in shaping and reshaping our greater cultures as well. In a
sense, then, our inner voice makes its home in us as children by going
from the outside in, until we later speak from the inside out and affect
those around us.

Recent research that Vygotsky didn't live to see has taken his theory
further, with studies demonstrating that children brought up in families
with rich communication patterns develop this facet of inner speech
earlier. Moreover, it turns out that having imaginary friends may spur
internal speech in children. In fact, emerging research suggests that
imaginary play promotes self-control, among many other desirable
qualities such as creative thinking, confidence, and good communication.
Another crucial way the inner voice helps us control ourselves is by
evaluating us as we strive toward goals. Almost like a tracking app on a
phone, the default state monitors us to see if we're meeting benchmarks
at work to get that end-of-the-year raise, if we're advancing on our
side-hustle dream of opening a restaurant, or if our relationship with
that friend we have a crush on is developing apace. This frequently
happens with a verbal thought popping in our mind much like an
appointment reminder appearing on your lock screen. In fact, spontaneous
thoughts related to goals are among the most frequent kind that fill our
mind. It's our inner voice alerting us to pay attention to an objective.
Part of reaching goals involves making the right choice when there is a
proverbial fork in the road, which is why our inner voice also allows us
to run mental simulations. For example, when we are engaged in creative
brainstorming about, say, the best way to do a presentation or the best
melodic progression for a song we're writing, we internally explore
different possible paths. Often even before writing the words for a
presentation or touching a musical instrument, we've already tapped our
introspective capacities to decide on the best permutation. The same
goes for figuring out how to deal with an interpersonal challenge, the
way Tony did while walking around New York thinking about his friends
who hadn't told him about their pregnancy. He was simulating whether he
should remain close or distance himself. This multiple-reality
brainstorming even happens while we are sleeping, in our dreams.
Historically, psychologists thought of dreams as a chamber of their own
in the mind, and very different from what happens during our waking
hours. Freud, of course, thought dreams were the royal road to the
unconscious, a locked box holding our repressed urges, and
psychoanalysis was the key that opened it. With our defenses down and
our civilized propriety turned

off while we slept, he thought, our demons came out and romped around,
revealing our desires. Then came early neuroscience, which took out all
the dark and naughty romance of psychoanalysis and replaced it with the
cold no-nonsense attitude of the physical workings of the brain. It said
that dreams were nothing more than the brain's way of interpreting
random brain-stem firings during REM sleep. Out the door went sexual
symbolism, which was entertaining if a bit loony, and in came the
mechanics of neurons, which was more scientifically grounded (and not at
all salacious). Present-day research with more advanced technology has
shown that our dreams in fact share many similarities with the
spontaneous verbal thoughts we experience when we are awake. It turns
out that our waking verbal mind converses with our sleeping one.
Fortunately, this doesn't produce Oedipal wish fulfillments. It can help
us. Emerging evidence suggests that dreams are often functional and
highly attuned to our practical needs. You can think of them as a
slightly zany flight simulator. They aid us in preparing for the future
by simulating events that are still to come, pointing our attention to
potentially real scenarios and even threats to be wary of. Although we
still have much to learn about how dreams affect us, at the end of the
day---or night, rather---they are simply stories in the mind. And sure
enough, in waking life, the inner voice pipes up loudly about the most
foundational psychological story of all: our identities. Our verbal
stream plays an indispensable role in the creation of our selves. The
brain constructs meaningful narratives through autobiographical
reasoning. In other words, we use our minds to write the story of our
lives, with us as the main character. Doing so helps us mature, figure
out our values and desires, and weather change and adversity by keeping
us rooted in a continuous identity. Language is integral to this process
because it smooths the jagged and seemingly unconnected fragments of
daily life into a cohesive through line. It helps us "storify" life. The
words of the mind sculpt the past, and thus set up a narrative for us to
follow into the future. By flitting back and forth between different
memories, our internal monologues weave a neural narrative of
recollections. It sews the past into the seams of our brain's
construction of our identity.

The brain's multitasking abilities are varied and vital, as is the inner
voice. But to truly understand its profound value, we must contemplate
what it would be like if our verbal thoughts were to disappear. As
improbable as this may sound, we don't have to merely imagine this
scenario. In some cases, it actually happens.

Going to La-La Land On December 10, 1996, Jill Bolte Taylor woke just as
she did every morning. A thirty-seven-year-old neuroanatomist, she
worked in a psychiatry lab at Harvard University, where she studied the
makeup of the brain. Her drive to map our cortical landscapes to
understand their cellular interactions and the behaviors they produced
grew out of her family history. Her brother had schizophrenia, and
though she couldn't expect to reverse his illness, it motivated her to
try to unravel the mysteries of the mind. She was well on her way to
doing so---that is, until the day her brain stopped functioning well.
Bolte Taylor got out of bed to do her morning exercise on a cardio
machine, but she didn't feel like herself. She had a pulsing pain behind
her eye, like an ice-cream headache that came and went, and came and
went. Then, once she started exercising, things got strange. While on
the machine, she felt her body slow down and her perception contract. "I
can no longer define the boundaries of my body," she later recalled. "I
can't define where I begin and where I end." Not only did she lose the
sense of her body in physical space, she also began to lose her sense of
who she was. She felt her emotions and memories drift away, as if they
were leaving her to take up residence elsewhere. The second-by-second
sparking of perceptions and reactions that characterized her normal
mental awareness faded. She felt her thoughts losing their shape, and
with them, her words. Her verbal stream slowed like a river drying up.
Her brain's linguistic machinery broke down. A blood vessel had popped
on the left side of her brain. She was having a stroke.

While her physical movements and linguistic faculties were drastically
encumbered, she managed to phone a colleague, who quickly gathered that
something was wrong. Soon after, Bolte Taylor found herself in the back
of an ambulance being taken to Massachusetts General Hospital. "I felt
my spirit surrender," she said. "I was no longer the choreographer of my
life." Sure that she was going to die, she said farewell to her life.
She didn't die. Later that afternoon she woke up in a hospital bed,
astonished that she was still alive, though her life wouldn't be the
same for a long time. Her inner voice as she had always known it had
departed. "My verbal thoughts were now inconsistent, fragmented, and
interrupted by an intermittent silence," she later recalled. "I was
alone. In the moment, I was alone with nothing but the rhythmic pulse of
my beating heart." She wasn't even alone with her thoughts, because she
didn't have thoughts as she'd had before. Her working memory wasn't
working, making it impossible to complete the simplest tasks. Her
phonological loop, it seemed, had unraveled. Her self-talk was silenced.
She was no longer a mental time traveler capable of revisiting the past
and imagining the future. She felt vulnerable in a way she had never
even imagined possible, as if she were spinning by herself in outer
space. She wondered, wordlessly, if words would ever return in full to
her mental life. Without verbal introspection, she ceased to be human in
the previous sense she had known. "Devoid of language and linear
processing," she wrote, "I felt disconnected from the life I had lived."
Most profoundly of all, she lost her identity. The narrative her inner
voice had allowed her to construct over nearly four decades erased
itself. "Those little voices inside your head," as she put it, had made
her her, but now they were silent. "So, was I really still me? How could
I still be Dr.Â Jill Bolte Taylor, when I no longer shared her life
experiences, thoughts, and emotional attachments?" When I imagine what
it would be like to go through what Jill Bolte Taylor experienced, it
fills me with panic. Losing the ability to talk to myself, to use
language to tap into my intuitions, stitch together my experiences into
a coherent whole, or plan for the future, sounds much

worse than a letter from a deranged stalker. Yet it's here where her
story gets stranger and even more fascinating. Bolte Taylor wasn't
frightened the way I imagine I or anyone else in her situation would
feel. Remarkably, she found a comfort like nothing she had ever felt
before when her lifelong internal conversation vanished. "The growing
void in my traumatized brain was entirely seductive," she later wrote.
"I welcomed the reprieve that the silence brought from the constant
chatter." She had gone, as she put it, to "la-la land." Being robbed of
language and memory, on the one hand, was terrifying and lonely. On the
other hand, it was ecstatically, euphorically liberating. Free from her
past identity, she could also be free from all her recurring painful
recollections, present stresses, and looming anxieties. Without her
inner voice she was free from chatter. To her, this trade-off felt worth
it. She later reflected that this was because she hadn't learned to
manage her buzzing inner world prior to her stroke. Like all of us, she
had trouble controlling her emotions when she got sucked into negative
spirals. Two and a half weeks after her stroke, Bolte Taylor would have
surgery to remove a golf-ball-sized blood clot from her brain. It would
take her eight years to fully recover. She continues to conduct research
on the brain while also sharing her story with the world. She emphasizes
the overwhelming sense of generosity and well-being she felt when her
inner critic was muted. She is now, as she describes it, "a devout
believer that paying attention to our self-talk is vitally important for
our mental health." What her experience shows us in singularly vivid
terms is how deeply we struggle with our inner voice---to the point
where the stream of verbal thoughts that allows us to function and think
and be ourselves could lead to expansively good feelings when it's gone.
This is striking evidence of how influential our inner voice can be.
Research bears out this phenomenon in less exceptional circumstances.
Not only can our thoughts taint experience. They can blot out nearly
everything else. A study published in 2010 drives home this point. The
scientists found that inner experiences consistently dwarf outer ones.
What participants were thinking about turned out to be a better
predictor of their happiness than what they were actually doing. This
speaks to a sour experience many

people have had: You're in a situation in which you should be happy
(spending time with friends, say, or celebrating an accomplishment), but
a ruminative thought swallows your mind. Your mood is defined not by
what you did but by what you thought about. The reason people experience
relief when their inner voice quiets isn't that it is a curse of our
evolution. As we've seen, we have a voice in our heads because it is a
unique gift that accompanies us from the streets of New York to our
sleeping dreams. It allows us to function in the world, achieve goals,
create, connect, and define who we are in wonderful ways. But when it
morphs into chatter, it is often so overwhelming that it can cause us to
lose sight of this and perhaps even wish we didn't have an inner voice
at all. Before we get into what science teaches us about how to control
our verbal mental stream, though, we need to understand the harmful
effects of chatter that require us to intervene in the first place. When
you take a close look at what our destructive verbal thoughts can do to
us---to our minds, bodies, and relationships---you realize that shedding
a few tears on the streets of New York is getting off easy.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï´ï·ï¯

When Talking to Oursel es Back res

T

he first wild pitch seemed like a fluke. It was October 3, 2000, game
one between the St.Â Louis Cardinals and the Atlanta Braves in the first
round of the National League playoffs. The Cardinal pitcher Rick Ankiel
watched the ball he had just thrown bounce off the ground past his
catcher and then hit the backstop. As the runner on first jogged to
second, the crowd made a sound of modest, almost supportive
surprise---he was, after all, playing on his home turf at Busch Stadium
in St.Â Louis---though there was no reason to think his wild throw
presaged any shift in the balance of the inning. In baseball, pitches
occasionally get away from even the best pitchers, never mind the fact
that Ankiel wasn't just any pitcher. When he was drafted right out of
high school, a seventeen-year-old with a ninety-four-mile-an-hour
fastball, scouts and commentators believed Ankiel had the potential to
be one of the best pitchers the game had seen in decades. His debut in
the majors two years later didn't disappoint. During his first full
season in 2000, he struck out 194 batters, racking up eleven wins to
help his team reach the playoffs. Everything pointed to a spectacular
career. It was no surprise, then, that he was chosen as the starter for
game one against the Braves in the playoffs that October. All he had to
do was the thing he did best in life: throw a baseball. Ankiel tried to
forget the wild pitch. It was an anomaly for him, and there was nothing
to worry about. It was only the third inning and his team

had already jumped to a dramatic 6--0 lead. On top of that, the pitch
hadn't even been that wild; it had just ricocheted off the ground the
wrong way and gotten away from his catcher. He'd felt good going into
the inning, so he would just shake it off. And yet a prickly nettle of a
thought lodged itself in his mind as he gathered himself on the mound.
Man, he said to himself, I just threw a wild pitch on national TV. What
he didn't know was that he did have something to worry about. Moments
later, after reading the signs from his catcher, Ankiel uncoiled his
explosive, left-handed windup and...threw another wild pitch. The crowd
oohed a bit louder and longer this time, as if sensing something were
off. The runner on second ran to third base. While the darkeyed,
twenty-one-year-old Ankiel chewed his gum and kept an unreadable facial
expression, inside he was anything but composed. As his catcher
retrieved the ball again and the seconds passed beneath the afternoon
sun, he felt his mind slipping out of his control and into the hands of
what he would come to call "the monster"---his cruel inner critic, a
stream of verbal thoughts so vicious they could undo years of hard work,
its voice louder than the fifty-two thousand fans in the stands.
Anxiety. Panic. Fear. His own immense vulnerability---a young player
with everything on the line---was something he could no longer ignore.
Ankiel might have looked like the shining embodiment of the American
dream---a small-town kid from Florida making good on his exceptional
gift ---but his childhood belied such a picturesque narrative. The son
of a verbally and physically abusive father who was both a petty
criminal and an addict, he knew depths of emotional pain beyond his
years. Which is why baseball was more than just a career for him. It was
a hallowed, safe place where he felt good, where things were easy, where
a kind of joy was built in, unlike his family life. Only now something
strange and seemingly uncontrollable was starting to happen,
overwhelming his senses and flooding him with terror. Still, he was
determined to rally. He narrowed his focus in on his weight, on his
stance, on his arm. All he had to do was make the machinery of his
windup click into place. Then he wound up again.

And threw another wild pitch. And another. And another. Before the
Cardinals gave up any more runs, Ankiel was pulled out of the game. He
disappeared into the dugout accompanied by "the monster" inside him. His
showing on the mound that day was both embarrassing and unexpected. The
last time a pitcher had thrown five wild pitches in one inning had been
more than a hundred years earlier. But it wouldn't have retrospectively
gone down as one of the most painful-to-watch performances in baseball
history were it not for what soon followed. When Ankiel was called on to
pitch against the Mets nine days later, the same thing happened. The
monster reappeared and he threw more wild pitches. Once again, he was
pulled from the mound, this time before the first inning was over. And
yet the humiliation didn't end there, though his brief career as a
major-league pitcher effectively did. At the start of the following
season, Ankiel pitched a few more games during which he had to drink
alcohol to stay his nerves before taking the field, but even the liquor
couldn't help calm his mind. His pitching didn't improve. He was sent to
the minors, where he spent a dispiriting three years before deciding to
retire from baseball in 2005 at the tragically premature age of
twenty-five. "I can't do this anymore," he told his coach. Rick Ankiel
would never pitch professionally again.

Unlinking and the Magical Number Four Rick Ankiel isn't the first elite
athlete to lose his superpower---to suddenly have the skill he was best
at stop being a skill altogether. Time and again, people who have spent
years mastering a talent watch it break down like a decrepit old Chevy
when chatter hijacks their inner voice. This phenomenon isn't restricted
to athletes. It can happen to anyone who has

become skilled at a learned task---from teachers who memorize their
lesson plans, to start-up founders with rehearsed spiels they pitch to
investors, to surgeons who perform complex operations that took them
years to master. The explanation for why these skills fail ultimately
relates to how the conversations we have with ourselves influence our
attention. At any given moment, we are bombarded with
information---countless sights and sounds, and the thoughts and feelings
that these stimuli spark. Attention is what allows us to filter out the
things that don't matter so that we can focus on the things that do. And
although much of our attention is involuntary, like when we
automatically turn toward a loud noise, one of the features that make
humans so unique is our ability to consciously concentrate on the tasks
that require our attention. When we find ourselves overwhelmed by
emotion, as Ankiel did on that fall day in 2000, one of the things our
inner voice does is harness our attention, narrowing it in on the
obstacles we encounter to the exclusion of practically everything else.
This serves us well most of the time, but not when it comes to
exercising our attention to wrangle an automatic, learned skill, as
pitching was for Ankiel. To understand why this is, it's useful to look
at what goes right when athletes' automatized behaviors lift them into
the most impressive heights of performance. On August 11, 2019, the
American gymnast Simone Biles made sports history when she became the
first woman to ever land a triple-double flip at an official competition
during her floor routine at the U.S. Gymnastics Championships. As one
commentator wrote, "It's a move that requires incredible, almost
superhuman strength, coordination, and training." To execute it by
deliberately thinking about each movement would be impossible, because
everything happens in the air, where the laws of physics play out in an
instant---gravity versus a body. The seemingly impossible move Biles
pulled off required her to spin her body around two axes at the same
time and do two backflips while also spinning three times, hence the
name triple double. We can think of her perfect execution of the move as
the culmination of all the automatized movements her brain had mastered
over the years: running, jumping, handsprings, backflips, twists, and
landing. To achieve her triple double, she linked into one breathtaking
feat a set of movements that took years to

learn but that eventually stopped needing her brain's conscious control.
Biles's inner voice didn't direct her every action, though it likely
rejoiced as the crowd went wild. Like all athletes, Biles built her
triple double out of a series of individual behaviors that she linked
together through practice. Eventually, the separate elements in the
chain of movements merged into one seamless action. Her automatic bodily
mechanics, spurred by her brain's ability to link them together
(combined with fabulous DNA), propelled Biles into sports history. Until
Ankiel's meltdown, he seemed as if he were on a similar trajectory, with
flawless movements and a preternaturally strong arm. So, what happened
that day on the mound? He unlinked. Ankiel's verbal stream turned into a
spotlight that shined his attention too brightly on the individual
physical components of his pitching motion, thereby seeming to
inadvertently dismantle it. After throwing the first few wild pitches,
he mentally stepped back and focused on the mechanics of his throw: the
choreographed movements that involved his hips, legs, and arm. On the
surface, that seems wise and intuitive. He was calling on his brain to
fix a scripted behavior it had previously successfully carried out
literally tens of thousands of times. Which is precisely where things
went wrong. When you're completing your taxes, it pays to double-check
your calculations to make sure you've done everything right, even if
you're an experienced accountant. But for well-worn, automatic behaviors
that you're trying to execute under pressure, like pitching, this very
same tendency leads us to break down the complicated scripts that we've
learned to execute without thinking. This is exactly what our inner
voice's tendency to immerse us in a problem does. It overfocuses our
attention on the parts of a behavior that only functions as the sum of
its parts. The result: paralysis by analysis. Chatter ruined Ankiel's
career as a pitcher, but automatic behaviors aren't the only kind of
skill that can backfire when our inner voice betrays us. After all, one
of the things that distinguishes us from every other animal species is
our ability not just to execute automatic behaviors but to use our mind
to consciously focus our attention.

It is our ability to reason logically, solve problems, multitask, and
control ourselves that allows us to manage work, family, and so many
other crucial parts of our lives with wisdom, creativity, and
intelligence. To do this, we have to be deliberate and attentive and
flexible, which we are capable of doing thanks to what we can think of
as the CEO of the human brain---our executive functions, which are also
vulnerable to the incursions of an unsupportive inner voice. Our
executive functions are the foundation of our ability to steer our
thoughts and behavior in the ways we desire. Supported largely by a
network of prefrontal brain regions located behind our forehead and
temples, their job is to intervene when our instinctual processes aren't
sufficient and we need to consciously guide our behavior. They allow us
to keep relevant information active in our mind (working memory is a
part of executive functions), filter out extraneous information, block
out distractions, play with ideas, point our attention where it needs to
go, and exercise self-control---like helping us resist the temptation to
open a new browser tab and go down a tangential Wikipedia rabbit hole.
In short, without our executive functions we wouldn't be able to
function in the world. The reason your brain needs this type of
neurological leadership is that paying attention, reasoning wisely,
thinking creatively, and executing tasks often require you to leave
automatic mode and exercise conscious effort. And doing this asks a lot
of your executive functions because they have a limited capacity. Like a
computer that slows down when it has too many programs open, your
executive functions perform worse as the demands placed on them
increase. The classic illustration of this limited capacity, known as
the magical number four, has to do with our ability to hold between
three and five units of information in the mind at any given time. Take
an American phone number. Memorizing the number 200-350-2765 is much
easier than memorizing 2003502765. In the first instance, you've grouped
the numbers, so you're memorizing three pieces of information; in the
latter, you're trying to memorize an unbroken string of ten pieces of
information, placing more demands on the system.

Your labor-intense executive functions need every neuron they can get,
but a negative inner voice hogs our neural capacity. Verbal rumination
concentrates our attention narrowly on the source of our emotional
distress, thus stealing neurons that could better serve us. In effect,
we jam our executive functions up by attending to a "dual task"---the
task of doing whatever it is we want to do and the task of listening to
our pained inner voice. Neurologically, that's how chatter divides and
blurs our attention. All of us are familiar with the distractions of a
negative verbal stream. Have you ever tried to read a book or complete a
task requiring focus after a bad fight with someone you love? It's next
to impossible. All the resulting negative thoughts consume your
executive functions because your inner critic and its ranting have taken
over corporate headquarters, raiding your neuronal resources. The
problem for most of us, however, is that usually we're engaged in
activities with much higher stakes than retaining information in a book.
We're doing our jobs, pursuing our dreams, interacting with others, and
being evaluated. Chatter in the form of repetitive anxious thought is a
marvelous saboteur when it comes to focused tasks. Countless studies
reveal its debilitating effects. It leads students to perform worse on
tests, produces stage fright and a tendency to catastrophize among
artistic performers, and undermines negotiations in business. One study
found, for instance, that anxiety led people to make low initial offers,
exit discussions early, and earn less money. This is a very nice way of
saying they failed at their jobs ---because of chatter. On any given
day, the keel of our inner voice can be thrown askew by an infinite
number of things. When this happens, we have trouble focusing our minds
to address the inevitable daily challenges we face, which often produces
still more turbulence in our inner dialogues. Quite naturally, when
we're floundering like this, we look for a way out of our predicament.
So, what exactly do we do? That's the question a middle-aged,
mild-mannered psychologist became intrigued with some thirty years ago.
His research would raise profound questions about the costs of chatter
that go far beyond our ability to focus our attention. Our inner voice
affects our social lives as well.

A Social Repellent In the late 1980s, a bespectacled Belgian
psychologist named Bernard RimÃ© decided to examine whether experiencing
the kinds of strong negative emotions that characterize chatter lead
people to engage in a very social process: talking. Over the course of
several studies, RimÃ© brought people into his laboratory and asked them
whether they talked about negative experiences from their past with
others. Then he turned his focus to the present and asked people to
record in diaries over the course of several weeks each time they
confronted an upsetting situation and whether they discussed it with
members of their social networks. He also ran experiments in which he
provoked participants in the lab and then watched if they shared their
reactions with others nearby. Again and again, RimÃ© landed on the same
finding: People feel compelled to talk to others about their negative
experiences. But that wasn't all. The more intense the emotion was, the
more they wanted to talk about it. Additionally, they returned to
talking about what had occurred more often, doing so repeatedly over the
course of hours, days, weeks, and months, and sometimes even for the
remainder of their lives. RimÃ©'s finding proved true regardless of
people's age or education level. It was characteristic of men as well as
women. It even carried across geography and cultures. From Asia to the
Americas to Europe, he kept finding the same thing: Strong emotions
acted like a jet propellant, blasting people off to share their
experiences. It seemed to be a law of human nature. The only exceptions
to this rule were cases in which people felt shame, which they often
wished to conceal, or certain forms of trauma, which they wanted to
avoid dwelling on. Such consistency in a finding was stunning, though it
may sound like a confirmation of the obvious. As we all know, people
talk a lot about intense emotions. It's not as if we go around calling
friends to say, "Hey, I feel fairly normal today." It's the highs and
lows that leap from the verbal stream in our minds to the words that
leave our mouths.

While this sounds normal and harmless, repeatedly sharing our negative
inner voice with others produces one of the great ironies of chatter and
social life: We voice the thoughts in our minds to the sympathetic
listeners we know in search of their support, but doing so excessively
ends up pushing away the people we need most. It's as though the pain of
chatter makes people less sensitive to the normal social cues that tell
us when enough is enough. To be clear, this doesn't mean that talking to
others about your problems is harmful per se. But it highlights how
chatter can transform an otherwise helpful experience into something
negative. Many of us have a limited threshold for how much venting we
can listen to, even from the people we love, as well as how often we can
tolerate this venting while not feeling listened to ourselves.
Relationships thrive on reciprocity. That's one of the reasons why
therapists charge us for their time and friends don't. When this
conversational balance becomes lopsided, social connections fray. To
make matters worse, when this occurs, the people who are overventing and
inadvertently alienating those around them are less capable of solving
problems. This makes it harder for them to fix the breach in their
relationships, begetting a vicious cycle that can end with a toxic
outcome: loneliness and isolation. For a heightened example of how this
process of progressive social isolation operates, we can look to that
widespread emotional tumult known as middle school. One study tracked
more than one thousand middle schoolers for seven months and found that
kids who were prone to rumination reported talking with their peers more
than their low-rumination counterparts. Yet this did more harm than
good. It predicted a host of painful results: being socially excluded
and rejected, being the target of gossip and rumors by their peers, and
even being threatened with violence. Unfortunately, in this case, what
is true of preteens and teens crosses over to adulthood. Furthermore, it
turns out it doesn't matter much even if you have a legitimate reason
for venting; overvoicing your chatter can still push people away. One
study that focused on grieving adults found that people who were prone
to ruminate reached out for more social support after their loss, which
is normal. The uncomfortable twist, though, is that

they reported experiencing more social friction and less emotional
support in their relationships as a result. Uncontrolled emotional
sharing isn't the only type of social repellent that chatter enables.
People who perseverate on conflicts are also more likely to behave
aggressively. One experiment showed that cuing people to ruminate about
how they felt after being insulted by an experimenter who
undiplomatically criticized an essay they had written led them to be
more hostile with the person who insulted them. When given the chance to
administer loud blasts of noise to the experimenter, they did so more
than people who didn't ruminate. In other words, the more I stew over
what you did to me, the more I keep those negative feelings alive, and
the more likely I am to act aggressively against you as a result.
Chatter also leads us to displace our aggression against people when
they don't deserve it. Our boss upsets us, for example, and we take it
out on our kids. But none of this research considers our digital lives.
In the age of online sharing, RimÃ©'s work on emotions and our social
lives has acquired a new urgency. Facebook and other social media
applications like it have provided us with a world-altering platform for
sharing our inner voice and listening in on the inner voices of others
(or at least what other people want us to think they're thinking about).
Indeed, the first thing people see when they log in to Facebook is the
prompt asking them to broadcast their answer to this question: "What's
on your mind?" And broadcast we do. In 2020, close to two and a half
billion people use Facebook and Twitter---almost a third of the world's
population---and they frequently do so to share their private
ruminations. It's worth highlighting that there's nothing inherently bad
about sharing on social media. In the long historical timeline of our
species, it's simply a new environment that we find ourselves spending a
great deal of time in, and environments aren't good or bad per se.
Whether they help or harm us depends on how we interact with them. That
said, there are two features of social media that are worrying when you
consider the intense drive we have to air our stream of thoughts:
empathy and time. It's hard to overstate the importance of empathy both
individually and collectively. It's what allows us to forge meaningful
connections with

others, it's one of the reasons why we so often find ourselves venting
(we seek the empathy of others), and it's also one of the mechanisms
that holds communities together. It's a capacity we evolved because it
helps our species survive. Research shows that observing other people's
emotional responses--- seeing someone wince or hearing a quiver in a
voice---can be a potent route to triggering empathy. But online, the
subtle physical gestures, microexpressions, and vocal intonations that
elicit empathic responses in daily life are absent. As a result, our
brains are deprived of information that serves a critical social
function: inhibiting cruelty and antisocial behavior. In other words,
less empathy all too frequently leads to trolling and cyberbullying,
which have grave consequences. Cyberbullying, for example, has been
linked to longer episodes of depression, anxiety, and substance abuse,
as well as several toxic physical effects like headaches, sleep
disturbances, gastrointestinal ills, and changes in how well
stressresponse systems operate. The passage of time is likewise
essential to helping us manage our emotional lives, especially when it
comes to processing upsetting experiences. When we identify someone to
talk to off-line, we often have to wait until we see the person or until
they're available to chat. While one waits for that person, something
magical happens: Time passes, which allows us to reflect on what we're
feeling and thinking about in ways that often temper our emotions.
Indeed, research supports the common idea that "time heals" or the
advice to "just give it time." Now let's transplant ourselves to the
parallel world of digital life and our ability to access it anytime
thanks to our smart devices. Social media allows us to connect with
others in the immediate aftermath of a negative emotional response,
before time provides us with the opportunity to rethink how we're
feeling or what we're planning to do. Thanks to twenty-firstcentury
connectivity, during the very peak of our inner flare-ups, right when
our inner voice wants to rant from the rooftops, it can. We post. We
tweet. We comment. With the passage of time and physical elicitors of
empathy removed, social media becomes a place amenable to the unseemly
sides of the inner voice. This can lead to increased conflict,
hostility, and chatter for both

individuals and arguably society as a whole. It also means that we
overshare more than ever before. Similar to talking for too long and too
frequently to others about your problems, overly emotional posts
irritate and alienate others. They violate unspoken norms, and users
wish people who overshare online would look for support from friends
off-line. Unsurprisingly, people with depression--- which is fueled by
the verbal stream---share more negative personal content on social media
yet actually perceive their network as less helpful than nondepressed
people do. But social media doesn't just provide us with a platform to
(over)share the thoughts and feelings streaming through our head, and
the ways it derails our internal dialogues don't exclusively relate to
empathy and time. Social media also allows us to shape what we want
other people to believe is happening in our lives, and our choices about
what to post can fuel other people's chatter. The human need to
self-present is powerful. We craft our appearances to influence how
people perceive us all the time. This has always been the case, but then
along came social media to give us exponentially more control over how
we do this. It allows us to skillfully curate the presentations of our
lives---the proverbial photoshopped version of life, with the low points
and less aesthetically pleasing moments left out. Engaging in this
self-presentation exercise can make us feel better, satisfying our own
need to appear positively in the eyes of others and buoying our inner
voice. But there's a catch. Although posting glamour shots of our lives
may lead us to feel better, that very same act can cause the users who
view our posts to feel worse. That's because at the same time that we
are motivated to present ourselves positively, we are also driven to
compare ourselves with others. And social media switches the
social-comparison hardware in our brain into overdrive. A study my
colleagues and I published in 2015 demonstrated, for example, that the
more time people spent passively scrolling through Facebook, peering in
on the lives of others, the more envy they experienced and the worse
they subsequently felt. If broadcasting our feelings on social media and
participating in its culture of self-curation have so many
chatter-inducing effects, it's

reasonable to ask why we continue to share. One answer to that question
has to do with the trade-off that often comes from engaging in behaviors
that feel good in the moment but have negative consequences over time.
Research shows that the same brain circuitry that becomes active when we
are attracted to someone or consume desirable substances (everything
from cocaine to chocolate) also activates when we share information
about ourselves with others. In a particularly compelling illustration,
one study by Harvard neuroscientists published in 2012 showed that
people would prefer to share information about themselves with others
than receive money. The social high, in other words, is like a neuronal
high, a delicious hit for our dopamine receptors. The point of all this
is to say that both online and off-line, when we let our chatter drive
social behaviors, we frequently crash into a range of negative outcomes.
The most damaging one for internal and external conversations is that,
quite often, we end up finding less support. This starts a vicious cycle
of social isolation, which further wounds us. In fact, if you stop and
listen, you'll notice that many people actually use the language of
physical "pain" to describe how they feel when they're rejected by
others. In languages across the globe, from Inuktitut to German, Hebrew
to Hungarian, Cantonese to Bhutanese, people use words related to
physical injury to describe emotional pain---"damaged," "wound,"
"injured," among many others. It turns out the reason they do so is not
just that they have a knack for metaphorical expression. One of the most
chilling discoveries I've had in my career is that chatter doesn't
simply hurt people in an emotional sense; it has physical implications
for our body as well, from the way we experience physical pain all the
way down to the way our genes operate in our cells.

e Piano Inside Our Cells One by one they arrived in our basement
laboratory: the heartbroken of New York City.

It was 2007. My colleagues and I had begun a study to better understand
what emotional pain really looked like in the brain. Instead of finding
just any volunteers to participate---which would have meant finding a
method for making them feel bad in the lab in some effective but somehow
still ethical way---we sought out forty volunteers who were already
hurting: people who had recently suffered heartbreak, one of the most
potent elicitors of emotional torment that we know. We posted ads in the
subway and in parks looking for people who had just been rejected from
monogamous relationships that had lasted at least six months: HAVE YOU
RECENTLY HAD A DIFFICULT, UNWANTED BREAKUP? STILL HAVE FEELINGS FOR AN
EX-PARTNER? PARTICIPATE IN AN EXPERIMENT ON HOW THE BRAIN PROCESSES
EMOTIONAL AND PHYSICAL PAIN!

In a city of eight million, volunteers were easy to find. We did do one
slightly provocative thing, though. We had them bring a photo of the
person who'd dumped them. Having the photos wasn't gratuitous. By asking
the volunteers to lie in an MRI scanner, look at the object of their
unrequited love, and recall how they felt during the precise moment of
their breakup, we were hoping to obtain a neural snapshot of chatter.
But we also wanted to know something else: whether the way the brain
processes an experience of emotional pain was similar to how it
processes physical pain. To get at the latter, we also applied heat to
their arms that felt like a hot cup of coffee. Afterward, we compared
the MRI results from when they looked at the photo of their lost love
with those of the hot-coffee simulation. Incredibly, there was a high
degree of overlap in brain regions that play a role in our sensory
experience of physical pain. In other words, our results suggested that
emotional pain had a physical component as well. These and a host of
findings from other labs that emerged around the same time were
beginning to demonstrate how admittedly fuzzy concepts

like social pain influence what happens in our bodies, especially when
it comes to stress. It's a clichÃ© of the twenty-first century to say
that stress kills. It's a modern epidemic that contributes to
productivity losses in the United States alone that amount to \$500
billion annually. Yet we frequently lose sight of the fact that stress
is an adaptive response. It helps our bodies respond quickly and
efficiently to potentially threatening situations. But stress stops
being adaptive when it becomes chronic---when the fight-or-flight alarm
fails to stop signaling. And sure enough, a main culprit in keeping
stress active is our negative verbal stream. Threat includes physical
danger, of course, but it also encompasses a range of more common
experiences. For example, when we encounter situations that we aren't
sure we can handle: losing a job or starting a new one, having a
conflict with a friend or family member, moving to a new city, facing a
health challenge, grieving the death of a loved one, getting a divorce,
living in an unsafe neighborhood. These are all adverse circumstances
capable of triggering a threat response similar to the one we get when
we are in immediate physical danger. When the threat trip wire in our
brain gets crossed, our bodies quickly mobilize themselves to protect
us, much like a country mobilizing its army for a coordinated strike
against an enemy invader. Phase one begins instantly in a cone-shaped
region of the brain called the hypothalamus. When your hypothalamus
receives signals from other parts of your brain indicating that threat
exists, it triggers a chain of chemical reactions that release
adrenaline into your bloodstream. The adrenaline causes your heart to
beat fast, your blood pressure and energy levels to rise, and your
senses to sharpen. Moments later, the stress hormone cortisol is
released to keep your jet engines firing and maintain your energy
levels. While all of this is happening, chemical messengers are also
working to curb the systems in your body that aren't vital to your
ability to respond to an immediate threat, like your digestive and
reproductive systems. If you've ever noticed your appetite for food or
sex disappear when you're in the midst of a crisis, these chemical
messengers are the reason why. All of these changes have a singular
goal: to enhance your ability to respond quickly to the stressors you
face, regardless of

whether you're actively confronting those stressors in the moment (like
seeing a burglar enter your home) or simply conjuring them up in your
mind. Yes, we can create a chronic physiological stress reaction just by
thinking. And when our inner voice fuels that stress, it can be
devastating to our health. Countless studies have linked the long-term
activation of our stressresponse systems with illnesses that span the
gamut from cardiovascular disease to sleep disorders to various forms of
cancer. This explains how stressful experiences such as feeling
chronically isolated and alone can have drastic effects on our health.
Indeed, not having a strong social-support network is a risk factor for
death as large as smoking more than fifteen cigarettes a day, and a
greater risk factor than consuming excessive amounts of alcohol, not
exercising, being obese, or living in a highly polluted city. Chronic
negative thoughts can also push into the territory of mental illness,
though this isn't to say chatter is the same thing as clinical
depression, anxiety, or post-traumatic stress disorder. Repetitive
negative thinking isn't synonymous with these conditions, but it's a
common feature of them. Indeed, scientists consider it a transdiagnostic
risk factor for many disorders, meaning that chatter underlies a variety
of mental illnesses. But here is what is most frightening about the ways
in which chatter feeds stress. When our panic response is prolonged, the
gradual physiological erosion it causes can harm more than our ability
to fight sickness and keep our body running smoothly. It can change the
way our DNA influences our health. When I was in college, I learned a
simple formula: Genes + Environment = Who We Are. In class after class,
my professors told me that when it came to the shaping of human life,
the effects of genes and environment didn't mix. Nurture was in one box,
and Nature was in another. This was conventional wisdom for a long
time---until suddenly it wasn't. To many a scientist's surprise, new
research suggests that this equation couldn't be further from the truth.
Just because you have a certain type of gene doesn't mean it actually
affects you. What determines who we are is whether those genes are
turned on or off.

One way to think about this is to imagine that your DNA is like a piano
buried deep in your cells. The keys on the piano are your genes, which
can be played in a variety of ways. Some keys will never be pressed.
Others will be struck frequently and in steady combinations. Part of
what distinguishes me from you and you from everyone else in the world
is how these keys are pressed. That's gene expression. It's the genetic
recital within your cells that plays a role in forming how your body and
mind work. Our inner voice, it turns out, likes to tickle our genetic
ivories. The way we talk to ourselves can influence which keys get
played. The UCLA professor of medicine Steve Cole has spent his career
studying how nature and nurture collide in our cells. Over the course of
numerous studies he and his colleagues discovered that experiencing
chatter-fueled chronic threat influences how our genes are expressed.
Cole and others have found that a similar set of inflammation genes are
expressed more strongly among people who experience chronic threat,
regardless of whether those feelings emerge from feeling lonely or
dealing with the stress of poverty or the diagnoses of disease. This
happens because our cells interpret the experience of chronic
psychological threat as a viscerally hostile situation akin to being
physically attacked. When our internal conversations activate our threat
system frequently over time, they send messages to our cells that
trigger the expression of inflammation genes, which are meant to protect
us in the short term but cause harm in the long term. At the same time,
the cells carrying out normal daily functions, like warding off viral
pathogens, are suppressed, opening the way for illnesses and infections.
Cole calls this effect of chatter "death at the molecular level."

Asset or Liability? Learning about the effects that our negative
internal dialogues can have on our minds, relationships, and bodies can
be deeply unsettling. As a scientist steeped in this work, I often can't
help but think how this research applies

to my own life and the lives of those I love. I'd be lying if I told you
I didn't worry each time I see one of my daughters fretting over
something. And yet, if I look around me, I see examples that offer hope.
I see students who go from insecure freshmen drowning in self-doubt to
confident seniors ready to make contributions to the world. I see people
who face tremendous hardships find ways to connect with others and
receive support from their social networks. And I see those who have
lived with chronic stress attain healthy lives. As a young woman in
Poland, my grandmother Dora escaped the Nazis by hiding in the forest a
whole terrifying year, and yet she still managed to live seventy more
resilient, joyful years in the United States. What these important
counterexamples bring me back to is that great puzzle of the human mind:
how our inner voice can be both a liability and an asset. The words
streaming through our heads can unravel us, but they can also drive us
toward meaningful accomplishments...if we know how to control them. At
the same time that our species evolved the inner voice, which can drown
us in chatter, we also co-evolved tools to turn it into our greatest
strength. Just look at Rick Ankiel, who returned to the major leagues in
2007---not as a pitcher, but as an outfielder who still had to contend
with the pressures of playing in front of tens of thousands of fans.
Ankiel would play in the majors for another seven years, known for his
rocket arm in the outfield and his explosive swing at the plate. He was
the pitcher who'd lost his career, he wrote, "at about the worst
possible time, spent nearly five years fighting that with a
determination that bordered on obsession, and turned up the hitter who
could put a ball in the top deck and the outfielder whose arm was again
golden. It was all so marvelous and strange." Even stranger and more
marvelous, in 2018, four years after retiring, Ankiel took the pitching
mound at an exhibition game of former professional players, the first
time he'd done so in public in nearly twenty years since his incident
against the Braves. He faced one batter and struck him out. Now, to
begin learning the hidden techniques for harnessing our inner voice, we
need look no further than one of the more remarkable students I've ever
taught. A spy from West Philadelphia.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï´ï¨ï²ï¥ï¥

Zooming Out

"H

ave you ever killed someone?" the examiner asked. If she had been
anywhere else, with anyone else, and if her future hadn't been hanging
in the balance with this absurd yet apparently crucial question, she
would've rolled her eyes. "Like I told you last time," Tracey said. "No,
I have never killed anyone." Of course, I haven't, she thought. I'm
seventeen! I'm not a killer. This was her second polygraph with the
National Security Agency, the United States' highly secretive
intelligence organization. Tracey's body--- her heart rate and her
breathing---had betrayed her when she was asked this question the first
time around, and the squiggly readout indicated that she was lying. Now,
two months later, she found herself sitting in the same nondescript
office in the middle of Maryland undergoing a second polygraph test.
What if they don't believe me again? she wondered, her inner voice
providing an anxious running commentary as the examiner looked at her
inscrutably. She knew the answer to her own question: If they didn't
believe her, the future she had been dreaming of would disappear. ---

For as long as Tracey could remember, she knew she wanted more than the
life she was born into. School and learning had always come easy to her,
even if lots of other things hadn't. She grew up in a tough neighborhood
in West Philadelphia, and although her family wasn't poor, money placed
limitations on her future. During her freshman year in high school,
Tracey learned about a program at a boarding school in the Northeast
that allowed gifted students from across the country to complete the
last two years of high school on an accelerated track that set them up
for success in elite colleges. While the thought of leaving her family
and uprooting her existence to a new environment was daunting, the
prospect of meeting new people, being challenged intellectually, and
escaping the life she had known until then appealed to her. She worked
hard on the application and got in. Boarding school exposed Tracey to a
new world of friends and ideas that, for the first time in her life,
truly tested her. Although she sometimes felt out of place amid her
mostly white peers from privileged backgrounds, she was happy. As one of
the few African American students in her program, Tracey frequently
found herself invited to events to help raise money for the school.
Stories like hers tended to open the wallets of wealthy donors. During
one such event, she met a man named Bobby Inman, the former director of
the U.S. National Security Agency. During their conversation, Inman told
her about a highly selective undergraduate training program the NSA
offered to the country's most talented and patriotic students. He
encouraged her to apply. She did and the NSA called her in for the
interview in which she failed her first polygraph test, making her doubt
that her dreams would become a reality. The second time around, however,
she managed to control her nerves, and the NSA no longer suspected her
of murder, if they even really had in the first place. Her life was
about to change in dramatic ways, though her first polygraph experience
would end up being a harbinger of things to come: the challenges of
managing her inner voice. At first blush, the terms of the scholarship
were everything she wanted. The NSA would cover the entire cost of
Tracey's college education and provide her with a generous monthly
stipend. Of course, there were

conditions. She would have to spend her summers training to become a top
secret analyst and then work for the NSA for at least six years after
graduating. Still, it was an incredible opportunity, especially when she
got into Harvard that spring. Tracey had earned herself a free Ivy
League education and a thrilling future. A few weeks before classes at
Harvard began, she got her first taste of what working with the NSA
would be like. During her weeklong onboarding, she received top secret
clearances allowing her to access highly classified information. She
also learned about the details of the restrictions that came along with
her scholarship. She could major only in a handful of subjects that were
central to the NSA's interests: subjects like electrical engineering,
computer science, and math. She couldn't date or maintain close
friendships with students from other countries. She couldn't study
abroad. She was discouraged from playing varsity sports. Slowly but
surely Tracey's scholarship, her golden ticket, was morphing into a pair
of golden handcuffs. While other freshmen in her dorm mingled freely,
Tracey found herself on guard. In the past, she had been the one
profiled. Now at mixers she was doing the profiling, quickly scanning
people's faces and vocal intonations for clues about where they came
from out of fear that she might become friends with---or even worse,
perhaps even feel attracted to---someone from a distant land. She felt
likewise constricted by the math and engineering classes she was
enrolled in, which were unlike the excitingly diverse courses so many of
her peers were taking. As she hurried along the treelined paths of
Harvard Yard between classes, her thoughts curled inward on all the
not-great things about this supposedly great opportunity. She wondered
if she had made a mistake. Time passed. As she went from being a
freshman to a sophomore and then a junior, Tracey felt increasingly
lonely. She was drowning, as she put it, in her "inner dialogue." She
couldn't talk about how she spent her summers---the training in
cryptography and circuit-board building, or learning how to scale
rooftops to splice antennas. But her feelings of isolation were only one
source of stress. Another was the fact that engineering, one of the most
challenging majors at Harvard, was proving to be the hardest academic
struggle she'd ever faced, and if her grades dipped

below a 3.0 GPA, she would be kicked out of the NSA program and required
to pay the government back the money it had already paid her---a
terrifying possibility. The stream of her ever more negative inner voice
consumed her. Ruminations about what would happen if she didn't make the
grades she needed would spike before her tests. Consumed by anxiety, she
began compulsively chewing on the tip of her pencil and twirling her
hair during exams. Her nervous tics provided her with a strange sense of
comfort. Despite her best attempts to maintain the outward appearance
that everything was okay, her body disappointed her once again, in a
different way than it had during her first polygraph exam. Precisely
when she began to stress out about her grades, she would develop cystic
acne on her face, pus-filled pimples beneath the top layer of her skin
that required cortisone injections. It was as though the chatter brewing
beneath her surface were too extreme to contain. She didn't know how
much more she could take. She felt as if she had two options: fail out
or drop out.

Becoming a Fly on the Wall Tracey's story, like the stories of most
people whose internal conversations become pools of negativity, is an
exercise in distance---the distance we do or don't have from our
problems. We can think of the mind as a lens and our inner voice as a
button that zooms it either in or out. In the simplest sense, chatter is
what happens when we zoom in close on something, inflaming our emotions
to the exclusion of all the alternative ways of thinking about the issue
that might cool us down. In other words, we lose perspective. This
dramatically narrowed view of one's situation magnifies adversity and
allows the negative side of the inner voice to play, enabling rumination
and its companions: stress, anxiety, and depression. Of course,
narrowing your attention isn't a problem in and of itself. To the
contrary, it's often essential to helping us address challenging
situations and the feelings that arise from them. But when we find
ourselves stuck on our problems and lose the

ability to flexibly zoom out---to gain perspective---that's when our
inner voice turns into rumination. When our internal conversation loses
perspective and gives rise to intensely negative emotions, the brain
regions involved in self-referential processing (thinking about
ourselves) and generating emotional responses become activated. In other
words, our stress-response hardware starts firing, releasing adrenaline
and cortisol, flooding us with negative emotions, which only serve to
further rev up our negative verbal stream and zoom us in more. As a
result, we're unable to get a wider-angle view that might reveal more
constructive ways of handling the emotionally trying situations we
encounter. But our brains evolved not just to zoom in when we confront
difficulties but also to zoom out, though the latter is much more
challenging during times of stress. The mind is flexible, if we know how
to bend it. If you have a fever, you can take something to bring it
down. Likewise, our mind has a psychological immune system: We can use
our thoughts to change our thoughts---by adding distance. Psychological
distance, of course, doesn't eliminate a problem. If, for instance,
Tracey had been able to step back from her high-pressured predicament
and settle into a less anguished state, she nonetheless would still have
been in debt to the NSA, with her future hanging in the balance.
Similarly, even if Rick Ankiel had been able to retain his pitch, he
still would've been standing on the mound pitching in the playoffs on
national television. Distance doesn't solve our problems, but it
increases the likelihood that we can. It unclouds our verbal stream. The
big question, then, is this: When chatter strikes, how do we gain
psychological distance? As it happened, around the same time that Tracey
was sitting in her freshman dorm room at Harvard, I was three and a half
hours south down the highway in Manhattan, a graduate student in
psychology sitting in the basement of Columbia University's dingy
Schermerhorn Hall thinking about a remarkably similar question. How can
people reflect on their negative experiences, I wondered, without
getting sucked down the rumination vortex? Answering that question was
the reason I had decided to attend Columbia to train with my adviser,
Walter Mischel, a

groundbreaking scientist whom most people know as the Marshmallow Man.
Walter was akin to royalty in psychology for developing what the public
now calls the marshmallow test, a paradigm for studying self-control
that involved bringing kids into the lab for an experiment and
presenting them with a simple choice: They could have one marshmallow
now, or if they waited for an experimenter to return, they could have
two. It turned out that children who waited longer ended up performing
better on their SATs as teens, were healthier as they got older, and
coped better with stress in adulthood than those who immediately grabbed
the gooey marshmallow. But even more important than documenting these
striking long-term outcomes, the so-called marshmallow test (its real
name is the delay of gratification test) helped revolutionize science's
understanding of the tools people have to control themselves. By the
time I arrived at Columbia, Walter and his then postdoctoral student
Ãzlem Ayduk had already become interested in examining how to help
people think about painful experiences without succumbing to chatter. At
the time, one of the dominant approaches to battling inner-voice
rumination was distraction. Several studies had shown that when people
find themselves sucked into negative verbal thinking, diverting their
attention away from their problems improved the way they felt. The
downside of this approach, however, is that distraction constitutes a
shortterm fix---a Band-Aid that obscures the wound without healing it.
If you go to the movies to escape the adversities of real life, your
problems are still there waiting for you when you leave the theater. Out
of sight, in other words, isn't actually out of mind, because the
negative feelings remain, eagerly waiting to be activated again. Oddly,
at this time, the idea of distancing had fallen out of vogue in
psychology. In 1970, Aaron Beck, one of the founders of cognitive
therapy and an influential figure in mental health, proposed that
teaching patients how to objectively scrutinize their thoughts, a
process he called "distancing," was a central tool that therapists
should employ with their patients. In the ensuing years, however,
distancing had come to be equated with avoidance---with not thinking
about your problems. But in my mind,

there was nothing inherently avoidant about distancing. In theory, you
could use your mind to frame your problems from a zoomed-out
perspective. This approach differed from the meditative practice of
mindfulness in that the goal wasn't to stand apart and watch one's
thoughts drift by without engaging with them. The point was to engage,
but to do so from a distanced perspective, which isn't the same thing as
an emotionally avoidant one. That was the essence of my dad's teachings
and what I had spent so much time doing growing up. So, Walter, Ãzlem,
and I began thinking about the different ways people could "step back"
from their experiences to reflect on them more effectively. We landed on
a tool we all possess: our ability to imaginatively visualize. A
powerful optical device of sorts is built into the human mind: the
ability to see yourself from afar. This mental home theater, it turns
out, projects scenes when we think about unpleasant experiences from the
past or imagine possible anxiety-producing scenarios in the future. They
are almost like videos stored on a phone. Yet these scenes aren't
entirely fixed. Studies show that we don't see our memories and reveries
from the same perspective every time. We can view them from different
perspectives. For example, sometimes we replay a scene happening through
our own eyes as though we were right back in the event in the first
person. Yet we can also see ourselves from the outside, as if
transplanted to another viewpoint. We become a fly on the wall. Could we
harness this ability to better regulate our inner voice? Ãzlem, Walter,
and I brought participants into the lab to find out. To do so, we asked
one group to replay an upsetting memory in their minds through their own
eyes. We asked another group to do the same, only from a fly-on-the-wall
perspective, visually observing themselves like a bystander. Then we
asked the participants to work through their feelings from the
perspective they had been asked to adopt. The differences in the verbal
stream characterizing the two groups were striking. The immersers---the
people who viewed the event from a first-person perspective---got
trapped in their emotions and the verbal flood they released. In their
accounts describing their stream of thoughts, they tended to zero in on
the hurt. "Adrenaline infused. Pissed off. Betrayed," one person wrote.
"Angry. Victimized. Hurt. Shamed. Stepped-on. Shitted on.

Humiliated. Abandoned. Unappreciated. Pushed. Boundaries trampled upon."
Their attempts to "go inside" and work through their internal
conversations just led to more negative feelings. The fly-on-the-wall
group, meanwhile, offered contrasting narratives. Where the immersers
got tangled in the emotional weeds, the distancers went broad, which led
them to feel better. "I was able to see the argument more clearly,"
wrote one person. "I initially empathized better with myself but then I
began to understand how my friend felt. It may have been irrational but
I understand his motivation." Their thinking was clearer and more
complex, and, sure enough, they seemed to view events with the insight
of a third-party observer. They were able to emerge from the experience
with a constructive story. The experiment provided evidence that
stepping back to make sense of our experiences could be useful for
changing the tone of our inner voice. Soon after, in more studies, we
and others discovered that zooming out in this way also reined in
people's fight-or-flight cardiovascular response to stress, dampened
emotional activity in the brain, and led people to experience less
hostility and aggression when they were provoked---the kind of situation
that is fertile ground for stoking chatter. We also found that this
distancing technique worked not just with random collections of college
students but also with those struggling with more extreme forms of
inner-voice torment. For example, people with depression and even highly
anxious parents grappling with their children's undergoing painful
cancer treatments. Yet our findings were, at this point, still limited.
They related only to how distancing affects us in the moment. We also
wanted to know whether it would have lasting effects, shortening the
amount of time people spent ruminating. It turned out we weren't the
only ones interested in exploring this question. Not long after we
published our initial work, a research team at the University of Leuven
in Belgium, led by Philippe Verduyn, devised a clever set of studies to
look at whether people's tendencies to distance in daily life, outside a
laboratory setting, influenced how long their emotional episodes lasted.
They found that distancing by adopting an observer perspective shortened
the duration of people's negative moods after they experienced

events that led them to feel angry or sad. Distancing could put out
chatter brush fires before they grew into longer-lasting conflagrations.
This dampening quality of distancing could, however, have an unintended
consequence. Distancing shortened both negative and positive
experiences. In other words, if you got a promotion at work and stepped
back to remind yourself that status and money don't really matter in the
grand scheme of things and that we all die in the end anyway, your
welldeserved joy would decrease. The takeaway: If you want to hold on to
positive experiences, the last thing you want to do is become a fly on
the wall. In such cases, immerse away. By this time, it had become clear
that we are all prone to either psychological immersion or psychological
distance when we reflect on emotional experiences, though we aren't
locked into either state. The tendency we have shapes the patterns of
our inner voice, but fortunately so does our ability to consciously
alter our perspective. Along with our work and Verduyn's, a slew of
other studies published around the same time began to shift our
understanding of the role distancing plays in helping people control
their emotions. Researchers at Stanford, for example, linked adopting
the perspective of a detached observer with less rumination over time.
Across the Atlantic, researchers at Cambridge found that teaching people
to "see the big picture" reduced intrusive thinking (the kind that
drains executive functions) and avoidance of painful memories. Other
experiments demonstrated that even shrinking the size of an image that
causes distress in one's imagination reduces how upset people become
when they view it. Still other work applied the concept of distancing to
education, showing how leading ninth graders to focus on the big-picture
reasons for doing schoolwork---for instance, emphasizing how doing well
in school would help them land their desired jobs and contribute to
society as adults---led them to earn higher GPAs and stay more focused
on boring but important tasks. Distance, then, helps us deal better not
only with the big emotions we experience from upsetting situations but
also with the smaller yet crucial daily emotional challenges of
frustration and boredom that come with the important tedium of work and
education.

All of this taught us that taking a step back could be effective for
helping people manage their chatter in a variety of everyday contexts.
But we would soon learn that gaining mental distance also has positive
implications for something else important: wisdom.

Solomon's Paradox It was around 1010 B.C.E. The maternal dreams of a
woman in Jerusalem, named Bathsheba, finally came true. After the loss
of her first child as an infant, she now gave birth to a second child: a
healthy young baby boy whom she named Solomon. As the Bible tells us,
this was no ordinary baby. The son of David (of Goliath fame), Solomon
grew up and went on to become king of the Jewish people. A peerless
leader, he was respected not only for his military might and economic
acumen but also for his wisdom. People would travel from distant lands
to seek his counsel. The dispute he most famously settled was between
two women who both claimed to be the mother of the same child. He
suggested that they cut the child in half, and when one of the women
protested, he was able to identify her as the true mother. In an ironic
twist of fate, however, when it came to Solomon's own life, he wasn't so
savvy. Amorous and shortsighted, he married hundreds of women from
different faiths and went to great lengths to please them, building
elaborate temples and shrines so they could worship their gods. This
eventually alienated him from his own God, and the people he ruled,
which would finally lead to his kingdom's demise in 930 B.C.E. The
asymmetry in King Solomon's thinking is a chatter parable that embodies
a fundamental feature of the human mind: We don't see ourselves with the
same distance and insight with which we see others. Data shows that this
goes beyond biblical allegory: We are all vulnerable to it. My
colleagues and I refer to this bias as "Solomon's Paradox," though King
Solomon is by no means the only sage who could lend his name to the
phenomenon.

Take a little-known story about one of the wisest men in U.S. history,
Abraham Lincoln, who, in 1841, was in a rut both professionally and
romantically. He had yet to establish himself as a lawyer to the extent
he desired. He was also anguishing over doubts about his feelings for
his fiancÃ©e, Mary, because he had fallen in love with another woman.
Immersed in his problems, he sank into depression, or what one historian
has called "Lincoln's melancholy." The following year, when the future
president had begun to recover his hope and clarity, a good friend of
his, Joshua Speed, fell into similar doubts about his own engagement.
Now in a different role, Lincoln was able to offer Speed sound advice he
hadn't been able to marshal with regard to his own situation. He told
Speed that his ideas about love were the problem, not the woman he was
engaged to marry. Lincoln later reflected, as Doris Kearns Goodwin
writes in her book Team of Rivals, that "had he understood his own
muddled courtship as well as he understood Speed's, he might have
'sailed through clear.' " Before we look at how distancing can lead to
wisdom, it's worth taking a moment to ask what wisdom actually is in
practice. In a rigorous field like psychology, an amorphous-seeming
concept like wisdom at first appears hard to define. Nonetheless,
scientists have identified its salient features. Wisdom involves using
the mind to reason constructively about a particular set of problems:
those involving uncertainty. Wise forms of reasoning relate to seeing
the "big picture" in several senses: recognizing the limits of one's own
knowledge, becoming aware of the varied contexts of life and how they
may unfold over time, acknowledging other people's viewpoints, and
reconciling opposing perspectives. Although we generally associate
wisdom with advanced age, because the longer you live the more
uncertainty you will have experienced and learned from, research
indicates that you can teach people how to think wisely regardless of
their age---through gaining distance. Take a study that Igor Grossmann
and I did in 2015. We presented people with a dilemma and asked them to
predict how it would unfold in the future. One group of participants was
asked to imagine their partner had cheated on them, while the other
group imagined the same exact thing

happening to a friend---a practical method of creating psychological
distance. While some people may understandably think that outrage is the
wisest response to discovering that your partner cheated on you, our
interest was in whether distance would decrease rather than increase
conflict by cultivating a wise response. As we expected, people were
much wiser when they imagined the problem was happening to someone else.
They felt it was more important to find compromise with the person who
had cheated, and they were also more open to hearing that person's
perspective. Another illustration of how people can use distance as a
hatch to escape from Solomon's Paradox comes from research on medical
decision making. Few contexts are more chatter provoking---and
consequential---than having to make an important decision about your
health. Uncertainty surrounding physical pain or illness, never mind
mortality, bloats the verbal stream with worry, which can cloud our
judgment and lead us to make poor decisions that, ironically, further
impair our health. In one large-scale experiment, a group of scientists
gave people a choice: do nothing and have a 10 percent chance of dying
from cancer, or undergo a novel treatment that has a 5 percent chance of
killing you. Obviously, the second option is better, because the risk of
death is 5 percent less. And yet, consistent with prior research
indicating that people often choose to do nothing rather than something
when it comes to their health, 40 percent of participants chose the more
life-threatening option. But---and this is a big but---when the same
people were asked to make this decision for someone else, only 31
percent made the bad choice. When you frame this percentage difference
in terms of the number of cancer diagnoses per year---18 million---that
adds up to more than 1.5 million people who could sabotage their own
best course of treatment. But this lack of wisdom, brought about by a
lack of mental distance, can also influence other areas of our life.
Daniel Kahneman, the Nobel Prize--winning psychologist and author of
Thinking, Fast and Slow, has written that one of his most informative
experiences involved learning how to avoid an "inside view" and adopt an
"outside view." As he frames it, an inside view limits your thinking to
your circumstances. Because you don't know what you don't know, this
often

leads to inaccurate predictions about potential obstacles. The outside
view, on the other hand, includes a broader sample of possibilities and
thus more accuracy. You're able to better foresee obstacles and prepare
accordingly. Although Kahneman's views pertain to accurately predicting
the future, research shows that the ability to step outside
oneself---another way of saying mental distance---is helpful for
decision making more generally. It can help us get past information
overload---for instance, when we're evaluating contrasting features and
prices while car shopping---so that we can attain clarity. It can roll
back "loss aversion," the concept Kahneman popularized referring to the
fact that people are much more sensitive to losses than they are to
gains. Additionally, it can make people more compromising and willing to
tolerate alternative views. In one study conducted right before the 2008
U.S. presidential election, Igor and I found that asking people to
imagine a future in which their chosen candidate lost the election from
a distanced perspective (we asked them to imagine that they were living
in another country) led them to become less extreme in their political
views and more open to the idea of cooperating with people who supported
the opposing candidate. These positive interpersonal and
wisdom-enhancing effects of distancing make this skill invaluable to
another area of life where we often experience inner-voice ranting: our
romantic relationships. My colleague Ãzlem and I wondered how distance
might factor into intimate-partner harmony. So over twenty-one days we
profiled the tendency of people to distance each time they fought with
their romantic partner. We found that whether people "distanced" or
"immersed" when thinking about problems in their relationships
influenced how they argued. When an immerser's partner argued calmly,
the immerser responded the same way---with similar patience and
compassion. But once their partners began to show the slightest hint of
anger or disdain, the immersers responded in kind. As for the
distancers, when their partners talked calmly, they too remained calm.
But even if their partner got worked up, they were still able to problem
solve, which eased the conflict. A subsequent experiment took this
research even further by showing that teaching couples to distance when
they focused on disagreements in their relationships buffered against
romantic decline. Over the course of a

year, spending twenty-one minutes trying to work through their conflicts
from a distanced perspective led couples to experience less unhappiness
together. If not exactly a love potion, distancing does seem to keep the
flame of love from being extinguished. All this research demonstrates
how useful stepping back can be for changing the nature of the
conversations we have with ourselves. Yet more broadly, it also shows
how we can reason wisely about the most chatterprovoking situations we
face---those that involve uncertainty, which requires wisdom. But what's
striking to me about all this work is that it demonstrates just how many
ways there are to get psychological distance, how many options our mind
gives us for gaining perspective. But sometimes we need more than
wisdom. As Tracey would learn at Harvard, we need new stories---imagined
narratives that also add distance---which we create by harnessing the
power of the time machine in our own minds.

Time Travel and the Power of the Pen There Tracey was, sitting in her
dorm room each night, gnawing away at her pencil eraser, tormented by
her acne, her inner voice spiraling into despondency with the split
demands of being a covert agent in training and a lonely scholarship
student at an elite university. Helplessly immersed in her anxiety, she
finally spoke to therapists at Harvard and the NSA. Much to her
disappointment, neither counselor really helped. She remained as alone
as ever---or did she? As a hobby, but seeming to sense it would aid her
in some way, Tracey embarked on a family history project. She was
fascinated by the long chain of people and events that had brought her
into existence. So, during breaks from school, when she wasn't required
to be at the NSA, she chased down stories from her past. Doing so led
her to ride on the backs of motorcycles with relatives around Lake
Michigan and walk the shores of Lake Merritt in California, wander the
sticky streets of New Orleans's French Quarter with two aunts, and make
grave rubbings from the family headstones that dotted

the cemetery down the road from her ancestors' burned-down farm in
central Texas. As her relatives opened up to her, Tracey heard about the
struggles of being part of one of the first African American families
living in Kalamazoo, Michigan. She discovered that her great-grandmother
had been a voodoo practitioner in a relationship with a white man, her
greatgrandfather, and learned about the prayers she cast to ward off
evil spirits. And after careful but persistent prodding, she eventually
got different relatives to talk about the most painful and oppressive
chapters of her family's past in the United States. She confirmed that
she was the greatgreat-grandchild of slaves and learned that one of her
great-grandfathers had been lynched, while another had been conscripted
into the Confederate army. She also discovered she was a descendant of
George Washington's. The deeper Tracey delved into her family's history,
the calmer she noticed herself feeling when she returned to Harvard. On
the one hand, as she tapped into the legacy of her forebears, she seemed
to be demonstrating to the world that a descendant of slaves could
achieve success at one of the most prestigious institutions in the
world. In spite of her difficulties at Harvard, this historical
perspective gave her a bird's-eye view of how far she had come, even
making her think her ancestors would be proud of her. At the same time,
learning about the suffering that her forebears had endured also helped
her put her trials and tribulations in perspective. In her mind, the
anxiety surrounding not making grades and not being able to date whom
she wanted paled in comparison to the torment her ancestors must have
experienced toiling away as slaves. She had become a fly on the wall not
just of her own life but of generations of lives---the long line of
ancestors who survived the transatlantic slave crossing and eventually
flourished in the United States over time. This dramatically calmed her
inner voice. Several studies back up scientifically what Tracey
experienced personally, revealing that the ability to strategically time
travel in one's mind can be a tool for creating positive personal
narratives that reroute negative inner dialogues. But the benefits of
mental time travel aren't restricted to adopting a bird's-eye view of
the past to weave together a positive story about the present. You can
also benefit by mentally time

traveling into the future, a tool called temporal distancing. Studies
show that when people are going through a difficult experience, asking
them to imagine how they'll feel about it ten years from now, rather
than tomorrow, can be another remarkably effective way of putting their
experience in perspective. Doing so leads people to understand that
their experiences are temporary, which provides them with hope. In a
certain sense, then, what temporal distancing promotes is one of the
facets of wisdom: the understanding that the world is constantly in flux
and circumstances are going to change. Recognizing that feature of life
when it comes to negative experiences can be tremendously alleviating.
It is what helped me, for example, cope with what was arguably the most
chatter-provoking event of the past century: the 2020 COVID-19 pandemic.
As schools closed, quarantines began to take effect and the world
outside became quiet; chatter began to brew in my mind just like
millions of other people. Will social distancing affect my children's
well-being? How am I going to survive without leaving the house for
weeks? Will the economy ever improve? Focusing on how I would feel once
the pandemic ends made me realize that what we were going through was
temporary. Just as countless pandemics had come and gone in the long
history of our species, so too would the COVID-19 threat eventually
pass. That buoyed my inner voice. My colleague Ãzlem has found that
temporal distancing helps people manage major stressors like the loss of
a loved one but also more minor yet still critical ones, like looming
work deadlines. And best of all, this technique doesn't just make you
feel better; it even improves your love life by making relationships and
arguments fare better, with less blame and more forgiveness. Alongside
her family history project, Tracey also kept a journal as her college
years progressed. This, too, became a medium for gaining distance.
Although journaling has surely been around nearly as long as the written
word, it is only in the past few decades that research has begun to
illuminate the psychological consolation it provides. Much of this work
has been pioneered by the psychologist James Pennebaker (yes, he has the
word "pen" in his name). Over the course of a long and distinguished
career, he has shown that simply asking people to write about their most
upsetting

negative experiences for fifteen to twenty minutes---to create a
narrative about what happened, if you will---leads them to feel better,
visit the doctor less, and have healthier immune function. By focusing
on our experiences from the perspective of a narrator who has to create
a story, journaling creates distance from our experience. We feel less
tied to it. Tracey journaled for years, and it helped her immensely.
Thanks to her inventive ability to pacify her internal dialogues, by the
end of Tracey's senior year at Harvard her acne had abated, her nervous
tics subsided, and her grades were stellar. She had subdued her chatter.
After graduating from Harvard, she began her work for the NSA. She would
spend the next eight years working on covert missions in conflict zones
around the world. With hundreds of hours of advanced language training
under her belt, she spoke French and Arabic fluently and blended
seamlessly into her various assignments, many of which still remain
confidential. The intelligence work she produced would be used to brief
the highest levels of the U.S. government all the way up to the White
House. In many ways, she would end up living the dynamic, cinematic life
she had fantasized about when she first learned about the NSA
scholarship in high school. To this day, Tracey still keeps a journal.
And she's now a professor at an Ivy League university (and no longer
works for the government). ---

e strange thing about being a psychologist, especially one who studies
how to control the inner voice, is that no matter what insights your
research yields, you still can't escape being yourself. Which is to say,
when I "go inside," I can still get lost, in spite of everything I know
about how to distance. There's no other way of explaining what happened
to me when I received the threatening letter from my stalker. I was
aware of a variety of distancing tools to calm my chatter: adopting a
fly-on-the-wall perspective, assuming a detached observer's perspective,
imagining how I'd feel in the future, writing in a journal, and so on.
And yet... I was immersed. I was all chatter.

I was living Solomon's Paradox. All I could do was verbalize my panicked
inner voice. Naturally, this created tension between my wife and me, and
even her distanced perspective couldn't yank me out of my dialogue. My
chatter was so intense it felt as if there were no way out---until
suddenly I found the way. I said my own name.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï¦ï¯ïµï²

When I Become You

I

t was three o'clock in the morning and I sat in my pajamas, peering out
the window of my home office, scrutinizing the night. I couldn't make
out anything in the dark, but in my mind I saw very clearly the
disturbing letter and deranged face of the person who had sent it, which
I managed to concoct in my imagination with a little help from Dexter
and the Saw movies. After a long time, I turned away from the window.
Without really knowing what I was doing, I wandered over to my desk, sat
down, and opened my computer. Somehow, even in the depth of my fear, I
realized that this couldn't go on. The lack of sleep was draining me, I
wasn't eating, and I was having trouble focusing at work. In this
blearyeyed state, I went "inside" again as intently as I could to find a
way out of this mess. Introspection hadn't yielded much in the previous
days, but I focused my mind on the problem. What about a bodyguard? I
thought to myself. One who specializes in protecting professors. As
ridiculous as this sounds to me in retrospect, at the time it didn't
seem ridiculous at all. But as I readied my fingers to start googling
for bodyguards specially trained in defending frightened academics in
the Midwest, something happened. I stopped, leaned back from my
computer, and said to myself in my mind, Ethan, what are you doing? This
is crazy! Then something strange happened: Saying my own name in my
head, addressing myself as if I were speaking to someone else, allowed
me to

immediately step back. Suddenly I was able to focus on my predicament
more objectively. The notion that a cottage industry had developed for
protecting professors with Navy SEAL--credentialed bodyguards, an idea
that moments ago had seemed reasonable enough to google, now became
apparent for what it really was: lunacy. Once I had this realization,
others quickly followed. How is pacing the house with a baseball bat
going to help? I thought. You have a state-of-theart alarm system.
Nothing else disconcerting has happened since you first received the
letter. It was probably just a hoax. So, what are you worried about?
Enjoy your life the way you used to. Think about your family, students,
and research. Plenty of people receive threats that amount to nothing.
You've managed worse situations. You can deal with this. Ethan, I said
to myself. Go to bed. As these thoughts began to spread like a salve on
an open wound, I walked from my office to my bedroom. My heartbeat
slowed, and the weight of my emotions changed. I felt lighter. And when
I quietly got into bed next to my wife, I was able to do something that
I had desperately wanted to do since I first received the letter: I
closed my eyes without clenching my teeth, without booby-trapping the
door to my bedroom, without clutching my Little League baseball bat, and
I slept deeply until morning. Saying my own name had saved me. Not from
my hostile stalker, but from myself. During the days and then weeks
following that night, I kept thinking about what had happened. On the
one hand, there was the uncomfortable irony that I was a psychologist
who specializes in self-control and yet I had lost my self-control,
never mind my rationality, albeit briefly. On the other hand, there was
the scientifically intriguing observation that I had somehow regained
control of my emotions and internal conversation by talking to myself as
if I were another person. Normally, using one's own name is associated
with eccentricity, narcissism, or sometimes mental illness, but I didn't
identify with any of these. For me, at least in that moment of crisis, I
had somehow managed to subdue my inner voice...with my inner voice. And
I had done so without even meaning to.

There's a classic finding in psychology called the frequency illusion.
It describes the common experience of, say, learning a new word and then
suddenly seeing it seemingly everywhere you look. In reality, the
word---or whatever recent new observation you've had---has always been
present in your environment with an ordinary frequency; your brain just
wasn't sensitized to it before, so this creates a mental illusion.
Something similar happened to me after realizing that I had spoken to
myself during a moment of tremendous emotional stress. The pattern
recognition software in my mind for people talking to themselves as if
they were communicating with someone else---using their names and other
nonfirst-person pronouns---was activated. Over the next few months, then
years, I noticed more and more noteworthy instances of it in several
different contexts. The threatening letter arrived in the spring of
2011, but the first case that caught my attention was actually a
recollection I had of the basketball superstar LeBron James from the
summer of 2010. As a lifelong Knicks fan, I had been holding out the
naive hope that he would come to New York to redeem my floundering team.
Instead, he appeared on ESPN to announce that he was leaving the
Cleveland Cavaliers, the hometown team that had nurtured his career from
its inception, to play for the Miami Heat---a highstakes and, by his own
admission, difficult decision. "One thing that I didn't want to do was
make an emotional decision," LeBron explained to the ESPN commentator
Michael Wilbon. A split second later, right after he articulated his
goal to avoid making an emotional decision, he switched from talking
about himself in the first person to talking about himself using his own
name: "And I wanted to do what was best for LeBron James and what LeBron
James is going to do to make him happy." A few years later, I came
across a video of the future Nobel Peace Prize winner Malala Yousafzai
on The Daily Show with Jon Stewart. In the summer of 2012,
fourteen-year-old Malala was living in the Swat valley of Pakistan with
her family when she received arguably one of the most stressful pieces
of news imaginable: The Taliban had vowed to assassinate her as
punishment for her outspoken advocacy of girls' rights to education.
When Stewart asked her how she responded to learning of the threat
against her, Malala inadvertently revealed that employing her own name
to coach

herself had been key. After beginning to recount her experience in the
first person, as she narrated the story and arrived at its most fearsome
moment, she told Stewart, "I asked myself, 'What would you do, Malala?'
Then I would reply to myself, 'Malala, just take a shoe and hit him'
"...But then I said, 'If you hit a Talib with your shoe, then there will
be no difference between you and the Talib.' " The examples kept
cropping up, not just in pop culture contexts---such as the actress
Jennifer Lawrence pausing during an emotional interview with a New York
Times reporter to say to herself, "O.K., get ahold of yourself,
Jennifer"---but also in historical instances that had been hiding in
plain sight. There was already a term for talking about oneself in the
third person, "illeism," which was frequently used to describe the
literary device Julius Caesar had employed to narrate his work on the
Gallic Wars, in which he had participated. He wrote about himself by
using his own name and the pronoun "he" instead of the word "I." And
then there was the American historian Henry Adams's Pulitzer
Prize--winning autobiography, published in 1918, which he narrated
entirely in the third person. In keeping with this stylistic approach,
he didn't title the book My Education or something similar. He called it
The Education of Henry Adams. By this time, I had already shared my
observations about how people use their own names and second- and
third-person pronouns to talk to themselves with my students and
colleagues. As a result, a conversation had gotten under way in the lab,
and we had begun to examine the relationship between language and
distance. We had a strong intuition that using one's own name---silently
in one's own head, that is, not talking to oneself aloud in ways that
elicit raised eyebrows and disrupt social norms---was a tool that helped
people control their inner voice. Of course, all of the "evidence" I had
come across was anecdotal. It wasn't scientific proof of anything,
though it did seem to suggest a common pattern in human behavior. For
years my colleagues and I had been studying approaches to distancing,
yet all the techniques we had uncovered required both time and
concentration, whereas using one's name to mentally speak to oneself in
a moment of distress had taken neither. Could talking to yourself as if
you were someone else be its own form of distancing?

Say Your Name "Are you serious?" the participant in our experiment
asked. "Yes," the experimenter told him. "Follow me." She led him down
the hallway. Like the other volunteers who had come into our lab, he had
known only that he was going to participate in an experiment on language
and emotion. What none of the volunteers knew until they arrived for the
study was the method we would be using, one of the most powerful
techniques scientists have at our disposal for stressing people out in
the lab: We asked them to engage in public speaking in front of an
audience without giving them sufficient time to prepare. In doing so, we
hoped to gain a better understanding of how silently referring to
ourselves using our own names (and other non-first-person pronouns like
"you") might help people control an inner voice agitated by
circumstances like the ones we had concocted. When they arrived, we told
the volunteers that they would have to deliver a five-minute speech to a
group on why they were qualified to land their dream job. Then we
escorted them into a small windowless room, where they had five minutes
to prepare their presentations without being able to take any notes. Our
idea was that if we asked some participants to use non-first-person
language while thinking to themselves before the speech, they would have
more mental distance, which would help them manage their nerves. Our
theory wasn't based only on my experience or the words of Malala, LeBron
James, and others. Previous research had indicated that a high usage of
first-person-singular pronouns, a phenomenon called I-talk, is a
reliable marker of negative emotion. For example, one large study
performed in six labs across two countries with close to five thousand
participants revealed a robust positive link between I-talk and negative
emotion. Another study showed that you can predict future occurrences of
depression in people's medical records by computing the amount of I-talk
in their Facebook posts. All of which is to say, talking to oneself
using firstperson-singular pronouns like "I," "me," and "my" can be a
form of linguistic immersion.

A natural question arose: What would happen if you not only reduced a
person's tendency to think about themselves in the first person but
actually had them refer to themselves as if they were interacting with
someone else? Our idea was that using your own name, while also
employing the second and third person, created emotional distance
because it makes you feel as if you were talking to another person when
you're talking to yourself. For example, rather than thinking to
oneself, Why did I blow up at my coworker today? a person could think,
Why did Ethan blow up at his coworker today? After the five-minute
speech preparation period was over, we randomly divided the participants
into two groups: one in which they reflected on their anxieties
surrounding their upcoming speech using the first-person pronoun "I";
and the other in which they did the same but only using nonfirst-person
pronouns and their own name. After they were done, we took them down the
hall to deliver their presentations in front of a panel of judges who
were trained to maintain stoic facial expressions and a large video
camera that was distractingly positioned right in front of them. It was
showtime. As we predicted, participants who used distanced self-talk
reported that they experienced less shame and embarrassment after giving
their speech compared with participants who used immersed self-talk.
They also ruminated less about their performance afterward. In their
descriptions of their mental experiences, instead of highlighting their
nervousness or the difficulty of the task, they said that their inner
voices focused on the fact that nothing of real consequence was actually
at stake. Remarkably, as we coded the videos and dug deeper into the
data from the experiment, it wasn't just the participants' emotional
responses that differed. Judges who watched videos of participant's
speeches indicated that people in the distanced self-talk group
performed better on the task as well. We had uncovered a novel
distancing tool hidden in the mind: distanced self-talk. As our
experiments and others later demonstrated, shifting from the
first-person "I" to the second-person "you" or third-person "he" or
"she" provides a mechanism for gaining emotional distance. Distanced
self-talk, then, is a psychological hack embedded in the fabric of human
language. And we now know that its benefits are diverse.

Other experiments have shown that distanced self-talk allows people to
make better first impressions, improves performance on stressful
problemsolving tasks, and facilitates wise reasoning, just as
fly-on-the-wall distancing strategies do. It also promotes rational
thinking. For instance, during the height of the 2014 Ebola crisis, some
people were terrified about contagion in the United States. So we ran a
study over the internet with people across the United States. We found
that people who were anxious about Ebola and were asked to switch away
from using "I" to using their own names to reflect on how the Ebola
scare would play out in the future found more fact-based reasons not to
worry, which predicted a decrease in their anxiety and risk perception.
They no longer thought it was so likely that they would contract the
disease, which was both a more accurate reflection of reality and a
muzzle on their previously panicked inner voices. Research also shows
that distanced self-talk can have implications for helping people deal
with one of the most chatter-provoking scenarios I've studied: having to
choose between our love of others we care for and our moral principles.
For instance, a person we know commits a crime, and we're forced to
decide whether to protect or punish them. Studies show that when this
internal conflict occurs, people are considerably more likely to protect
those they know rather than report them, a phenomenon that we see define
decisions in everyday life time and again---for example, the university
administrators and gymnastics officials who failed to stop the
now-convicted child-molesting physician Larry Nassar. If the reason why
we are motivated to protect certain people is that we are so close to
them, then it would follow that engaging in distanced selftalk should
reduce these protective tendencies by allowing us to step back from
ourselves and the relationships we share with others. Sure enough,
across several experiments, this is exactly what we found. For example,
in one study, my students and I asked people to vividly imagine
observing a loved one commit a crime, like secretly using another
person's credit card, and then being approached by a police officer who
asks if they saw anything. Participants who reflected on what they
should do using their own name (for example, What facts is Maria
considering when making this decision?) were more likely to report
severe offenses to the police officer.

While these findings demonstrated the power of distanced self-talk, they
didn't explore another property that makes it so valuable: its speed.
One of the things I found most interesting about saying my own name to
calm myself down was how remarkably easy it was. Normally, it takes time
to regulate our emotions. Just think of the effort involved in mentally
traveling through time to imagine how you'll feel differently about
something in the future, or writing a journal entry to contemplate your
thoughts and feelings, or even closing your eyes to picture a past
experience from a fly-on-the-wall perspective. These are all empirically
validated selfdistancing tools. Yet, because of the effort they require,
they're not always easy to implement in the heat of the moment. Now
think about my experience. All I did was say my name, and it put my
inner voice on a totally different trajectory, almost like switching the
direction a train goes when it comes to a Y-juncture. Distanced
self-talk appeared to be quick and powerful, unlike so many other
emotionregulation strategies. How could that be? In linguistics,
"shifters" refer to words, like personal pronouns (such as "I" and
"you"), whose meaning changes depending on who is speaking. For example,
if Dani asks, "Can you pass me the ketchup?" and Maya answers, "Sure,
here you go," the person that "you" addresses changes. It refers to Maya
initially but then Dani. Most children figure out that language works
this way by the time they are two years old and can switch perspectives
in this way incredibly fast, within milliseconds. The concept of
shifters demonstrates how powerful certain words can be for switching
our perspectives. Our idea was that distanced self-talk might operate
through a similar mechanism, producing a virtual automatic shift in
perspective requiring minimal effort. Using this lens on language and
psychological distance, the Michigan State University psychologist Jason
Moser and I designed an experiment to measure how quickly distanced
self-talk works. But instead of listening to people's inner voices, we
looked at their brains. In our experiment, we asked participants to
think about how they felt each time they saw a disturbing photograph,
using either immersed language (What am I feeling?) or distanced
language (What is Jason feeling?). As they did this, we monitored the
electrical activity of their

brains using an electroencephalogram machine, which provides a useful
means of determining just how quickly different psychological operations
work in the brain. The results indicated that participants displayed
much less emotional activity in the brain when they used distanced
language to reflect on their feelings after viewing the disturbing
pictures. But the crucial finding was how long it took the participants
to feel the relief of distance. We saw changes in emotional activity
emerge within one second of having people view a negative picture. One
tiny second. That was it. Equally exciting to us, we didn't find
evidence to suggest that this kind of self-talk overtaxed people's
executive functions. This was crucial, because more effortful distancing
techniques create a Catch-22 of sorts: When our chatter is buzzing, it
drains us of the neural resources we need to focus, get distance, and
regain control of our inner voice. Yet distanced selftalk sidesteps this
conundrum. It is high on results and low on effort. If changing the
words we use to think about ourselves offers a hyperspeed form of
distancing for dealing with stress, it stood to reason that it should
also influence the stream of our inner voice. As it turns out, distanced
self-talk can do this by harnessing a capacity we all possess: the
ability to interpret sources of stress as challenges rather than
threats. To see how this works, let's drop in on an old neighbor.

Get to It, Fred If you grew up or had children in the United States
between 1968 and 2001, you probably recall Fred Rogers's soothing voice
on his legendary thirtyminute television program, Mister Rogers'
Neighborhood. But beneath his serene persona, Rogers's inner voice could
torment him, just like the rest of us. We know this because his inner
critic is on full display in a letter he typed to himself in 1979,
shortly after returning from a three-year break from doing his show:

Am I kidding myself that I'm able to write a script again? Am I really
just whistling Dixie? I wonder. If I don't get down to it I'll never
really know. Why dan't...I trust myself. Really that's what it's all
about...that and not wanting to go through the agony of creation. AFTER
ALL THESE YEARS IT'S JUST AS BAD AS EVER. I wonder if every creative
artist goes through the tortures of the damned trying to create.?. Oh,
well, the hour commeth \[sic\] and now IS when I've got to do it. GET TO
IT, FRED. GET TO IT. Rogers's strikingly vulnerable letter provides us
with a raw chatter artifact of sorts, a front-row seat to observe his
shifting inner voice. The first three-quarters of the letter presents an
inner dialogue that is filled with self-doubt, self-criticism, and even
despair. But as the note to himself progresses, you can see Rogers
building toward another way of thinking about his situation. His inner
critic begins to fade out as he recognizes that regardless of his
insecurities he has to deal with the task at hand---"the hour
commeth...I've got to do it." And then he does it. He switches into
using distanced language---using his own name---to convey to himself
that he can in fact write his show. And with that shift in perspective
he got back to work for another twenty-two years while at the same time
illuminating the fork in the road we all face when confronting an
overwhelming situation. Psychologists have shown that when you place
people in stressful situations, one of the first things they do is ask
themselves (usually subconsciously) two questions: What is required of
me in these circumstances, and do I have the personal resources to cope
with what's required? If we scan the situation and conclude that we
don't have the wherewithal needed to handle things, that leads us to
appraise the stress as a threat. If, on the other hand, we appraise the
situation and determine that we have what it takes to respond
adequately, then we think of it as a challenge. Which way we choose to
talk about the predicament to ourselves makes all the difference for our
inner voice. And unsurprisingly, the more constructive framing of a
challenge leads to more positive results. In Mr. Rogers's case, it
allowed him to acknowledge the difficulty of creation, and then keep
creating.

Several studies back up what Mr.Â Rogers's letter embodies. From taking
math exams to performing in pressure-filled situations to coping with
the toxic effects of stereotyping, people think, feel, and perform
better when they frame the stressor at hand as a challenge rather than a
threat. But as Mr.Â Rogers's use of his own name to motivate himself
suggests, distanced self-talk can be the pivotal shove that sends you
down the path of the challenge mindset. Research shows that distanced
self-talk leads people to consider stressful situations in more
challenge-oriented terms, allowing them to provide encouraging, "you can
do it" advice to themselves, rather than catastrophizing the situation.
In one study that my collaborators and I performed, for example, we
asked people to write about their deepest thoughts and feelings
concerning an upcoming stressful event using immersed or distanced
self-talk. Seventy-five percent of participants whose essays revealed
the highest levels of challenge-oriented thinking were in the distanced
self-talk group. In stark contrast, 67 percent of participants whose
essays revealed the highest levels of threat-oriented thinking were in
the immersed self-talk group. To see how this actually played out inside
participants' heads, consider what one person in the immersed group
wrote: I am afraid that I won't get a job if I mess up during an
interview. And I always mess up in some way. I never know what to say,
and I am always incredibly nervous. I end up in a feedback loop of
nervousness causing bad interviews causing nervousness. Even if I got a
job, I think I would still be afraid of interviews. Meanwhile, the
distanced-language group's inner voices were notably different. One
participant, reflecting on the insecurity he was feeling in anticipation
of a date, wrote, Aaron, you need to slow down. It's a date; everyone
gets nervous. Oh jeez, why did you say that? You need to pull it back.
Come on man, pull it together. You can do this. You don't, however,
solely need to scrutinize the content of people's thoughts to see how
language influences our tendency to perceive experiences as challenges
or threats: You can see it in people's bodies as well. The psychological
experience of challenge and threat have unique biological signatures.
When you put a person in a threatening state, their heart starts pumping
blood faster throughout his body. The same is true of a

challenge. A key difference between the two states is how the tangle of
arteries and veins that carry blood in the body responds. When a person
is in a threat state, their vasculature constricts, leaving less room
for their blood to flow, which over time can lead to burst blood vessels
and heart attacks. In contrast, when people are in challenge mode, their
vasculature relaxes, allowing blood to move easily throughout the body.
Lindsey Streamer, Mark Seery, and their colleagues at the University at
Buffalo wanted to know whether distanced self-talk would lead to shifts
like this in the way people's cardiovascular systems functioned. Put
more simply, through distanced self-talk, could you persuade not only
your mind but your body to see a situation as challenging rather than
threatening? Sure enough, participants who were asked to use their name
to reflect on stress before giving a public speech displayed a
challenge-mode cardiovascular response. People in the immersed-language
group displayed a textbook biological threat response. If distanced
self-talk can help adults, it's natural to wonder if it can benefit
children as well. One of the great tasks of being a parent is teaching
your children how to persevere in situations that are difficult but
important, such as finding ways to help them study. With this question
in mind, the psychologists Stephanie Carlson and Rachel White discovered
what is known as the Batman Effect. In one experiment, they had a group
of children pretend they were a superhero as they performed a boring
task designed to simulate the experience of having to complete a tedious
homework assignment. The kids were asked to assume the role of the
character and then ask themselves how they were performing on the task
using the character's name. For example, a girl in the study who was
pretending to be Dora the Explorer was instructed to ask herself, "Is
Dora working hard?" during the study. Carlson and White found that the
kids who did this persevered longer than children who reflected on their
experience the normal way using "I." (Kids in a third group who used
their own names also outperformed the I-group.) Taking this phenomenon
into even more stressful circumstances, other research with kids has
linked distanced self-talk with healthy coping following the loss of a
parent. For example, one child said, "No matter what, their dad loved
them, and they have to think of the good things that

happened...they can hold on to the good memories and just let the bad
ones go." Conversely, children who employed more immersed language had
higher incidences of post-traumatic stress symptoms and more avoidant,
unhealthy coping. One child heartbreakingly said, "I still picture
it---how he looked at the end. I wish he didn't have to be in pain. I'm
upset that he died that way." All of these findings highlight how a
small shift in the words we use to refer to ourselves during
introspection can influence our ability to control chatter in a variety
of domains. Given the benefits associated with this tool, it's worth
asking whether other types of distanced self-talk exist that are
similarly effective in helping people manage their emotions. My
colleagues and I would discover that such additional shifts exist, but
their use is so subtle, pervasive, and seamless you could almost fail to
notice them.

e Universal "You" Although the chatter I experienced after receiving my
letter felt unbearable before I said my own name to myself, there was
one moment that brought me a sliver of relief, if only temporarily: when
the police officer I met with told me that such threats were in fact a
common occurrence for people with public-facing careers and they almost
always blow over without incident. Plunged as I was in deep threat
thinking---the letter did not feel like an exciting challenge---this
information didn't erase my fears. But it did provide a beam of hope. It
made me feel less alone. There is a potent psychological comfort that
comes from normalizing experiences, from knowing that what you're
experiencing isn't unique to you, but rather something everyone
experiences---that, unpleasant as it is, it's just the stuff of life.
When we are going through grief, relationship turbulence, professional
setbacks, parenting struggles, or other types of adversity, we often
feel agonizingly alone, zoomed in as we are on our problems. Yet when we
talk with others and learn that they have faced similar challenges, we
realize that as hard as the experience is, it happens to

other people, which gives an immediate sense of perspective. If other
people got through this hardship, our internal dialogue now reasons with
us, then so can I. What felt extraordinary, it turns out, is in fact
ordinary. This offers relief. Now what if, instead of normalizing our
experiences through hearing other people talk about overcoming adversity
or benefiting from their expertise, we could find a form of distanced
self-talk with the same effect? What I mean is, could there be something
built into the very structure of language that helps us think about our
own personal experiences in more universal terms? In May 2015, David
Goldberg, the Silicon Valley entrepreneur and husband of Facebook's COO,
Sheryl Sandberg, had an accident on a treadmill while on vacation in
Mexico and died tragically. In the aftermath, Sandberg was devastated.
Her life with Goldberg had disappeared, as if her future had been ripped
out of her hands. In the wake of his death, she looked for ways to
withstand the fierce tide of grief that threatened to suck her under.
She began journaling about what she was going through---an
understandable choice because, as we know, expressive writing is an
effective means of gaining helpful emotional distance. Yet with the
words she used in at least one entry---which she decided to publish on
Facebook--- she also did something curious. Notice the exact words in
Sandberg's post (my italics), I think when tragedy occurs, it presents a
choice. You can give in to the void, the emptiness that fills your
heart, your lungs, constricts your ability to think or even breathe. Or
you can try to find meaning. At first glance, her repetitive use of the
second-person "you" and "your" might seem odd. She's writing about one
of the most painful personal experiences imaginable without using the
most natural word for recounting her own experience: "I." Instead, she
relies on the word "you," but not in the sense we've previously
discussed, as if addressing herself directly like she were talking to
someone else. She's using the word instead to invoke the universal
nature of her hardship. It's as if she were saying,

"Anyone can give in to the void, the emptiness that fills everyone's
heart, everyone's lungs, constricts everyone's ability to think or even
breathe. Or anyone can try to find meaning." Sandberg is by no means
alone in using the word "you" this way. If we look around, we can find
similar usages---in everyday speech, on talk shows and radio, in song
lyrics. Indeed, once you notice this phenomenon, it's hard to read
interviews with athletes talking about bad games or politicians doing
interviews about obstacles without noticing their use of "you" in this
fashion to frame their experience more broadly. The question, of course,
is why we do this. Why do we use a word that is typically used to refer
to someone else---you---to talk about our own deeply emotional
experiences? My colleagues Susan Gelman and Ariana Orvell and I call
this specific usage "generic 'you' " or "universal 'you.' " And we've
found that it is another type of linguistic hack that promotes
psychological distance. The first thing we know about the universal
"you" is that people use it to talk about norms that apply to everyone,
not personal preferences. For instance, if a child holds up a pencil and
asks, "What do you do with this?" an adult will typically respond, "You
write with it" (not "I write with it"). In contrast, if that same child
holds up a pencil and asks, "What do you like to do with this?" an adult
will typically respond in a personal first-person fashion, saying, "I
write with it." In other words, the generic usage of the word "you"
allows us to talk about how things function generally, not our specific
idiosyncratic proclivities. We also know people use the universal "you"
to make sense of negative experiences, to think about difficult events
as not unique to the self but instead characteristic of life in general,
as Sandberg did in her Facebook post. For example, in one study we
instructed people to either relive a negative experience or think about
the lessons they could learn from the event. Participants were almost
five times more likely to use the universal "you" when they were trying
to learn from their negative experience than when they simply rehashed
what happened. It connected their personal adversity more generally to
how the world works. Participants who were asked to learn from their
experience wrote statements like "When you take a step back and cool
off, sometimes we see things from a different

perspective," and "You can actually learn a lot from others who see
things differently than you." These kinds of normalizations provide us
with the perspective we lack when mired in chatter. They help us learn
lessons from our experiences that contribute to us feeling better. In
other words, our use of the universal "you" in speech isn't arbitrary.
It's one more emotion-management gadget that human language provides.
---

So, what happened after I talked to myself and fell asleep? The next
morning, I woke up and life was back to normal. I chatted over breakfast
with my wife about what she had planned for the day, played with my
daughter before leaving for work, and got back to all the students and
research that I had neglected over the past three days. Distanced
selftalk had transformed my ability to manage my chatter. And, as if my
tormentor saw that he or she could no longer upset me, the letter writer
never bothered me again. And yet a troubling thought stayed with me. I
had spoken to numerous people after receiving the letter, when I was at
the height of my rumination. I reached out for help. And without
exception, the conversations I had with friends, family, and colleagues
made me feel supported. But they didn't make me feel better about the
situation. They didn't soothe my inner voice the way distanced self-talk
had. The reason for this discrepancy brings us to another one of the
great mysteries of the human mind. Just like the inner voice itself,
other people can be a tremendous asset, but more often than we realize,
they can be a liability too.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï¦ï©ï¶ï¥

e Power and Peril of Other People

T

ragedy arrived swiftly and without warning on the campus of Northern
Illinois University on a Thursday in February 2008, when a
twenty-seven-year-old with a history of mental illness named Steven
Kazmierczak kicked open the door to a lecture hall where a geology class
was in session. Armed with a shotgun and three handguns, he stepped onto
the stage that the professor was lecturing from. The 119 students
sitting in the class watched in confusion, then disbelief, then terror,
as the unexpected guest fired a shotgun at them, followed by another
blast at their professor. Then he opened fire on them again. After
discharging more than fifty rounds from different guns, he concluded his
rampage by turning one of them on himself and taking his own life.
Minutes later, the police descended on the gruesome scene. Twenty-one
people were injured and five dead, not including Kazmierczak. The
university and the small city of DeKalb, where it is located, were
devastated. After the tragedy, the community held public vigils, but
many students chose to express their feelings online, posting on
Facebook and memorial websites and using chat messaging programs to talk
about what had happened. One hundred and seventy miles south of DeKalb,
at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign, the psychologists Amanda
Vicary and R. Chris Fraley saw the Northern Illinois tragedy as a
heartbreaking but valuable opportunity to further a line of research
they were already pursuing to better

understand grief and emotional sharing in real time. In science we
sometimes need to look at the most painful experiences people endure to
learn something valuable about how to help people navigate such events.
To do so takes both delicacy and compassion, as well as commitment to
the scientific method and its potential to yield insights that benefit
the greater good. This was the task that Vicary and Fraley set
themselves to in the aftermath of the shooting in DeKalb. They started
by emailing a large number of students from Northern Illinois to
participate in a study to track how they were coping. Ten months
earlier, a gunman had gone on an even more destructive rampage at
Virginia Tech, killing thirty-two people and similarly leaving behind a
grief-stricken community. Vicary and Fraley had also reached out to a
group of Virginia Tech students shortly after that attack. Now they had
two samples to pool together to get a picture of how the survivors
recovered from the resulting welter of emotions. Two weeks after the
shootings, roughly three-quarters of the students in the two samples
displayed symptoms of depression or post-traumatic stress. This was to
be expected. Most of them were grappling with the most disturbing
experience of their lives. Tragedies of the sort that the students had
gone through in both Illinois and Virginia challenge a person's
worldview. When that happens, some people try to avoid focusing on their
traumatic memories to blunt the pain. But others actively try to make
sense of their feelings, and a principal way of doing so is by
communicating with others, which is what the students did. Eighty-nine
percent of them joined a Facebook group to talk and read about what
happened. Seventy-eight percent, meanwhile, chatted online about it, and
74 percent texted about it using their cellphones. Most of the students
found this way of releasing their chatter comforting. It allowed them to
express their thoughts and feelings with others who were dealing with a
similar experience, which can be a valuable form of normalization. As
one Virginia Tech student said, "When I have a bout of loneliness, I can
log on to Facebook or send someone an IM and I'll feel just a little
more connected to people." None of this was particularly surprising. As
we already know, people are naturally disposed to sharing their thoughts
with others when they are

struggling with chatter, and social media and other forms of virtual
connectivity provide convenient avenues for doing so. What was
surprising was what Vicary and Fraley discovered when the study ended
two months after the shootings. While the students at Virginia Tech and
Northern Illinois University thought that expressing their emotions to
others made them feel better, the degree to which they shared their
emotions didn't actually influence their depression and post-traumatic
stress symptoms. All that emoting, writing, connecting, and
remembering---it hadn't been beneficial.

From Aristotle to Freud The same year that the Northern Illinois
massacre occurred, a related study was published that examined the
emotional resiliency of a nationally representative sample of people
living in the United States in the wake of the September 11 attacks. The
researchers examined whether more than two thousand people living across
the country chose to express their feelings about 9/11 during the ten
days following the fall of the Twin Towers. Then they tracked the
participants' physical and mental health over the next two years. The
terrain of human behavior they were looking at was complicated, but
their question was simple: Does sharing emotions impact how we feel over
time? What they found was remarkably consistent with what Vicary and
Fraley discovered. The people who shared their thoughts and feelings
about 9/11 right after it happened didn't feel better. In fact, on the
whole, they fared worse than the people in the study who didn't open up
about how they felt. They experienced more chatter and engaged in more
avoidant coping. Moreover, among those who did choose to express their
feelings, the people who shared the most had the highest levels of
general distress and worst physical health. Once again, sharing emotions
didn't help. In this case, it hurt.

Of course, both the college shootings and 9/11 were rare acts of
extraordinary violence, which might lead you to think that sharing
emotions with others is only unhelpful in the wake of tragic events.
That brings us back to the work of the Belgian psychologist Bernard
RimÃ©. Recall the fundamental pattern in human behavior that RimÃ©
uncovered. When people are upset, they are strongly driven to share
their feelings with others; emotions act like jet fuel that propels us
to talk to other people about the thoughts and feelings streaming
through our heads. But alongside this discovery, he uncovered something
equally important---and certainly more surprising---which confirms that
these studies on the emotional fallout of major tragedies aren't
isolated cases. In study after study, RimÃ© found that talking to others
about our negative experiences doesn't help us recover in any meaningful
way. Sure, sharing our emotions with others makes us feel closer to and
more supported by the people we open up to. But the ways most of us
commonly talk and listen to each other do little to reduce our chatter.
Quite frequently, they exacerbate it. RimÃ©'s finding, along with many
others, clashes dramatically with conventional wisdom. Talking, we are
often told by popular culture, makes you feel better. Much self-help
literature tells us this, as do many of the people around us. We hear
that venting our emotions is healthy and supporting others is
indispensable. It's not that simple, though there are reasons it might
seem that it is. The idea that talking about negative emotions with
others is good for us isn't a recent development. It has been a part of
Western culture for more than two thousand years. One of the earliest
proponents of this approach was Aristotle, who suggested that people
need to purge themselves of their emotions after watching a tragic
event, a process he called catharsis. But this practice didn't really
gain traction more broadly until two millennia later. As modern
psychology was bursting to life in Europe in the late 1890s, Sigmund
Freud and his mentor Josef Breuer picked up Aristotle's thread and
argued that the path to a sound mind required people to bring the dark
pain of their inner lives into the light. You can think of this as the
hydraulic model of emotion: Strong feelings need to be released like the
steam escaping from a boiling kettle.

While these cultural trappings urge us from a young age to talk to
others about our feelings, the underlying drive to air our inner voice
is actually implanted in our minds at an even earlier stage of our
development ---when we are drooling, screaming babies. As newborns,
helpless to care for ourselves or manage our emotions, we signal our
distress to our caretakers, usually by wailing like little banshees (or
at least my daughters did). After we get our needs met and the feeling
of threat passes, our physiological arousal levels return to normal.
Engaging in this process establishes an attachment to the caretaker, who
often talks to the baby even before the infant can understand words.
Over time, our rapidly developing brains acquire language and soak up
what our caregivers tell us about cause and effect, how to remedy our
problems and deal with our emotions. This not only provides us with
useful information for managing how we feel; it also provides us with
the storytelling tools we need to talk to others about our experiences.
This is one explanation for why communication is so entwined with
chatter and why chatter is so entwined with seeking out other people.
Fortunately, there is a reason why the support we get from others so
often backfires and a way to circumvent this phenomenon. Other people
can be an invaluable tool for helping us subdue our chatter, and we can
likewise help others with theirs. But as with any tool, to benefit from
it we need to know how to properly use it, and in the case of giving and
receiving support, that knowledge begins with understanding two basic
needs that all humans have.

e Co-rumination Trap When we're upset and feel vulnerable or hurt or
overwhelmed, we want to vent our emotions and feel consoled, validated,
and understood. This provides an immediate sense of security and
connection and feeds the basic need we have to belong. As a result, the
first thing we usually seek out in others when our inner voice gets
swamped in negativity is a fulfillment of our emotional needs.

We often think of fight or flight as the main defensive reaction human
beings turn to when faced with a threat. When under stress, we flee or
hunker down for the impending battle. While this reaction does
characterize a pervasive human tendency, researchers have documented
another stressresponse system that many people engage in when under
threat: a "tend and befriend" response. They seek out other people for
support and care. From an evolutionary perspective, the value of this
approach comes from the fact that two people are more likely to ward off
a predator than one; banding together during times of need can have a
concrete advantage. Supporting this idea, research indicates that
affiliating with others while under stress provides us with a sense of
security and connection. It triggers a cascade of stress-attenuating
biochemical reactions---involving naturally produced opioids as well as
oxytocin, the so-called cuddle hormone---and feeds the basic need humans
have to belong. And of course, a principal way we do this is by talking.
Through active listening and displays of empathy, those who counsel us
on our chatter can address these needs. Satisfying them can feel good in
the moment, offering one sort of relief. But this is just one-half of
the equation. That is because we also need to satisfy our cognitive
needs. When we're dealing with chatter, we confront a riddle that
demands solving. Inhibited by our inner voice run amok, we at times need
outside help to work through the problem at hand, see the bigger
picture, and decide on the most constructive course of action. All of
this can't be addressed solely by the caring presence and listening ear
of a supportive person. We often need others to help us distance,
normalize, and change the way we're thinking about the experiences we're
going through. By doing so, we allow our emotions to cool down, pulling
us out of dead-end rumination and aiding us in redirecting our verbal
stream. Yet this is why talking about emotions so often backfires, in
spite of its enormous potential to help. When our minds are bathed in
chatter, we display a strong bias toward satisfying our emotional needs
over our cognitive ones. In other words, when we're upset, we tend to
overfocus on receiving empathy rather than finding practical solutions.
This dilemma is compounded by a commensurate problem on the helper side
of the equation: The people we seek out for help respond in

kind, prioritizing our emotional needs over our cognitive ones. They see
our pain and first and foremost strive to provide us with love and
validation. This is natural, a gesture of caring, and sometimes even
useful in the short term. But even if we do signal that we want more
cognitive assistance, research demonstrates that our interlocutors tend
to miss these cues. One set of experiments demonstrated that even when
support providers are explicitly asked to provide advice to address
cognitive needs, they still believe it is more important to address
people's emotional needs. And it turns out that our attempts to satisfy
those emotional needs often end up backfiring in ways that lead our
friends to feel worse. Here's how talking goes wrong. To demonstrate
that they are there to offer emotional support, people are usually
motivated to find out exactly what happened to upset us---the
who-what-when-where-why of the problem. They ask us to relate what we
felt and tell them in detail what occurred. And though they may nod and
communicate empathy when we narrate what happened, this commonly results
in leading us to relive the very feelings and experiences that have
driven us to seek out support in the first place, a phenomenon called
corumination. Co-rumination is the crucial juncture where support subtly
becomes egging on. People who care about us prompt us to talk more about
our negative experience, which leads us to become more upset, which then
leads them to ask still more questions. A vicious cycle ensues, one that
is all too easy to get sucked into, especially because it is driven by
good intentions. In practice, co-rumination amounts to tossing fresh
logs onto the fire of an already flaming inner voice. The rehashing of
the narrative revives the unpleasantness and keeps us brooding. While we
feel more connected and supported by those who engage us this way, it
doesn't help us generate a plan or creatively reframe the problem at
hand. Instead, it fuels our negative emotions and biological threat
response. Harmful co-ruminative dynamics emerge out of otherwise
healthy, supportive relationships because our emotional, inner-voice
mechanics aren't actually like a hydraulic system, as Freud and
Aristotle and conventional wisdom suggest. Letting out steam doesn't
relieve the pressure

buildup inside. This is because when it comes to our inner voice, the
game of dominoes provides a more appropriate metaphor. When we focus on
a negative aspect of our experience, that tends to activate a related
negative thought, which activates another negative thought, and another,
and so on. These dominoes continue to hit one another in a game where
there is a potentially infinite supply of tiles. That is because our
memories of emotional experiences are governed by principles of
associationism, which means that related concepts are linked together in
our mind. To illustrate this idea, take a moment to imagine a cat. When
you read the word "cat," you probably thought of cats you have known or
seen, or actually pictured them in your mind. But you also had thoughts
and images of purring sounds, soft fur, and, if you're allergic like me,
bouts of sneezing. Now take this associative neural dominoing and apply
it to the realm of talking about our emotions. It means that when our
friends and loved ones ask us to recount our troubles in detail, related
negative thoughts, beliefs, and experiences also spring to mind, which
reactivate how bad we feel. The associative nature of memory, combined
with the bias we have to prioritize emotional needs over cognitive ones
when we're upset, is why talking often fails to lift our troubled
internal dialogues into a more tranquil state. This is one possible
explanation for why the Northern Illinois and Virginia Tech students who
actively shared their thoughts and feelings about the shootings with
other people didn't get any measurable long-term benefit from doing so.
And it's why people in the national survey after 9/11 who shared their
feelings may have ended up suffering from more physical and mental ills.
All of which, of course, raises an urgent question: What's the solution
to co-rumination making us feel worse?

Kirk or Spock? The common shorthand in psychology circles for the
tension between emotion and cognition---between what we feel and what we
think---is to

use the Star Trek characters of Captain Kirk and Officer Spock. Kirk is
all heart, a man of intense and compelling emotions. He's fire. By
contrast, Spock, that lovable, pointy-eared half human half Vulcan, is
all head; he's a cerebral problem solver unencumbered by the
distractions of feelings. He's ice. The key to avoid rumination is to
combine the two Starship Enterprise crew members. When supporting
others, we need to offer the comfort of Kirk and the intellect of Spock.
The most effective verbal exchanges are those that integrate both the
social and the cognitive needs of the person seeking support. The
interlocutor ideally acknowledges the person's feelings and reflections,
but then helps her put the situation in perspective. The advantage of
such approaches is that you're able to make people who are upset feel
validated and connected, yet you can then pivot to providing them with
the kind of big-picture advice that you, as someone who is not immersed
in their chatter, are uniquely equipped to provide. Indeed, the latter
task is critical for helping people harness their inner voice in ways
that lead them to experience less chatter over time. Time, of course,
plays a role in our ability to offer perspectivebroadening support to
the people in our lives. Studies consistently show that people prefer to
not cognitively reframe their feelings during the very height of an
emotional experience when emotions are worked up; they choose to engage
in more intellectual forms of interventions later on. This is where a
certain art in talking to other people comes into play, because you must
walk a tightrope to take upset people from addressing their emotional
needs to the more practical cognitive ones. As it turns out, one version
of this balancing act was codified decades ago by the New York Police
Department Hostage Negotiations Team, which emerged in the early 1970s
after a series of disastrous situations not just in New York City but
also worldwide. To name just a few: the 1971 Attica prison riot, the
1972 Munich Olympics massacre, and the 1972 Brooklyn bank robbery
featured in the film Dog Day Afternoon. A police officer and clinical
psychologist named Harvey Schlossberg was tasked with creating the
playbook for the new unit, whose unofficial motto became "Talk to me."
Along with prioritizing the need for compassionate engagement over the

use of force, he stressed patience. Once the hostage takers understood
that they weren't in immediate danger, their autonomic threat response
(presumably) eased. This reduced the negative frenzy of their inner
voice, allowing the negotiator to shift the dialogue toward ending the
standoff. As soon as the NYPD Hostage Negotiations Team was up and
running, the city saw an immediate decrease in bad outcomes for hostage
situations. This breakthrough spurred law-enforcement agencies around
the globe to follow suit, including the FBI. The bureau developed its
own approach called the Behavioral Change Stairway Model, a progression
of steps to guide negotiators: Active Listening â Empathy â Rapport â
Influence â Behavioral Change. In essence, it's a road map for
satisfying people's social-emotional needs that nudges them toward a
solution drawing on their cognitive abilities. While law-enforcement
negotiators are naturally trying to defuse dangerous situations and
arrest criminals, their work bears some similarities to coaching someone
we care about through a problem. In both cases, there is a person who
can benefit from the right kind of verbal support. While all of these
strategies apply to how you help the people in your life manage their
inner voices, they can also help you make better choices when selecting
the people you go to for emotional support. After they've made you feel
validated and understood, do they guide you toward brainstorming
practical solutions? Or do they excessively extract details and revive
the upsetting experience by repeating things like "He's such a jerk! I
can't believe he did that." By reflecting after the fact, you can often
determine if someone helped you immerse or distance. Most likely, it'll
be a combination of the two, which can be a starting point for a
dialogue about how the person can better help you next time. By thinking
through other experiences with your "chatter advisers," you can also
narrow in on which people are right for which problems. While some
friends, colleagues, and loved ones will be useful for a broad range of
emotional adversities, when the problems are more specialized, specific
people may be more helpful. Your brother might be the right person to
coach you through family drama (or, perhaps just as likely, he might be
the wrong person). Your spouse might be the perfect chatter adviser for
professional challenges, or maybe it's that person from another

department at work. Indeed, research indicates that people who diversify
their sources of support---turning to different relationships for
different needs---benefit the most. The most important point here is to
think critically after a chatter-provoking event occurs and reflect on
who helped you---or didn't. This is how you build your chatter board of
advisers, and in the internet age we can find unprecedented new
resources online. A powerful example is the case of the journalist, sex
columnist, and activist Dan Savage and his partner, Terry Miller, who in
September 2010 were looking for a way to respond to the news of yet
another gay teenager committing suicide after relentless bullying. This
time it was a fifteen-yearold named Billy Lucas; he had hanged himself
in his grandmother's barn in Greensburg, Indiana. Savage had blogged
about his death, and a reader had left a comment saying that he wished
he could have told the boy that things ---his life---would get better.
This prompted Savage and Miller to film themselves talking about how,
though their teenage years were hard, they lived happy lives as adults,
filled with love and a sense of belonging. They posted the video, and
within a week it went viral. Thousands of people made similar videos,
and gay teens across the country wrote to Savage to say how it was
making them feel more hopeful. Ten years later---as of this
writing---the sentiment that drove that first video is much more than a
mere viral phenomenon. It Gets Better is an innovative nonprofit
organization and global grassroots movement. More than seventy thousand
people have shared their inspiring stories, almost ten times more have
pledged support, and untold numbers of young gay people have found
comfort, strength, and reasons not to end their lives before they've
truly begun. It Gets Better has rescued the inner voices of so many
emotionally vulnerable people because, in essence, it acts as a
distancing tool promoting normalization---everybody gets picked on, but
we all get through it---and mental time travel. Most fascinating of all
is the fact that people who watch the video don't have to actually know
the speakers to benefit from their advice, a principle that applies to
all sorts of similar social-support videos available online. We can find
people to coach us through our chatter in the form of prerecorded
strangers. Our discussion of whom we go to for support and how they
verbally engage us when we're dealing with chatter raises a question
about therapy

and its effectiveness, because it obviously involves lots of talking.
Does the talking cure, as it is sometimes called, truly cure? The first
thing to keep in mind is that there are countless forms of talk therapy
and they often differ drastically in approach. Many empirically
validated forms of therapy such as cognitive behavioral therapy employ
precisely the kinds of techniques we've been talking about throughout
this chapter; they provide clients with emotional support while also
crucially helping them engage in cognitive problem solving. Yet some
interventions continue to focus on in-depth emotional venting as a tool
for mitigating chatter. Case in point: psychological debriefing, an
approach that emphasizes the value of emotional unburdening in the
immediate aftermath of negative experiences despite overwhelming
evidence arguing against its benefits. The take-home point is that if
you find yourself needing more than a conversation with a friend or
loved one to deal with your chatter, given what you now know, have a
conversation with your prospective mental-health providers to learn
about their approach and find out whether it is empirically supported.

In isible Support Everything we've explored thus far concerns situations
in which people seek support. Yet we all know people who experience
chatter and sometimes don't reach out for help. They may be trying to
manage a problem on their own or may be concerned about how asking for
help might impact the way others view them, or how they see themselves.
But often we still want to provide support in some way. After all,
observing those we care about in need is a powerful neurobiological
experience. It triggers empathy, which motivates us to want to act on
their behalf. Under such circumstances, however, caution is needed.
Research shows that there's a danger in trying to dole out unsolicited
advice, no matter how skilled you are at blending the strengths of Kirk
and Spock. When we give advice at the wrong time, this too can backfire.

Think about the archetypal experience of a parent advising a child how
to do a math problem she is struggling with. The parent earnestly looks
over the problem, sure that a patient, clear explanation is exactly what
their kid needs to succeed at the assignment and feel better about
herself. It's a cognitive solution that should lead to positive emotion,
right? Except it doesn't play out that way. As the parent explains, the
child turns surly and gets agitated. The clean mathematical logic
somehow gets lost in emotional static as an argument breaks out. "I know
how to do it!" the kid says. "But you were having trouble, so that's why
I was trying to help," the parent responds. "I don't need your help!"
The kid storms off to her room. The parent is baffled. What just
happened? (Note: This might or might not have been an autobiographical
experience.) Offering advice without considering the person's needs can
undermine a person's sense of self-efficacy---the crucial belief that we
are capable of managing challenges. In other words, when we are aware
that others are helping us but we haven't invited their assistance, we
interpret this to mean that we must be helpless or ineffective in some
way---a feeling that our inner voice may latch on to. A long history of
psychological research into self-efficacy has shown that when it is
compromised, it damages not only our self-esteem but also our health,
decision making, and relationships. In the late 1990s, the Columbia
psychologist Niall Bolger and his colleagues took advantage of the New
York bar exam to examine when people's attempts to provide support for
another are most effective. The bar, as all lawyers and their loved ones
know, is a grueling, chatter-churning test. Bolger recruited couples in
which one person was studying for the bar and, for a little over a
month, asked the examinees to answer a set of questions capturing how
anxious and depressed they felt, as well as how much support they
received from their partner. He also asked the partners of the examinees
to report how much support they provided. Bolger was primarily
interested in whether benefits that people derive from receiving

social support depend on whether a person is aware of the fact that a
partner is trying to help. The study revealed that helping without the
recipient being aware of it, a phenomenon called "invisible support,"
was the formula for supporting others while not making them feel bad
about lacking the resources to cope on their own. As a result of
receiving indirect assistance, the participants felt less depressed. In
practice, this could be any form of surreptitious practical support,
like taking care of housework without being asked or creating more quiet
space for the person to work. Or it can involve skillfully providing
people with perspective-broadening advice without their realizing that
it is explicitly directed to them. For example, asking someone else for
input that has implications for your friend or loved one in the presence
of the person who needs it (a kind of invisible advice) or normalizing
the experience by talking about how other people have dealt with similar
experiences. Doing these things transmits needed information and
support, but without shining a spotlight on the vulnerable person's
seeming shortcomings. Since Bolger's first experiment pioneered this
domain, other research has converged to validate the effectiveness of
invisible support. A study on marriages, for example, found that
partners felt more satisfaction about their relationships the day after
receiving invisible support. Another experiment found that people were
more successful in meeting their selfimprovement goals if the support
they received from their partner toward those goals was delivered under
the radar. Further research has yielded insights into the circumstances
in which such invisible support is most effective: when people are under
evaluation or preparing to be. For example, when they're studying for
exams, preparing for interviews, or rehearsing the talking points of a
presentation. During such times people feel most vulnerable. In
contrast, when people want to manage their chatter as quickly and
efficiently as possible, it's not necessary to be subtle or crafty in
how you support. In this case, direct advice that blends Kirk and Spock
is most needed, appropriate, and likely to succeed. Along with the forms
of invisible support we've discussed, there is one other pathway for
subtly aiding people we are very close to who find

themselves submerged in chatter, and it's completely nonverbal:
affectionate touch. Touch is actually one of the most basic tools that
we use to help those we care most about turn a negative internal
dialogue around. Like language, it is inseparable from our ability to
manage our emotions from infancy onward, because our caregivers use
affectionate physical contact to calm us from the moment we leave the
womb. Research shows that when people feel the welcome, affectionate
touch or embrace of those they are close to, they often interpret that
as a sign that they are safe, loved, and supported. Caring physical
contact from people we know and trust lowers our biological threat
response, improves our ability to deal with stress, promotes
relationship satisfaction, and reduces feelings of loneliness. It also
activates the brain's reward circuitry and triggers the release of
stressrelieving neurochemicals such as oxytocin and endorphins.
Affectionate touch is so potent, in fact, that one set of studies found
that a mere one second of contact on the shoulder led people with low
selfesteem to be less anxious about death and feel more connected with
others. More striking still, even the touch of just a comforting
inanimate object, like a teddy bear, can be beneficial. This is most
likely a result of the brain coding contact with a stuffed animal
similar to how it codes interpersonal touch. Indeed, many scientists
consider the skin a social organ. In this sense, our contact with others
is part of an ongoing nonverbal conversation that can benefit our
emotions. What we give to and receive from other people in our daily
interactions constitutes a rich portfolio of comfort for the inner
voice. The science of how these techniques work is becoming increasingly
clear, though of course employing them with people we love takes a
certain art, not to mention practice. ---

Ultimately, the con ersations we have with others aren't all that
different from the conversations we have with ourselves. They can make
us feel better or worse. Depending on how we engage other people, and
how they engage us, we experience more or less chatter. This has likely
been the case since

our species started sharing its problems. We just didn't understand the
underlying psychological mechanisms until recently. Yet in our young
twenty-first century, our relationships have begun to migrate to a novel
environment for our species and our chatter, the same place the students
at Northern Illinois and Virginia Tech went in the wake of their
respective tragedies: the internet. A natural question is if the ways in
which verbal support succeeds and fails carry over to how we "talk" on
social media, over texts, and through other forms of digital
communication. While psychology is only just beginning to grapple with
this question, we're already seeing some clues. For example, in the
mid-2010s, my colleagues and I wanted to better understand the nature of
co-rumination via social media, so we asked people who were in the midst
of grappling with an upsetting experience to chat with another person
via a computer messaging app. What they didn't know was that the other
person was an actor who had been carefully trained to nudge half of the
participants to keep talking about what happened. For the other half, he
gently encouraged them to zoom out and focus on the bigger picture. Sure
enough, the participants who were led to rehearse their feelings became
increasingly upset during the conversations. Their negative emotions
skyrocketed from the time they sat down at the keyboard until they left.
In contrast, the participants whom the actor helped to zoom out remained
just as calm and collected as they were when they first came into the
lab. The thing we don't often think about when we seek or give support,
online or off-, is that, objectively speaking, the people in our lives
form a social environment. What we've been learning is how to navigate
that environment to maximize positive outcomes for the inner voice. Our
surroundings are inseparable from the human beings who inhabit them, and
when we use the resources that are available to us in our relationships
with others, the benefits are powerful. But other people are only one
facet of our environment that we can harness to improve our internal
conversations. We can also go outside for a walk, attend a concert, or
simply tidy up our living space, and each of these seemingly small
actions can have surprising effects on our chatter.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï³ï©ï¸

Outside In

I

n 1963, the Chicago Housing Authority completed construction on a
monumental project on the city's historically black South Side: the
Robert Taylor Homes. A vast syndicate of twenty-eight sixteen-story
concrete towers, it was the biggest public housing complex in the
history of the world. Built to halt the rise of slum conditions that
were taking over more and more neighborhoods, the Robert Taylor Homes
were named after a prominent, recently deceased black community leader
and architect. Unfortunately, the final product didn't honor his memory.
Not only did the Robert Taylor Homes reinforce the citywide structure of
segregation that already reigned in Chicago, they gradually exacerbated
the challenges facing the community. By the 1980s, the Robert Taylor
Homes had become notorious as a microcosm of the same problems plaguing
dozens of American cities: gang violence, drugs, and people beset with
fear, ill health, and disenfranchisement. A grand, much-touted attempt
at urban renewal had crumbled into yet another example of urban decline
that disproportionately affected African Americans. If you lived in the
Robert Taylor Homes, you didn't have to turn on the television or read a
newspaper to witness the devastating effects that poverty and
segregation were having on America during the second half of the
twentieth century. You simply had to walk outside your apartment. But

within this atmosphere of crime, amid the daily tumult that defined the
lives of the Robert Taylor Homes residents, a groundbreaking experiment
would soon take place. When people applied for an apartment in the
Robert Taylor Homes, they had no say over the building where they would
live. They were randomly assigned to a unit in almost the same way that
scientists randomly assign subjects to different groups in an
experiment. As a consequence, tenants found themselves living in
apartments that, in many cases, looked out onto dramatically different
landscapes. Some units faced courtyards filled with grass and trees.
Others looked out onto gray slabs of cement. In the late 1990s, this
unique circumstance ended up providing Ming Kuo, a newly minted
assistant professor working at the University of Illinois, with an
unexpected opportunity. With short dark hair, glasses, a warm smile, and
a penetrating mind, Ming was interested in understanding whether the
physical surroundings of residents affected their ability to cope with
the stress of living in a drug- and crime-filled environment. Like many
other scientists, she had been struck by a growing body of research that
demonstrated a link between views of green spaces and increased
resiliency. In one particularly compelling study, the environmental
psychologist Roger Ulrich had found that patients recovering from
gallbladder surgery who were assigned to a room that faced onto a small
cluster of deciduous trees recovered faster from their operations, took
fewer painkillers, and were judged as more emotionally resilient by the
nurses caring for them than patients whose rooms looked out onto a brick
wall. But whether glancing at green views would help people manage the
emotional turmoil of inner-city life in one of the most hostile
environments in the United States was a complete mystery. When Ming
learned about the housing assignment process at the Robert Taylor Homes,
she saw a chance to further examine the effects of nature on the mind.
So she and her team got to work visiting apartments to see what they
could uncover. First, they took pictures of the areas surrounding
eighteen Robert Taylor Homes buildings and coded each building's view
for the presence of green space. Then they went door-to-door recruiting
participants for their study; in this case, female heads of households.
During forty-five-minute sessions held in the participants' apartments,
Ming's team

cataloged how well they were managing the most important issues in their
lives: whether to go back to school, how to keep their homes safe, and
how to raise their children. They also measured each person's ability to
focus their attention by measuring how many digits they could retain and
manipulate from a string of numbers. When Ming and her team analyzed the
data, they found that the tenants who lived in apartments with green
views were significantly better at focusing their attention than those
whose buildings looked out onto barren cityscapes. They also
procrastinated less when making challenging decisions and felt that the
obstacles they faced were less debilitating. In other words, their
behavior was more positive; their thinking was calmer and more challenge
oriented. What's more, Ming's findings suggested that the Robert Taylor
Homes residents' behavior and thinking were more positive because they
were better able to focus their attention. Trees and grass seemed to act
like mental vitamins that fueled their ability to manage the stressors
they faced. As it turned out, Ming's findings were not a fluke. In the
years since her study, more green revelations have followed. For
example, using data from more than ten thousand individuals in England
collected over eighteen years, scientists found that people reported
experiencing lower levels of distress and higher well-being when living
in urban areas with more green space. Meanwhile, a 2015 high-resolution
satellite imagery study of the Canadian city of Toronto found that
having just ten more trees on a city block was associated with
improvements in people's health comparable to an increase in their
annual income of \$10,000 or being seven years younger. Finally, a study
involving the entire population of England below the age of
retirement---approximately forty-one million people---revealed that
exposure to green spaces buffered people against several of the harmful
effects of poverty on health. To put it another way that only slightly
exaggerates, green spaces seem to function like a great therapist,
anti-aging elixir, and immune-system booster all in one. These findings
raise a fascinating possibility: that the internal conversations we have
with ourselves are influenced by the physical spaces we navigate in our
daily lives. And if we make smart choices about how we relate to our
surroundings, they can help us control our inner voice. But in

order to understand how this works, we first need to know which facets
of nature appeal to us.

e Force of Nature In a certain sense, Ming's work in Chicago with the
Robert Taylor Homes didn't start with her or Ulrich's work on
gallbladder patients. Rather, it emerged out of a scientific
husband-and-wife duo's curiosity about the interaction between the human
mind and the natural world. In the 1970s, Stephen and Rachel Kaplan,
both psychologists at the University of Michigan, had begun to advance
an intriguing idea: that nature could act like a battery of sorts,
recharging the limited attentional reserves that the human brain
possesses. They called it attention restoration theory. Sure, most
people knew that a painterly sunset, mountain view, walk in the woods,
or day at the beach usually left a person feeling good, but was there
more to it? The Kaplans thought that there was because of a distinction
related to human attention that William James, one of the founders of
modern-day psychology in the United States, put forth more than a
hundred years ago. James separated the ways we paid attention into two
categories: involuntary and voluntary. When we involuntarily pay
attention to something, it's because the object of our attention has an
inherently intriguing quality that effortlessly draws us to it. In a
real-life scenario, you can imagine, say, a talented musician playing on
a street corner while you're walking around a city, and you feel
yourself notice the sound and gravitate toward it to stop and listen for
a few minutes (and then maybe toss some money into the instrument case
before you keep walking). Your attention has been gently reeled in by a
process the Kaplans called "soft fascination." Voluntary attention, in
contrast, is all about our will. It captures the amazing capacity that
we human beings have to shine our attentional spotlight on whatever we
want---like a difficult math problem or dilemma we're trying to stop
ruminating on. As a result, voluntary attention is easily

exhausted and needs continual recharging, while involuntary attention
doesn't burn as much of our brain's limited resources. The Kaplans
believed that nature draws our involuntary attention because it is rife
with soft fascinations: subtly stimulating properties that our mind is
pulled to unconsciously. The natural world delicately captures our
attention with artifacts such as big trees, intricate plants, and small
animals. We may glance at these things, and approach them for greater
appreciation like that musician playing on the corner, but we're not
carefully focusing on them as we would if we were memorizing talking
points for a speech or driving in city traffic. Activities like those
drain our executive-function batteries, whereas effortlessly absorbing
nature does the opposite: It allows the neural resources that guide our
voluntary attention to recharge. The studies that Ming and her
colleagues went on to perform in Chicago were designed to rigorously
test the Kaplans' ideas, and as we've already seen, they produced
dramatic supporting evidence. Other experiments have likewise
illustrated nature's powers. One now classic study was done in 2007 just
a few blocks from my home in Ann Arbor, when Marc Berman and his
colleagues brought participants into the lab and had them perform a
demanding test that taxed their attentional abilities---they heard
several sequences of numbers that varied from three to nine digits in
length, which they were asked to repeat in backward order. Half of the
participants then went out for a walk in the local arboretum for just
under one hour, while the other half walked down a congested street in
downtown Ann Arbor for the same amount of time. Then they came back to
the lab and repeated the attention task. A week later they swapped
circumstances; each person had to go on the walk not taken the previous
week. The finding: Participants' performance on the attention test
improved considerably after the nature walk but not the urban walk.
Their ability to invert strings of numbers and repeat them back to the
experimenter was much sharper. Moreover, the result didn't depend on
whether participants took their walks during the idyllic summer or
gloomy winter. No matter what time of year, the nature stroll helped
their attention more than the urban one did.

Berman and his colleagues went on to replicate these results in other
populations. For example, one study with clinically depressed
participants indicated that the nature walk improved their cognitive
function and led them to feel happier. Another satellite-imagery study
conducted by a different team with more than 900,000 participants found
that children who grew up with the least exposure to green spaces had up
to 15 to 55 percent higher risk of developing psychological disorders
such as depression and anxiety as adults. All of this, along with Ming's
work in Chicago, suggested that the benefits of nature weren't limited
to our attentional reserves. They also extended to our emotions.
Nature's impact on human feelings made sense given how critical the
ability to maintain our attention is for helping people manage their
inner voice. After all, many of the distancing techniques we've examined
rely on focusing the mind; it's hard to keep a journal, "time travel,"
or adopt a flyon-the-wall perspective if you can't concentrate.
Moreover, the ability to divert our internal conversations away from
things that are bothering us, or reframe how we're thinking about
stressful situations, likewise requires that our executive functions not
be running on empty. But Ming and other scientists never tested the idea
that nature could reduce rumination directly. This occurred in 2015 at
Stanford University in Palo Alto, California. Leafy, suburban Palo Alto
is a far cry from gritty, crowded Chicago, though it does have a handful
of busy streets. Researchers there designed an experiment that had
participants take a ninety-minute walk either on a congested avenue or
through a green space adjacent to Stanford's campus. When the scientists
compared people's rumination levels at the end of the study, they found
that participants in the nature-walk group reported experiencing less
chatter and less activity in a network of brain regions that support
rumination. As a born and bred city dweller, I think it's necessary to
pause here for a moment. Over the last two centuries, human civilization
has seen a vast migration from rural areas to urban ones, and by 2050 an
estimated 68 percent of the world's population is expected to live in
cities. If you have a citified life, it's natural to feel alarmed if
you're part of this huge swath of humanity with less access to nature
and green spaces. When I first learned about this research, I was
certainly disconcerted. I wondered, does having

lived in the dense, concrete cities of Philadelphia and New York for the
first twenty-eight years of my life mean that I---as well as everyone
else with similar urban living experiences---am destined to have worse
health, impaired attention, and more ruminative thoughts? Thankfully,
the answer is no. You don't need to be surrounded by nature to "green"
your mind. Recall that the underlying idea in the Kaplans' attention
restoration theory is that the subtle perceptual features of nature act
as a battery of sorts for the brain. Well, the visual characteristics
that create this pleasing soft fascination don't just have this effect
when you're physically close to nature. Secondhand exposure to the
natural world through photos and videos also restores attentional
resources. This means that you can bring nature and its sundry benefits
into your urban environment---or any environment, for that matter---by
glancing at photos or videos of natural scenes. Virtual nature is,
incredibly, still nature as far as the human mind is concerned. An
experiment published in 2016, for example, induced stress in
participants using the dreaded speech task. Afterward, they watched a
sixminute video of neighborhood streets that varied in their green
views. At the low end, participants watched a video of homes on a street
without any trees; at the high end, the video toured a neighborhood with
a lush canopy of trees. Those exposed to the most views of nature
demonstrated a 60 percent increase in their ability to recover from the
stress of the speech compared with those who saw videos with the fewest
views of green spaces. While the bulk of the research done on the
psychological benefits of nature focuses on visual exposure, there's no
reason to think that our other senses don't also provide pathways for
these startling effects. In 2019, a study found that exposing people to
natural sounds, such as rainfall and crickets chirping, improved
performance on an attentional task. Such sonic forms of nature may also
constitute a soft fascination. Collectively, these findings demonstrate
that nature provides humans with a tool for caring for our inner voice
from the outside in, and the longer we're exposed to nature, the more
our health improves. It offers us a playbook for structuring our
environments to reduce chatter. And bringing new technologies to bear
will likely make it easier to reap the benefits. For

instance, Marc Berman and his collaborator Kathryn Schertz have
developed an app called ReTUNE, short for Restoring Through Urban Nature
Experience. It integrates information concerning the greenness,
noisiness, and crime frequency of every city block in the neighborhood
surrounding the University of Chicago to come up with a naturalness
score. When users input their travel destination, the app generates
directions that maximize the restorative nature of the walk, taking into
account such practical issues as number of road crossings and length of
the walk. If proven effective, a natural next step would be to extend
the app to, well, everywhere. Of course, you don't need the app to
maximize exposure to nature in your daily life. Just make a careful
assessment of the different environments you move through and modify
your routes accordingly. As our mind's relationship with nature
demonstrates, the physical world is capable of influencing psychological
processes deep within us. But nature's many sources of soft fascination
are only one pathway through which we reap these benefits. There is
another feature that helps us control our inner voice, except this tool
isn't limited to our surroundings in the natural world. We can also find
it at concerts, in museums, and even watching a baby take its first
steps.

Shrinking the Self The excitement that Suzanne Bott felt as she grabbed
her paddle and climbed into the raft made her body tingle. For the next
four days, she would be paddling down Utah's shimmering Green River with
three other rafts of people. During the day they would take in the
tawny, castle-like canyon walls. At night they would talk about the
day's adventures around a flickering campfire. Despite first appearances
from a cursory glance at the group, this wasn't your average collection
of wilderness enthusiasts. Most of the paddlers were military veterans
who had seen combat, along with several former firefighters who had been
first responders on 9/11. Each person had replied to an advertisement
recruiting veterans for an expenses-paid journey

on the Green River designed to help them connect with nature. There was,
however, a catch: The trip doubled as a research experiment. Even so,
all the participants had to do was paddle and fill out a few
questionnaires. Bott was the outlier of the group. She wasn't a combat
veteran and had no experience dousing fires. In 2000, after spending six
years earning her PhD in natural resource management from Colorado State
University, she felt burned out by the publish-or-perish culture of
academia. So she began working in redevelopment, helping revitalize
small towns. But Bott remained mindful all the while of the privileged
life she led compared with so many other Americans, including her
brother, a senior intelligence officer serving in Iraq. While some
people's rumination comes from the things that they do, hers came from
what she wasn't doing. She needed a change. After working stateside for
several years, Bott found a job with a State Department contractor in
Iraq that supported the new government's efforts to take firmer control
of different regions of the country. She landed in Baghdad in January
2007 and spent a year deployed in Ramadi, the Iraqi city Time magazine
had dubbed "the most dangerous place in Iraq" only a month before she
arrived. She spent much of her time there developing a long-term
transition strategy for the new Iraqi government, working closely with a
small corps of marines and army engineers. Her commute involved donning
body armor, traveling in Humvee convoys, and sprinting from vehicles to
buildings to avoid sniper fire. She was a world away from cozy Colorado.
Her new career provided Bott with the sense of purpose that had been
missing from her life. It also pushed her to an emotional breaking
point. She attended memorials for fallen colleagues on a regular basis
and witnessed horrors amid her work that she wasn't prepared for---car
bombs, territorial warfare, and assassinations. Carnage became the stuff
of everyday life. In 2010, Bott returned home to the United States,
where her chatter took over. Questions about why she survived when so
many of her colleagues had not were a continual source of distress.
Memories of the horrors she witnessed replayed in her mind, compounded
by constant news reports detailing the rise of ISIS in areas where she
had so recently lived and worked. Her chatter reached a crescendo in
2014 when she learned that

in Syria ISIS had decapitated James Foley, a journalist she worked
closely with in Iraq. Against her own better judgment, she watched the
decapitation video that ISIS posted on the internet. She hadn't been the
same since. Then she saw the advertisement for the rafting trip. During
the evening after their first day out on the water, Bott filled out a
brief questionnaire that asked her to rate how much she experienced
several different positive emotions. A team of scientists, led by a
psychologist named Craig Anderson from the University of California,
Berkeley (who was also participating in the trip), were hoping to use
the paddlers' responses to understand the impact of the common but
grossly understudied emotional experience of awe. Awe is the wonder we
feel when we encounter something powerful that we can't easily explain.
We are often flooded by it in the natural world when we see an
incredible sunset, mile-high mountain peak, or beautiful view. Awe is
considered a self-transcendent emotion in that it allows people to think
and feel beyond their own needs and wants. This is reflected in what
happens in the brain during awe-inspiring experiences: The neural
activity associated with self-immersion decreases, similar to how the
brain responds when people meditate or take psychedelics like LSD, which
are notorious for blurring the line between a person's sense of self and
the surrounding world. The feeling of awe, however, is by no means
restricted to nature and the great outdoors. Some people experience it
when they see Bruce Springsteen in concert, read an Emily Dickinson
poem, or take in the Mona Lisa at the Louvre. Others may have
awe-drenched experiences when they see something extraordinary in
person, like a high-stakes sports event or a legendary object such as
the U.S. Constitution, or witness something intimately monumental, like
an infant taking its first steps. Evolutionary psychologists theorize
that we developed this emotion because it helps unite us with others by
reducing our self-interest, which provides us with a survival advantage
because groups fare better against threats and can achieve loftier goals
by working together. But the Berkeley team wasn't solely interested in
whether shooting down roaring rapids would lead the rafters to
experience awe. They figured it would. What they really wanted to know
was whether the amount of awe

they experienced on the trip would have any lasting impact on their
stress and well-being after it was over. So, at the beginning of the
rafting trip and a week after it was complete, Anderson asked the
rafters to fill out a set of measures indexing their levels of
well-being, stress, and PTSD. Much had happened between the two
assessments. They rafted dozens of miles over the course of their
four-day trip, spent numerous afternoons hiking along the riverbanks,
and looked at prehistoric petroglyphs created thousands of years ago
that led them to muse on the forgotten societies that had once trod the
same ground beside the river as they did now. Would the effects of these
experiences dissipate after the trip, or would they leave something
behind? When Anderson crunched the numbers after the study ended, he
found that participants displayed significant improvements on each of
the wellbeing measures after the trip ended; their stress and PTSD
levels declined, while their overall levels of happiness, satisfaction
with life, and sense of belonging improved. Those were interesting
results on their own. But the most fascinating finding concerned what
predicted them. As Anderson and his colleagues expected, it wasn't a
function of how much amusement or contentment or gratitude or joy or
pride that paddlers felt during each day of the rafting trip. It was how
awe inspiring it felt. Suzanne felt all of these boosts, including a
more tranquil inner voice. "That rafting trip changed my perspective
dramatically," she told me two years later. When you're in the presence
of something vast and indescribable, it's hard to maintain the view that
you---and the voice in your head---are the center of the world. This
changes the synaptic flow of your thoughts in similar ways as other
distancing techniques we've examined. In the case of awe, however, you
don't have to focus your mind on a visual exercise or on reframing an
upsetting experience. In this sense, it's similar to saying your own
name: You just have the experience, whatever it happens to be, and
relief follows. When you feel smaller in the midst of awe-inspiring
sights--- a phenomenon described as a "shrinking of the self"---so do
your problems. The Berkeley Green River white-water rafting study is
just one example of a burgeoning line of research linking awe to
physical and psychological benefits. Another study, for instance, showed
that awe leads people to perceive time as being more available, pushing
them to prioritize

time-intensive but highly rewarding experiences like going to a Broadway
show over less time-intensive---but also less rewarding---material ones
like purchasing a new watch. Meanwhile, on the physiological level, awe
is linked with reduced inflammation. The influence of awe on behavior is
so strong, in fact, that others can't help but notice it. One set of
studies found that "awe-prone" people came across as humbler to their
friends. They also reported higher humility and had a more balanced view
of their strengths and weaknesses---both hallmark features of
wisdom---and more accurately credited the role of outside influences on
their successes. There is an important caveat to consider when thinking
about the role that awe plays in our emotional lives. While the bulk of
research links it with positive outcomes, scientists have shown that a
subset of awe-inducing experiences can trigger negative feelings. Let's
call these encounters "awful" in the negative sense: the sight of a
tornado, a terrorist attack, or believing in a wrathful God. (Research
shows that approximately 80 percent of awe-related incidents are
uplifting and 20 percent aren't.) These kinds of experiences are
considered awe inspiring in the sense that they, like a majestic sunset,
are so vast and complex that we can't easily explain them. The
difference is that people perceive them as threatening. And it turns out
that when you inject a bit of threat into the awe equation, that can,
perhaps not surprisingly, turn thoughts into chatter. The operative
power of awe is its ability to make us feel smaller, nudging us to cede
control of our inner voice to a greater grandeur. But there is another
lever that our physical environments can pull to improve our internal
dialogues that is the opposite of giving in to life's wild vastness ---a
lever that doesn't help us cede control but rather helps us regain it.

e Nadal Principle In June 2018, the Spanish tennis superstar Rafael
Nadal stepped onto the clay courts of the French Open to battle in the
tournament's final match in pursuit of his eleventh championship there.
That summer day in Paris, with

fifteen thousand fans waiting restlessly to watch a world-class match,
he and his opponent, the Austrian Dominic Thiem, came out of the locker
rooms, ready to compete. Nadal did what he always does before a match.
First, he walked across the court to his bench with a single racket in
his hand. Then he took off his warm-up jacket as he faced the crowd,
bouncing back and forth vigorously on the balls of his feet. And as
usual, he placed his tournament ID card on his bench facing up. Then the
match began. Nadal jumped ahead right away, winning the first set. After
each point, he fiddled with his hair and shirt before the next serve, as
if arranging them back in place. During breaks in the action, he sipped
a power drink and water and then returned both exactly as they had
been---in front of his chair to his left, one precisely behind the
other, aligned at a diagonal with the court. Two sets later, Nadal beat
Thiem and left the French Open victorious yet again. Although you might
think that competing against world-class athletes and making sure you
don't pull a muscle are the most essential parts of professional tennis,
that's not true for Nadal, one of the greatest players in history. "What
I battle hardest to do in a tennis match," he says, "is to quiet the
voices in my head." And his quirky customs on the court, which many of
his fans find amusing but strange, provide him with a perfectly
reasonable method of doing so. By always placing his ID faceup,
carefully arranging his water bottles so they are perfectly aligned in
front of his bench, and making sure that his hair is just right before a
serve, Nadal is engaging in a process called compensatory control; he's
creating order in his physical environment to provide him with the order
he seeks internally. As he puts it, "It's a way of placing myself in a
match, ordering my surroundings to match the order I seek in my head."
This tendency to structure elements in our environment as a buffer
against chatter goes beyond contexts in which our performance is being
evaluated. It extends to any of the spaces that we occupy. As a result,
humans infuse order into their external surroundings---and by extension
their minds---in a variety of ways. Some are very similar to Rafael
Nadal's.

This might explain the global influence of Marie Kondo and her 2014
bestselling book, The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up. Her philosophy
of decluttering our homes by only retaining objects that give us joy is
a strategy for influencing how we feel by imposing order on the
environment. But how does the ordering of our surroundings influence
what's happening inside our minds? To answer this question, it's crucial
to understand the pivotal role that perceptions of control---the belief
that we possess the ability to impact the world in the ways we
desire---play in our lives. The desire to have control over oneself is a
strong human drive. Believing that we have the ability to control our
fate influences whether we try to achieve goals, how much effort we
exert to do so, and how long we persist when we encounter challenges.
Given all this, it is not surprising that increasing people's sense of
control has been linked to benefits that span the gamut from improved
physical health and emotional well-being, to heightened performance at
school and work, to more satisfying interpersonal relationships.
Conversely, feeling out of control often causes our chatter to spike and
propels us to try to regain it. Which is where turning to our physical
environments becomes relevant. In order for you to truly feel in
control, you have to believe not only that you are capable of exerting
your will to influence outcomes but that the world around you, in turn,
is an orderly place where any actions you engage in will have their
intended effect. Seeing order in the world is comforting because it
makes life easier to navigate and more predictable. The need for order
in the external world is so strong, one study found, that after
recalling a chatter-provoking incident and focusing on their lack of
control, participants actually saw illusory patterns in images. In lieu
of other avenues for simulating order, their minds led them to imagine
the patterns. In another experiment, participants who couldn't control
the noise levels in their surroundings were asked to choose either a
postcard of a water lily with a black border that conveyed the idea of
structure or a similar postcard that lacked a border. On average, they
preferred the one with the structured border, another visual shorthand
for order. What scientists have discovered, however, is that just like
Nadal we can simulate a sense of order in the world---and by extension
in our own minds

---by organizing our surroundings and making sure that our physical
environments conform to a particular, controllable structure. The
fascinating thing about seeking compensation for chaos in one area (that
is, our minds) by creating order in another (that is, the physical
environment) is that it doesn't even have to have anything to do with
the specific issue that is throwing off our inner voice. This is why
imposing order on our environments is so useful; it's almost always easy
to do. And the value of engaging in this practice is impressive. For
instance, one experiment demonstrated that just reading about the world
described as an orderly place reduced anxiety. Unsurprisingly, research
indicates that people who live in more disadvantaged
neighborhoods---such as the Robert Taylor Homes in Chicago, and likely
the areas of Iraq where Suzanne Bott worked ---experience more
depression, in part because of disorder they perceive in their
surroundings. In contemporary culture, many people view overly frequent
attempts to order one's environment as a sign of pathology. Consider,
for example, a subset of people with obsessive-compulsive disorder who
are strongly motivated to arrange things so they are orderly. What this
research on compensatory control suggests is that these people may
simply be taking the strong desire people have to establish order in
their surroundings---in order to gain a sense of control---to an
extreme. There is logic to what they do, even if restraint is lacking.
What makes OCD harmful---a psychological disorder---is that the need
that people with this condition display for order in the environment is
excessive and interferes with their normal daily functioning. As a
parallel case, our need for order can also get out of control in our
larger social surroundings. Just look at the recent proliferation of
conspiracy theories online, in which the chaos and upheaval of events
are attributed to the shadowy (and orderly) plan of diabolical forces.
In this case, people are grasping for order through a narrative
mechanism, but often to the detriment of others (the conspiracies are,
after all, usually false and based on an absence of evidence). What
research on our need for order and the benefits of nature and awe makes
clear is how closely intertwined our physical environments are with our
minds. They're part of the same tapestry. We're embedded in our

physical spaces, and different features of these spaces activate
psychological forces inside us, which affect how we think and feel. Now
we know not only why we are drawn to different features of our
environment but also how we can make proactive choices to increase the
benefits we derive from them. ---

In 2007, the last of the Robert Taylor Homes was demolished. The city
had long since moved out all of the residents, and the once famous
symbol of urban blight, segregation, and social disorder was set to be
redeveloped into a new complex of mixed-income homes and retail and
community spaces. Such a positive, orderly transformation would likely
be awe inspiring to the people who remember the crime and violence the
buildings were once home to. Whether the new iteration will have green
space integrated into its design in a way that benefits its residents is
yet to be determined, but the legacy the original complex left behind
still reverberates through the history of Chicago, and the history of
science. It is a lasting example of how our environments play a pivotal
role in shaping what we think, feel, and do and the importance of
actively taking control of our surroundings for our own benefit. For all
the power of our environments, though, we don't just gain psychological
relief from our surroundings and the things that fill them. As we saw
with the need to exert control, there are also specific things we do in
our environments that can help us harness our inner voices, but imposing
order the way Nadal does is only the beginning. The methods at our
disposal are often so strange, and their effects so strong, that they
almost seem like magic.

ï£ï¨ï¡ï°ï´ï¥ï² ï³ï¥ï¶ï¥ï®

Mind Magic

O

ne morning in 1762, a three-year-old named Maria Theresia von Paradis
woke up blind. The daughter of an adviser to the Holy Roman Empress,
Maria Theresia grew up in Vienna and, in spite of her loss of sight,
lived a relatively charmed life. Born a musical prodigy, she excelled at
the clavichord, a small rectangular keyboard, and organ. Her talent
combined with her disability earned her the attention and generosity of
the empress, who ensured that she received a pension and the best
education available. By the time she was a teenager, she was a
celebrated musician, playing at the most exclusive salons in Vienna and
beyond. Mozart would even write a concerto for her. Yet Maria Theresia's
parents didn't give up on the idea of their daughter regaining her
vision. As she grew up, doctors experimented with a variety of
treatments, administering everything from leeches to electric shocks to
Maria Theresia's eyes, all to no avail. Her vision didn't return. Even
worse, the treatments left her with a host of maladies. By the time she
was eighteen, she suffered from bouts of vomiting, diarrhea, headaches,
and fainting spells. Enter Franz Anton Mesmer, a mysterious
Vienna-trained physician who had become well-connected among the city's
elite. He claimed to have pioneered a medical intervention that could
cure a broad range of physical and emotional ills by altering the flow
of an imperceptible force that

coursed through the universe using magnetic principles alone. Mesmer
cured people's conditions by channeling this invisible energy with
magnets and his hands. He called this technique animal magnetism. It
would later be eponymized as "mesmerism." In 1777, when she was
eighteen, Maria Theresia began undergoing treatment with Mesmer. Over
the course of several months, he touched her eyes and body with his
magnets, telling her about animal magnetism and how it would heal her.
She was a believer, as were her parents, and sure enough her sight
miraculously returned. Not all at once, but in fits and starts. At
first, she just saw blurry images. But then she started distinguishing
between black and white objects. Eventually, her sense of color came
back. While her perception of depth and proportions still lagged, she
gradually began to make out human faces. Yet instead of filling her with
joy after all these years, they frightened her, especially noses. The
visual world had become alien to her. But the change was still
incredible. She could finally see again. Briefly. Maria Theresia's
parents had a dramatic falling-out with Mesmer, which eventually caused
their treatment sessions to end. Hearsay had it that her parents were
worried their daughter would lose her pension if she fully recovered her
sight. Another version suggested Mesmer and Maria Theresia had been
caught carrying on an illicit affair. In any case, their time together
was over, and amid swirling rumors Mesmer left Vienna. And when the
medical master of animal magnetism disappeared from her life, so did
Maria Theresia's vision, yet again. Mesmer's story, however, didn't end
there. After leaving Vienna and relocating to Paris, he opened a clinic
and once again ingratiated himself with the upper classes. He even
treated King Louis XVI's wife, Marie Antoinette, along with one of his
brothers. During the following years, the demand for Mesmer's services
was so great that to increase his profits, he devised a method to
increase the number of patients he could simultaneously treat: He
directed many people to stand or sit shoulder to shoulder around a
wooden tub filled with water and tiny shreds of iron that he had
magnetized. Metal rods jutted out from the tub, and with

music playing quietly in the background, patients applied the rods to
the part of their body that was bothering them while Mesmer walked
around adjusting the flow of magnetic energy between rod and patient.
The effectiveness of Mesmer's treatment differed depending on the
patients he saw, in some cases significantly. Some people experienced
small tinges of pain in the affected parts of their body; some convulsed
as if they were having seizures. Others simply felt cured. But not
everyone saw improvements. Some experienced something else: nothing at
all. Eventually, in 1784, King Louis had heard enough about mesmerism.
He ordered a royal commission of scientists to investigate Mesmer's
techniques, led by none other than Benjamin Franklin, who was living in
Paris as a diplomat at the time. From the outset, the commission was
skeptical of Mesmer's claims. They didn't doubt that some people
benefited from being mesmerized. They just didn't believe that the cause
was an invisible magnetic force. The commission's investigation did
little to alter their opinion. In one experiment, for example, a woman
who was a passionate believer in mesmerism sat next to a closed door. On
the other side of the door a Mesmer-trained physician actively applied
magnetic energy. When the woman didn't know he was on the other side,
she showed no signs of being mesmerized. The moment the same physician
made his presence known, the woman began to jerk and flail wildly,
indicating the treatment's success. Many similar demonstrations
followed. After concluding the investigation, Franklin and his
commission published a damning critique of Mesmer's methods. They wrote
that the only healing power that they had observed was the one residing
within the human mind: that people simply expecting to feel a certain
way could produce a positive outcome---not "animal magnetism." While
Mesmer was indeed peddling a force that didn't exist, more than two
hundred years later we now know that he provided the world with a
valuable peek into a unique tool for combating chatter, which scientific
research has only recently caught up to: the magical-seeming power of
what we believe, and the profound implications it has for our minds and
bodies. Mesmer hadn't discovered animal magnetism. He had simply
administered a placebo.

From Worry Dolls to Nasal Sprays Ask most people what a placebo is, and
they'll likely tell you that it is, basically, nothing. Placebos are
commonly understood to be a substance---a sugar pill, in many
cases---that is used in pharmaceutical research to gauge the
effectiveness of an actual drug. In reality, though, a placebo can be
anything ---not only a pill, but also a person, an environment, even a
lucky charm. And what makes placebos so intriguing is that they can make
us feel better even though they have no active medical ingredients. We
use placebos in research to verify that a new medicine or procedure has
a clear medicinal effect over and above the simple power of suggestion
alone. Doing so acknowledges that the mind possesses real healing
potential, but placebos aren't something generally thought of as
substantial in their own right. They have long been understood as a tool
serving a greater purpose, with no separate use of their own. This
completely misses the point. Ben Franklin, of course, didn't miss this
point. He understood that the benefits Mesmer gave to his patients were
real even if animal magnetism wasn't. Yet his timeless insight about the
mind's role in healing was swallowed by the sensational story of Mesmer
himself. This lasted until the mid-twentieth century, when scientists
began to question the idea that placebos were merely a foil for
research---in essence, nothing. We now know they are very much
something: a remarkable testament to the psychologically intertwined
nature of belief and healing, and a hidden back door for subduing
chatter. Placebos are part of an ancient human tradition of endowing
objects or symbols with "magic." The mythical seal of King Solomon
consists of two interlaced triangles and was believed, among other
things, to ward off harmful demons. Likewise, long before it became
synonymous with Nazism, the swastika was considered a symbol of good
fortune. And still today in Guatemala, when children are scared, they
are given a set of tiny figurines dressed in traditional Mayan garb
called worry dolls whose job is to take their concerns away.

Many people also develop their own idiosyncratic lucky charms. For
instance, the model Heidi Klum carries a tiny bag filled with her baby
teeth when she flies and clutches it during turbulence. (Weird, I know,
but it helps her.) Michael Jordan wore his college shorts beneath his
Chicago Bulls uniform during every game. Of late the healing practice of
crystals has become big business---a billion-dollar business, in fact.
In a broad sense, placebos are very common. We would be mistaken to
write off people who cherish charmed objects as misguided.
Scientifically speaking, it's quite rational. Study after study
demonstrates that simply believing that a placebo---a charmed object,
healing human presence (like a shaman or trusted physician), or special
environment---is going to make us feel better actually does. For
example, fewer stomach cramps for irritable bowel syndrome patients,
less frequent headache attacks for migraine sufferers, and improved
respiratory symptoms for asthmatics. Though the amount of relief that
placebos provide varies notably across diseases and patients---like
Mesmer's patients, some people are more naturally sensitive to placebos
than others---in some cases it can be substantial. Placebos are even
effective for Parkinson's disease. In one experiment, scientists
injected a promising new chemical treatment into the brains of patients
with advanced Parkinson's symptoms. The hope was that doing so would
stimulate dopamine production, impoverished levels of which are a root
cause of the disease. After the surgeries were performed, the scientists
monitored the patients' symptoms over the next two years. At first
glance, the findings were encouraging. Participants who received the
injection experienced a significant decline in their symptoms. But there
was one problem. Participants in a "sham surgery" group who also had
their brains drilled into but didn't have the injection---a placebo, in
this context--- experienced the same decline in symptoms. They thought
they had received the special treatment, so their brains and bodies
responded as if they had. The message from this and many other studies
is clear: Our minds are sometimes as powerful as modern medicine. But
what about chatter? After all, Mesmer also cured patients suffering from
"hysteria," a term that was once used to describe people who experienced
difficulty controlling heightened emotions. The placebo of

animal magnetism had helped them too. So, do placebos help the inner
voice? This was the question that I began discussing one day over coffee
with the neuroscientist Tor Wager in 2006, when I was still in graduate
school and he was a newly minted assistant professor at Columbia. "What
if we asked people to inhale a nasal spray filled with saline?" he said.
"We'll tell them it's a painkiller. I bet that would make them feel
better. And we'll also look at their brains." I won't say I thought Tor
was crazy, but I was skeptical at first. Nonetheless, we soon went ahead
with the experiment. The result was the study in which we brought the
heartbroken of New York City into the lab to study their brains. You'll
recall that we discovered a fascinating overlap between the experience
of emotional and physical pain by monitoring participants' brain
activity as they looked at a photo of the person who dumped them. But
that was only the first part of the experiment. After participants
completed that phase of the study, an experimenter in a white lab coat
slid them out of the brain scanner and escorted them to a room down the
hallway. The experimenter closed the door, then presented half of them
with a nasal spray, telling them it contained a harmless saline solution
that would improve the clarity of the MRI brain images that we hoped to
collect during the next phase of the study. Then participants inhaled
the spray twice in each nostril and returned to the scanner for a second
round of brain imaging. The other group underwent the exact same
procedure with one crucial difference. The experimenter told them that
their nasal spray contained an opioid analgesic drug that would
temporarily blunt their experience of pain. The salty spray was our
placebo. Both groups inhaled the same saline solution. But half of them
believed that they consumed a substance that would relieve their pain.
Now we measured the effect. Participants who thought they received a
painkiller reported experiencing substantially less distress when they
relived their rejection. What's more, their brain data told a similar
story; they displayed significantly less activity in their brain's
social pain circuitry compared with people who knew they had inhaled a
saline solution. We discovered that placebos can directly help people
with chatter. A spray with nothing

chemically meaningful in it could work like a painkiller for the inner
voice. It was both strange and exciting: Our minds can cause emotional
distress while simultaneously and covertly reducing that distress. The
findings from our study complemented other work documenting the benefits
of placebo for managing a range of conditions in which chatter features
prominently, like clinical manifestations of depression and anxiety. And
in many cases the benefits aren't fleeting. For instance, one large
analysis of eight studies found that the benefits of consuming a placebo
for reducing depressive symptoms endured for several months. The
wide-ranging effects of placebos raise the question of why they work so
miraculously. As it turns out, the explanation isn't miraculous at all.
It relates to a necessity our brain generates every waking second of our
lives: expectations.

Great Expectations On August 3, 2012, the comedian Tig Notaro took the
stage at the club Largo in Los Angeles and performed a set that
immediately became legendary. Four days earlier she had learned that she
had cancer in both breasts, but this was only the climax of a recent
string of misfortunes. She had been severely ill with pneumonia and gone
through a horrible breakup, and her mother had died in a fall. None of
this was funny in the least, but she grabbed the mic and started talking
anyway. "Good evening," Notaro said. "Hello. I have cancer." The crowd
laughed expectantly, anticipating a punch line. "Hi, how are you? Is
everybody having a good time?" she continued. "I have cancer." Some
people laughed. Others gasped. The joke was that it wasn't a joke. If
part of comedy is about going to uncomfortable places, Notaro did just
that. And this was very uncomfortable. But genius that she is, Notaro
walked the tightrope between laughing and crying, and got lots of
laughs.

For instance, she riffed about how her online dating life would change
now, infusing it with new urgency. "I have cancer," she said. "Serious
inquiries only." Her set continued in this startling, tragic, brave, and
hilarious vein for twenty-nine minutes in all, and eventually vaulted
Notaro to a new level of fame and success (and thankfully, she beat her
cancer). What I find so illustrative about it is the way it highlights
the essential role that expectations play in governing how we function.
Notaro knew she could make people laugh, even when talking about one of
the most somber and chatter-inducing topics imaginable. All she had to
do was say the right words in the right order, with the right tone, and
with the right pauses. She knew how to do this because of how well honed
her expectations were---her expectations about what she could do and
what the result would be. If we extend this idea, we begin to realize we
all rely on expectations every second of our lives. You walk. You move.
You speak. Now think for a second about how you are able to engage in
these actions. How do you determine where to put your foot when you
walk, where to run to catch a ball, or how to project your voice when
you're speaking to a large group? We are able to do these things because
we are constantly, both consciously and subconsciously, making
predictions about what we expect is going to happen next, and our brain
prepares to respond accordingly. The brain is a prediction machine that
is constantly trying to help us navigate the world. The more we are able
to bring our prior experiences to bear on what is required of us, the
better we should be at this. And this isn't just relevant to our
behaviors. It generalizes to our internal experiences in our bodies as
well, which is where placebos come into play. They are a hack for
harnessing the power of expectations to influence our minds and physical
health. When a doctor tells you that you'll feel better, this provides
you with information you can use to predict how you're actually going to
fare over time, especially if she has fancy medical degrees, wears a
white coat, and talks with authority. That's not a joke. Research shows
that features that you might think are peripheral---if a physician wears
a lab coat or not, whether she has acronyms attached to her name
placards, and even whether the pills

you take are referred to as "brand-labeled" or generic---subconsciously
strengthen our beliefs. Over the course of our lives, we develop
automatic beliefs about how certain objects and people influence our
health. Like Pavlov's salivating dogs, we see a pill and we reflexively
expect that consuming it will lead us to feel better, often without even
knowing what it is or how it works. This pathway for expectations, and
by extension placebos, is preconscious. It's not a product of careful
thought but rather an automatic, reflexive response. Perhaps
unsurprisingly, studies show that rodents and other animals respond to
placebos via this same automatic channel. This type of response is
adaptive. It provides us with very good guesses about how to react
quickly and effectively across a variety of situations. Yet we also
evolved an additional pathway in the brain that guides our responses:
our conscious thought. When my head aches and I take a painkiller, I
remind myself that swallowing the pill will make me feel better. This
simple awareness provides my brain with something invaluable: It helps
silence all the doubts I may have about whether the headache will ever
go away. What if nothing will help? I say to myself. This hurts so bad.
What can I do? Taking the pill offers me hope that my discomfort is
going to diminish and in doing so shifts my internal conversation.
Indeed, research indicates that these conscious appraisals draw on the
same default system in the brain where our inner voice makes its home.
In a simpler sense, what's going on is that I have a belief. This belief
shapes my expectations, which in turn makes me feel better. People tell
us things that we later tell ourselves, and we also have experiences we
extract ideas from, and this process creates an infrastructure of
expectation in the brain. What particular beliefs we have depends on the
people we know and the things that happen to us. But what's really going
on in the brain that allows this placebo "magic" to happen? Because our
beliefs pertain to so many different kinds of emotions, physiological
responses, and experiences, there is no single neural pathway that
creates the placebo effect. For instance, while believing that you'll
feel less pain is linked with lower levels of activation in pain
circuitry in the brain and spinal cord, thinking that you're drinking an
expensive wine can

increase activation in the brain's pleasure circuitry. Believing you're
consuming a fatty (versus healthy) milk shake even leads to lower levels
of the hunger hormone ghrelin. In effect, once you believe something,
your neural machinery brings it to fruition by increasing or decreasing
the activation levels of other parts of the brain or body related to the
processes you are forming beliefs about. Clearly, there are limits to
the effects of placebos. You can't completely believe your way out of
any malady. Many medical interventions do provide additional value over
and above placebos, and we now know that placebo effects tend to be
stronger for psychological outcomes (like chatter) than physical ones.
But these caveats notwithstanding, the power of placebos is both
profound and undeniable. In fact, mounting evidence indicates that
placebos can act as enhancers, supercharging the benefits of certain
medicines and treatments. The problem, however, is that the back door of
placebos is tricky to access. For one to work, we have to be deceived
into believing that we're consuming a substance or engaging in a
behavior that has actual healing properties. Outside of research, where
people who participate in studies are typically informed about the
possibility of receiving a placebo, such lying would be unethical. So
we're left in a bind: We can't lie to ourselves about the medicine we
take, which means that in the case of placebos we have access to a tool
we can't take advantage of. Or can we? If placebos are fundamentally
about changing beliefs, then what if we could identify other ways of
altering people's expectations that don't involve lying? Information
from trusted sources is a potent persuasive device. If I want to
convince you of something that you're skeptical of, facts and science
often help. Ted Kaptchuk and his team at Harvard capitalized on this
idea in 2010 when they published a study that shattered how the
scientific world thought about placebos. First, they settled on a common
illness that had already been shown to respond well to placebos:
irritable bowel syndrome. After Kaptchuk and his colleagues brought
participants with IBS into the medical center where they were performing
their study, they explained to them what placebos are and how and why
they work. In theory, just learning about the placebo pill

should have changed the participants' expectations, which in turn should
have spurred their IBS symptoms to wane. And that's exactly what
happened. Over the course of the twenty-one-day experiment, the
participants who were educated about the science behind placebo effects
and then informed that they were taking a placebo displayed fewer IBS
symptoms and greater relief compared with people who were educated about
placebos and didn't receive any pills. Understanding how a placebo could
make their IBS better actually did just that. Intrigued by the strange
new possibilities of nondeceptive placebos, my lab conducted our own
experiment to examine whether Kaptchuk's findings would generalize
beyond problems of the bowels to problems of the mind. We used a similar
method and divided participants into two groups, one of which was
informed about the science of placebos. In effect, we told them, "If you
think a substance will help you, it will." Then we gave them a
placebo---a nasal spray again---and told them again that if they thought
it would make them feel better, it would. Next, we stirred up their
negative emotions by showing them aversive pictures, such as scenes of
blood and gore (participants had agreed to view such images in advance).
Sure enough, the people in the placebo group experienced less distress.
They also displayed less emotional activity in the brain within two
seconds of viewing a distressing image. Several labs have extended this
line of research to other conditions. For example, nondeceptive placebos
have been shown to improve allergy symptoms, lower back pain, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder, and depression. We still need to perform
more work to understand how powerful and long lasting nondeceptive
placebo effects can be. But these discoveries open up a new set of
possibilities for how people can cope with physical and emotional pain,
and demonstrate how powerfully beliefs affect our inner voice and
health. They also reveal something else important---the role culture
plays in passing down chatter-fighting practices. Many of our beliefs
are transmitted by the culture we come from, such as the expectations we
have about doctors and lucky charms and all sorts of other superstitious
influences in our environments. In this sense, the families,
communities, religions, and other forms of culture that shape us

also provide us with tools for dealing with chatter. Yet beliefs aren't
the only "magical" tool that our cultures pass down to us. They offer
another approach too: rituals.

e Magic of Fishing with Sharks World War I turned out remarkably well
for Bronislaw Malinowski. A Polish-born, thirty-year-old anthropology
student at the London School of Economics, he traveled to New Guinea in
1914 to conduct fieldwork on the customs of native tribes. Soon after he
arrived, however, World War I broke out. This put Malinowski in a
politically awkward situation, because he was technically behind enemy
lines. He was a citizen of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, now at war with
Britain. Meanwhile, New Guinea was an Australian territory and thus an
ally of Britain's. As a result, Malinowski couldn't travel back to
England or home to Poland, but the local authorities decided to let him
continue his work. So he sat out the war in the remote Southern
Hemisphere, where he embarked on a quest to understand culture and the
human mind. Malinowski's most important work grew out of the two years
he spent in the Trobriand Islands, an archipelago near New Guinea,
living with the tribes there to experience their culture firsthand. With
his glasses, high boots, white clothing, and pale balding head, he stood
out from the islanders, who were dark-skinned, shirtless, and chewed
betel nuts, a stimulant like coffee, that turned their teeth red. Yet
Malinowski succeeded at gaining their acceptance and a deep
understanding of their traditions, including the "magic" involved in
their fishing practices. When the islanders went out on fishing
expeditions in safe, shallow lagoons, they simply grabbed their fishing
spears and nets, hopped into their canoes, and glided off along the
island waterways until they found their preferred spots. But when they
fished in the shark-infested unpredictable waters that surrounded the
island, the Trobrianders behaved differently. Before setting off, they
offered food to their ancestors, rubbed herbs on

their canoes, and chanted magical spells. Then they offered more magical
incantations when they were out on the open sea. "I kick thee down, O
shark," they intoned in their language, Kilivila. "Duck down under
water, shark. Die, shark, die away." Of course, the Trobrianders weren't
actually engaging in magic. The elaborate choreography of preparation
that they engaged in before going on dangerous fishing trips transcends
the particularities of their tribe. They were doing something entirely
practical on an emotional level that speaks to the psychology of human
beings. They were engaging in ritual---another tool for mitigating
chatter. When people are filled with grief, religious institutions
prescribe mourning rites to engage in, such as ritual bathing, burying
the dead, and having funerals or memorial services. When cadets
attending the U.S. Military Academy at West Point experience stress
before an exam, they are told that dressing up in their uniform and
walking across campus to spin the spurs on the back of a bronze statue
of a Civil War general named John Sedgwick will improve their exam
performance. We see rituals increasingly finding their ways into the
business world as well. When Southwest Airlines rebranded in 2014 with a
new heart-shaped logo on the sides of its planes, pilots began touching
it as they stepped on board, and this spread throughout the company,
presumably as a source of comfort when facing the daily, inescapable
risks of flight. These are all examples of culturally transmitted
rituals, but you can probably think of several idiosyncratic rituals you
have created on your own, or those of others. The Hall of Fame third
baseman Wade Boggs fielded precisely 150 ground balls, ran wind sprints
at exactly 7:17 P.M. (before a 7:35 start time), and ate chicken before
every game. To cite another example, for thirty-three years Steve Jobs
would look at himself in the mirror each morning and ask himself if that
day was the last day of his life whether he'd be happy with what he was
going to do. Idiosyncratic rituals of this sort are by no means
restricted to famous people. In one study, the Harvard organizational
psychologists Michael Norton and Francesca Gino found that the majority
of rituals people performed after experiencing a significant loss, such
as the death of a loved one or the end of a romantic relationship, were
unique.

Regardless of whether the rituals we engage in are personalized or
collective, research indicates that when many people experience chatter,
they naturally turn to this seemingly magical form of behavior and it
offers relief for the inner voice. A study performed in Israel during
the 2006 Lebanon conflict found that women living in war zones who
ritualistically recited psalms saw their anxiety decrease, unlike those
who didn't. For Catholics, reciting the rosary is a similar dampener of
anxiety. Rituals can also help with meeting goals. One experiment found
that engaging in a ritual before meals helped women who struggled to eat
healthier consume fewer calories than women who tried to be "mindful"
about their eating. Rituals also positively influence performance in
high-pressure situations like math exams and (much more fun but even
more chatter inducing) performing karaoke. One memorable experiment had
participants sing the band Journey's epic song "Don't Stop Believin' "
in front of another person. Those who did a ritual beforehand felt less
anxiety, had a lower heart rate, and sang better than the participants
who didn't. Lesson learned: Start believing in rituals. It's important
to point out that rituals aren't simply habits or routines. Several
features distinguish them from the more prosaic customs that fill our
lives. First, they tend to consist of a rigid sequence of behaviors
often performed in the same order. That's different from a habit or
routine, in which case the sequence of steps composing those behaviors
can be looser or frequently change. Take one of my daily routines as an
example. When I wake up every morning, I do three things: I pop a
thyroid pill (my gland is just a teeny bit underactive), brush my teeth,
and drink a cup of tea. While my physician would prefer I take my
medication first (it metabolizes better on an empty stomach), that
doesn't always happen. Some days the tea comes first. On others, I'll
brush as soon as I wake up. And that's okay. I don't feel compelled to
repeat the sequence of behaviors if I don't do them in a particular
order, and I know that their order won't have a significant effect on me
for good or ill. Now let's contrast what I do every morning with what
the Australian Olympic swimmer Stephanie Rice does before every race.
She swings her

arms eight times, presses her goggles four times, and touches her cap
four times. She always does this. This progression of behaviors is
Rice's personal and peculiar invention, as are lots of other
personalized rituals. In fact, the specific steps that compose rituals
often have no apparent connection to the broader goal they're aimed at
bringing about. For example, it's not clear how Rice tapping her goggles
and cap four times will help her swim faster. But it has meaning for
her, and this connects us to the second feature of rituals. Rituals are
infused with meaning. They are charged with significance because they
have a crucial underlying purpose, whether it's putting a small rock on
a cemetery headstone to honor the dead, engaging in a rain dance to
nourish crops, or taking Communion. Rituals take on a greater meaning in
part because they help us transcend our own concerns, connecting us with
forces larger than ourselves. They simultaneously serve to broaden our
perspective and enhance our sense of connection with other people and
forces. The reason rituals are so effective at helping us manage our
inner voices is that they're a chatter-reducing cocktail that influences
us through several avenues. For one, they direct our attention away from
what's bothering us; the demands they place on working memory to carry
out the tasks of the ritual leave little room for anxiety and negative
manifestations of the inner voice. This might explain why pregame
rituals abound in sports, providing a distraction at the most
anxiety-filled moment. Many rituals also provide us with a sense of
order, because we perform behaviors we can control. For example, we
can't control what will happen to our children throughout their lives,
and we can protect them only to a limited degree, which is a source of
chatter for many parents. But when they are born, we can baptize them or
perform any other of a variety of birth rituals that provide us with an
illusion of control. Because rituals are infused with meaning, and often
connect to purposes or powers that transcend our individual concerns,
they also make us feel connected to important values and communities,
which fulfill our emotional needs and serve as a hedge against
isolation. This symbolic feature of rituals also often furnishes us with
awe, which broadens our perspective in ways that minimize how
preoccupied we are with our

concerns. Of course, rituals also frequently activate the placebo
mechanism: If we believe they will aid us, then they do. One of the most
intriguing aspects of rituals is that we often engage in them without
even knowing it. An experiment performed in the Czech Republic found,
for instance, that inducing college students to experience high levels
of anxiety led them to subsequently engage in more ritualized cleaning
behaviors. Similar findings are evident among children. In one
experiment, six-year-olds who were socially rejected by their peers were
more likely to engage in repetitive, ritual-like behaviors than other
children in the study who weren't rejected. I have personal experience
with similar ritualism myself. While I was writing this book, when I was
stuck staring at my computer screen with writer's block, my inner stream
of thoughts filled with doubts about whether I'd ever finish, I found
myself going to the kitchen to do the dishes, wipe down the counter, and
then organize the papers strewn across my home-office desk (a new set of
behaviors that my wife found strange, though not objectionable given my
usual predilection for making messes rather than cleaning them up). Only
when I began researching this chapter did I realize that this was my
ritual for dealing with the despair of the writing process and my
looming deadline. This organic emergence of rituals is seemingly a
product of the brain's remarkable ability to monitor whether we are
achieving our desired goals--- for our purposes, the goal of avoiding an
inner voice that turns painfully negative. According to many influential
theories, your brain is set up like a thermostat to detect when
discrepancies emerge between your current and your desired end states.
When a discrepancy is registered, that signals us to act to bring the
temperature down. And engaging in rituals is one way that people can do
this. I should stress that we don't have to wait to be subconsciously
prompted to engage in rituals when we experience chatter. We can engage
in them deliberately as well, as I now do whenever I'm feeling stuck at
work (my kitchen and home office have never been so clean). There are
multiple ways to do so. One approach involves creating our own rituals
to engage in before or after a stress-inducing event or to help us deal
with chatter. Experiments show that cuing people to engage in completely

arbitrary acts that are nevertheless rigid in structure has benefits.
For instance, in the karaoke study in which participants had to sing
Journey's "Don't Stop Believin'," they were asked to draw a picture of
their feelings, sprinkle salt on it, count to five aloud, then ball up
the paper and toss it in the trash. This mere onetime reliance on a
ritual improved their performance. Rituals that we see people engage in
in lab settings, however, are stripped of their cultural meaning, which
we know has additional benefits because it provides a sense of awe,
social connection, and feelings of transcendence. With this in mind,
another ready avenue for taking advantage of rituals when facing chatter
is to lean on those transmitted by our cultures---our families,
workplaces, and the broader social institutions we belong to. You might
draw on your religion and go to a service, or even the quirky but
meaningful rituals of your family. For instance, I make waffles for my
kids every Sunday morning after I get back from working out at the gym.
It doesn't matter where rituals come from or how exactly they form; they
just help.

e Magic of the Mind The power of placebos and rituals doesn't reside in
supernatural forces (though some people believe it does, and that in no
way diminishes the benefits of such practices). Their benefits lie
instead in their capacity to activate chatter-fighting tools that we
carry inside us. Considering their potency, it's interesting to note
that while many people develop their own personalized rituals and
placebos, the cultures we are a part of provide us with a vast
assortment of these techniques. Culture is often compared to the
invisible air we breathe, and much of what we inhale are the beliefs and
practices that shape our minds and behavior. You can even think of
culture as a system for delivering tools to help people combat chatter.
Yet our scientific understanding of these tools is continually
advancing, which raises a question: How do we spread this newfound
knowledge and integrate it into our culture as a whole?

I never truly contemplated this question until I was forced to confront
it when a student of mine raised her hand in class. What she asked me
changed everything.

Conclusion

"W

hy are we learning about this now?" These words, asked in exasperation,
came from a student named Arielle on the final day of a seminar I was
teaching. For the past three months, I had spent my Tuesday afternoons
with twenty-eight University of Michigan undergraduates in the basement
of the Psychology Department discussing what science has taught us about
people's ability to control their emotions, including chatter caused by
the inner voice. The students' final assignment was to come to class
with questions for me. It was their chance to raise any lingering doubts
before the end of the course, and in most cases before graduating and
moving on to the next phase of their lives. It was the session I looked
forward to the most each semester I taught the class. The discussions
always sparked interesting ideas, some of which even led to new studies.
Little did I know when I entered the classroom on that sunny afternoon
that this particular final session would add a new dimension to my work
as a scientist. As soon as class began, Arielle had shot her hand up,
urging me to call on her first. I obliged, but I didn't understand what
she was asking. "Can you be more specific?" I said. "We've spent this
whole semester learning ways to feel better and be more successful," she
said, "but most of us are going to graduate this year. Why didn't anyone
teach us about these things earlier, when we could have really benefited
from them?" After you teach a class a few times, you usually know what
questions to expect. But this one was new. I felt as if I had just run
face-first into a wall I

hadn't known was there. I deflected Arielle's question onto the rest of
the class (yep: classic professor technique). Students started raising
their hands and offering ideas. But I was barely listening. I was stuck
inside my head, fixated on what she had said. The truth was, I didn't
have an answer. Eventually, class time wound down, I said goodbye to the
students, and off they went into their futures. But what Arielle had
been getting at lodged itself in my mind like a splinter. Throughout my
career---and throughout that semester too---I have met people desperate
to escape their inner voice because of how bad it makes them feel. This
is understandable. As we know, chatter can pollute our thoughts and fill
us with painful emotions that, over time, damage all that we hold
dear---our health, our hopes, and our relationships. If you think of
your inner voice as an inner tormentor, then it's natural to fantasize
about permanently muting it. But losing your inner voice is, in fact,
the last thing you would ever want if your aim is to live a functional
life, much less a good one. While many cultures today celebrate living
in the moment, our species didn't evolve to function this way all the
time. Quite the contrary. We developed the ability to keep our inner
worlds pulsing with thoughts and memories and imaginings fueled by the
inner voice. Thanks to our busy internal conversations, we are able to
hold information in our minds, reflect on our decisions, control our
emotions, simulate alternative futures, reminisce about the past, keep
track of our goals, and continually update the personal narratives that
undergird our sense of who we are. This inability to ever fully escape
our minds is a main driver of our ingenuity: the things we build, the
stories we tell, and the futures we dream. It is a mistake, however, to
value our own inner voice only when it buoys our emotions. Even when the
conversations we have with ourselves turn negative, that in and of
itself isn't a bad thing. As much as it can hurt, the ability to
experience fear, anxiety, anger, and other forms of distress is quite
useful in small doses. They mobilize us to respond effectively to
changes in our environments. Which is to say, a lot of the time the
inner voice is valuable not in spite of the pain it causes us but
because of it.

We experience pain for a reason. It warns us of danger, signaling us to
take action. This process provides us with a tremendous survival
advantage. In fact, each year a small number of people are born with a
genetic mutation that makes it impossible for them to feel pain. They
usually end up dying young as a result. Because they don't experience,
for instance, the discomfort of an infection, the burn of scalding
water, or the agony of a broken bone, they don't know the help they are
in need of or their extreme vulnerability. This phenomenon mirrors the
indispensability of the harsh side of our inner voice. It can cloud our
thoughts with negative emotions, but if we didn't have this critical
self-reflective capacity, we'd have a difficult time learning, changing,
and improving. As uncomfortable as it is when I make a joke that bombs
at a dinner party, I'm grateful that afterward I can replay what went
wrong in my mind so I hopefully won't embarrass myself---and my
wife---next time. You wouldn't want to live a life without an inner
voice that upsets you some of the time. It would be like braving the sea
in a boat with no rudder. When Jill Bolte Taylor, the neuroanatomist who
suffered a debilitating stroke, experienced her verbal stream crawling
to a stop, and along with it her chatter, she felt strangely elated but
also empty and disconnected. We need the periodic pain of our internal
conversations. The challenge isn't to avoid negative states altogether.
It's to not let them consume you. Which brings me back to my student
Arielle. What she meant when she asked her question was this: Why hadn't
she learned earlier in her life how to reduce episodes of full-blown
chatter? Of course, she, just like all of us, possessed many of the
tools she needed to control her inner voice. But until she took my
class, she didn't have an explicit guide for how to manage it, and
Arielle's question made me wonder whether we were doing enough to share
this knowledge. A few weeks after that class, my older daughter, who was
four at the time, came home from school in tears. She told me that a boy
in her class was taking her toys, which was making her feel bad. As she
recounted what happened and I tried to comfort her, Arielle's question
popped back into my head. Here I was, a supposed expert on controlling
emotions, and yet my own daughter was struggling. Granted, she was just
four, which is when the

neural circuitry underlying the ability to control your emotions is
still developing. Nonetheless, the thought troubled me. I wondered about
what she and her friends were learning at school and whether they would
develop the tools that Arielle felt had been withheld from her until she
took my class. And eighteen years later, would my daughter ask a
professor the same question Arielle asked me? Or more likely, she'd ask
me, which would make me feel even worse. During the days and months that
followed, I reflected on the rich and startling variety of ways to
distance, to talk to oneself, to leverage and improve personal
relationships, to benefit from our environments, and to use placebos and
rituals to harness the ability of the mind to heal itself. These
techniques had been hidden in plain sight inside us and around us. And
while no specific tool is a panacea, they all have the potential to
bring down the temperature of our inner voice when it runs too hot. But
these findings didn't seem to be penetrating into the world. So I got to
work and recruited a group of like-minded scientists and educators to
translate what we know about the science of managing emotion into a
course that could be weaved into middle and high school curricula. After
traveling around the country and meeting with hundreds of educators and
scientists, in the fall of 2017 we launched a pilot study. Its aim was
to translate research on controlling our emotions---including how to
harness our inner voice---into a curriculum, and to evaluate what the
implications of teaching students about this information are for their
health, performance, and relationships with others. We call it the
Toolbox Project. And thankfully, our efforts are beginning to pay off.
In the pilot study, a culturally and socioeconomically diverse group of
some 450 students from a public school in the United States participated
in the toolbox course we designed. The results were exciting: Kids in
the toolbox-curriculum classes who learned about techniques such as
journaling, distanced self-talk, and challenge-oriented reframing
actually used them to a significant extent in their daily lives. And
this is just the start. Soon we are planning to run a much larger study
with close to twelve thousand students.

---

e metaphor of the toolbox doesn't just describe the curriculum my
colleagues and I developed. It also describes what I hope you take away
from this book. Distancing is a tool, whether it's imagining yourself as
a fly on the wall, mentally traveling through time, or visualizing
yourself and your predicaments as physically smaller in your mind. So is
distanced self-talk: You can talk to yourself or about yourself using
non-first-person pronouns or your own name, and you can normalize your
challenges with the universal "you." We can be an inner-voice tool for
the people grappling with chatter in our lives---and they can do the
same for us---by avoiding corumination and finding a balance between
providing caring support and helping others constructively reframe their
problems when their emotions cool. We can also help in invisible ways
that ease the strains of people under stress who may feel insecure about
their capabilities. These antichatter approaches apply to the ways we
interact in our increasingly immersive digital lives as well, though
there are behaviors online that are just as important to avoid: passive
instead of active use of social media, and doing things lacking empathy
that we wouldn't do off-line. Another subset of tools comes from the
complex world around us. Mother Nature is a veritable toolshed for our
minds, containing pleasant and effective ways of restoring the
attentional tools that are so helpful for reducing chatter and
bolstering our health. It can fill us with awe, as can plenty of
experiences found not on mountaintops but at concerts, in places of
worship, and even in special moments in our own homes (just remembering
when each of my daughters said "Dada" for the first time rekindles awe
in me). Imposing order on our surroundings likewise can be comforting
and allow us to feel better, think more clearly, and perform at higher
levels. Then there are our beliefs, whose malleability can work to our
advantage. Through the neural apparatus of expectation, sugar pills that
we know are just sugar pills can improve our health, as can the exercise
of rituals, both those that are culturally ordained and those we create
ourselves. The power

of the mind to heal itself is, indeed, magical (in the awe-inspiring,
not supernatural, sense). You now know about these different tools, but
it's critical that you build your own toolbox. That is your personal
puzzle, and it's why subduing chatter can frequently be so challenging,
even when we know the research. Science has shown us so much, but there
is still more to learn. We have only just begun to understand how the
various strategies for controlling chatter work together for different
people in different situations, or how they work when used
interchangeably. Why do some tools work better for us than others? We
each need to discover which tools we find most effective. Managing our
inner voice has the potential not only to help us become more
clearheaded but to strengthen the relationships we share with our
friends and loved ones, help us offer better support to people we care
about, build more organizations and companies where people are insulated
against burnout, design smarter environments that leverage nature and
order, and rethink digital platforms to promote connection and empathy.
In short, changing the conversations we have with ourselves has the
potential to change our lives. ---

My interest in introspection came from my dad, and when people hear the
story about how he used to encourage me to "go inside" and "ask yourself
the question" during my childhood, they often wonder whether I do the
same with my children when they feel upset. The answer to that question
is no. I most certainly do not. I'm not my dad. But that doesn't mean
that I don't talk to my kids about how they can address their chatter.
As a parent who wants his children to be happy, healthy, and successful,
and as a scientist who knows how important harnessing the conversations
we have with ourselves is for achieving these goals, I can't think of a
more important lesson to teach them. I just do it in my own way.

I stick Band-Aids on their elbows when they're upset and tell them that
if they think the Band-Aid will make them feel better, it will. I take
them for walks in the splendidly green arboretum near our house when
they feel sad, and carefully nudge them to focus on the big picture when
they tell me about their latest tiff on the playground or in the
classroom. And when they are acting impossibly irrational for the
silliest reasons, I ask them to tell themselves what they imagine their
mom or I would say to them. And I tickle them. One of the things that
has become clear to me while writing this book is just how influential a
role my wife and I play in the conversations that our daughters have
with themselves. We ourselves are one of their tools, in the sense that
we provide them with chatter support when they need it and we create the
culture they are immersed in at home. We are shaping their inner voices,
just as they increasingly affect our own. Often the things I tell my
daughters to rein in their chatter help. Sometimes, I'll admit, they
roll their eyes the way I sometimes did with my dad. But over time I've
noticed that both of them have begun to implement many of these
practices on their own, cycling back and forth through the different
techniques they have at their disposal in their unique style as they
discover what works. In this way, I hope I can help my daughters harness
the conversations they have with themselves throughout their lives. I
also remind my daughters and myself that while creating a calming
distance between our thoughts and our experiences can be useful when
chatter strikes, when it comes to joy, doing the opposite---immersing
ourselves in life's most cherished moments---helps us savor them. The
human mind is one of evolution's greatest creations, not just because it
allowed our species to survive and thrive, but because in spite of the
inevitable pain that comes with life, it also endowed us with a voice in
our head capable of not only celebrating the best times but also making
meaning out of the worst times. It's this voice, not the din of chatter,
that we should all listen to. I haven't been in touch with Arielle since
our last class together, so she doesn't know what her question inspired.
She will, though, if she ends up reading this book, which has been the
other effort that grew out of that final class meeting. This book is
another attempt to share the discoveries that

science has revealed but that haven't yet rooted themselves in our
culture. In a certain sense, there are too many Arielles to count out in
the world--- people hungry to learn about their own minds, how they give
rise to chatter, and how it can be controlled. So I wrote this book for
them. And for myself. And for you. Because no one should have to pace
his house at 3:00 A.M. with a Little League baseball bat.

e Tools

C

hatter reviews the different tools that exist for helping people resolve
the tension between getting caught in negative thought spirals and
thinking clearly and constructively. Many of these techniques involve
shifting the way we think to control the conversations we have with
ourselves. But a central idea of this book is that strategies for
controlling the inner voice exist outside us too, in our personal
relationships and physical environments. Scientists have identified how
these tools work in isolation. But you must figure out for yourself
which combination of these practices works best for you. To help you in
this process, I've summarized the techniques discussed in this book,
organizing them into three sections: tools that you can implement on
your own, tools that leverage your relationships with other people, and
tools that involve your environment. Each section begins with the
strategies that you are likely to find easiest to implement when chatter
strikes, building up to those that may require a little more time and
effort.

Tools You Can Implement on Your Own The ability to "step back" from the
echo chamber of our own minds so we can adopt a broader, calmer, and
more objective perspective is an important tool for combating chatter.
Many of the techniques reviewed in this section help people do this,
although some---like performing rituals and embracing
superstitions---work via other pathways.

1. Use distanced self-talk. One way to create distance when you're
experiencing chatter involves language. When you're trying to work
through a difficult experience, use your name and the second-person
"you" to refer to yourself. Doing so is linked with less activation in
brain networks associated with rumination and leads to improved
performance under stress, wiser thinking, and less negative emotion. 2.
Imagine advising a iend. Another way to think about your experience from
a distanced perspective is to imagine what you would say to a friend
experiencing the same problem as you. Think about the advice you'd give
that person, and then apply it to yourself. 3. Broaden your perspective.
Chatter involves narrowly focusing on the problems we're experiencing. A
natural antidote to this involves broadening our perspective. To do
this, think about how the experience you're worrying about compares with
other adverse events you (or others) have endured, how it fits into the
broader scheme of your life and the world, and/or how other people you
admire would respond to the same situation. 4. Re ame your experience as
a challenge. A theme of this book is that you possess the ability to
change the way you think about your experiences. Chatter is often
triggered when we interpret a situation as a threat--- something we
can't manage. To aid your inner voice, reinterpret the situation as a
challenge that you can handle, for example, by reminding yourself of how
you've succeeded in similar situations in the past, or by using
distanced self-talk. 5. Reinterpret your body's chatter response. The
bodily symptoms of stress (for example, an upset stomach before, say, a
date or presentation) are often themselves stressful (for instance,
chatter causes your stomach to grumble, which perpetuates your chatter,
which leads your stomach to continue to grumble). When this happens,
remind yourself that your bodily response to stress is an adaptive
evolutionary reaction that improves performance under high-stress
conditions. In other words, tell yourself that your sudden rapid
breathing, pounding heartbeat, and

sweaty palms are there not to sabotage you but to help you respond to a
challenge. 6. Normalize your experience. Knowing that you are not alone
in your experience can be a potent way of quelling chatter. There's a
linguistic tool for helping people do this: Use the word "you" to refer
to people in general when you think and talk about negative experiences.
Doing so helps people reflect on their experiences from a healthy
distance and makes it clear that what happened is not unique to them but
characteristic of human experience in general. 7. Engage in mental time
travel. Another way to gain distance and broaden your perspective is to
think about how you'll feel a month, a year, or even longer from now.
Remind yourself that you'll look back on whatever is upsetting you in
the future and it'll seem much less upsetting. Doing so highlights the
impermanence of your current emotional state. 8. Change the view. As you
think about a negative experience, visualize the event in your mind from
the perspective of a fly on the wall peering down on the scene. Try to
understand why your "distant self" is feeling the way it is. Adopting
this perspective leads people to focus less on the emotional features of
their experience and more on reinterpreting the event in ways that
promote insight and closure. You can also gain distance through visual
imagery by imagining moving away from the upsetting scene in your mind's
eye, like a camera panning out until the scene shrinks to the size of a
postage stamp. 9. Write expressively. Write about your deepest thoughts
and feelings surrounding your negative experience for fifteen to twenty
minutes a day for one to three consecutive days. Really let yourself go
as you jot down your stream of thoughts; don't worry about grammar or
spelling. Focusing on your experience from the perspective of a narrator
provides you with distance from the experience, which helps you make
sense of what you felt in ways that improve how you feel over time.

10. Adopt the perspective of a neutral third party. If you find yourself
experiencing chatter over a negative interaction you've had with another
person or group of people, assume the perspective of a neutral,
third-party observer who is motivated to find the best outcome for all
parties involved. Doing so reduces negative emotions, quiets an agitated
inner voice, and enhances the quality of the relationships we share with
the people we've had negative interactions with, including our romantic
partners. 11. Clutch a lucky charm or embrace a superstition. Simply
believing that an object or superstitious behavior will help relieve
your chatter often has precisely that effect by harnessing the brain's
power of expectation. Importantly, you don't have to believe in
supernatural forces to benefit from these actions. Simply understanding
how they harness the power of the brain to heal is sufficient. 12.
Perform a ritual. Performing a ritual---a fixed sequence of behaviors
that is infused with meaning---provides people with a sense of order and
control that can be helpful when they're experiencing chatter. Although
many of the rituals we engage in (for example, silent prayer,
meditation) are passed down to us from our families and cultures,
performing rituals that you create can likewise be effective for
quieting chatter.

Tools

at In ol e Other People

When we think about the role that other people in our lives play in
helping us manage our inner voice, there are two issues to consider.
First, how can we provide chatter support for others? And second, how
can we receive chatter support ourselves?

Tools for Providing Chatter Support 1. Address people's emotional and
cognitive needs. When people come to others for help with their chatter,
they generally have two needs they're trying

to fulfill: They're searching for care and support, on the one hand
(emotional needs), and concrete advice about how to move forward and
gain closure, on the other (cognitive needs). Addressing both of these
needs is vital to your ability to calm other people's chatter.
Concretely, this involves not only empathically validating what people
are going through but also broadening their perspective, providing hope,
and normalizing their experience. This can be done in person, or via
texting, social media, and other forms of digital communication. 2. Pro
ide in isible support. Offering advice about how to reduce chatter can
backfire when people don't ask for help; it threatens people's sense of
self-efficacy and autonomy. But that doesn't mean there aren't still
ways of helping others when they experience chatter and don't ask for
assistance. In such situations providing support invisibly, without
people being aware you're helping them, is useful. There are many ways
to do this. One approach involves covertly providing practical support,
like cleaning up the house without being asked. Another involves helping
broaden people's perspectives indirectly by, for example, talking in
general terms about others who have dealt with similar experiences (for
example, "It's amazing how stressful everyone finds parenthood") or by
soliciting advice from someone else but without signaling that the
questions are meant to help the person in need. For example, if my
colleague was struggling to connect with their graduate student and we
found ourselves at a function with other advisers, I might casually ask
a group whether they've experienced trouble connecting with their
students and, if so, how they managed the situation. 3. Tell your kids
to pretend they're a superhero. This strategy, popularized in the media
as "the Batman effect," is a distancing strategy that is particularly
useful for children grappling with intense emotions. Ask them to pretend
they're a superhero or cartoon character they admire, and then nudge
them to refer to themselves using that character's name when they're
confronting a difficult situation. Doing so helps them distance.

4. Touch aï¬ectionately (but respectfully). Feeling the warm embrace of a
person we love, whether that be holding someone's hand or sharing a hug,
reminds us at the conscious level that we have supportive people in our
lives whom we can lean on---a chatter-relieving psychological reframe.
Affectionate touch also unconsciously triggers the release of endorphins
and other chemicals in the brain such as oxytocin that reduce stress. Of
course, for affectionate touch to be effective it has to be welcome. 5.
Be someone else's placebo. Other people can powerfully influence our
beliefs, including our expectations about how effectively we can deal
with chatter and how long it will last. You can utilize this
interpersonal healing pathway by providing the people you're advising
with an optimistic outlook that their conditions will improve, which
changes their expectations for how their chatter will progress.

Tools for Receiving Chatter Support 1. Build a board of advisers.
Finding the right people to talk to, those who are skilled at satisfying
both your emotional and your cognitive needs, is the first step to
leveraging the power of others. Depending on the domain in which you're
experiencing chatter, different people will be uniquely equipped to do
this. While a colleague may be skilled at advising you on work problems,
your partner may be better suited to advising you on interpersonal
dilemmas. The more people you have to turn to for chatter support in any
particular domain, the better. So build a diverse board of chatter
advisers, a group of confidants you can turn to for support in the
different areas of your life in which you are likely to find your inner
voice running amok. 2. Seek out physical contact. You don't have to wait
for someone to give you affectionate touch or supportive physical
contact. Knowing about the benefits they provide, you can seek them out
yourself, by asking trusted people in your life for a hug or a simple
hand squeeze. Moreover, you need not even touch another human being to
reap these benefits.

Embracing a comforting inanimate object, like a teddy bear or security
blanket, is helpful too. 3. Look at a photo of a lo ed one. Thinking
about others who care about us reminds us that there are people we can
turn to for support during times of emotional distress. This is why
looking at photos of loved ones can soothe our inner voice when we find
ourselves consumed with chatter. 4. Perform a ritual with others.
Although many rituals can be performed alone, there is often added
benefit that comes from performing a ritual in the presence of others
(for example, communal meditation or prayer, a team's pregame routine,
or even just toasting drinks with friends the same way each time by
always saying the same words). Doing so additionally provides people
with a sense of support and selftranscendence that reduces feelings of
loneliness. 5. Minimize passive social media usage. Voyeuristically
scrolling through the curated news feeds of others on Facebook,
Instagram, and other social media platforms can trigger self-defeating,
envy-inducing thought spirals. One way to mitigate this outcome is to
curb your passive social media usage. Use these technologies actively
instead to connect with others at opportune times. 6. Use social media
to gain support. Although social media can instigate chatter, it also
provides you with an unprecedented opportunity to broaden the size and
reach of your chatter-support network. If you use this medium to seek
support, however, be cautious about impulsively sharing your negative
thoughts. Doing so runs the risk of sharing things that you may later
regret and that may upset others.

Tools

at In ol e the En ironment

1.  Create order in your en ironment. When we experience chatter, we
    often feel as if we are losing control. Our thought spirals control
    us rather than the other way around. When this happens, you can
    boost your sense of control by imposing order on your surroundings.
    Organizing

your environment can take many forms. Tidying up your work or home
spaces, making a list, and arranging the different objects that surround
you are all common examples. Find your own way of organizing your space
to help provide you with a sense of mental order. 2. Increase your
exposure to green spaces. Spending time in green spaces helps replenish
the brain's limited attentional reserves, which are useful for combating
chatter. Go for a walk in a tree-lined street or park when you're
experiencing chatter. If that's not possible, watch a film clip of
nature on your computer, stare at a photograph of a green scene, or even
listen to a sound machine that conveys natural sounds. You can surround
the spaces in which you live and work with greenery to create
environments that are a boon to the inner voice. 3. Seek out
awe-inspiring experiences. Feeling awe allows us to transcend our
current concerns in ways that put our problems in perspective. Of
course, the experiences that provide people with awe vary. For some it
is exposure to a breathtaking vista. For someone else it's the memory of
a child accomplishing an amazing feat. For others it may be staring at a
remarkable piece of art. Find what instills a sense of awe within you,
and then seek to cultivate that emotion when you find your internal
dialogue spiraling. You can also think about creating spaces around you
that elicit feelings of awe each time you glance at them.

To Dad, for teaching me to go inside, and Lara, Maya, and Dani, my
ultimate chatter antidotes

Acknowledgments

T

he seed for Chatter was planted thirty-seven years ago, when my dad
started encouraging me to "go inside." His voice was a constant
companion as I wrote this book. To my students, collaborators, and
colleagues (there are too many of you to name). Without you, there would
be no Chatter. Working with you has been a privilege. I hope this book
allows other people to benefit from your wisdom the way I have. It's
hard to imagine how I could've finished this project without my family's
support. My wife, Lara, patiently listened to me talk about Chatter
every day for several years. She read every word and never stopped
cheering me on. I shudder to think where the kids would be without her
(likely stranded at school, in tattered clothing, hungry, wondering why
I forgot to pick them up). I, too, would be lost. I'm confident that my
fatherin-law, Basil, had no idea what he was getting into when he
offered to provide advice whenever I needed it. Suffice it to say, I
took him up on the offer. Thank you for your indefatigable love and
support. Mom, Irma, Karen, Ian, Lila, and Owen---thank you for putting
up with my absences and not judging me (too) harshly for working on
vacation. I love you all. Doug Abrams, my literary agent extraordinaire,
isn't just brilliant and savvy and tall. He has a magnificent heart. His
drive to make the world a better place is intoxicating. Doug had a clear
vision for Chatter before I did, and tirelessly worked to bring the
project to life. His voice was another welcome companion throughout the
project. Aaron Shulman started out as my writing coach and ended up
becoming a close friend. He taught me how to write for a broad audience,
unlocked the secrets to finding great stories,

punched up my prose when it needed a lift, and helped me push the
manuscript across the finish line during the final sprint. He was my
consummate literary guide. Lara Love provided incisive feedback on every
chapter of the book, patiently explained how the publishing industry
works, and spent countless hours schmoozing with me. Her warmth and
wisdom made writing Chatter fun. Tim Duggan, my editor at Penguin Random
House, was a dream to work with. Discerning, patient, and empathic, he
championed Chatter from the moment we began collaborating and never
stopped. His perceptive line edits and gentle encouragements to scale
back here and go deeper there transformed the manuscript. I'm eternally
grateful we had the opportunity to work together. I hope we get to do it
again. Thinking about all the people who contributed to Chatter is
moving. Joel Rickett, my UK editor, offered multiple rounds of
penetrating feedback. His suggestion to have an "aha" on every page was
a guiding mantra while I worked on the book, and his encouragement to
investigate how chatter manifests in dreams remains one of my favorite
sidebars. Will Wolfslau read every chapter and made countless
suggestions that improved Chatter's final form. Aubrey Martinson (and
Will) deftly nursed the manuscript through the publication process,
keeping me updated on progress every step of the way. Molly Stern
championed Chatter from the moment she saw the proposal. Rachel Klayman,
Emma Berry, and Gillian Blake provided exceptional input on several
chapters. Their advice enhanced Chatter's depth and breadth in ways that
I'm grateful. Finally, Evan Nesterak is a fact-checking wunderkind. His
meticulousness helped me sleep well knowing that every story detail I
presented was confirmed. Idea Architects is a literary agency filled
with sharp minds who are passionate about what they do. Thank you,
Rachel Neuman, Ty Love, Cody Love, Janelle Julian, Boo Prince, Mariah
Sanford, Katherine Vaz, Kelsey Sheronas, Esme Schwall Weigand, and the
rest of the team for all of your help. At Penguin Random House, Steve
Messina, Ingrid Sterner, Robert Siek, Linnea Knollmueller, Sally
Franklin, Elizabeth Rendfleisch, Chris Brand, Julie Cepler, Dyana
Messina, and Rachel Aldrich. At Ebury, Penguin Random House UK, Leah
Feltham and Serena Nazareth. Abner Stein and the Marsh Agency helped
spread word about Chatter around the world. I'm indebted to the hard
work that Caspian Dennis, Sandy Violette,

Felicity Amor, Sarah McFadden, Saliann St.Â Clair, Camilla Ferrier, Jemma
McDonagh, and Monica Calignano put into the project along with the rest
of both agencies' teams. Walter Mischel passed away before he could read
Chatter. His influence permeates its pages. Ãzlem Ayduk and I have been
close friends and research partners since the first day of graduate
school. Her everlasting friendship and support motivated me throughout
the project. Chatter is filled with her wisdom as well. Angela Duckworth
is the busiest scientist I know. Yet, she always returned my calls
(usually minutes after I rang) and never failed to provide wise advice
and heartfelt encouragement. David Mayer patiently listened to me pitch
countless stories on our weekly runs. Jason Moser was a consummate
brainstorming partner who provided a keen clinical perspective on
several issues I grappled with (in the book, not personally). Little did
I know when I met Jamil Zaki in graduate school that we'd end up writing
books at the same time. He is the quintessential Chatter Adviser. Adam
Grant, Susan Cain, Dan Pink, Dan Heath, Jane McGonigal, Maria Konnikova,
Adam Alter, Elissa Epel, Sonja Lyubomirsky, Dave Evans, Tom Boyce, James
Doty, John Bargh, Scott Sonenshein, and Andy Molinsky were all
tremendous supporters of this project from its inception. Thank you all
for your kind words. Dozens of people generously shared their amazing
stories with me. Thank you. Without them, Chatter would not be what it
is. I'm fortunate to work with colleagues who are as generous with their
time as they are brilliant. John Jonides, Susan Gelman, Oscar Ybarra,
Luke Hyde, Jacinta Beeher, Gal Sheppes, Daniel Willingham, David
Dunning, Steve Cole, Ariana Orvell, Marc Berman, Rudy Mendoza Denton,
Andrew Irving, Ming Kuo, Amie Gordon, Marc Seery, Scott Paige, Lou
Penner, Nick Hoffman, Dick Nisbett, Shinobu Kitayama, Stephanie Carlson,
Rachel White, Craig Anderson, Janet Kim, Bernard RimÃ©, Walter Sowden,
Philippe Verduyn, and Tor Wager all provided helpful feedback throughout
the writing process. I'd also like to acknowledge the University of
Michigan, a unique institution that encourages its faculty to ask "big"
questions that matter. Without its support, much of the research I talk
about in Chatter would not have been possible. I am also grateful to the
National Institutes

of Health, the National Science Foundation, Riverdale Country School,
Character Lab, Facebook, and the John Templeton Foundation for their
support. Of course, the views presented in this book are my own; they do
not necessarily reflect the views of these organizations. Finally, to
Maya and Dani. The worst part about working on this book (by far) was
knowing it took away from our time together. Thank you for your patience
and love. I'm back!

Notes

Epigraphs "The biggest challenge": Cathleen Falsani, "Transcript: Barack
Obama and the God Factor Interview," Sojourners, March 27, 2012,
sojo.net/articles/transcript-barack-obama-and-godfactor-interview. "The
voice in my head": Dan Harris, 10% Happier: How I Tamed the Voice in My
Head, Reduced Stress Without Losing My Edge, and Found Self-Help That
Actually Works---a True Story (New York: It Books, 2014).

Introduction CBS Evening News: "Pain of Rejection: Real Pain for the
Brain," CBS News, March 29, 2011,
www.cbsnews.com/news/pain-of-rejection-real-pain-for-the-brain/. The
segment can be viewed here:
selfcontrol.psych.lsa.umich.edu/wp-content/uploads/2017/08/Why-does-a-broken-heartphysically-hurt.mp4.
central evolutionary advances: Janet Metcalfe and Hedy Kober,
"Self-Reflective Consciousness and the Projectable Self," in The Missing
Link in Cognition: Origins of Self-Reflective Consciousness, ed.Â H. S.
Terrace and J. Metcalfe (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 57--
83. In recent years: Each of the points referenced in this paragraph are
fleshed out in the remaining chapters, with references provided when
they are discussed. For a discussion of how chatter contributes to aging
at the cellular level, see the "illnesses and infections" note in
chapter 2. not living in the present: Matthew A. Killingsworth and
Daniel T. Gilbert, "A Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind," Science 330
(2010): 932; Peter Felsman et al., "Being Present: Focusing on the
Present Predicts Improvements in Life Satisfaction but Not Happiness,"
Emotion 17 (2007): 1047--1051; Michael J. Kane et al., "For Whom the
Mind Wanders, and When, Varies Across Laboratory and Daily-Life
Settings," Psychological Science 28 (2017): 1271--1289. As the Kane et
al.Â article makes clear, mind wandering rates do, of course, vary across
individuals. The numbers I report in the chapter refer to averages, like
most of the other statistics I present in Chatter.

"default state": A paper published in 2001 triggered an explosion of
research into the "default state," Marcus E. Raichle et al., "A Default
Mode of Brain Function," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
of the United States of America 98 (2001): 676--682. Subsequent research
linked default state activity to mind wandering: Malia F. Mason et al.,
"Wandering Minds: The Default Network and Stimulus-Independent Thought,"
Science 315 (2007): 393-- 395. Also see Kalina Christoff et al.,
"Experience Sampling During fMRI Reveals Default Network and Executive
System Contributions to Mind Wandering," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 106 (2009):
8719--8724. when we slip away: As I explain in chapter 1, our default
mode is not restricted to verbal reasoning. We can, for example, engage
in visual-spatial reasoning when our mind wanders as well. Nonetheless,
verbal reasoning constitutes a central component of mind-wandering. For
example, in one of the first rigorous studies on this topic, Eric
Klinger and W. Miles Cox concluded that "thought content is usually
accompanied by some degree of interior monologue," which they defined as
"I was talking to myself throughout the whole thought." They further
noted that "interior monologues were at least as prevalent a feature of
thought flow as visual imagery." Eric Klinger and W. Miles Cox,
"Dimensions of Thought Flow in Everyday Life," Imagination, Cognition,
and Personality 7 (1987): 105--128. Also see Christopher L. Heavey and
Russell T. Hurlburt, "The Phenomena of Inner Experience," Consciousness
and Cognition 17 (2008): 798--810; and David Stawarczyk, Helena Cassol,
and Arnaud D'Argembeau, "Phenomenology of Future-Oriented Mind-Wandering
Episodes," Frontiers in Psychology 4 (2013): 1--12. dawn of
civilization: Halvor Eifring, "Spontaneous Thought in Contemplative
Traditions," in The Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought:
Mind-Wandering, Creativity, and Dreaming, ed.Â K. Christoff and K. C. R.
Fox (New York: Oxford University Press, 2018), 529--538. Eifring
conceptualizes spontaneous thought as a kind of mind-wandering, which,
as noted above (see "when we slip away"), often involves interior
monologue. More broadly, the idea that inner speech plays a prominent
role in religion throughout history has been discussed by several
scholars. Christopher C. H. Cook notes, for instance, "the attribution
of voices to divine sources in contemporary religious experience is
indisputable": Christopher C. H. Cook, Hearing Voices, Demonic and
Divine (London: Routledge, 2019). For additional discussion, see Daniel
B. Smith, Muses, Madmen and Prophets: Hearing Voices and the Borders of
Sanity (New York: Penguin Books, 2007); T. M. Luhrmann, Howard Nusbaum,
and Ronald Thisted, "The Absorption Hypothesis: Learning to Hear God in
Evangelical Christianity," American Anthropologist 112 (2010): 66--78;
Charles Fernyhough, The Voices Within: The History and Science of How We
Talk to Ourselves (New York: Basic Books, 2016); and Douglas J. Davies,
"Inner Speech and Religious Traditions," in Theorizing Religion:
Classical and Contemporary Debates, ed.Â James A. Beckford and John
Walliss (Aldershot, England: Ashgate Publishing, 2006), 211--223. one in
ten people: K. Maijer et al., "Auditory Hallucinations Across the
Lifespan: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis," Psychological Medicine
48 (2018): 879--888. vocal impairments: Ron Netsell and Klaas Bakker,
"Fluent and Dysfluent Inner Speech of Persons Who Stutter: Self-Report,"
Missouri State University Unpublished Manuscript (2017). For discussion,
see M. Perrone-Bertolotti et al., "What Is That Little Voice Inside My
Head? Inner Speech Phenomenology, Its Role in Cognitive Performance, and
Its Relation to SelfMonitoring," Behavioural Brain Research 261 (2014):
220--239, and Charles Fernyhough, The Voices Within: The History and
Science of How We Talk to Ourselves. There is, however,

evidence that people who stutter make errors during internal speech just
as they do when they talk out loud when asked to perform
tongue-twisters, "Investigating the Inner Speech of People Who Stutter:
Evidence for (and Against) the Covert Repair Hypothesis," Journal of
Communication Disorders 44 (2011): 246--260. silently signing to
themselves: Deaf people who use sign language "talk to themselves" too,
but the way their inner speech manifests shares both similarities and
differences with hearing populations. Margaret Wilson and Karen Emmorey,
"Working Memory for Sign Language: A Window into the Architecture of the
Working Memory System," Journal of Deaf Studies and Deaf Education 2
(1997): 121--130; Perrone-Bertolotti et al., "What Is That Little Voice
Inside My Head?"; and Helene Loevenbruck et al., "A Cognitive
Neuroscience View of Inner Language: To Predict and to Hear, See, Feel,"
in Inner Speech: New Voices, ed.Â P. LanglandHassan and Agustin Vicente
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2019), 131--167. One brain imaging
study found, for example, that the same regions of the left prefrontal
cortex that supports inner speech in hearing populations becomes
activated when profoundly deaf individuals were asked to silently
complete a sentence (for example, "I am...") using inner signing. Philip
K. McGuire et al., "Neural Correlates of Thinking in Sign Language,"
NeuroReport 8 (1997): 695--698. These findings are broadly consistent
with research demonstrating an overlap between the brain systems that
support spoken and signed language usage in hearing and deaf
populations. To understand how signed and spoken language can share a
common neural basis, it's useful to consider the fact that both types of
languages are governed by identical sets of organizing principles (e.g.,
morphology, syntax, semantics, and phonology): Laura Ann Petitto et al.,
"Speech-Like Cerebral Activity in Profoundly Deaf People Processing
Signed Languages: Implications for the Neural Basis of Human Language,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 97 (2000): 13961--13966. four thousand words per minute: Rodney
J. Korba, "The Rate of Inner Speech," Perceptual and Motor Skills 71
(1990): 1043--1052, asked participants to record the "inner speech" they
used to solve verbal word problems and then speak the solution out loud
in fully predicated speech. Participants silently verbalized the
solution approximately eleven times faster than they were able to
express the solution in "expressive speech." As this study demonstrates,
although we are capable of thinking to ourselves in full sentences,
inner speech can also take a more condensed form that occurs much faster
than how we talk out loud. For discussion, see Simon McCarthy Jones and
Charles Fernyhough, "The Varieties of Inner Speech: Links Between
Quality of Inner Speech and Psychopathological Variables in a Sample of
Young Adults," Consciousness and Cognition 20 (2011): 1586--1593. State
of the Union speeches: I defined "contemporary American presidents'
annual State of the Union speeches as referring to all presentations
delivered from 2001 until the latest date that data was available in
2020. Gerhard Peters, "Length of State of the Union Address in Minutes
(from 1966)," in The American Presidency Project, ed.Â John T. Woolley
and Gerhard Peters (Santa Monica, CA: University of California,
1999--2020). Available from the World Wide Web:
https://www.presidency.ucsb.edu/node/324136/. sabotage us: Psychologists
have historically used different terms to refer to ostensibly similar
chatter-related processes (for example, "rumination," "post-event
processing," "habitual negative self-thinking," "chronic stress," and
"worry"). Although in some cases subtle differences characterize these
different forms of repetitive negative thinking (that is, rumination
tends to be past focused, whereas worry is future oriented), scientists
often talk about them as

constituting a single construct of "perseverative cognition" or
"negative repetitive thoughts." In this book, I use the term "chatter"
to capture this concept. For discussion of these issues, see Jos F.
Brosschot, William Gerin, and Julian F. Thayer, "The Perseverative
Cognition Hypothesis: A Review of Worry, Prolonged Stress-Related
Physiological Activation, and Health," Journal of Psychosomatic Research
60 (2006): 113--124; and Edward R. Watkins, "Constructive and
Unconstructive Repetitive Thought," Psychological Bulletin 134 (2008):
163--206.

Chapter One: Why We Talk to Oursel es fourteen months: For the date
range of the project, see Irving's webpage at the University of
Manchester:
www.research.manchester.ac.uk/portal/en/researchers/andrew-irving(109e5208716e-42e8-8d4f-578c9f556cd9)/projects.html?period=finished.
a hundred New Yorkers: "Interview: Dr.Â Andrew Irving & 'New York
Stories,' " June 10, 2013, Wenner-Gren Foundation,
blog.wennergren.org/2013/06/interview-dr-andrew-irving-new-yorkstories/;
and Andrew Irving, The Art of Life and Death: Radical Aesthetics and
Ethnographic Practice (New York: Hau Books, 2017). earlier fieldwork in
Africa: For a discussion of Irving's fieldwork in Africa see Andrew
Irving, "Strange Distance: Towards an Anthropology of Interior
Dialogue," Medical Anthropology Quarterly 25 (2011): 22--44; and Sydney
Brownstone, "For 'New York Stories,' Anthropologist Tracked 100 New
Yorkers' Inner Monologues Across the City," Village Voice, May 1, 2013.
avid time traveler: Thomas Suddendorf and Michael C. Corballis, "The
Evolution of Foresight: What Is Mental Time Travel, and Is It Unique to
Humans?," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 30 (2007): 299--351. often dealt
with negative "content": Irving noted that although there was
variability in what participants thought about, he was struck by how
many people thought about negative topics such as economic instability
and terrorism. Brownstone, "For 'New York Stories,' Anthropologist
Tracked 100 New Yorkers' Inner Monologues Across the City." nature of
the default state: Eric Klinger, Ernst H. W. Koster, and Igor Marchetti,
"Spontaneous Thought and Goal Pursuit: From Functions Such as Planning
to Dysfunctions Such as Rumination," in Christoff and Fox, Oxford
Handbook of Spontaneous Thought, 215--232; Arnaud D'Argembeau,
"Mind-Wandering and Self-Referential Thought," in ibid., 181--192; and
A. Morin, B. Uttl, and B. Hamper, "Self-Reported Frequency, Content, and
Functions of Inner Speech," Procedia: Social and Behavioral Journal 30
(2011): 1714--1718. nonverbal forms: See "when we slip away" note from
the introduction. neural reuse: Michael L. Anderson, "Neural Reuse: A
Fundamental Principle of the Brain," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 33
(2010): 245--313. phonological loop: Alan Baddeley, "Working Memory,"
Science 255 (1992): 556--559. Also see Alan Baddeley and Vivien Lewis,
"Inner Active Processes in Reading: The Inner Voice, the Inner Ear, and
the Inner Eye," in Interactive Processes in Reading, ed.Â A. M. Lesgold
and C. A. Perfetti (Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1981), 107--129;
Alan D. Baddeley and Graham J. Hitch, "The Phonological Loop as a Buffer
Store: An Update," Cortex 112 (2019): 91--106; and Antonio Chella and
Arianna Pipitone, "A Cognitive Architecture for Inner Speech," Cognitive
Systems Research 59 (2020): 287--292. in infancy: Nivedita Mani and Kim
Plunkett, "In the Infant's Mind's Ear: Evidence for Implicit Naming in
18-Month-Olds," Psychological Science 21 (2010): 908--913. For
discussion, see Ben Alderson-Day and Charles Fernyhough, "Inner Speech:
Development, Cognitive Functions, Phenomenology, and Neurobiology,"
Psychological Bulletin 141 (2015); and Perrone-Bertolotti et al., "What
Is That Little Voice Inside My Head?" language development and
self-control: Lev Vygotsky, Thinking and Speech: The Collected Works of
Lev Vygotsky, vol.Â 1 (1934; New York: Plenum Press, 1987). Also see
Alderson-Day and

Fernyhough, "Inner Speech"; and Perrone-Bertolotti et al., "What Is That
Little Voice Inside My Head?" research on socialization: For research
highlighting the complexity of the role that parents play in
socialization, see W. Andrew Collins et al., "Contemporary Research on
Parenting: The Case for Nature and Nurture," American Psychologist 55
(2000): 218--232. A more recent illustration of the role that parents
play in children's emotional lives comes from a large meta-analysis,
which revealed statistically significant positive links between parental
behavior and several emotional adjustment outcomes. See Michael M.
Barger et al., "The Relation Between Parents' Involvement in Children's
Schooling and Children's Adjustment: A Meta-analysis," Psychological
Bulletin 145 (2019): 855--890. shape our own verbal streams: For broader
discussions of the role that language plays in the transmission of
cultural ideas, see Susan A. Gelman and Steven O. Roberts, "How Language
Shapes the Cultural Inheritance of Categories," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114 (2017):
7900--7907; and Roy Baumeister and E. J. C. Masicampo, "Conscious
Thought Is for Facilitating Social and Cultural Interactions,"
Psychological Review 117 (2010): 945--971. broader cultural factors:
Hazel R. Markus and Shinobu Kitayama, "Culture and the Self:
Implications for Cognition, Emotion, and Motivation," Psychological
Review 98 (1991): 224-- 253. Religions and the values they teach: Adam
B. Cohen, "Many Forms of Culture," American Psychologist 64 (2009):
194--204. inner speech earlier: Laura E. Berk and Ruth A. Garvin,
"Development of Private Speech Among Low-Income Appalachian Children,"
Developmental Psychology 20 (1984): 271--286; Laura E. Berk, "Children's
Private Speech: An Overview of Theory and the Status of Research," in
Private Speech: From Social Interaction to Self-Regulation, eds.Â Rafael
M. Diaz and Laura E. Berk (New York: Psychology Press, 1992), 17--54.
imaginary friends may spur internal speech: Paige E. Davis, Elizabeth
Meins, and Charles Fernyhough, "Individual Differences in Children's
Private Speech: The Role of Imaginary Companions," Journal of
Experimental Child Psychology 116 (2013): 561--571. among many other
desirable qualities: Amanda Grenell and Stephanie M. Carlson,
"Pretense," in The Sage Encyclopedia of Contemporary Early Childhood
Education, ed.Â D. Couchenour and J. K. Chrisman (New York: Sage, 2016),
1075--1077. spontaneous thoughts related to goals: For illustrative
studies, see Arnaud D'Argembeau, Olivier Renaud, and Martial Van der
Linden, "Frequency, Characteristics, and Functions of FutureOriented
Thoughts in Daily Life," Applied Cognitive Psychology 25 (2011):
96--103; Alain Morin, Christina Duhnych, and Famira Racy, "Self-Reported
Inner Speech Use in University Students," Applied Cognitive Psychology
32 (2018): 376--382; and Akira Miyake et al., "Inner Speech as a
Retrieval Aid for Task Goals: The Effects of Cue Type in the Random Task
Cuing Paradigm," Acta Psychologica 115 (2004): 123--142. Also see Adam
Winsler, "Still Talking to Ourselves After All These Years: A Review of
Current Research on Private Speech," in Private Speech, Executive
Functioning, and the Development of Verbal Self-Regulation, ed.Â A.
Winsler, C. Fernyhough, and I. Montero (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2009), 3--41. run mental simulations: D'Argembeau, Renaud, and
Van der Linden, "Frequency, Characteristics, and Functions of
Future-Oriented Thoughts in Daily Life"; D'Argembeau, "Mind-Wandering

and Self-Referential Thought"; and Morin, Duhnych, and Racy,
"Self-Reported Inner Speech Use in University Students." Historically,
psychologists thought of dreams: Erin J. Wamsley, "Dreaming and Waking
Thought as a Reflection of Memory Consolidation," in Christoff and Fox,
Oxford Handbook of Spontaneous Thought, 457--468, presents a cogent
review of dream research. share many similarities: Kieran C. R. Fox et
al., "Dreaming as Mind Wandering: Evidence from Functional Neuroimaging
and First-Person Content Reports," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7
(2013): 1--18; Tracey L. Kahan and Stephen P. LaBerge, "Dreaming and
Waking: Similarities and Differences Revisited," Consciousness and
Cognition 20 (2011): 494-- 514; Lampros Perogamvros et al., "The
Phenomenal Contents and Neural Correlates of Spontaneous Thoughts Across
Wakefulness, NREM Sleep, and REM Sleep," Journal of Cognitive
Neuroscience 29 (2017): 1766--1777; and Erin J. Wamsley, "Dreaming and
Waking Thought as a Reflection of Memory Consolidation." dreams are
often functional: For a discussion of the role that dreams play in
simulating threats, see Katja Valli and Antti Revonsuo, "The Threat
Simulation Theory in Light of Recent Empirical Evidence: A Review,"
American Journal of Psychology 122 (2009): 17--38; and Antti Revonsuo,
"The Reinterpretation of Dreams: An Evolutionary Hypothesis of the
Function of Dreaming," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 23 (2001):
877--901. Also see J. Allan Hobson, "REM Sleep and Dreaming: Towards a
Theory of Protoconsciousness," Nature Reviews Neuroscience 10 (2009):
803--813. creation of our selves: Arnaud D'Argembeau et al., "Brains
Creating Stories of Selves: The Neural Basis of Autobiographical
Reasoning," Social Cognitive Affective Neuroscience 9 (2014): 646-- 652;
Raymond A. Mar, "The Neuropsychology of Narrative: Story Comprehension,
Story Production, and Their Interrelation," Neuropsychologia 42 (2004):
1414--1434; and Baumeister and Masicampo, "Conscious Thought Is for
Facilitating Social and Cultural Interactions"; Kate C. McLean et al.,
"Selves Creating Stories Creating Selves: A Process Model of
SelfDevelopment," Personality and Social Psychology Review 11 (2007):
262--278. For a broader discussion of the role that language plays in
autobiographical reasoning, see Robyn Fivus, "The Stories We Tell: How
Language Shapes Autobiography," Applied Cognitive Psychology 12 (1998):
483--487. stopped functioning well: To tell Jill Bolte Taylor's story, I
drew on her book, My Stroke of Insight: A Brain Scientist's Personal
Journey (New York: Penguin Books, 2008), and her TED Talk, "My Stroke of
Insight,"
www.ted.com/talks/jill_bolte_taylor_s_powerful_stroke_of_insight?
language=en, both of which I quote from. I am grateful to an article by
Alain Morin that analyzed Jill Bolte Taylor's case in the context of
private speech for pointing me to this example: Alain Morin,
"Self-Awareness Deficits Following Loss of Inner Speech: Dr.Â Jill Bolte
Taylor's Case Study," Consciousness and Cognition 18 (2009): 524--529.
inner experiences consistently dwarf outer ones: Killingsworth and
Gilbert, "Wandering Mind Is an Unhappy Mind."

Chapter Two: When Talking to Oursel es Back res first wild pitch: To
tell Rick Ankiel's story, I drew on Rick Ankiel, The Phenomenon:
Pressure, the Yips, and the Pitch That Changed My Life (New York:
PublicAffairs, 2017), which I quote from, as well as this article: Gary
Waleik, "Former MLB Hurler Remembers 5 Pitches That Derailed His
Career," Only a Game, WBUR, May 19, 2017, www.wbur.org/onlyagame/2017/
05/19/rick-ankiel-baseball; and Rick Ankiel, "Letter to My Younger
Self," The Players' Tribune, Sept.Â 18, 2017,
https://www.theplayerstribune.com/en-us/articles/rick-ankiel-letter-tomy-younger-self-cardinals.
national TV: Waleik, "Former MLB Hurler Remembers 5 Pitches That
Derailed His Career." crowd oohed a bit louder: MLB.com. YouTube:
https://www.youtube.com/watch?
time_continue=5&v=KDZX525CSvw&feature=emb_title. never pitch
professionally again: Baseball-reference.com:
https://www.baseball-reference.com/ players/a/ankieri01.shtml. influence
our attention: Sian Beilock is one of the world's foremost experts on
choking under pressure. I drew on the work she describes in Sian L.
Beilock and Rob Gray, "Why Do Athletes Choke Under Pressure?," in
Handbook of Sport Psychology, 3rd ed., ed.Â G. Tenenbaum and R. C. Eklund
(Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, 2007), 425--444. Attention is what
allows us: Michael I. Posner and Mary K. Rothbart, "Research on
Attention Networks as a Model for the Integration of Psychological
Science," Annual Review of Psychology 58 (2007): 1--23. "It's a move
that requires": Amanda Prahl, "Simone Biles Made History with Her Triple
Double--- Here's What That Term Actually Means," PopSugar, Aug.Â 15,
2019, www.popsugar.com/
fitness/What-Is-Triple-Double-in-Gymnastics-46501483. Also see Charlotte
Caroll, "Simone Biles Is First-Ever Woman to Land Triple Double in
Competition on Floor," Sports Illustrated, Aug.Â 11, 2019,
https://www.si.com/olympics/2019/08/12/simone-biles-first-ever-woman-landtriple-double-competition-video.
He unlinked: Beilock and Gray, "Why Do Athletes Choke Under Pressure?"
Note that this work typically uses the word "dechunked" to describe the
process that I refer to as "unlinked." paralysis by analysis: Sian
Beilock, Choke (New York: Little, Brown, 2011). steer our thoughts and
behavior: Adele Diamond, "Executive Functions," Annual Review of
Psychology 64 (2013): 135--168. limited capacity: Amitai Shenhav et al.,
"Toward a Rational and Mechanistic Account of Mental Effort," Annual
Review of Neuroscience 40 (2017): 99--124. illustration of this limited
capacity: Nelson Cowan, "The Magical Mystery Four: How Is Working Memory
Capacity Limited, and Why?," Current Directions in Psychological Science
19 (2010): 51--57. hogs our neural capacity: The idea that perseverative
cognition compromises executive functions has been studied from several
perspectives. See Michael W. Eysenck et al., "Anxiety and Cognitive
Performance: Attentional Control Theory," Emotion 7 (2007): 336--353;
Hannah R. Snyder, "Major Depressive Disorder Is Associated with Broad
Impairments on Neuropsychological Measures of Executive Function: A
Meta-analysis and Review," Psychological Bulletin 139 (2013): 81--132;
and Tim P. Moran, "Anxiety and Working Memory

Capacity: A Meta-analysis and Narrative Review," Psychological Bulletin
142 (2016): 831-- 864. perform worse on tests: Nathaniel von der Embse
et al., "Test Anxiety Effects, Predictors, and Correlates: A 30-Year
Meta-analytic Review," Journal of Affective Disorders 227 (2018): 483--
493. artistic performers: Dianna T. Kenny, "A Systematic Review of
Treatments for Music Performance Anxiety," Anxiety, Stress, and Coping
18 (2005): 183--208. make low initial offers: Alison Wood Brooks and
Maurice E. Schweitzer, "Can Nervous Nelly Negotiate? How Anxiety Causes
Negotiators to Make Low First Offers, Exit Early, and Earn Less Profit,"
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 115 (2011): 43--54.
Bernard RimÃ©: Bernard RimÃ©, "Emotion Elicits the Social Sharing of
Emotion: Theory and Empirical Review," Emotion Review 1 (2009): 60--85.
I also drew on the following lecture: Bernard RimÃ©, "The Social Sharing
of Emotion" (lecture delivered at Collective Emotions in Cyberspace
Consortium), YouTube, published May 20, 2013, www.youtube.com/watch?
v=JdCksLisfUQ. From Asia to the Americas: Although RimÃ©'s research
suggests that the motivation to talk about one's emotions is a
cross-cultural phenomenon, cultures nonetheless vary in the rate at
which they share their emotions. See Archana Singh-Manoux and Catrin
Finkenauer, "Cultural Variations in Social Sharing of Emotions: An
Intercultural Perspective on a Universal Phenomenon," Journal of
Cross-Cultural Psychology 32 (2001): 647--661. Also see Heejung S. Kim,
"Social Sharing of Emotion in Words and Otherwise," Emotion Review 1
(2009): 92--93. pushing away: For review, see Susan Nolen-Hoeksema,
Blair E. Wisco, and Sonja Lyubomirsky, "Rethinking Rumination,"
Perspectives on Psychological Science 3 (2008): 400--424; also see
Thomas E. Joiner et al., "Depression and Excessive Reassurance-Seeking,"
Psychological Inquiry 10 (1999): 269--278; Michael B. Gurtman,
"Depressive Affect and Disclosures as Factors in Interpersonal
Rejection," Cognitive Therapy Research 11 (1987): 87--99; and Jennifer
L. Schwartz and Amanda McCombs Thomas, "Perceptions of Coping Responses
Exhibited in Depressed Males and Females," Journal of Social Behavior
and Personality 10 (1995): 849--860. less capable of solving problems:
For reviews, see Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, and Lyubomirsky, "Rethinking
Rumination"; and Lyubomirsky et al., "Thinking About Rumination," Annual
Review of Clinical Psychology 11 (2015): 1--22. toxic outcome: For a
discussion of how frayed social relationships contribute to feelings of
social isolation and loneliness, see Julianne Holt-Lunstad, "Why Social
Relationships Are Important for Physical Health: A Systems Approach to
Understanding and Modifying Risk and Perception," Annual Review of
Psychology 69 (2018): 437--458; and Julianne Holt-Lunstad, Timothy B.
Smith, Mark Baker, Tyler Harris, and David Stephenson, "Loneliness and
Social Isolation as Risk Factors for Mortality: A Meta-analytic Review,"
Perspectives on Psychological Science 10 (2015): 227--237. For work
documenting the toxic effects of loneliness and social isolation, see
John T. Cacioppo and Stephanie Cacioppo, "The Growing Problem of
Loneliness," The Lancet 391 (2018): 426; Greg Miller, "Why Loneliness Is
Hazardous to Your Health," Science 14 (2011): 138--140; and Aparna
Shankar, Anne McMunn, James Banks, and Andrew Steptoe, "Loneliness,
Social Isolation, and Behavioral and Biological Health Indicators in
Older Adults," Health Psychology 30 (2011): 377--385.

kids who were prone to rumination: Katie A. McLaughlin and Susan
Nolen-Hoeksema, "Interpersonal Stress Generation as a Mechanism Linking
Rumination to Internalizing Symptoms in Early Adolescents," Journal of
Clinical Child and Adolescent Psychology 41 (2012): 584--597. A study by
John Cacioppo and colleagues further underscores the reciprocal link
between loneliness and self-focused attention: John T. Cacioppo, Hsi
Yuan Chen, and Stephanie Cacioppo, "Reciprocal Influences Between
Loneliness and Self-Centeredness: A Cross-Lagged Panel Analysis in a
Population-Based Sample of African American, Hispanic, and Caucasian
Adults," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 43 (2017):
1125--1135. grieving adults: Susan Nolen-Hoeksema and Christopher G.
Davis, " 'Thanks for Sharing That': Ruminators and Their Social Support
Networks," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 77 (1999):
801--814. behave aggressively: Thomas F. Denson et al., "Understanding
Impulsive Aggression: Angry Rumination and Reduced Self-Control Capacity
Are Mechanisms Underlying the ProvocationAggression Relationships,"
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 37 (2011): 850--862; and Brad
J. Bushman, "Does Venting Anger Feed or Extinguish the Flame? Catharsis,
Rumination, Distraction, Anger, and Aggressive Responding," Personality
and Social Psychology Bulletin 28 (2002): 724--731. displace our
aggression: Brad J. Bushman et al., "Chewing on It Can Chew You Up:
Effects of Rumination on Triggered Displaced Aggression," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 88 (2005): 969--983. two and a half
billion people: Facebook Newsroom, Facebook,
newsroom.fb.com/company-info/; and J. Clement, "Number of Monthly Active
Twitter Users Worldwide from 1st Quarter 2010 to 1st Quarter 2019 (in
Millions)," Statista,
www.statista.com/statistics/282087/number-ofmonthly-active-twitter-users/.
share their private ruminations: Mina Choi and Catalina L. Toma, "Social
Sharing Through Interpersonal Media: Patterns and Effects on Emotional
Well-Being," Computers in Human Behavior 36 (2014): 530--541; and
Adriana M. Manago, Tamara Taylor, and Patricia M. Greenfield, "Me and My
400 Friends: The Anatomy of College Students' Facebook Networks, Their
Communication Patterns, and Well-Being," Developmental Psychology 48
(2012): 369-- 380. how we interact with them: As one example of this
principle, consider research my colleagues and I performed demonstrating
that passively using Facebook (that is, browsing the site to consume
information about others) leads to emotional well-being declines,
whereas actively using Facebook (that is, producing information on the
site) does not. See Philippe Verduyn et al., "Passive Facebook Usage
Undermines Affective Well-Being: Experimental and Longitudinal
Evidence," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 144 (2015):
480--488. For review, see Philippe Verduyn et al., "Do Social Network
Sites Enhance or Undermine Subjective WellBeing? A Critical Review,"
Social Issues and Policy Review 11 (2017): 274--302. importance of
empathy: Jamil Zaki, The War for Kindness: Building Empathy in a
Fractured World (New York: Crown, 2019); and Frans B. M. de Waal and
Stephanie Preston, "Mammalian Empathy: Behavioural Manifestations and
Neural Basis," Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18 (2017): 498--509. find
ourselves venting: RimÃ©, "Emotion Elicits the Social Sharing of
Emotion."

subtle physical gestures: John Suler, "The Online Disinhibition Effect,"
Cyberpsychology and Behavior 3 (2004): 321--326; Noam Lapidot-Lefler and
Azy Barak, "Effects of Anonymity, Invisibility, and Lack of Eye-Contact
on Toxic Online Disinhibition," Computers in Human Behavior 28 (2012):
434--443; and Christopher Terry and Jeff Cain, "The Emerging Issue of
Digital Empathy," American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education 80
(2016): 58. Cyberbullying: Committee on the Biological and Psychosocial
Effects of Peer Victimization: Lessons for Bullying Prevention, National
Academy of Sciences Report; Michele P. Hamm et al., "Prevalence and
Effect of Cyberbullying on Children and Young People," JAMA Pediatrics,
Aug.Â 2015; Robin M. Kowalski et al., "Bullying in the Digital Age: A
Critical Review and Meta-analysis of Cyberbullying Research Among
Youth," Psychological Bulletin 140 (2014): 1073--1137; and Robert
Tokunaga, "Following You Home from School: A Critical Review and
Synthesis of Research on Cyber-bullying Victimization," Computers in
Human Behavior 26 (2010): 277--287. passage of time: Emotions typically
wane once they reach their maximum level of intensity: Philippe Verduyn,
Iven Van Mechelen, and Francis Tuerlinckx, "The Relation Between Event
Processing and the Duration of Emotional Experience," Emotion 11 (2011):
20--28; and Philippe Verduyn et al., "Predicting the Duration of
Emotional Experience: Two Experience Sampling Studies," Emotion 9
(2009): 83--91. irritate and alienate others: Caitlin McLaughlin and
Jessica Vitak, "Norm Evolution and Violation on Facebook," New Media and
Society 14 (2012): 299--315; and Emily M. Buehler, " 'You Shouldn't Use
Facebook for That': Navigating Norm Violations While Seeking Emotional
Support on Facebook," Social Media and Society 3 (2017): 1--11. share
more negative personal content: Jiyoung Park et al., "When Perceptions
Defy Reality: The Relationships Between Depression and Actual and
Perceived Facebook Social Support," Journal of Affective Disorders 200
(2016): 37--44. need to self-present: For two classic accounts of the
role that self-presentation plays in daily life, see Erving Goffman, The
Presentation of Self in Everyday Life (Garden City, NY: Doubleday,
1959); and Mark R. Leary and Robin M. Kowalski, "Impression Management:
A Literature Review and Two-Component Model," Psychological Bulletin 107
(1990): 34--47. skillfully curate: Randi Zuckerberg captured this facet
of Facebook well in an interview she did with The New York Times. "What
are you most guilty of on Facebook?" the reporter asked her. "I'm a
marketer," she responded, "and sometimes I almost can't take it out of
my personal life. I've had friends call me and say, 'Your life looks so
amazing.' And I tell them: 'I'm a marketer; I'm only posting the moments
that are amazing.' " Susan Dominus, "Randi Zuckerberg: 'I Really Put
Myself Out There,' " New York Times, Nov.Â 1, 2013,
www.nytimes.com/2013/11/03/
magazine/randi-zuckerberg-i-really-put-myself-out-there.html. feel
better: Amy L. Gonzales and Jeffrey T. Hancock, "Mirror, Mirror on My
Facebook Wall: Effects of Exposure to Facebook on Self-Esteem,"
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking 14 (2011): 79--83.
driven to compare ourselves with others: Leon Festinger, "A Theory of
Social Comparison Processes," Human Relations 7 (1954): 117--140; and
Katja Corcoran, Jan Crusius, and Thomas Mussweiler, "Social Comparison:
Motives, Standards, and Mechanisms," in Theories in Social Psychology,
ed.Â D. Chadee (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2011), 119--139. Sometimes we
compare ourselves with others to see how we're stacking up in a
particular domain. Other times it's to make ourselves feel better (by
comparing ourselves with someone ostensibly "beneath" us) or

to identify how we might improve some facet of our lives that we care
about (by comparing ourselves with someone ostensibly "above" us). There
is also evidence that comparing ourselves with others is an efficient
way of measuring and obtaining information about ourselves. A study my
colleagues and I published: Verduyn et al., "Passive Facebook Usage
Undermines Affective Well-Being." And the more we stew over how badly
our lives stack up against others, the worse the consequences. Case in
point: A longitudinal study performed with 268 young adults found that
the more people compared themselves negatively to others on Facebook,
the more they ruminated and the more depressed they felt: Feinstein et
al., "Negative Social Comparison on Facebook and Depressive Symptoms,"
Psychology of Popular Media Culture 2 (2013): 161-- 170. Also see
Melissa G. Hunt et al., "No More FOMO: Limiting Social Media Decreases
Loneliness and Depression," Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology 37
(2018): 751--768; Morten Tromholt, "The Facebook Experiment: Quitting
Facebook Leads to Higher Levels of Well-Being," Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking 19 (2016): 661--666; R. Mosquera et al.,
"The Economic Effects of Facebook," Experimental Economics (2019); Holly
B. Shakya and Nicholas A. Christakis, "Association of Facebook Use with
Compromised Well-Being: A Longitudinal Study," American Journal of
Epidemiology 185 (2017): 203--211; and Cesar G. Escobar-Viera et al.,
"Passive and Active Social Media Use and Depressive Symptoms Among
United States Adults," Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking
21 (2018): 437--443. Research has also begun to demonstrate how these
findings generalize to other social media platforms like Instagram.
Eline Frison and Steven Eggermont, "Browsing, Posting, and Liking on
Instagram: The Reciprocal Relationships Between Different Types of
Instagram Use and Adolescents' Depressed Mood," Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking 20 (2017): 603--609. the more envy they
experienced: The negative consequences of envy are well-established.
However, envy isn't all bad. It can be functional in small doses,
motivating us to improve ourselves: Jens Lange, Aaron Weidman, and Jan
Crusius, "The Painful Duality of Envy: Evidence for an Integrative
Theory and a Meta-analysis on the Relation of Envy and Schadenfreude,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 114 (2018): 572--598. One
answer to that question: Additional explanations for why we continue to
use social media in spite of its negative consequences include: (a) our
desire to stay abreast of what is happening in our community, which
might trump our desire to feel better about ourselves at any given
moment in time, (b) the desire to obtain feedback from others, and (c)
people often misjudge how using Facebook will make them feel (i.e., we
focus on the potential positives that social media will bring us, losing
sight \[or perhaps even being unaware in the first place\] of its
potential to do harm as well). For discussion, see Ethan Kross and
Susannah Cazaubon, "How Does Social Media Influence People's Emotional
Lives?," in Applications of Social Psychology: How Social Psychology Can
Contribute to the Solution of Real-World Problems, eds.Â J. Forgas,
William D. Crano, and Klaus Fiedler (New York: Routledge-Psychology
Press, 2020), 250--264. Harvard neuroscientists: Diana I. Tamir and
Jason P. Mitchell, "Disclosing Information About the Self Is
Intrinsically Rewarding," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 109 (2012): 8038--8043.

languages across the globe: Geoff MacDonald and Mark R. Leary, "Why Does
Social Exclusion Hurt? The Relationship Between Social and Physical
Pain," Psychological Bulletin 131 (2005): 202--223; Naomi I.
Eisenberger, Matthew D. Lieberman, and Kipling D. Williams, "Does
Rejection Hurt? An fMRI Study of Social Exclusion," Science 302 (2003):
290--292. heartbroken of New York City: Ethan Kross et al., "Social
Rejection Shares Somatosensory Representations with Physical Pain,"
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America 108 (2011): 6270--6275. city of eight million:
https://www.health.ny.gov/statistics/vital_statistics/2007/table02.htm.
influence what happens in our bodies: Naomi I. Eisenberger and Steve W.
Cole, "Social Neuroscience and Health: Neurophysiological Mechanisms
Linking Social Ties with Physical Health," Nature Neuroscience 15
(2012): 669--674; and Gregory Miller, Edith Chen, and Steve W. Cole,
"Health Psychology: Developing Biologically Plausible Models Linking the
Social World and Physical Health," Annual Review of Psychology 60
(2009): 501--524. \$500 billion annually: Michele Hellebuyck et al.,
"Workplace Health Survey," Mental Health America,
www.mhanational.org/sites/default/files/Mind%20the%20Workplace%20%20MHA%20Workplace%20Health%20Survey%202017%20FINAL.pdf.
negative verbal stream: For an account of how perseverative cognition,
which often takes the form of verbal rumination and worry (see the
introduction), prolongs the stress response, see Brosschot, Gerin, and
Thayer, "Perseverative Cognition Hypothesis"; Jos F. Brosschot, "Markers
of Chronic Stress: Prolonged Physiological Activation and (Un)conscious
Perseverative Cognition," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 35
(2010): 46--50; and Cristina Ottaviani et al., "Physiological
Concomitants of Perseverative Cognition: A Systematic Review and
Meta-analysis," Psychological Bulletin 142 (2016): 231--259. illnesses
that span the gamut: Andrew Steptoe and Mika Kivimaki, "Stress and
Cardiovascular Disease," Nature Reviews Cardiology 9 (2012): 360--370;
Suzanne C. Segerstrom and Gregory E. Miller, "Psychological Stress and
the Human Immune System: A Meta-analytic Study of 30 Years of Inquiry,"
Psychological Bulletin 130 (2004): 601--630; Bruce S. McEwen, "Brain on
Stress: How the Social Environment Gets Under the Skin," Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 109
(2012): 17180--17185; Ronald Glaser and Janice Kiecolt-Glaser,
"Stress-Induced Immune Dysfunction: Implications for Health," Nature
Reviews Immunology 5 (2005): 243--251; Edna Maria Vissoci Reiche, Sandra
Odebrecht Vargas Nunes, and Helena Kaminami Morimoto, "Stress,
Depression, the Immune System, and Cancer," Lancet Oncology 5 (2004):
617--625; A. Janet Tomiyama, "Stress and Obesity," Annual Review of
Psychology 70 (2019): 703--718; and Gregory E. Miller et al., "A
Functional Genomic Fingerprint of Chronic Stress in Humans: Blunted
Glucocorticoid and Increased NFÎºB Signaling," Biological Psychiatry 15
(2008): 266--272. not having a strong social-support network: Julianne
Holt-Lunstad, Timothy B. Smith, and J. Bradley Layton, "Social
Relationships and Mortality Risk: A Meta-analytic Review," PLOS Medicine
7 (2010): e1000316. transdiagnostic risk factor: Susan Nolen-Hoeksema
and Edward R. Watkins, "A Heuristic for Developing Transdiagnostic
Models of Psychopathology: Explaining Multifinality and Divergent
Trajectories," Perspectives on Psychological Science 6 (2011): 589--609;
Katie A. McLaughlin et al., "Rumination as a Transdiagnostic Factor
Underlying Transitions Between Internalizing Symptoms and Aggressive
Behavior in Early Adolescents," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 123
(2014): 13--23; Edward R. Watkins, "Depressive Rumination and Co-

morbidity: Evidence for Brooding as a Transdiagnostic Process," Journal
of Rational-Emotive and Cognitive-Behavior Therapy 27 (2009): 160--75;
Douglas S. Mennin and David M. Fresco, "What, Me Worry and Ruminate
About DSM-5 and RDoC? The Importance of Targeting Negative
Self-Referential Processing," Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice
20 (2013): 258--267; and Brosschot, "Markers of Chronic Stress." DNA is
like a piano: I drew on the following sources to make the connection
between gene expression and playing a musical instrument: Jane Qiu,
"Unfinished Symphony," Nature 441 (2006): 143--145; and University of
Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, "Study Gives Clue as to How
Notes Are Played on the Genetic Piano," EurekAlert!, May 12, 2011,
www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2011-05/uoth-sgc051011.php. Steve Cole:
Steven W. Cole, "Social Regulation of Human Gene Expression," American
Journal of Public Health 103 (2013): S84--S92. I also drew on the
following talk that Steve delivered at Stanford: "Meng-Wu Lecture"
(lecture delivered at the Center for Compassion and Altruism Research
and Education, Nov.Â 12, 2013),
ccare.stanford.edu/videos/meng-wu-lecture-stevecole-ph-d/. inflammation
genes: George M. Slavich and Michael R. Irwin, "From Stress to
Inflammation and Major Depressive Disorder: A Social Signal Transduction
Theory of Depression," Psychological Bulletin 140 (2014): 774--815;
Steve W. Cole et al., "Social Regulation of Gene Expression in Human
Leukocytes," Genome Biology 8 (2007): R189; and Gregory E. Miller, Edith
Chen, and Karen J. Parker, "Psychological Stress in Childhood and
Susceptibility to the Chronic Diseases of Aging: Moving Towards a Model
of Behavioral and Biological Mechanisms," Psychological Bulletin 137
(2011): 959--997. illnesses and infections: Chatter also extends its
tentacles around our DNA in another fashion--- through our telomeres.
Telomeres are little caps at the end of our chromosomes that protect our
DNA from unraveling in ways that affect our health and longevity. Short
telomeres contribute to a host of age-related diseases. Fortunately, we
all have a chemical in our body called telomerase that is capable of
preserving the length of our telomeres. The problem is, stress hormones
like cortisol deplete our body of this chemical, speeding up the rate at
which our telomeres shorten. In 2004, Elissa Epel, Nobel laureate
Elizabeth Blackburn, and their colleagues published a landmark study
examining the relationship between how stressed women felt over a
ten-month period and their telomere length. As expected, they found that
the more stressed the women felt ---stress, of course, being a trigger
for chatter, and chatter a driver of chronic stress---the shorter their
telomeres. Even more dramatic, the most stressed women had telomeres
that were equivalent to over a decade shorter than the least stressed
women. Elissa S. Epel et al., "Accelerated Telomere Shortening in
Response to Life Stress," Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences 101 (2004): 17312--17315. For a detailed review, see Elizabeth
H. Blackburn and Elissa S. Epel, The Telomere Effect (New York: Grand
Central Publishing, 2017). Also see Elizabeth Blackburn, Elissa S. Epel,
and Jue Lin, "Human Telomere Biology: A Contributory and Interactive
Factor in Aging, Disease Risks, and Protection," Science 350 (2015):
1193--1198; and Kelly E. Rentscher et al., "Psychosocial Stressors and
Telomere Length: A Current Review of the Science," Annual Review of
Public Health 41 (2020): 223--245. nearly twenty years: Matt Kelly,
"This Thirty-Nine-Year-Old Is Attempting a Comeback," MLB.com, August 2,
2018, https://www.mlb.com/news/rick-ankiel-to-attempt-comebackc288544452
(retrieved February 9, 2020).

Chapter

ree: Zooming Out

"Have you ever killed someone?": I changed the name and several other
details in this story to preserve my former student's anonymity. All
other aspects of the story are true. I also consulted with a published
profile, which I don't cite here to protect her anonymity. the brain
regions: Ethan Kross et al., "Coping with Emotions Past: The Neural
Bases of Regulating Affect Associated with Negative Autobiographical
Memories," Biological Psychiatry 65 (2009): 361--366; and Ayna Baladi
Nejad, Philippe Fossati, and Cedric Lemogne, "SelfReferential
Processing, Rumination, and Cortical Midline Structures in Major
Depression," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 7 (2013): 666. zoom out:
Ethan Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Self-Distancing: Theory, Research, and
Current Directions," in Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
eds.Â J. Olson and M. Zanna (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 2017), 81--136; and
John P. Powers and Kevin S. LaBar, "Regulating Emotion Through
Distancing: A Taxonomy, Neurocognitive Model, and Supporting
Metaanalysis," Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews 96 (2019):
155--173. psychological immune system: See Daniel T. Gilbert et al.,
"Immune Neglect: A Source of Durability Bias in Affective Forecasting,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 (1998): 617--638, for an
introduction to the concept of a psychological immune system. paradigm
for studying self-control: Walter Mischel, The Marshmallow Test:
Mastering SelfControl (New York: Little, Brown, 2014); and Walter
Mischel, Yuichi Shoda, and Monica Rodriguez, "Delay of Gratification in
Children," Science 244 (1989): 933--938. battling inner-voice
rumination: Ãzlem Ayduk, Walter Mischel, and Geraldine Downey,
"Attentional Mechanisms Linking Rejection to Hostile Reactivity: The
Role of 'Hot' Versus 'Cool' Focus," Psychological Science 13 (2002):
443--448. Also see Cheryl L. Rusting and Susan Nolen-Hoeksema,
"Regulating Responses to Anger: Effects of Rumination and Distraction on
Angry Mood," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 74 (1998):
790-- 803. The downside of this approach: Ethan Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk,
"Facilitating Adaptive Emotional Analysis: Distinguishing
Distanced-Analysis of Depressive Experiences from ImmersedAnalysis and
Distraction," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 34 (2008):
924--938. tool that therapists should employ: Aaron T. Beck, "Cognitive
Therapy: Nature and Relation to Behavior Therapy," Behavior Therapy 1
(1970): 184--200. Also see Rick E. Ingram and Steven Hollon, "Cognitive
Therapy for Depression from an Information Processing Perspective," in
Personality, Psychopathology, and Psychotherapy Series: Information
Processing Approaches to Clinical Psychology, ed.Â R. E. Ingram (San
Diego: Academic Press, 1986), 259--281. not thinking about your
problems: For a classic review of research pointing to the harmful
effects of avoidance, see Edna B. Foa and Michael J. Kozak, "Emotional
Processing of Fear: Exposure to Corrective Information," Psychological
Bulletin 99 (1986): 20--35. As I mention in the text, people can
distance to achieve different goals (i.e., to avoid their emotions, to
mindfully accept them, to approach and analyze them). Like a hammer that
can be used to pound a nail into the wall or rip it out, distancing has
multiple applications. And like any tool, whether it's helpful or
harmful depends on how and why people use it. In the work reviewed in
this section of the chapter, I focus on a context in which research
indicates that distancing is helpful: to aid people in their attempts to
actively reflect on and make sense of their negative experiences. For a
more

detailed discussion of these issues, see the conclusion and Ethan Kross
and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Self-Distancing: Theory, Research, and Current
Directions." powerful optical device: Georgia Nigro and Ulric Neisser,
"Point of View in Personal Memories," Cognitive Psychology 15 (1983):
467--482; John A. Robinson and Karen L. Swanson, "Field and Observer
Modes of Remembering," Memory 1 (1993): 169--184. People tend to recall
intense negative experiences from a self-immersed/first person
perspective: Arnaud D'Argembau, "Phenomenal Characteristics of
Autobiographical Memories for Positive, Negative, and Neutral Events,"
Applied Cognitive Psychology 17 (2003): 281--294; and Heather K. McIsaac
and Eric Eich, "Vantage Point in Episodic Memory," Psychonomic Bulletin
and Review 9 (2002): 146--150. However, memories of trauma and
self-conscious experiences are more likely to be recalled from a
self-distanced/observer perspective: Lucy M. Kenny et al., "Distant
Memories: A Prospective Study of Vantage Point of Trauma Memories,"
Psychological Science 20 (2009): 1049--1052; and Meredith E. Coles et
al., "Effects of Varying Levels of Anxiety Within Social Situations:
Relationship to Memory Perspective and Attributions in Social Phobia,"
Behaviour Research and Therapy 39 (2001): 651--665. For discussion of
the implications of this distinction for emotion regulation, see Ethan
Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Self-Distancing: Theory, Research, and Current
Directions." fly-on-the-wall perspective: Ethan Kross, Ãzlem Ayduk, and
Walter Mischel, "When Asking 'Why' Does Not Hurt: Distinguishing
Rumination from Reflective Processing of Negative Emotions,"
Psychological Science 16 (2005): 709--715. differences in the verbal
stream: The examples of verbal streams that I cite were pulled from
Ethan Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Making Meaning out of Negative Experiences
by Self-Distancing," Current Directions in Psychological Science 20
(2011): 187--191. response to stress: Ãzlem Ayduk and Ethan Kross,
"Enhancing the Pace of Recovery: SelfDistanced Analysis of Negative
Experiences Reduces Blood Pressure Reactivity," Psychological Science 19
(2008): 229--231. Also see Rebecca F. Ray, Frank H. Wilhelm, and James
J. Gross, "All in the Mind's Eye? Anger Rumination and Reappraisal,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 94 (2008): 133--145.
dampened emotional activity in the brain: Brittany M. Christian et al.,
"When Imagining Yourself in Pain, Visual Perspective Matters: The Neural
and Behavioral Correlates of Simulated Sensory Experiences," Journal of
Cognitive Neuroscience 27 (2015): 866--875. less hostility and
aggression: Dominik Mischkowski, Ethan Kross, and Brad Bushman, "Flies
on the Wall Are Less Aggressive: Self-Distancing 'in the Heat of the
Moment' Reduces Aggressive Thoughts, Angry Feelings, and Aggressive
Behavior," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 48 (2012):
1187--1191. Also see Tamara M. Pfeiler et al., "Adaptive Modes of
Rumination: The Role of Subjective Anger," Cognition and Emotion 31
(2017): 580--589. people with depression: Ethan Kross et al., " 'Asking
Why' from a Distance: Its Cognitive and Emotional Consequences for
People with Major Depressive Disorder," Journal of Abnormal Psychology
121 (2012): 559--569; Ethan Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Boundary Conditions
and Buffering Effects: Does Depressive Symptomology Moderate the
Effectiveness of DistancedAnalysis for Facilitating Adaptive
Self-Reflection?," Journal of Research in Personality 43 (2009):
923--927; Emma Travers-Hill et al., "Beneficial Effects of Training in
Self-Distancing and Perspective Broadening for People with a History of
Recurrent Depression," Behaviour Research and Therapy 95 (2017): 19--28.
For a summary of research on the clinical implications of distancing and
a discussion of how it operates under different conditions, see Ethan
Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Self-Distancing: Theory, Research, and Current
Directions."

highly anxious parents: Louis A. Penner et al., "Self-Distancing Buffers
High Trait Anxious Pediatric Cancer Caregivers Against Short- and
Longer-Term Distress," Clinical Psychological Science 4 (2016):
629--640. Philippe Verduyn: Philippe Verduyn et al., "The Relationship
Between Self-Distancing and the Duration of Negative and Positive
Emotional Experiences in Daily Life," Emotion 12 (2012): 1248--1263. For
a conceptual replication of the finding demonstrating that distancing
reduces positive affect, see June Gruber, Allison G. Harvey, and Sheri
L. Johnson, "Reflective and Ruminative Processing of Positive Emotional
Memories in Bipolar Disorder and Healthy Controls," Behaviour Research
and Therapy 47 (2009): 697--704. For experimental data supporting the
delayed benefits of distancing, see Kross and Ayduk, "Facilitating
Adaptive Emotional Analysis." we are all prone: Ãzlem Ayduk and Ethan
Kross, "From a Distance: Implications of Spontaneous Self-Distancing for
Adaptive Self-Reflection," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
98 (2010): 809--829. Researchers at Stanford: Ray, Wilhelm, and Gross,
"All in the Mind's Eye?" Across the Atlantic: Patricia E. Schartau, Tim
Dalgleish, and Barnaby D. Dunn, "Seeing the Bigger Picture: Training in
Perspective Broadening Reduces Self-Reported Affect and
Psychophysiological Response to Distressing Films and Autobiographical
Memories," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 118 (2009): 15--27. shrinking
the size of an image: Joshua Ian Davis, James J. Gross, and Kevin N.
Ochsner, "Psychological Distance and Emotional Experience: What You See
Is What You Get," Emotion 11 (2011): 438--444. higher GPAs: David S.
Yeager et al., "Boring but Important: A Self-Transcendent Purpose for
Learning Fosters Academic Self-Regulation," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 107 (2014): 558--580. 1010 B.C.E.: John S. Knox,
"Solomon," Ancient History Encyclopedia, Jan.Â 25, 2017,
www.ancient.eu/solomon/. As the Bible tells us: Robert Alter, The Hebrew
Bible: A Translation with Commentary (New York: W. W. Norton, 2018).
"Solomon's Paradox": Igor Grossmann and Ethan Kross, "Exploring
Solomon's Paradox: SelfDistancing Eliminates the Self-Other Asymmetry in
Wise Reasoning About Close Relationships in Younger and Older Adults,"
Psychological Science 25 (2014): 1571--1580. Lincoln later reflected:
Doris Kearns Goodwin, Team of Rivals (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2005).
what wisdom actually is: Igor Grossmann, "Wisdom in Context,"
Perspectives on Psychological Science 12 (2017): 233--257. associate
wisdom with advanced age: Igor Grossmann et al., "Reasoning About Social
Conflicts Improves into Old Age," PNAS 107 (2010): 7246--7250. Also see
Darrell A. Worthy et al., "With Age Comes Wisdom: Decision Making in
Younger and Older Adults," Psychological Science 22 (2011): 1375--1380.
happening to someone else: Grossmann and Kross, "Exploring Solomon's
Paradox"; and Alex C. Huynh et al., "The Wisdom in Virtue: Pursuit of
Virtue Predicts Wise Reasoning About Personal Conflicts," Psychological
Science 28 (2017): 1848--1856.

choose to do nothing: This tendency is referred to as the omission bias.
Ilana Ritov and Jonathan Baron, "Reluctance to Vaccinate: Omission Bias
and Ambiguity," Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 3 (1990):
263--277. and this is a big but: This study included three different
conditions in which people were asked to make medical decisions for
someone other than the self. Participants were randomly assigned to
assume the role of a physician making a decision for a patient, a
medical director setting treatment policy for all patients, or a parent
making a decision for a child. Each of these "making a decision for
someone else" conditions produced judgments that were equivalent to one
another and superior compared with when participants decided for
themselves. I averaged across the response rates for all three
conditions for the purpose of text. Brian J. ZikmundFisher et al., "A
Matter of Perspective: Choosing for Others Differs from Choosing for
Yourself in Making Treatment Decisions," Journal of General Internal
Medicine 21 (2006): 618--622. 18 million: Global Cancer Observatory,
"Globocan 2018," International Agency for Research on Cancer, World
Health Organization, 1,
gco.iarc.fr/today/data/factsheets/cancers/39-All-cancersfact-sheet.pdf.
avoid an "inside view": Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (New
York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2011). decision making more generally:
Qingzhou Sun et al., "Self-Distancing Reduces ProbabilityWeighting
Biases," Frontiers in Psychology 9 (2018): 611. information overload:
Jun Fukukura, Melissa J. Ferguson, and Kentaro Fujita, "Psychological
Distance Can Improve Decision Making Under Information Overload via Gist
Memory," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 142 (2013):
658--665. roll back "loss aversion": Evan Polman, "Self-Other Decision
Making and Loss Aversion," Organizational Behavior and Human Decision
Processes 119 (2012): 141--150; Flavia Mengarelli et al., "Economic
Decisions for Others: An Exception to Loss Aversion Law," PLoS One 9
(2014): e85042; and Ola Andersson et al., "Deciding for Others Reduces
Loss Aversion," Management Science 62 (2014): 29--36. 2008 U.S.
presidential election: Ethan Kross and Igor Grossmann, "Boosting Wisdom:
Distance from the Self Enhances Wise Reasoning, Attitudes, and
Behavior," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 141 (2012):
43--48. eased the conflict: Ãzlem Ayduk and Ethan Kross, "From a
Distance: Implications of Spontaneous Self-Distancing for Adaptive
Self-Reflection." buffered against romantic decline: Eli J. Finkel et
al., "A Brief Intervention to Promote Conflict Reappraisal Preserves
Marital Quality over Time," Psychological Science 24 (2013): 1595--
1601. creating positive personal narratives: For review, see Dan P.
McAdams and Kate C. McLean, "Narrative Identity," Current Directions in
Psychological Science 22 (2013): 233--238. temporal distancing: Emma
Bruehlman-Senecal and Ãzlem Ayduk, "This Too Shall Pass: Temporal
Distance and the Regulation of Emotional Distress," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 108 (2015): 356--375. Also see Emma
Bruehlman-Senecal, Ãzlem Ayduk, and Oliver P. John, "Taking the Long
View: Implications of Individual Differences in Temporal Distancing for
Affect, Stress Reactivity, and Well-Being," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 111 (2016): 610--635; S. P. Ahmed, "Using Temporal
Distancing to Regulate Emotion in Adolescence: Modulation by Reactive
Aggression," Cognition and Emotion 32 (2018): 812--826; and Alex C.
Huynh, Daniel Y. J. Yang, and Igor Grossmann, "The Value of

Prospective Reasoning for Close Relationships," Social Psychological and
Personality Science 7 (2016): 893--902. James Pennebaker: For reviews,
see James W. Pennebaker, "Writing About Emotional Experiences as a
Therapeutic Process," Psychological Science 8 (1997): 162--166; James W.
Pennebaker and Cindy K. Chung, "Expressive Writing: Connections to
Physical and Mental Health," in The Oxford Handbook of Health
Psychology, ed.Â H. S. Friedman (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011),
417--437; also see Eva-Maria Gortner, Stephanie S. Rude, and James W.
Pennebaker, "Benefits of Expressive Writing in Lowering Rumination and
Depressive Symptoms," Behavior Therapy 37 (2006): 292--303; Denise M.
Sloan et al., "Expressive Writing Buffers Against Maladaptive
Rumination," Emotion 8 (2008): 302--306; and Katherine M. Krpan et al.,
"An Everyday Activity as a Treatment for Depression: The Benefits of
Expressive Writing for People Diagnosed with Major Depressive Disorder,"
Journal of Affective Disorders 150 (2013): 1148--1151. creates distance
from our experience: Jiyoung Park, Ãzlem Ayduk, and Ethan Kross,
"Stepping Back to Move Forward: Expressive Writing Promotes
Self-Distancing," Emotion 16 (2016): 349--364. As Park and colleagues
discuss, this doesn't mean that distance is the only factor explaining
why expressive writing helps.

Chapter Four: When I Become You frequency illusion: Also referred to as
the "Baader-Meinhof phenomenon, Baader-Meinhof," Oxford English
Dictionary, April 6, 2020, https://www.oed.com/view/Entry/250279. LeBron
James: Interview by Michael Wilbon. Henry Abbott, "LeBron James'
Post-decision Interviews," ESPN, July 9, 2010,
https://www.espn.com/blog/truehoop/post/\_/id/17856/lebronjames-post-decision-interviews
and Jim Gray, "LeBron James 'The Decision,' " ESPN, July 8, 2010,
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bHSLw8DLm20. Malala Yousafzai: Malala
Yousafzai, interview by Jon Stewart, The Daily Show with Jon Stewart,
Oct.Â 8, 2013. Jennifer Lawrence: Brooks Barnes, "Jennifer Lawrence Has
No Appetite for Playing Fame Games," New York Times, Sept.Â 9, 2015.
Gallic Wars: Julius Caesar, Caesar's Gallic War: With an Introduction,
Notes, and Vocabulary by Francis W. Kelsey, 7th ed.Â (Boston: Allyn and
Bacon, 1895). The Education of Henry Adams: Henry Adams, The Education
of Henry Adams: An Autobiography (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts
Historical Society, 1918). powerful techniques: Sally Dickerson and
Margaret E. Kemeny, "Acute Stressors and Cortisol Responses: A
Theoretical Integration and Synthesis of Laboratory Research,"
Psychological Bulletin 130 (2004): 355--391. public speaking: Ethan
Kross et al., "Self-Talk as a Regulatory Mechanism: How You Do It
Matters," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 106 (2014):
304--324. marker of negative emotion: For a historical review and
meta-analysis, see Allison M. Tackman et al., "Depression, Negative
Emotionality, and Self-Referential Language: A Multi-lab, Multimeasure,
and Multi-language-task Research Synthesis," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 116 (2019): 817--834; and To'Meisha Edwards and
Nicholas S. Holtzman, "A Meta-Analysis of Correlations Between
Depression and First-Person Singular Pronoun Use," Journal of Research
in Personality 68 (2017): 63--68. For example: The two studies I discuss
in the text were published after our work on self-talk. As the papers
cited in the previous endnote demonstrate, however, research stretching
back multiple decades had already revealed a link between first-person
singular pronoun usage and negative affect. I present these newer
studies as evidence for that link because they represent particularly
compelling evidence of the relationship. Tackman et al., "Depression,
Negative Emotionality, and Self-Referential Language: A Multi-lab,
Multi-measure, and Multi-language-task Research Synthesis"; and Johannes
C. Eichstaedt et al., "Facebook Language Predicts Depression in Medical
Records," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United
States of America 115 (2018): 11203--11208. distanced self-talk: For
reviews, see Ethan Kross and Ãzlem Ayduk, "Self-Distancing: Theory,
Research, and Current Directions"; and Ariana Orvell et al., "Linguistic
Shifts: A Relatively Effortless Route to Emotion Regulation?," Current
Directions in Psychological Science 28 (2019): 567--573. third-person
"he" or "she": It's worth asking whether using "they" for those who
identify as nonbinary would lead to a similar result. Although we have
not tested this idea directly, theoretically we would expect this
pronoun to serve the same distancing, emotion regulatory function.

Other experiments: Kross et al., "Self-Talk as a Regulatory Mechanism";
Sanda Dolcos and Dolores Albarracin, "The Inner Speech of Behavioral
Regulation: Intentions and Task Performance Strengthen When You Talk to
Yourself as a You," European Journal of Social Psychology 44 (2014):
636--642; and Grossmann and Kross, "Exploring Solomon's Paradox." For
other domains in which distanced self-talk has revealed benefits, see
Celina Furman, Ethan Kross, and Ashley Gearhardt, "Distanced Self-Talk
Enhances Goal Pursuit to Eat Healthier," Clinical Psychological Science
8 (2020): 366--373; Ariana Orvell et al., "Does Distanced SelfTalk
Facilitate Emotion Regulation Across a Range of Emotionally Intense
Experiences?," Clinical Psychological Science (in press); and Jordan B.
Leitner et al., "Self-Distancing Improves Interpersonal Perceptions and
Behavior by Decreasing Medial Prefrontal Cortex Activity During the
Provision of Criticism," Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 12
(2017): 534--543. 2014 Ebola crisis: Ethan Kross et al., "Third-Person
Self-Talk Reduces Ebola Worry and Risk Perception by Enhancing Rational
Thinking," Applied Psychology: Health and Well-Being 9 (2017): 387--409.
most chatter-provoking scenarios: Aaron C. Weidman et al., "Punish or
Protect: How Close Relationships Shape Responses to Moral Violations,"
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 46 (2019). "shifters" refer
to words: Orvell et al., "Linguistic Shifts"; and Roman Jakobson,
Shifters, Verbal Categories, and the Russian Verb (Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University, Russian Language Project, Department of Slavic
Languages and Literatures, 1957). For discussion, see Orvell et al.,
"Linguistic Shifts." within milliseconds: For discussion, see Orvell et
al., "Linguistic Shifts." One tiny second: Jason S. Moser et al.,
"Third-Person Self-Talk Facilitates Emotion Regulation Without Engaging
Cognitive Control: Converging Evidence from ERP and fMRI," Scientific
Reports 7 (2017): 1--9. overtaxed people's executive functions: Ibid.
Catch-22 of sorts: Orvell et al., "Linguistic Shifts." typed to himself
in 1979: Robert Ito, "Fred Rogers's Life in 5 Artifacts," New York
Times, June 5, 2018. think of it as a challenge: Jim Blascovich and Joe
Tomaka, "The Biopsychosocial Model of Arousal Regulation," Advances in
Experimental Social Psychology 28 (1996): 1--51; and Richard S. Lazarus
and Susan Folkman, Stress, Appraisal, and Coping (New York: Springer,
1984). Several studies back: For review, see Jeremy P. Jamieson, Wendy
Berry Mendes, and Matthew K. Nock, "Improving Acute Stress Responses:
The Power of Reappraisal," Current Directions in Psychological Science
22 (2013): 51--56. Also see Adam L. Alter et al., "Rising to the Threat:
Reducing Stereotype Threat by Reframing the Threat as a Challenge,"
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 46 (2010): 155--171; and
Alison Wood Brooks, "Get Excited: Reappraising Pre-performance Anxiety
as Excitement," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 143 (2014):
1144--1158. Seventy-five percent: Kross et al., "Self-Talk as a
Regulatory Mechanism." see it in people's bodies: Jim Blascovich and Joe
Tomaka, "The Biopsychosocial Model of Arousal Regulation"; Mark D.
Seery, "Challenge or Threat? Cardiovascular Indexes of Resilience and

Vulnerability to Potential Stress in Humans," Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews 35 (2011): 1603--1610. cardiovascular systems
functioned: Lindsey Streamer et al., "Not I, but She: The Beneficial
Effects of Self-Distancing on Challenge/Threat Cardiovascular
Responses," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 70 (2017):
235--241. Batman Effect: Rachel E. White et al., "The 'Batman Effect':
Improving Perseverance in Young Children," Child Development 88 (2017):
1563--1571. Stephanie and her colleagues have examined the Batman Effect
in additional contexts. In one direction, they've shown that this tool
can promote executive functioning among five-year-olds: Rachel E. White
and Stephanie M. Carlson, "What Would Batman Do? Self-Distancing
Improves Executive Function in Young Children," Developmental Science 19
(2016): 419--426. In other work, they've shown that this tool is
uniquely effective for young children and vulnerable children
characterized by low levels of self-control when they work on
frustrating tasks that have no solution: Amanda Grenell et al.,
"Individual Differences in the Effectiveness of Self-Distancing for
Young Children's Emotion Regulation," British Journal of Developmental
Psychology 37 (2019): 84-- 100. loss of a parent: Julie B. Kaplow et
al., "Out of the Mouths of Babes: Links Between Linguistic Structure of
Loss Narratives and Psychosocial Functioning in Parentally Bereaved
Children," Journal of Traumatic Stress 31 (2018): 342--351. normalizing
experiences: Robert L. Leahy, "Emotional Schema Therapy: A Bridge over
Troubled Waters," in Acceptance and Mindfulness in Cognitive Behavior
Therapy: Understanding and Applying New Therapies, ed.Â J. D. Herbert and
E. M. Forman (Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, 2011), 109--131; and Blake
E. Ashforth and Glen E. Kreiner, "Normalizing Emotion in Organizations:
Making the Extraordinary Seem Ordinary," Human Resource Management
Review 12 (2002): 215--235. Sheryl Sandberg: Sheryl Sandberg Facebook
Post About Her Husband's Death, Facebook, June 3, 2015,
www.facebook.com/sheryl/posts/10155617891025177:0. Also see Sheryl
Sandberg in conversation with Oprah Winfrey, Super Soul Sunday, June 25,
2017, http://www.oprah.com/
own-super-soul-sunday/the-daily-habit-the-helped-sheryl-sandberg-heal-after-tragedy-video.
gaining helpful emotional distance: Park, Ayduk, and Kross, "Stepping
Back to Move Forward." "generic 'you' ": Ariana Orvell, Ethan Kross, and
Susan Gelman, "How 'You' Makes Meaning," Science 355 (2017): 1299--1302.
Also see Ariana Orvell, Ethan Kross, and Susan Gelman, "Lessons Learned:
Young Children's Use of Generic-You to Make Meaning from Negative
Experiences," Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 148 (2019):
184--191. another type of linguistic hack: Orvell et al., "Linguistic
Shifts." asked to learn from their experience: Orvell, Kross, and
Gelman, "How 'You' Makes Meaning."

Chapter Five:

e Power and Peril of Other People

Then he opened fire on them again: Steven Gray, "How the NIU Massacre
Happened," Time, Feb. 16, 2008,
content.time.com/time/nation/article/0,8599,1714069,00.html. Amanda
Vicary and R. Chris Fraley: Amanda M. Vicary and R. Chris Fraley,
"Student Reactions to the Shootings at Virginia Tech and Northern
Illinois University: Does Sharing Grief and Support over the Internet
Affect Recovery?," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 36 (2010):
1555--1563; report of the February 14, 2008, shootings at Northern
Illinois University,
https://www.niu.edu/forward/\_pdfs/archives/feb14report.pdf; Susan
Saulny and Monica Davey, "Gunman Kills at Least 5 at U.S. College," New
York Times, Feb.Â 15, 2008; and Cheryl Corley and Scott Simon, "NIU
Students Grieve at Vigil," NPR, Feb.Â 16, 2008, https://www.npr.org/
templates/story/story.php?storyId=19115808&t=1586343329323. one Virginia
Tech student: Vicary and Fraley, "Student Reactions to the Shootings at
Virginia Tech and Northern Illinois University." September 11 attacks:
Mark D. Seery et al., "Expressing Thoughts and Feelings Following a
Collective Trauma: Immediate Responses to 9/11 Predict Negative Outcomes
in a National Sample," Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 76
(2008): 657--667. The measure used to index expressing emotions
following 9/11 consisted of an open-ended prompt asking participants to
share their thoughts about 9/11. The authors used this prompt as a proxy
for assessing people's tendency to express emotions with others
(pp.Â 663, 665). Critically, the authors demonstrate that people who
completed the open-ended prompt also reported seeking out more emotional
support and venting to others after the attacks (p.Â 664). For additional
resources indicating that expressing emotions is not always beneficial,
see Richard McNally, Richard J. Bryant, and Anke Ehlers, "Does Early
Psychological Intervention Promote Recovery from Posttraumatic Stress?,"
Psychological Science in the Public Interest 4 (2003): 45--79; Arnold A.
P. van Emmerik et al., "Single Session Debriefing After Psychological
Trauma: A Meta-analysis," Lancet 360 (2002): 766--771; George A.
Bonanno, "Loss, Trauma, and Human Resilience: Have We Underestimated the
Human Capacity to Thrive After Extremely Aversive Events?," American
Psychologist 59 (2004): 20--28; Bushman, "Does Venting Anger Feed or
Extinguish the Flame?"; Bushman et al., "Chewing on It Can Chew You Up";
and RimÃ©, "Emotion Elicits the Social Sharing of Emotion." earliest
proponents of this approach: Aristotle, Poetics (Newburyport, MA:
Pullins, 2006). Also see, Brad J. Bushman, "Catharsis of Aggression," in
Encyclopedia of Social Psychology, ed. Roy F. Baumeister and Kathleen D.
Vohs (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2007), 135--137; and The Editors of
Encyclopaedia Britannica, "Catharsis," Encyclopaedia Britannica. Sigmund
Freud and his mentor: Josef Breuer and Sigmund Freud, Studies on
Hysteria, 1893--1895 (London: Hogarth Press, 1955). earlier stage of our
development: I drew on Bernard RimÃ©'s excellent synthesis of the role
that developmental processes play in establishing emotion regulation as
an interpersonal process for this section. RimÃ©, "Emotion Elicits the
Social Sharing of Emotion." basic need we have to belong: Roy F.
Baumeister and Mark R. Leary, "The Need to Belong: Desire for
Interpersonal Attachments as a Fundamental Human Motivation,"
Psychological Bulletin 117 (1995): 497--529. "tend and befriend"
response: Shelley E. Taylor, "Tend and Befriend: Biobehavioral Bases of
Affiliation Under Stress," Current Directions in Psychological Science
15 (2006): 273--77.

seek out other people: Research indicates that simply thinking about
caring for others, activating a mental snapshot of them, is sufficient
for activating an inner coach like a script in people's heads. According
to psychologists Mario Mikulincer and Phillip Shaver, two pioneers in
attachment research, the unspoken mental script goes like this: "If I
encounter an obstacle and/or become distressed, I can approach a
significant other for help; he or she is likely to be available and
supportive; I will experience relief and comfort as a result of
proximity to this person; I can then return to other activities." Mario
Mikulincer et al., "What's Inside the Minds of Securely and Insecurely
Attached People? The Secure-Base Script and Its Associations with
Attachment-Style Dimensions," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 97 (2002): 615-- 633. This script idea played into a set of
studies I performed in 2015 with my colleague, Cornell psychologist
Vivian Zayas, and her students, to examine whether glancing at pictures
of attachment figures would have implications for helping people manage
chatter. Specifically, we asked people to think about a negative
experience that caused chatter and then asked people to look at a
picture of either their mother or someone else's mother. Just as
Mikulincer and Shaver would have predicted, looking at a picture of
their mother reduced their emotional pain; they rated themselves as
feeling much better. Emre Selcuk et al., "Mental Representations of
Attachment Figures Facilitate Recovery Following Upsetting
Autobiographical Memory Recall," Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 103 (2012): 362--378. emotional needs over our cognitive
ones: Christelle Duprez et al., "Motives for the Social Sharing of an
Emotional Experience," Journal of Social and Personal Relationships 32
(2014): 757-- 787. Also see Lisanne S. Pauw et al., "Sense or
Sensibility? Social Sharers' Evaluations of Socio-affective
vs.Â Cognitive Support in Response to Negative Emotions," Cognition and
Emotion 32 (2018): 1247--1264. interlocutors tend to miss these cues:
Lisanne S. Pauw et al., "I Hear You (Not): Sharers' Expressions and
Listeners' Inferences of the Need for Support in Response to Negative
Emotions," Cognition and Emotion 33 (2019): 1129--1243. co-rumination:
Amanda J. Rose, "Co-rumination in the Friendships of Girls and Boys,"
Child Development 73 (2002): 1830--1843; Jason S. Spendelow, Laura M.
Simonds, and Rachel E. Avery, "The Relationship Between Co-rumination
and Internalizing Problems: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,"
Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy 24 (2017): 512--527; Lindsey B.
Stone et al., "Co-rumination Predicts the Onset of Depressive Disorders
During Adolescence," Journal of Abnormal Psychology 120 (2011):
752--757; and Benjamin L. Hankin, Lindsey Stone, and Patricia Ann
Wright, "Co-rumination, Interpersonal Stress Generation, and
Internalizing Symptoms: Accumulating Effects and Transactional
Influences in a Multi-wave Study of Adolescents," Developmental
Psychopathology 22 (2010): 217--235. Also see RimÃ©, "Emotion Elicits the
Social Sharing of Emotion." when it comes to our inner voice: For a
discussion of the role that spreading activation theories play in
rumination, see Rusting and Nolen-Hoeksema, "Regulating Responses to
Anger." most effective verbal exchanges: Andrew C. High and James Price
Dillard, "A Review and Metaanalysis of Person-Centered Messages and
Social Support Outcomes," Communication Studies 63 (2012): 99--118;
Frederic Nils and Bernard RimÃ©, "Beyond the Myth of Venting: Social
Sharing Modes Determine Emotional and Social Benefits from Distress
Disclosure," European Journal of Social Psychology 42 (2012): 672--681;
Stephen J. Lepore et al., "It's Not That Bad: Social Challenges to
Emotional Disclosure Enhance Adjustment to Stress," Anxiety, Stress, and
Coping 17 (2004): 341--361; Anika Batenburg and Enny Das, "An
Experimental Study on the

Effectiveness of Disclosing Stressful Life Events and Support Messages:
When Cognitive Reappraisal Support Decreases Emotional Distress, and
Emotional Support Is Like Saying Nothing at All," PLoS One 9 (2014):
e114169; and Stephanie Tremmel and Sabine Sonnentag, "A Sorrow Halved? A
Daily Diary Study on Talking About Experienced Workplace Incivility and
Next-Morning Negative Affect," Journal of Occupational Health Psychology
23 (2018): 568--583. prefer to not cognitively reframe: Gal Sheppes,
"Transcending the 'Good and Bad' and 'Here and Now' in Emotion
Regulation: Costs and Benefits of Strategies Across Regulatory Stages,"
Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 61 (2020). For further
discussion of the role that time plays in social exchanges, see RimÃ©,
"Emotion Elicits the Social Sharing of Emotion." Once the hostage takers
understood: Christopher S. Wren, "2 Give Up After Holding 42 Hostages in
a Harlem Bank," New York Times, April 19, 1973; Barbara Gelb, "A
Cool-Headed Cop Who Saves Hostages," New York Times, April 17, 1977;
Gregory M. Vecchi et al., "Crisis (Hostage) Negotiation: Current
Strategies and Issues in High-Risk Conflict Resolution," Aggression and
Violent Behavior 10 (2005): 533--551; Gary Noesner, Stalling for Time
(New York: Random House, 2010); "Police Negotiation Techniques from the
NYPD Crisis Negotiations Team," Harvard Law School, Nov.Â 11, 2019,
https://www.pon.harvard.edu/daily/crisis-negotiations/
crisis-negotiations-and-negotiation-skills-insights-from-the-new-york-city-police-departmenthostage-negotiations-team/.
diversify their sources of support: Elaine O. Cheung, Wendi L. Gardner,
and Jason F. Anderson, "Emotionships: Examining People's
Emotion-Regulation Relationships and Their Consequences for Well-Being,"
Social Psychological and Personality Science 6 (2015): 407-- 414. global
grassroots movement: It Gets Better Project, itgetsbetter.org/; "How It
All Got Started,"
https://itgetsbetter.org/blog/initiatives/how-it-all-got-started/; Brian
Stelter, "Campaign Offers Help to Gay Youths," New York Times, Oct.Â 18,
2010; and Dan Savage, "Give 'Em Hope," The Stranger, Sept.Â 23, 2010.
psychological debriefing: McNally, Bryant, and Ehlers, "Does Early
Psychological Intervention Promote Recovery from Posttraumatic Stress?";
and van Emmerik et al., "Single Session Debriefing After Psychological
Trauma." powerful neurobiological experience: For reviews of the empathy
literature, see Zaki, War for Kindness; de Waal and Preston, "Mammalian
Empathy"; and Erika Weisz and Jamil Zaki, "Motivated Empathy: A Social
Neuroscience Perspective," Current Opinion in Psychology 24 (2018):
67--71. damages not only our self-esteem: The relationship scientists
Eshkol Rafaeli and Marci Gleason offer an incisive review of the
social-support literature in Eshkol Rafaeli and Marci Gleason, "Skilled
Support Within Intimate Relationships," Journal of Family Theory and
Review 1 (2009): 20--37. They also provide a detailed discussion of the
myriad additional ways that visible support can backfire. They note that
it may focus attention on the source of stress, enhance how indebted one
feels to a partner, highlight relationship inequities, and be perceived
as hostile when the support is delivered with criticism (however
well-intentioned). New York bar exam: Niall Bolger, Adam Zuckerman, and
Ronald C. Kessler, "Invisible Support and Adjustment to Stress," Journal
of Personality and Social Psychology 79 (2000): 953--61. For an
experimental conceptual replication of these results, see Niall Bolger
and David Amarel,

"Effects of Social Support Visibility on Adjustment to Stress:
Experimental Evidence," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 92
(2007): 458--475. A study on marriages: Yuthika U. Girme et al., "Does
Support Need to Be Seen? Daily Invisible Support Promotes Next
Relationship Well-Being," Journal of Family Psychology 32 (2018):
882--893. meeting their self-improvement goals: Yuthika U. Girme,
Nickola C. Overall, and Jeffry A. Simpson, "When Visibility Matters:
Short-Term Versus Long-Term Costs and Benefits of Visible and Invisible
Support," Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 39 (2013): 1441--
1454. insights into the circumstances: Katherine S. Zee and Niall
Bolger, "Visible and Invisible Social Support: How, Why, and When,"
Current Directions in Psychological Science 28 (2019): 314-- 320. Also
see Katherine S. Zee et al., "Motivation Moderates the Effects of Social
Support Visibility," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 114
(2018): 735--765. Caring physical contact: Brittany K. Jakubiak and
Brooke C. Feeney, "Affectionate Touch to Promote Relational,
Psychological, and Physical Well-Being in Adulthood: A Theoretical Model
and Review of the Research," Personality and Social Psychology Review 21
(2016): 228--252. one second of contact: Sander L. Koole, Mandy Tjew A.
Sin, and Iris K. Schneider, "Embodied Terror Management: Interpersonal
Touch Alleviates Existential Concerns Among Individuals with Low
Self-Esteem," Psychological Science 25 (2014): 30--37. teddy bear:
Ibid.; and Kenneth Tai, Xue Zheng, and Jayanth Narayanan, "Touching a
Teddy Bear Mitigates Negative Effects of Social Exclusion to Increase
Prosocial Behavior," Social Psychological and Personality Science 2
(2011): 618--626. result of the brain: Francis McGlone, Johan Wessberg,
and Hakan Olausson, "Discriminative and Affective Touch: Sensing and
Feeling," Neuron 82 (2014): 737--751. For discussion of the role that
C-fibers play in social support, see Jakubiak and Feeney, "Affectionate
Touch to Promote Relational, Psychological, and Physical Well-Being in
Adulthood." social organ: India Morrison, Line S. Loken, and Hakan
Olausson, "The Skin as a Social Organ," Experimental Brain Research 204
(2009): 305--314. nature of co-rumination via social media: David S. Lee
et al., "When Chatting About Negative Experiences Helps---and When It
Hurts: Distinguishing Adaptive Versus Maladaptive Social Support in
Computer-Mediated Communication," Emotion 20 (2020): 368--375. For
additional evidence indicating that the social sharing processes
generalize to social media interactions, see Mina Choi and Catalina L.
Toma, "Social Sharing Through Interpersonal Media."

Chapter Six: Outside In In 1963: Erik Gellman, Robert Taylor Homes,
Chicago Historical Society,
http://www.encyclopedia.chicagohistory.org/pages/2478.html. Robert
Taylor Homes: Aaron Modica, "Robert R. Taylor Homes, Chicago, Illinois
(1959--2005)," BlackPast, Dec.Â 19, 2009,
blackpast.org/aah/robert-taylor-homes-chicago-illinois-1959-2005; D.
Bradford Hunt, "What Went Wrong with Public Housing in Chicago? A
History of the Robert Taylor Homes," Journal of the Illinois State
Historical Society 94 (2001): 96--123; Hodding Carter, Crisis on Federal
Street, PBS (1987). Ming Kuo: Frances E. Kuo, "Coping with Poverty:
Impacts of Environment and Attention in the Inner City," Environment and
Behavior 33 (2001): 5--34. Roger Ulrich: Roger S. Ulrich, "View Through
a Window May Influence Recovery from Surgery," Science 224 (1984):
420--421. green revelations have followed: For recent reviews of the
link between nature exposure and health, see Gregory N. Bratman et al.,
"Nature and Mental Health: An Ecosystem Service Perspective," Science
Advances 5 (2019): eaax0903; Roly Russell et al., "Humans and Nature:
How Knowing and Experiencing Nature Affect Well-Being," Annual Review of
Environmental Resources 38 (2013): 473--502; Ethan A. McMahan and David
Estes, "The Effect of Contact with Natural Environments on Positive and
Negative Affect: A Meta-analysis," Journal of Positive Psychology 10
(2015): 507--519; and Terry Hartig et al., "Nature and Health," Annual
Review of Public Health 35 (2014): 207--228. ten thousand individuals in
England: Mathew P. White et al., "Would You Be Happier Living in a
Greener Urban Area? A Fixed-Effects Analysis of Panel Data,"
Psychological Science 24 (2013): 920--928. seven years younger: Omid
Kardan et al., "Neighborhood Greenspace and Health in a Large Urban
Center," Scientific Reports 5 (2015): 11610. entire population of
England: Richard Mitchell and Frank Popham, "Effect of Exposure to
Natural Environment on Health Inequalities: An Observational Population
Study," Lancet 372 (2008): 1655--1660. Also see David Rojas-Rueda et
al., "Green Spaces and Mortality: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis
of Cohort Studies," Lancet Planet Health 3 (2019): 469--477. Stephen and
Rachel Kaplan: Rachel Kaplan and Stephen Kaplan, The Experience of
Nature: A Psychological Perspective (New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1989). I also drew on this article to tell the Kaplans' story:
Rebecca A. Clay, "Green Is Good for You," Monitor on Psychology 32
(2001): 40. William James: William James, Psychology: The Briefer Course
(New York: Holt, 1892). brain's limited resources: For an excellent
discussion of the distinction between voluntary and involuntary
attention as it relates to nature and attention restoration, see Stephen
Kaplan and Marc G. Berman, "Directed Attention as a Common Resource for
Executive Functioning and Self-Regulation," Perspectives on
Psychological Science 5 (2010): 43--57. Also see Timothy J. Buschman and
Earl K. Miller, "Top-Down Versus Bottom-Up Control of Attention in the
Prefrontal and Posterior Parietal Cortices," Science 315 (2007):
1860--1862. One now classic study: Marc G. Berman, John Jonides, and
Stephen Kaplan, "The Cognitive Benefits of Interacting with Nature,"
Psychological Science 19 (2008): 1207--1212. Also see

Terry Hartig et al., "Tracking Restoration in Natural and Urban Field
Settings," Journal of Environmental Psychology 23 (2003): 109--123.
clinically depressed participants: Marc G. Berman et al., "Interacting
with Nature Improves Cognition and Affect for Individuals with
Depression," Journal of Affective Disorders 140 (2012): 300--305.
Another satellite-imagery study: Kristine Engemann et al., "Residential
Green Space in Childhood Is Associated with Lower Risk of Psychiatric
Disorders from Adolescence into Adulthood," Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116 (2019):
5188--5193. Also see White et al., "Would You Be Happier Living in a
Greener Urban Area?" Palo Alto, California: Gregory N. Bratman et al.,
"Nature Experience Reduces Rumination and Subgenual Prefrontal Cortex
Activation," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 112 (2015): 8567--8572. For a conceptual
replication at the behavioral level, see Gregory N. Bratman et al., "The
Benefits of Nature Experience: Improved Affect and Cognition," Landscape
and Urban Planning 138 (2015): 41--50, which linked a nature (versus
urban) walk with improved rumination, anxiety, positive affect, and
working memory functioning. born and bred city dweller: There's a
natural level of skepticism that many people feel when they hear about
these findings on the cognitive and emotional restorative effects of
nature. Indeed, one clever set of studies found that people consistently
underestimate how much interacting with green spaces will improve their
mood. Elizabeth K. Nisbet and John M. Zelenski, "Underestimating Nearby
Nature: Affective Forecasting Errors Obscure the Happy Path to
Sustainability," Psychological Science 22 (2011): 1101--1106. 68 percent
of the world's population: United Nations, Department of Economic and
Social Affairs, Population Division, World Urbanization Prospects: The
2018 Revision (New York: United Nations, 2019); and Hannah Ritchie and
Max Roser, "Urbanization," Our World in Data (2018, updated 2019),
https://ourworldindata.org/urbanization#migration-to-towns-and-cities-is-veryrecent-mostly-limited-to-the-past-200-years.
six-minute video of neighborhood streets: Bin Jiang et al., "A
Dose-Response Curve Describing the Relationship Between Urban Tree Cover
Density and Self-Reported Stress Recovery," Environment and Behavior 48
(2016): 607--629. Also see Daniel K. Brown, Jo L. Barton, and Valerie F.
Gladwell, "Viewing Nature Scenes Positively Affects Recovery of
Autonomic Function Following Acute-Mental Stress," Environmental Science
and Technology 47 (2013): 5562--5569; Berman, Jonides, and Kaplan,
"Cognitive Benefits of Interacting with Nature"; and McMahan and Estes,
"Effect of Contact with Natural Environments on Positive and Negative
Affect." improved performance on an attentional task: Stephen C. Van
Hedger et al., "Of Cricket Chirps and Car Horns: The Effect of Nature
Sounds on Cognitive Performance," Psychonomic Bulletin and Review 26
(2019): 522--530. longer we're exposed: Danielle F. Shanahan et al.,
"Health Benefits from Nature Experiences Depend on Dose," Scientific
Reports 6 (2016): 28551. Also see Jiang et al., "Dose-Response Curve
Describing the Relationship Between Urban Tree Cover Density and
Self-Reported Stress Recovery." ReTUNE: ReTUNE (Restoring Through Urban
Nature Experience), The University of Chicago,
https://appchallenge.uchicago.edu/retune/, accessed March 4, 2020.
ReTUNE app: https://retune-56d2e.firebaseapp.com/.

Suzanne Bott: Suzanne Bott, interview by Ethan Kross, Oct.Â 1, 2008. "the
most dangerous place in Iraq": Mark Kukis, "The Most Dangerous Place in
Iraq," Time, Dec. 11, 2006. psychologist named Craig Anderson: Craig L.
Anderson, Maria Monroy, and Dacher Keltner, "Awe in Nature Heals:
Evidence from Military Veterans, At-Risk Youth, and College Students,"
Emotion 18 (2018): 1195--1202. Awe is the wonder: Jennifer E. Stellar et
al., "Self-Transcendent Emotions and Their Social Functions: Compassion,
Gratitude, and Awe Bind Us to Others Through Prosociality," Emotion
Review 9 (2017): 200--207; Paul K. Piff et al., "Awe, the Small Self,
and Prosocial Behavior," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
108 (2015): 883--899; and Michelle N. Shiota, Dacher Keltner, and Amanda
Mossman, "The Nature of Awe: Elicitors, Appraisals, and Effects on
Self-Concept," Cognition and Emotion 21 (2007): 944--963. brain during
awe-inspiring experiences: Michiel van Elk et al., "The Neural
Correlates of the Awe Experience: Reduced Default Mode Network Activity
During Feelings of Awe," Human Brain Mapping 40 (2019): 3561--3574.
brain responds when people meditate: Judson A. Brewer et al.,
"Meditation Experience Is Associated with Differences in Default Mode
Network Activity and Connectivity," Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America 108 (2011): 20254--20259.
For discussion of how the experience of awe relates to psychedelics in
terms of underlying brain function, see van Elk et al., "The Neural
Correlates of the Awe Experience: Reduced Default Mode Network Activity
During Feelings of Awe." Also see Robin L. Carhart-Harris et al., "The
Entropic Brain: A Theory of Conscious States Informed by Neuroimaging
Research with Psychedelic Drugs," Frontiers in Human Neuroscience 3
(2014): 20. we developed this emotion: For discussion, see Stellar et
al., "Self-Transcendent Emotions and Their Social Functions." center of
the world: For example, see Yang Bai et al.Â "Awe, the Diminished Self,
and Collective Engagement: Universals and Cultural Variations in the
Small Self," Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 113 (2017):
185--209. synaptic flow of your thoughts: van Elk et al., "Neural
Correlates of the Awe Experience." similar ways as other distancing
techniques: For a similar argument, see Phuong Q. Le et al., "When a
Small Self Means Manageable Obstacles: Spontaneous Self-Distancing
Predicts Divergent Effects of Awe During a Subsequent Performance
Stressor," Journal of Experimental Social Psychology 80 (2019): 59--66.
This study also interestingly suggests that people who tend to
spontaneously distance when reflecting on negative experiences may
benefit the most from experiencing awe prior to delivering a stressful
speech in terms of their cardiovascular stress response. purchasing a
new watch: Melanie Rudd, Kathleen D. Vohs, and Jennifer Aaker, "Awe
Expands People's Perception of Time, Alters Decision Making, and
Enhances Well-Being," Psychological Science 23 (2012): 1130--1136.
linked with reduced inflammation: Jennifer E. Stellar et al., "Positive
Affect and Markers of Inflammation: Discrete Positive Emotions Predict
Lower Levels of Inflammatory Cytokines," Emotion 15 (2015): 129--133.
One set of studies: Jennifer E. Stellar et al., "Awe and Humility,"
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 114 (2018): 258--269.

hallmark features of wisdom: Grossmann and Kross, "Exploring Solomon's
Paradox." caveat to consider: Amie Gordon et al., "The Dark Side of the
Sublime: Distinguishing a ThreatBased Variant of Awe," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 113 (2016): 310--328. "What I battle
hardest to do": Rafael Nadal, Rafa: My Story, with John Carlin (New
York: Hachette Books, 2013); Chris Chase, "The Definitive Guide to
Rafael Nadal's 19 Bizarre Tennis Rituals," USA Today, June 5, 2019.
compensatory control: Mark J. Landau, Aaron C. Kay, and Jennifer A.
Whitson, "Compensatory Control and the Appeal of a Structured World,"
Psychological Bulletin 141 (2015): 694--722. "It's a way of placing
myself": Nadal, Rafa. This might explain the global influence: Maria
Kondo, The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up: The Japanese Art of
Decluttering and Organizing (Berkeley, CA: Ten Speed Press, 2014).
perceptions of control: As Mark Landau, Aaron Kay, and Jennifer Whitson
deftly argue in their review, "Compensatory Control and the Appeal of a
Structured World," this topic has been the focus of a tremendous amount
of research over the past sixty years and has been studied from a
variety of perspectives. whether we try to achieve goals: Albert
Bandura, Social Foundations of Thought and Action: A Social Cognitive
Theory (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1986); and Bandura,
SelfEfficacy: The Exercise of Control (New York: Freeman, 1997).
improved physical health and emotional well-being: For reviews, see
Landau, Kay, and Whitson, "Compensatory Control and the Appeal of a
Structured World"; D. H. Shapiro, Jr., C. E. Schwartz, and J. A. Astin,
"Controlling Ourselves, Controlling Our World: Psychology's Role in
Understanding Positive and Negative Consequences of Seeking and Gaining
Control," The American Psychologist 51 (1996): 1213--1230; and Bandura,
Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control. Also see Richard M. Ryan and
Edward L. Deci, "Self-Determination Theory and the Facilitation of
Intrinsic Motivation, Social Development, and Well-Being," American
Psychologist 55 (2000): 68--78. heightened performance at school and
work: Michelle Richardson, Charles Abraham, and Rod Bond, "Psychological
Correlates of University Students' Academic Performance: A Systematic
Review and Meta-analysis," Psychological Bulletin 138 (2012): 353--387;
Michael Schneider and Franzis Preckel, "Variables Associated with
Achievement in Higher Education: A Systematic Review of Meta-analyses,"
Psychological Bulletin 143 (2017): 565--600; Alexander D. Stajkovic and
Fred Luthans, "Self-Efficacy and Work-Related Performance: A
Metaanalysis," Psychological Bulletin 124 (1998): 240--261. more
satisfying interpersonal relationships: Toni L. Bisconti and C. S.
Bergeman, "Perceived Social Control as a Mediator of the Relationships
Among Social Support, Psychological WellBeing, and Perceived Health,"
Gerontologist 39 (1999): 94--103; Tanya S. Martini, Joan E. Grusec, and
Silvia C. Bernardini, "Effects of Interpersonal Control, Perspective
Taking, and Attributions on Older Mothers' and Adult Daughters'
Satisfaction with Their Helping Relationships," Journal of Family
Psychology 15 (2004): 688--705. causes our chatter to spike: For
discussion, see Nolen-Hoeksema, Wisco, and Lyubomirsky, "Rethinking
Rumination." propels us to try to regain it: Another resource that
people frequently utilize to enhance their sense of control is religion,
which provides people with order, structure, and organization on
practical and spiritual levels. Aaron C. Kay et al., "God and the
Government: Testing a Compensatory

Control Mechanism for the Support of External Systems," Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology 95 (2008): 18--35. For discussion, see
Landau, Kay, and Whitson, "Compensatory Control and the Appeal of a
Structured World." easier to navigate and more predictable: Landau, Kay,
and Whitson, "Compensatory Control and the Appeal of a Structured
World." illusory patterns: Jennifer A. Whitson and Adam D. Galinsky,
"Lacking Control Increases Illusory Pattern Perception," Science 322
(2008): 115--117. the one with the structured border: Keisha M.
Cutright, "The Beauty of Boundaries: When and Why We Seek Structure in
Consumption," Journal of Consumer Research 38 (2012): 775--790. Also
see, Samantha J. Heintzelman, Jason Trent, and Laura A. King,
"Encounters with Objective Coherence and the Experience of Meaning in
Life," Psychological Science 24 (2013): 991--998. reading about the
world: Alexa M. Tullett, Aaron C. Kay, and Michael Inzlicht, "Randomness
Increases Self-Reported Anxiety and Neurophysiological Correlates of
Performance Monitoring," Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 10
(2015): 628--635. perceive in their surroundings: Catherine E. Ross,
"Neighborhood Disadvantage and Adult Depression," Journal of Health and
Social Behavior 41 (2000): 177--187. subset of people: Not all people
diagnosed with obsessive-compulsive disorder are motivated to establish
order in their surroundings: Miguel Fullana, "Obsessions and Compulsions
in the Community: Prevalence, Interference, Help-Seeking, Developmental
Stability, and Cooccurring Psychiatric Conditions," American Journal of
Psychiatry 166 (2009): 329--336. proliferation of conspiracy theories:
For discussion, see Landau, Kay, and Whitson, "Compensatory Control and
the Appeal of a Structured World."

Chapter Seven: Mind Magic Franz Anton Mesmer: I used the following
resources to tell Mesmer's story: George J. Makari, "Franz Anton Mesmer
and the Case of the Blind Pianist," Hospital and Community Psychiatry 45
(1994): 106--110; Derek Forrest, "Mesmer," International Journal of
Clinical and Experimental Hypnosis 50 (2001): 295--308; Douglas J.
Lanska and Joseph T. Lanska, "Franz Anton Mesmer and the Rise and Fall
of Animal Magnetism: Dramatic Cures, Controversy, and Ultimately a
Triumph for the Scientific Method," in Brain, Mind, and Medicine: Essays
in Eighteenth-Century Neuroscience, ed.Â Harry Whitaker (New York:
Springer, 2007), 301--320; Sadie F. Dingfelder, "The First Modern
Psychology Study: Or How Benjamin Franklin Unmasked a Fraud and
Demonstrated the Power of the Mind," Monitor on Psychology 41 (2010),
www.apa.org/monitor/2010/07-08/franklin; and David A. Gallo and Stanley
Finger, "The Power of a Musical Instrument: Franklin, the Mozarts,
Mesmer, and the Glass Armonica," History of Psychology 3 (2000):
326--343. didn't miss this point: Benjamin Franklin, Report of
Dr.Â Benjamin Franklin, and Other Commissioners, Charged by the King of
France, with the Examination of Animal Magnetism, as Now Practiced at
Paris (London: printed for J. Johnson, 1785). until the mid-twentieth
century: This dramatic jump forward is largely owed to an
anesthesiologist named Henry Beecher, who published an article in 1955
called "The Powerful Placebo": Henry Beecher, "The Powerful Placebo,"
Journal of the American Medical Association 159 (1955): 1602--1606.
ancient human tradition: The Editors of Encyclopaedia Britannica,
"Amulet," Encyclopaedia Britannica. mythical seal: Joseph Jacobs and M.
Seligsohn, "Solomon, Seal of," Jewish Encyclopedia,
www.jewishencyclopedia.com/articles/13843-solomon-seal-of. symbol of
good fortune: Mukti J. Campion, "How the World Loved the
Swastika---Until Hitler Stole It," BBC News, Oct.Â 23, 2014,
www.bbc.com/news/magazine-29644591. worry dolls: Charles E. Schaefer and
Donna Cangelosi, Essential Play Therapy Techniques: TimeTested
Approaches (New York: The Guilford Press, 2016). Heidi Klum: Dan
Snierson, "Heidi Klum Reveals Victoria's Secret," Entertainment Weekly,
Nov.Â 21, 2003. Michael Jordan: NBA.com Staff, "Legends Profile: Michael
Jordan," NBA, www.nba.com/history/ legends/profiles/michael-jordan.
healing practice of crystals has become big business: Rina Raphael, "Is
There a Crystal Bubble? Inside the Billion-Dollar 'Healing' Gemstone
Industry," Fast Company, May 5, 2017. it's quite rational: For an
excellent discussion of the psychological gymnastics that explain how
rational individuals endorse superstitious beliefs, see Jane Risen,
"Believing What We Do Not Believe: Acquiescence to Superstitious Beliefs
and Other Powerful Intuitions," Psychological Review 123 (2016):
182--207. Study after study demonstrates: Yoni K. Ashar, Luke J. Chang,
and Tor D. Wager, "Brain Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect: An Affective
Appraisal Account," Annual Review of Clinical Psychology 13 (2017):
73--98; Ted J. Kaptchuk and Franklin G. Miller, "Placebo Effects in
Medicine," New England Journal of Medicine 373 (2015): 8--9; and Tor D.
Wager

and Lauren Y. Atlas, "The Neuroscience of Placebo Effects: Connecting
Context, Learning and Health," Nature Reviews Neuroscience 16 (2015):
403--418. irritable bowel syndrome patients: Ted J. Kaptchuk et al.,
"Components of Placebo Effect: Randomized Controlled Trial in Patients
with Irritable Bowel Syndrome," British Medical Journal 336 (2008):
999--1003. migraine sufferers: Karin Meissner et al., "Differential
Effectiveness of Placebo Treatments: A Systematic Review of Migraine
Prophylaxis," JAMA Internal Medicine 173 (2013): 1941-- 1951. improved
respiratory symptoms for asthmatics: Michael E. Wechsler et al., "Active
Albuterol or Placebo, Sham Acupuncture, or No Intervention in Asthma,"
New England Journal of Medicine 365 (2011): 119--126. varies notably
across diseases and patients: For examples, see Andrew L. Geers et al.,
"Dispositional Optimism Predicts Placebo Analgesia," The Journal of Pain
11 (2010): 1165-- 1171; Marta Pecina et al., "Personality Trait
Predictors of Placebo Analgesia and Neurobiological Correlates,"
Neuropsychopharmacology 38 (2013): 639--646. injected a promising new
chemical treatment: C. Warren Olanow et al., "Gene Delivery of Neurturin
to Putamen and Substantia Nigra in Parkinson Disease: A Double-Blind,
Randomized, Controlled Trial," Annals of Neurology 78 (2015): 248--257.
For additional evidence that placebos benefit Parkinson's disease, see
Raul de la Fuente-Fernandez et al., "Expectation and Dopamine Release:
Mechanism of the Placebo Effect in Parkinson's Disease," Science 293
(2001): 1164--1166; Christopher G. Goetz, "Placebo Response in
Parkinson's Disease: Comparisons Among 11 Trials Covering Medical and
Surgical Interventions," Movement Disorders 23 (2008): 690--699;
American Parkinson Disease Association, "The Placebo Effect in Clinical
Trials in Parkinson's Disease," March, 6, 2017,
www.apdaparkinson.org/article/the-placebo-effect-in-clinical-trials-in-parkinsons-disease/.
after participants completed: Leonie Koban et al., "Frontal-Brainstem
Pathways Mediating Placebo Effects on Social Rejection," Journal of
Neuroscience 37 (2017): 3621--3631. help people with chatter: The flip
side to the emotionally fortifying boost of placebos holds as well. In a
phenomenon dubbed the "nocebo" effect, believing that a substance will
harm you has also been shown to have that effect in some circumstances.
Paul Enck, Fabrizio Benedetti, and Manfred Schedlowski, "New Insights
into the Placebo and Nocebo Responses," Neuron 59 (2008): 195--206.
depression and anxiety: For review, see Ashar, Chang, and Wager, "Brain
Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect." several months: Arif Khan, Nick
Redding, and Walter A. Brown, "The Persistence of the Placebo Response
in Antidepressant Clinical Trials," Journal of Psychiatric Research 42
(2008): 791-- 796. Tig Notaro: Stuart Heritage, "Tig Notaro and Her
Jaw-Dropping Cancer Standup Routine," Guardian, Oct.Â 19, 2012; Andrew
Marantz, "Good Evening. Hello. I Have Cancer," New Yorker, Oct.Â 5, 2012;
Vanessa Grigoriadis, "Survival of the Funniest," Vanity Fair, Dec.Â 18,
2012; and Tig Notaro, Live, 2012. brain is a prediction machine: Andy
Clark, "Whatever Next? Predictive Brains, Situated Agents, and the
Future of Cognitive Science," Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36 (2013):
181--204.

generalizes to our internal experiences: Irving Kirsch, "Response
Expectancy and the Placebo Effect," International Review of Neurobiology
138 (2018): 81--93; and Christian BÃ¼chel et al., "Placebo Analgesia: A
Predictive Coding Perspective," Neuron 81 (2014): 1223--1239. strengthen
our beliefs: For an excellent discussion of the role that preconscious
and deliberative processes play in placebo effects, see Ashar, Chang,
and Wager, "Brain Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect"; Donald D. Price,
Damien G. Finniss, and Fabrizio Benedetti, "A Comprehensive Review of
the Placebo Effect: Recent Advances and Current Thought," Annual Review
of Psychology 59 (2008): 565--590; and Karin Meissner and Klaus Linde,
"Are Blue Pills Better Than Green? How Treatment Features Modulate
Placebo Effects," International Review of Neurobiology 139 (2018):
357--378; John D. Jennings et al., "Physicians' Attire Influences
Patients' Perceptions in the Urban Outpatient Surgery Setting," Clinical
Orthopaedics and Related Research 474 (2016): 1908--1918. rodents and
other animals respond to placebos: As reviewed in Ashar, Chang, and
Wager, "Brain Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect." Also see R. J.
Herrnstein, "Placebo Effect in the Rat," Science 138 (1962): 677--678;
and Jian-You Gou et al., "Placebo Analgesia Affects the Behavioral
Despair Tests and Hormonal Secretions in Mice," Psychopharmacology 217
(2011): 83--90; and K. R. Munana, D. Zhang, and E. E. Patterson,
"Placebo Effect in Canine Epilepsy Trials," Journal of Veterinary
Medicine 24 (2010): 166--170. brain and spinal cord: Tor D. Wager and
Lauren Y. Atlas, "The Neuroscience of Placebo Effects." brain's pleasure
circuitry: Hilke Plassmann et al., "Marketing Actions Can Modulate
Neural Representations of Experienced Pleasantness," Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences 105 (2008): 1050--1054. hunger hormone
ghrelin: Alia J. Crum et al., "Mind over Milkshakes: Mindsets, Not Just
Nutrients, Determine Ghrelin Response," Health Psychology 30 (2011):
424--429. stronger for psychological outcomes: Ashar, Chang, and Wager,
"Brain Mechanisms of the Placebo Effect." placebos can act as enhancers:
Slavenka Kam-Hansen et al., "Altered Placebo and Drug Labeling Changes
the Outcome of Episodic Migraine Attacks," Science Translational
Medicine 6 (2014): 218ra5. potent persuasive device: For a classic
reference, see Richard E. Petty and John T. Cacioppo, "The Elaboration
Likelihood Model of Persuasion," Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 19 (1986): 123--205. Ted Kaptchuk and his team: Ted J.
Kaptchuk et al., "Placebos Without Deception: A Randomized Controlled
Trial in Irritable Bowel Syndrome," PLoS One 5 (2010): e15591. our own
experiment: Darwin Guevarra et al., "Are They Real? Non-deceptive
Placebos Lead to Robust Declines in a Neural Biomarker of Emotional
Reactivity," Nature Communications (in press). nondeceptive placebos:
James E. G. Charlesworth et al., "Effects of Placebos Without Deception
Compared with No Treatment: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis,"
Journal of EvidenceBased Medicine 10 (2017): 97--107. Bronislaw
Malinowski: Raymond W. Firth, "Bronislaw Malinowski: Polish-Born British
Anthropologist," Encyclopaedia Britannica, Feb.Â 2019; Katharine
Fletcher, "Bronislaw Malinowski---LSE pioneer of Social Anthropology,"
June 13, 2017, LSE History,
https://blogs.lse.ac.uk/lsehistory/2017/06/13/bronislaw-malinowski-lse-pioneer-of-social-

anthropology/; Michael W. Young and Bronislaw Malinowski, Malinowski's
Kiriwina: Fieldwork Photography, 1915--1918 (Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 1998). betel nuts: Cindy Sui and Anna Lacey, "Asia's
Deadly Secret: The Scourge of the Betel Nut," BBC News,
https://www.bbc.com/news/health-31921207; "Bronislaw Malinowski
(1884--1942)," Lapham's Quarterly,
www.laphamsquarterly.org/contributors/malinowski. "I kick thee down":
Bronislaw Malinowski, Argonauts of the Western Pacific: An Account of
Native Enterprise and Adventure in the Archipelagoes of Melanesian New
Guinea (Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press, 2010), loc. 5492--5493, Kindle;
Bronislaw Malinowski, "Fishing in the Trobriand Islands," Man 18 (1918):
87--92; Bronislaw Malinowski, Man, Science, Religion, and Other Essays
(Boston: Beacon Press, 1948). psychology of human beings: I drew from
this excellent review on the psychology of rituals for this section of
the book: Nicholas M. Hobson et al., "The Psychology of Rituals: An
Integrative Review and Process-Based Framework," Personality and Social
Psychology Review 22 (2018): 260--284. West Point: "10 Facts: The United
States Military Academy at West Point," American Battlefield Trust,
www.battlefields.org/learn/articles/10-facts-united-states-military-academy-west-point.
business world as well: Samantha McLaren, "A 'No Shoes' Policy and 4
Other Unique Traditions That Make These Company Cultures Stand Out,"
Linkedin Talent Blog, Nov.Â 12, 2018,
business.linkedin.com/talent-solutions/blog/company-culture/2018/unique-traditions-thatmake-these-company-cultures-stand-out.
Wade Boggs: George Gmelch, "Baseball Magic," in Ritual and Belief,
ed.Â David Hicks (Plymouth, UK: AltaMira Press, 2010): 253--262; Jay
Brennan, "Major League Baseball's Top Superstitions and Rituals,"
Bleacher Report, Oct.Â 3, 2017,
bleacherreport.com/articles/375113top-mlb-superstitions-and-rituals; and
Matthew Hutson, "The Power of Rituals," Boston Globe, Aug.Â 18, 2016.
Steve Jobs: Steve Jobs, Commencement Address, Stanford University, June
12, 2005, Stanford News, June 14, 2005. Michael Norton and Francesca
Gino: Michael I. Norton and Francesca Gino, "Rituals Alleviate Grieving
for Loved Ones, Lovers, and Lotteries," Journal of Experimental
Psychology: General 143 (2014): 266--272. naturally turn: Martin Lang et
al., "Effects of Anxiety on Spontaneous Ritualized Behavior," Current
Biology 25 (2015): 1892--1897; Giora Keinan, "Effects of Stress and
Tolerance of Ambiguity on Magical Thinking," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 67 (1994): 48--55; and Stanley J. Rachman and Ray J.
Hodgson, Obsessions and Compulsions (Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Prentice-Hall, 1980). recited psalms: Richard Sosis and W. Penn
Handwerker, "Psalms and Coping with Uncertainty: Religious Israeli
Women's Responses to the 2006 Lebanon War," American Anthropologist 113
(2011): 40--55. reciting the rosary: Matthew W. Anastasi and Andrew B.
Newberg, "A Preliminary Study of the Acute Effects of Religious Ritual
on Anxiety," Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine 14
(2008): 163--165. consume fewer calories: Allen Ding Tian et al.,
"Enacting Rituals to Improve Self-Control," Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology 114 (2018): 851--876.

"Don't Stop Believin' ": Alison Wood Brooks et al., "Don't Stop
Believing: Rituals Improve Performance by Decreasing Anxiety,"
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes 13 (2016): 71--85.
There is also evidence indicating that performing rituals reduces
activation in brain systems that become active when people experience
anxiety. Nicholas M. Hobson, Devin Bonk, and Michael Inzlicht, "Rituals
Decrease the Neural Response to Performance Failure," PeerJ 5 (2017):
e3363. aren't simply habits or routines: Hobson et al., "Psychology of
Rituals." Australian Olympic swimmer Stephanie Rice: Gary Morley,
"Rice's Rituals: The Golden Girl of Australian Swimming," CNN, June 28,
2012,
www.cnn.com/2012/06/28/sport/olympics-2012stephanie-rice-australia/index.html.
ritualized cleaning behaviors: Lang et al., "Effects of Anxiety on
Spontaneous Ritualized Behavior." socially rejected by their peers:
Rachel E. Watson-Jones, Harvey Whitehouse, and Cristine H. Legare,
"In-Group Ostracism Increases High-Fidelity Imitation in Early
Childhood," Psychological Science 27 (2016): 34--42. desired goals: E.
Tory Higgins, "Self-Discrepancy: A Theory Relating Self and Affect,"
Psychological Review 94 (1987): 319--340; and Charles S. Carver and
Michael F. Scheier, "Control Theory: A Useful Conceptual Framework for
Personality-Social, Clinical, and Health Psychology," Psychological
Bulletin 92 (1982): 111--135. Also see Earl K. Miller and Jonathan D.
Cohen, "An Integrative Theory of Prefrontal Cortex Function," Annual
Review of Neuroscience 24 (2001): 167--202. karaoke study: Brooks et
al., "Don't Stop Believing."

Conclusion our species didn't evolve: This is not to say that meditation
and mindfulness aren't useful. Like the other techniques reviewed in
this chapter, they are tools that are useful in some contexts. The
broader point is that it is not useful (or feasible) to continually
focus on the present, because succeeding often requires us to reflect on
the future and past. useful in small doses: Dacher Keltner and James J.
Gross, "Functional Accounts of Emotions," Cognition and Emotion 13
(1999): 467--480; and Randolph M. Nesse, "Evolutionary Explanations of
Emotions," Human Nature 1 (1989): 261--289. impossible for them to feel
pain: U.S. National Library of Medicine, "Congenital Insensitivity to
Pain," National Institutes of Health, Dec.Â 10, 2019,
ghr.nlm.nih.gov/condition/congenitalinsensitivity-to-pain#genes. into a
curriculum: The curriculum for this project focuses broadly on teaching
students how to control their emotions using several of the strategies
reviewed in Chatter, along with other empirically supported tools. the
pilot study: This study took place during the winter of 2019 in a high
school in the northeastern United States. Students were randomly
assigned to the toolbox curriculum or a "control" curriculum that taught
students about the science of learning. The curricula were co-created by
scientists (Angela Duckworth, Daniel Willingham, John Jonides, Ariana
Orvell, Benjamin Katz, and myself) and teachers (Rhiannon Killian and
Keith Desrosiers).

different situations: For a discussion of the importance of flexibly
using different emotionmanagement strategies, see Cecilia Cheng,
"Cognitive and Motivational Processes Underlying Coping Flexibility: A
Dual-Process Model," Journal of Personal and Social Psychology 84
(2003): 425--438; and George A. Bonanno and Charles L. Burton,
"Regulatory Flexibility: An Individual Differences Perspective on Coping
and Emotion Regulation," Perspectives on Psychological Science 8 (2013):
591--612. when used interchangeably: James J. Gross, "Emotion
Regulation: Current Status and Future Prospects," Psychological Inquiry
26 (2015): 1--26; Ethan Kross, "Emotion Regulation Growth Points: Three
More to Consider," Psychological Inquiry 26 (2015): 69--71.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Ethan Kross, PhD, is one of the world's leading experts on controlling
the conscious mind. An award-winning professor at the University of
Michigan and Ross School of Business, he is the director of the Emotion
& Self Control Laboratory. He has participated in policy discussion at
the White House and has been interviewed about his work on CBS Evening
News, Good Morning America, and NPR Morning Edition. His pioneering
research has been featured in The New York Times, The New Yorker, The
Wall Street Journal, USA Today, New England Journal of Medicine, and
Science. He completed his BA at the University of Pennsylvania and his
PhD at Columbia University. This is his first book.

W îat's next on your reading list? Discover your next great read! Get
personalized book picks and up-to-date news about this author. Sign up
now.


