OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

Also by David Robson The Intelligence Trap OceanofPDF.com

OceanofPDF.com

First published in Great Britain in 2022 by Canongate Books Ltd, 14 High
Street, Edinburgh EH1 1TE canongate.co.uk This digital edition first
published in 2021 by Canongate Books Copyright Â© David Robson, 2022 For
image permission credits please see here The right of David Robson to be
identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him in
accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988 British
Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data A catalogue record for this book
is available on request from the British Library eISBN 978 1 83885 328 0
Export ISBN: 978 1 83885 327 3

OceanofPDF.com

To Robert OceanofPDF.com

CONTENTS

Introduction 1. The prediction machine 2. A pious fraud 3. Do no harm 4.
The origins of mass hysteria 5. Faster, stronger, fitter 6. The food
paradox 7. De-stressing stress 8. Limitless willpower 9. Untapped genius
10. The super-agers Epilogue Notes Acknowledgements Image permissions

Index OceanofPDF.com

INTRODUCTION

'The mind is its own place and in itself, can make a Heaven of Hell, a
Hell of Heaven.' -- JOHN MILTON, PARADISE LOST

Our expectations are like the air we breathe -- they accompany us
everywhere, yet we are rarely conscious of their presence. You might
assume that your body is resilient, or that it is prone to sickness. You
might think you are naturally lean and sporty, or that you are
predisposed to gaining weight. You might believe that the stresses in
your life are harming your health, and that a night of poor sleep will
render you a walking zombie the next day. These assumptions may appear
to be inescapable, objective truths. But in this book I want to show you
how those beliefs, in themselves, are shaping your health and well-being
in profound ways, and that learning to reset our expectations about
these issues can have truly remarkable effects on our health, happiness
and productivity. Don't believe me? Then consider one attention-grabbing
study from Harvard University. The participants were hotel cleaners,
whose work is often physically intense, yet feels very different from
the exercise you might

perform at the gym. To change the cleaners' perceptions of their own
fitness, the researchers explained that the amount of energy that was
exerted by hoovering the floor, changing beds or moving furniture over
the course of a week easily amounts to the level of exercise recommended
for good health. One month later, the researchers found that the
cleaners' fitness had noticeably improved, with significant changes in
their weight and blood pressure. Quite amazingly, the shift in their
beliefs about their bodies, and their new expectations of their work,
had brought about real physiological benefits -- without any change in
lifestyle.1 We will discover how 'expectation effects' like this can
also influence our susceptibility to illness, our ability to maintain a
stable body weight, and the short- and long-term consequences of stress
and insomnia. As the following story shows, the power of expectation is
so strong that it can even determine how long you live.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Beginning in the late 1970s, the US Centers for Disease Control began to
receive reports that a worrying number of recent Laotian immigrants were
dying in their sleep. They were almost all male, aged between their
mid-20s and mid-40s, and most were from the persecuted Hmong ethnic
group, who had fled Laos after the rise to power of the communist
political movement Pathet Lao. For their loved ones, the only warning
was the sound of them struggling for breath and, occasionally, a gasp, a
moan or a cry. By the time help arrived, however, they were already
dead. Try as they might, epidemiologists could find no good medical
explanation for this 'Sudden Unexpected Nocturnal Death Syndrome'.
Autopsies showed no evidence of poisoning, nor was there anything
particularly unusual about their diet or their mental health. At its
peak, however, the mortality rate was so high among young Hmong men that
SUNDS accounted for more lives lost than all the other top five causes
of

death combined. Why were so many seemingly healthy adults passing away
in their sleep? Investigations by the medical anthropologist Shelley
Adler would eventually solve the mystery. According to Hmong traditional
folklore, an evil demon called the 'dab tsog' roamed the world at night.
When it found its victim, it would lie on the body, paralysing them and
smothering their mouth until they could no longer breathe. Back in the
mountains of Laos, the Hmong could ask a shaman to make a protective
necklace, or they could sacrifice animals to appease their ancestors,
who would fend off the dab tsog. But now these men were in the United
States, there were no shamans and they were no longer able to perform
their ritual sacrifices to appease their ancestors, meaning they had no
protection from the dab tsog. Many had converted to Christianity, so
that they could better integrate into American culture, neglecting their
old rituals altogether. Guilt at having abandoned their traditions was
itself a source of chronic stress that could have harmed their overall
health. But it was at night that the fears of the dab tsog became a
reality. Disturbing nightmares resulted in the experience of sleep
paralysis, in which the mind becomes conscious, as if you were fully
awake, but the body is unable to move. Sleep paralysis is not, in
itself, dangerous -- it affects around 8 per cent of people.2 For the
Hmong immigrants, however, it seemed like the dab tsog had come to wreak
revenge. The result, Adler concluded, was a panic so strong it could
exacerbate a heart arrhythmia, leading to cardiac arrest.3 And as the
deaths mounted, the Hmong men only became more scared, creating a kind
of hysteria among the population that may have caused even more deaths.
The explanation is now accepted by many scientists.4 Newspaper reports
at the time described the 'cultural primitivity' of these people, who
were 'frozen in time' and 'ruled by superstition and myth'. But
scientists now argue that we are all susceptible to beliefs that are
just as potent as the dab tsog. You may not believe in demons, but
thoughts about fitness, and expectations about long-term health, may
have real

consequences for your longevity, including the risk of heart disease.
This is the enormous power of the expectation effect. It is only once we
recognise its influence that we can begin to use it to our advantage to
ensure a longer, healthier, happier life. These provocative claims may
sound dangerously close to the content of many New Age self-help books,
such as Rhonda Byrne's 35-million-copy bestseller The Secret. Byrne
promoted the 'law of attraction' -- the idea that, for example,
visualising yourself rich will bring more money into your life. Such
ideas are pure pseudoscience, whereas the findings in this book are all
based on robust experiments, published in peer-reviewed journals, and
they can all be explained by well-accepted psychological and
physiological mechanisms, such as the actions of the nervous and
immunological systems. We will learn how our beliefs can influence many
important life outcomes without any appeal to the paranormal. You may
also wonder how the content of our thoughts could have any meaningful
influence in the chaos of the world today. I wrote much of this book in
the midst of the Covid-19 pandemic, when many of us were grieving for
loved ones and fearing for our livelihoods. We have also faced huge
political uncertainty and unrest, and many continue to wrestle with
enormous structural inequalities. Our own expectations and beliefs may
seem to hold little power in the face of all these barriers. It would be
foolish to argue that 'positive thinking' could eliminate all this
unhappiness and anxiety -- and I would be the last person to make that
claim. (Scientific research continues to show that simply denying the
difficulties of a situation will only lead to worse outcomes.) As we
shall soon see, however, there are many ways that our beliefs about our
own capacities can influence how we cope with challenges, and determine
the toll they take on our physical and mental health. While many of
today's crises are beyond our control, our responses to difficult
situations are often the product of our expectations -- and
understanding this fact allows us to increase our resilience and to
react in the most constructive way to the problems we face.

Crucially -- and this is something that I will emphasise throughout the
book -- the expectation effects described in these chapters concern
specific beliefs rather than a general optimism or pessimism. Armed with
scientific knowledge about the ways your expectations are shaping your
life, you can learn to reframe and reappraise your thinking without any
self-deception, and you don't need to turn into a cheery Pollyanna to
benefit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

My own understanding of the enormous power of expectations came seven
years ago, during a period of turmoil in my own life. Like many people,
I had previously suffered from depression and anxiety, but for most of
my life I had managed to weather the waves of unhappiness until they
passed. Then, after a period of intense stress, the troughs in my mood
started to get deeper, and longer, to the point that they were no longer
bearable. Recognising those symptoms, I went to my GP, who prescribed me
a course of anti-depressants and offered some of the usual warnings
about the known side effects, including migraine. Sure enough, my mood
seemed to stabilise, but on those first few days I also experienced
splitting headaches that felt like an ice-pick had penetrated my skull.
The pain was so intense that I was sure that something terrible was
happening to my brain. How could this agony not be some kind of warning?
It just so happened, however, that I had also started writing a popular
science article about the placebo effect (from the Latin, 'I will
heal'). As is now well known, inert sugar pills can often reduce
symptoms and accelerate recovery through the patient's mere expectation
that they will heal the body, and this coincides with physiological
changes to blood circulation, hormone balance and immunological
response. While working on my article, I discovered that many people
taking placebo pills not only experience the benefits of the drug they
believe they

are taking; they also report its side effects, too, from nausea,
headaches and fainting to sometimes dangerous drops in blood pressure.
And the more people are told about those side effects, the more likely
they are to report them. These are known as nocebo effects (from the
Latin, 'I will harm') and, like the placebo responses, these symptoms
are not simply 'imagined' but the result of measurable physiological
changes -- including significant shifts in our hormones and
neurotransmitters. For many anti-depressants, the vast majority of side
effects can be explained by the nocebo response rather than an
inevitable reaction. In other words, the terrible pain I had been
feeling while taking medication was perfectly real -- but the product of
my mind's expectation rather than the actual, chemical effects of the
drugs. With this knowledge, the pain soon vanished. After a few more
months of taking the anti-depressants (side-effect free) my depression
and anxiety had lifted. Knowing that many of the symptoms of withdrawal
may arise from the nocebo effect undoubtedly helped me to eventually
wean myself off the medication, too. Ever since, I have closely followed
the research on the mind's capacity to shape our health and well-being,
and our physical and mental capacities. And it is now becoming apparent
that the placebo and nocebo responses to drugs are just two examples of
the ways that beliefs can become selffulfilling prophecies, changing our
lives for better or worse. In the scientific literature, these phenomena
are variously called 'expectation effects', 'expectancy effects',
'Oedipus effects' (after the self-fulfilling prophecy in Sophocles'
famous play) and 'meaning responses'. For simplicity, I use the first --
'expectation effects' -- to describe all the scientific phenomena that
underlie the real-world consequences of our beliefs. The study of hotel
cleaners is just one example of this cutting-edge research, but there
are many other fascinating findings. So-called 'complaining good
sleepers' -- people who vastly over-estimate how much time they spend
awake and restless each night -- are much more likely to suffer greater
fatigue and poor concentration during the day, while 'non-

complaining bad sleepers' seem to escape the ill effects of insomnia.
For the purposes of our next-day performance, we slept as well as we
think we did. Beliefs about the consequences of anxiety, meanwhile, can
change someone's physiological responses to stress, affecting both
short-term performance and the long-term toll on mental and physical
health. Positive and negative self-fulfilling prophecies can also
determine memory capacity, concentration and fatigue during hard mental
tasks, and creativity in problem solving. Even someone's intelligence --
long considered to be an immutable trait -- may climb or fall according
to their expectations. These findings are causing some scientists to
question the fundamental limits of the brain, suggesting that we may all
have untapped mental reserves that we can free if we develop the right
mindset. And that has immediate implications for work and education, and
the ways that we cope under new pressures. The most mind-blowing results
concern the ageing process. People with a more positive attitude to
their later years are less likely to develop hearing loss, frailty and
illness -- and even Alzheimer's disease -- than people who associate
ageing with senility and disability. In a very real sense, we are as
young as we feel inside. As the Harvard study of the hotel cleaners
shows, our expectations are not set in stone. Once we acknowledge the
power that our expectations hold over our lives, the research offers
some very simple psychological techniques that we can all apply to boost
our physical and mental health, and unleash our full intellectual
potential. In the words of one of the most influential researchers in
this field, Alia Crum at Stanford University: 'Our minds aren't passive
observers simply perceiving reality as it is; our minds actually change
reality. In other words, the reality we will experience tomorrow is in
part a product of the mindsets we hold today.'5 So how do the body,
brain and culture interact so potently to produce these self-fulfilling
prophecies? What are the beliefs and expectations that rule our physical
and mental well-being? And how can we use these

fascinating findings to our own benefit? These are the central questions
this book sets out to answer. We will begin this journey with a
revolutionary new theory of the brain as a 'prediction machine' that
explains how conscious and unconscious expectations can powerfully
influence our perceptions of reality -- from the strange hallucinations
of Arctic explorers to our experience of pain and illness. Importantly,
this prediction machine can also alter our body's physiology -- leading
us to explore the power of belief in medicine, including an
extraordinarily simple psychological intervention that can accelerate
your recovery from surgery. We will discover the ways that expectations
can be transmitted between individuals through social contagion and the
psychosomatic origins of many recent health crises, including the
perplexing rise in food allergies -- and the ways to avoid falling
victim to these expectation effects yourself. We will then move beyond
medicine, to explore the power of expectation in everyday health and
well-being. We will see how food labelling can change the way your body
processes nutrients, with a direct impact on your waistline; how to use
your mind to take the pain out of exercise and improve your athletic
performance, without performanceenhancing drugs; and how to change your
physical and mental responses to stress. We shall understand how
prevailing cultural beliefs in countries such as India produce much
better concentration and willpower. We will also learn the secrets of
'super-agers' from the world's oldest acrobatic salsa dancer, and the
powerful potential of belief to slow the ravages of time -- right down
to the ageing of our individual cells. Finally, we will return to the
Hmong and discover how their story can help us all create our own
self-fulfilling prophecies. At the end of each chapter, you will also
find summaries of the techniques to employ expectation effects to your
advantage. These will vary in their details -- but, in general, they
will work better with repetition and practice. I encourage you to
approach them with an open mind -- testing the principles in comfortable
situations, with the aim of building on

any small gains. While it may be tempting to skip ahead to the practical
news you can use, these expectation effects tend to be more potent if
you understand the science behind their success. The more deeply you
process the material, the greater the benefits -- so it may also be
useful to write down the specific ways you hope to apply it in your
life. You may even like to share your results on social media, through
the #expectationeffect hashtag, or upload them to the website
www.expectationeffect.com, which I shall be updating regularly; there is
some research suggesting that sharing an expectation effect with others
-- and hearing about their experiences in return -- can increase its
power. Let me be absolutely clear. Your mind, alone, cannot perform
miracles -- you cannot simply imagine piles of money and think yourself
rich, or cure yourself of a terminal illness through positive
visualisations. But your expectations and beliefs can influence --
indeed, are already influencing -- your life in many other surprising
and powerful ways, and if you want to learn how to turn them to your
advantage, read on. You may be astonished by your potential for personal
change. OceanofPDF.com

1 THE PREDICTION MACHINE How your beliefs shape your reality It was just
a few nights before Christmas, and the drones seemed to be everywhere
and nowhere at the same time. The drama began at 9 p.m. on 19 December
2018, when a security officer at London Gatwick Airport reported two
unmanned aerial vehicles -- one flying around the perimeter fence,
another inside the complex. The runway was soon closed for fear of an
impending terrorist attack. It was only 19 months after the Islamist
bombing at the Manchester Arena, after all, and there had been reports
that Isis were planning to carry explosives on commercial drones. The
chaos escalated over the following 30 hours, as dozens of further
sightings kept the airport in lockdown. Try as they might, however, the
security officers and police just couldn't locate the drones, which
seemed to disappear as soon as they were sighted. Even more
astonishingly, their operators appeared to have found a way to avoid the
military's track-anddisable system, which was unable to detect any
unusual activity in the area, despite a total of 170 reported sightings.
The news soon spread to the

international media, who warned that similar attacks might occur in
other countries. By 6 a.m. on 21 December, the threat finally seemed to
have passed, and the airport reopened for business. Whoever was behind
the attack -- be it a terrorist or a joker -- had achieved their aim of
chaos, disrupting the travels of 140,000 passengers, with the
cancellation of more than a thousand flights. Despite offering a
substantial reward, the police have been completely unable to find a
culprit, and there is not a single photo offering evidence of an attack
-- leading some (including members of the police) to question whether
there were ever any drones at all.1 Even if there was, at one point, a
drone near the airport, it's clear that the vast majority of the
sightings were false, and the ensuing chaos was almost certainly
unnecessary. With so many independent reports from dozens of sources, we
can easily rule out the possibility that this was some kind of lie or
conspiracy. Instead, the event demonstrates the power of expectation to
change our perception, and -- occasionally -- to create a vision of
something that is entirely false. According to an increasing number of
neuroscientists, the brain is a 'prediction machine' that constructs an
elaborate simulation of the world, based as much on its expectations and
previous experiences as the raw data hitting the senses. For most
people, most of the time, these simulations coincide with objective
reality, but they can sometimes stray far from what is actually in the
physical world.2 Knowledge of the prediction machine can explain
everything from ghost sightings to disastrously bad calls by sports
referees -- and the mysterious appearance of non-existent drones in the
winter sky. It can help us to understand why the brand name of a beer
can change its taste, and it shows how, to someone with a phobia, the
world looks much more terrifying than it really is. This grand new
unifying theory of the brain also sets the stage for all the expectation
effects that we'll examine in this book. THE ART OF SEEING

The seeds of this extraordinary conception of the brain were sown in the
mid-nineteenth century by the German polymath Hermann von Helmholtz.
Studying the anatomy of the eyeball, he realised the patterns of light
hitting the retina would be too confusing to enable us to recognise what
is around us. The 3D world -- with objects at various distances and odd
angles -- has been flattened onto two two-dimensional discs, resulting
in obscured and overlapping contours that would be difficult to
interpret. And even the same object may reflect very different colours,
depending on the light source. If you are reading this physical book
indoors at dusk, for example, the page will be reflecting less light
than a dark grey page in direct sunlight -- yet in both cases, they look
distinctly white. Helmholtz suggested that the brain draws on past
experiences to tidy up the visual mess and to come up with the best
possible interpretation of what it receives, through a process that he
called 'unconscious inference'. We may think we are seeing the world
unfiltered, but vision is really forged in the 'dark background' of the
mind, he proposed, based on what it assumes is most likely to be in
front of you.3 Helmholtz's theories of optics influenced
Post-Impressionist artists like Georges Seurat,4 but it was only in the
1990s that the idea really started to take off in neuroscience -- with
signs that the brain's predictions influence every stage of visual
processing.5 Before you walk into a room, your brain has already built
many simulations of what might be there, which it then compares with
what it actually encounters. At some points, the predictions may need
retuning to better fit the data from the retina; at others, the brain's
confidence in its predictions may be so strong that it chooses to
discount some signals while accentuating others. Over numerous
repetitions of this process, the brain arrives at a 'best guess' of the
scene. As Moshe Bar, a neuroscientist at BarIlan University in Israel
who has led much of this work, puts it: 'We see what we predict, rather
than what's out there.' A wealth of evidence now supports this
hypothesis, right down to the brain's anatomy. If you look at the wiring
of the visual cortex at the back of

the head, you find that the nerves bringing electrical signals from the
retina are vastly outnumbered by the neural connections feeding in
predictions from other regions of the brain.6 In terms of the data it
provides, the eye is a relatively small (but admittedly essential)
element of your vision, while the rest of what you see is created 'in
the dark' within your skull. By measuring the brain's electrical
activity, neuroscientists like Bar can watch the effects of our
predictions in real time. He has observed, for instance, the passing of
signals from frontal regions of the brain -- which are involved in the
formation of expectations -- back into the visual cortex at the earliest
stages of visual processing, long before the image pops into our
consciousness.7 There are lots of good reasons why we might have evolved
to see the world in this way. For one thing, the use of predictions to
guide vision helps the brain to cut down the amount of sensory
information it actually processes, so that it can focus on the most
important details -- the things that are most surprising, and which do
not fit its current simulations. As Helmholtz originally noted, the
brain's reliance on prediction can also help us to deal with incredible
ambiguity.8 If you look at the following image -- a real, albeit
poor-quality, bleached photograph -- you will probably struggle to
identify anything recognisable.

If I tell you to look for a cow, however -- facing you, with its large
head towards the left of the image -- you may find that something
somehow 'clicks' and the image suddenly makes a lot more sense. If so,
you've just experienced your brain's predictive processing retuning its
mental models to make use of additional knowledge, transforming the
picture into something meaningful. Or what do you see when you look at
the following? (Try for at least 10 seconds before going on.)

If you're like me, you will initially find it extremely hard to make out
anything specific. What if I tell you it's a popular pet? If you're
still struggling to make it out, refer to the original image (here). It
should now become a lot clearer: that's your brain's updated predictions
suddenly making sense of the mess.9 Once you've seen it, it's almost
impossible to believe that you were ever confused by the image -- and
the effect of those updated predictions is enduring. Even if you return
to this page in a year's time, you'll be much more likely to make sense
of the image than when you first saw the incomprehensible splodges of
black and white. The brain will draw on any contextual information it
can to refine its predictions -- with immediate consequences for what we
see. (If you'd seen the picture in a pet shop or a veterinary surgeon's
office, you may have been far more likely to have seen the dog at first
glance.) Even the time of year can determine how your brain processes
ambiguous sights. A pair of Swiss scientists, for example, stood at the
main entrance of ZÃ¼rich Zoo and asked participants what they saw when
looking at a version of a famously ambiguous visual illusion:

In October, around 90 per cent of the zoo visitors reported seeing a
bird looking to the left. At Easter, however, that dropped to 20 per
cent, while the vast majority saw it as a rabbit looking to the right.
Of children under ten, for whom the Easter Bunny may be an especially
important figure, nearly 100 per cent saw a rabbit on the holiday
weekend. The prediction machine had weighed up which potential
interpretation of the ambiguous picture was most relevant, and the
season managed to tip the balance -- with a tangible effect on people's
conscious visual experience.10 We now know that the 'top down' influence
of the brain's expectations is not limited to vision but governs all
kinds of sensory perception. And it is incredibly effective. Suppose you
are driving on a misty day: if you are familiar with the route, your
previous experiences will help your brain to make out the sight of a
road sign or another car, so that you avoid having an accident. Or
imagine you are trying to work out the meaning of someone's words on a
crackly telephone line. This will be much easier if you are already
familiar with the accent and cadences of the speaker's voice, thanks to
the prediction machine. By predicting the effects of our movements, the
brain can damp down the feeling of touch when one part of our body makes
contact with

another, so that we don't jump out of our skin whenever one of our legs
brushes against the other, or our arm touches our side. (It is also for
this very reason that we can't tickle ourselves.) Errors in people's
internal simulations might also explain why amputees still often feel
pain in their missing limbs -- the brain hasn't fully updated its map of
the body, and erroneously predicts that the arm or limb is in great
distress. There will inevitably be some small errors in each of the
brain's simulations of the world around us -- a mistaken object or a
misheard sentence that is soon corrected. Occasionally, however, those
simulations can go completely awry, with heightened expectations evoking
vivid illusions of things that do not exist in the real world -- such as
drones flying over the UK's second biggest airport. In one brilliant
demonstration of this possibility, participants were asked to watch a
screen of random grey dots (like the 'snow' on an untuned analogue TV).
With a suitable suggestion, they could be primed to see faces in 34 per
cent of trials, even though there was nothing there apart from random
visual noise. The expectation that a face would appear led the brain to
sharpen certain patterns of pixels in the sea of grey, leading people to
hallucinate a meaningful image with astonishing frequency. What's more,
brain scans showed the brain forming these hallucinations in real time,
with the participants demonstrating heightened neural activity in the
regions normally associated with face perception.11 Clearly, seeing
isn't believing -- believing is seeing. Believing is also hearing. Dutch
researchers told some students that they might be able to hear a very
faint rendition of 'White Christmas' by Bing Crosby embedded in a
recording of white noise. Despite the fact that, objectively, there was
not a hint of music, nearly one-third of participants reported that they
could really hear the song. The implanted belief about what they were
about to hear led the students' brains to process the white noise
differently, accentuating some elements while muting others, until they
hallucinated the sound of Crosby singing. Interestingly, a follow-up
study found that auditory hallucinations of this kind are more common

when we feel stressed and have consumed caffeine, which is thought to be
a mildly hallucinogenic substance and may lead the brain to place more
confidence in its predictions.12 If we cast our minds back to those
officers at Gatwick, it's easy to imagine how fears of an impending
terrorist attack could conjure up the image of a drone in the grey
blanket of the winter sky, where there might be many ambiguous figures
-- birds or helicopters, for example -- that the prediction machine is
liable to misinterpret. And the more sightings that were reported, the
more people would have expected to see further drones. Had scientists
been able to peer into their brains, it is likely that they would have
observed exactly the same brain activity as someone looking at an actual
drone.13 Momentary hallucinations of this kind can result from the
prediction machine's errors in countless other situations. Strange
visions are apparently common among polar explorers, for example, as the
unchanging blankness of the landscape -- the 'white darkness', as some
describe it -- plays havoc with the prediction machine's simulations.
One of the most memorable examples of this phenomenon concerns Roald
Amundsen's expedition to Antarctica. On 13 December 1911, Amundsen's
team was within spitting distance of the Pole, and dreaded the thought
that Robert Falcon Scott's competing expedition might beat them to their
goal. As they made up camp, one of Amundsen's group, Sverre Helge
Hassel, called out that he had spotted people moving in the distance.
Soon the whole team could see them. When the explorers ran forward,
however, they soon discovered that it was simply a pile of their own
dogs' turds lying on the snow. The explorers' minds had transformed a
pile of faeces into the thing they feared.14 Many supposedly paranormal
experiences may arise through a similar process. When a fire broke out
at Notre Dame Cathedral in Paris on 15 April 2019, for example, a number
of eyewitnesses reported seeing the form of Jesus in the flames.15 Some
assumed it was a sign of God's disapproval at the turn of events;
others, that He was trying to offer comfort to those

affected by the damage. But scientists would argue that it was the
observers' underlying beliefs that led their brains to construct
something meaningful from ambiguous patterns of light. Whenever someone
claims to have seen a ghost, or to have heard the voices of the undead
in the static of an untuned radio, or to have seen an image of Elvis in
the clouds, the overreactive prediction machine may be to blame. These
phenomena are all natural consequences of the way the brain normally
makes sense of the world, although they are, of course, much more likely
if you already hold religious or paranormal beliefs. Athletes and
referees would do well to remember the role of the prediction machine
during sports controversies. When a tennis player and an umpire quarrel
over a point, it reflects a serious difference in the perceptual
experience: one 'saw' the ball inside the court and the other 'saw' it
outside. Neither party is being stupid or dishonest -- their minds have
simply constructed different simulations of the world around them,
causing them to have radically different experiences of the event. For
each person, the perception could have seemed just as 'real' as the
greenness of the grass or the blueness of the sky. A confident player,
in particular, might be primed to see the ball landing in their favour
and, without any conscious intention to deceive, that could sway their
perception -- a phenomenon that psychologists call 'wishful seeing'.16
At the time of the airport 'attack', the police at Gatwick were keen to
stress the credibility of their eyewitnesses, but the theory of the
brain as a prediction machine suggests that there may be no such thing
as a fully objective observer. As the neuroscientist Anil Seth puts it:
'We don't just passively perceive the world, we actively generate it.
The world we experience comes as much, if not more, from the inside out
as from the outside in.'17 Our brain's expectations are intricately
woven into everything we experience. The philosophical implications of
this inherent subjectivity are profound enough. But as we shall soon
find out, the theory of the brain as a prediction machine also has
immense consequences for our well-being --

insights that go far beyond the emergence of uncanny visual illusions.
And to see how, we need to meet a remarkable patient. 'I WAS BLIND BUT
NOW I SEE' A young woman I'll call Sara was in her late teens when she
woke up almost completely blind. Her vision had been deteriorating for
six months; now she saw just a faint glow around certain light sources
-- everything else was darkness. Ophthalmologists could find nothing
wrong with her eyes, though that knowledge did absolutely nothing to
help her day-to-day wellbeing, as she carefully counted each step and
felt her way around furniture to navigate her home. After numerous
examinations, Sara was diagnosed with a 'functional neurological
disorder' (FND), a term describing a serious problem with the brain and
nervous system's workings without any evidence of anatomical damage.
Other examples include deafness, a loss of sensation or movement in the
limbs, or an inability to feel pain -- all in otherwise physiologically
healthy individuals. And they are not as rare as you might assume:
despite the relatively low public awareness, FNDs are in fact the second
most common reason for someone to be referred to a neurologist (after
migraines and headaches).18 Sigmund Freud assumed that these symptoms
were the consequence of repressed stress or trauma. Today, many
neurologists believe that FNDs such as Sara's may be a direct result of
errors in the brain's predictions, which somehow dampen the normal
processing of sensory signals to the point that they are no longer
experienced. In Sara's case, her brain was effectively pulling shutters
over her eyes. She initially baulked at the suggestion that her
condition had 'psychogenic' origins; it seemed a bizarre diagnosis when
she had never previously experienced any psychiatric disorders, and
given that she was dealing with her newly developed blindness with
remarkable resilience. But she was eventually referred to Jon Stone, a
neurologist at the University of Edinburgh who specialises in FNDs.
During their initial conversations, he

discovered that, before losing her sight, Sara had been experiencing
chronic migraines which seemed to be triggered by the light. This had
led her to spend more and more time in a darkened room, until one
morning she woke up without any vision at all. Stone proposed that, with
her increasing 'photophobia' (fear of light) and the constant seeking of
darkness, Sara's brain had somehow become stuck on the idea that it
couldn't see anything. And while that erroneous expectation may have
arisen unconsciously, Stone hoped that it would be possible to correct
the error through continued encouragement and discussion. To do so, he
would point out whenever Sara made eye contact with him or copied
certain gestures -- evidence that, unconsciously, her brain was still
able to process some visual information -- and he encouraged her family
to do the same at home. As further encouragement, Stone also employed a
non-invasive form of brain stimulation, in which an electromagnetic
coil, placed on the scalp, excites neurons underneath the skull.
Amplifying the electrical activity in the visual cortex can provoke the
sensation of bright flashes of light without any input through the eyes.
The use of the stimulation, therefore, provided direct evidence that
Sara's brain was still capable of visual awareness, and offered a
reminder of what it felt like to see. It worked. After the first session
of brain stimulation, Sara reported being able to see the bright light
of her phone screen more intensely; by the third, she began seeing
coloured images for the first time since the onset of her blindness.
Further progress was slow, but eight months after the treatment began,
she woke up one morning to find that her vision had made a full
recovery. Remarkably, the chronic migraines had also ceased -- and
within two weeks, she was symptom-free and able to return to her
previous lifestyle.19 SHRINKING FEARS

Sara's experience demonstrates the sheer power of the prediction
machine, and -- equally importantly -- it shows the possibility of
correcting these grave errors. Thankfully, most of us will never endure
such a powerful experience of the brain's failings, but there are many
subtle ways that our perceptions are biased by less-than-healthy
expectations, every day of our lives, for good or bad. You could
describe these as micro-illusions -- small deviations in perception that
will confirm and amplify what we are already feeling. To give a simple
example from my own life: I recently experienced two attempted
burglaries of my flat, during which intruders tried to force the lock on
my front door while I was in bed. For months afterwards, my brain would
transform any slight disturbance -- day or night -- into the sound of
the door being opened. Even the starting of a printer in another room
seemed to resemble the clicking of the lock, and I would rush to see if
there was another intruder. That all came from the prediction machine's
overzealous attempts to identify another threat.20 With time -- and a
change of my apartment's locks -- I stopped hearing these phantom
break-ins. But there is now strong evidence that many enduring anxieties
and phobias are accompanied -- and perhaps partly caused -- by
permanently distorted perceptions of potential dangers in the
environment. People with a fear of heights, for instance, were asked to
look over a 26-foot-high balcony and to guess the distance to the
ground. On average, their estimates were about five feet larger than
those of people without the sense of fear.21 Similarly, people with
arachnophobia consistently see spiders as being much larger and faster
than they actually are -- and the greater their fears, the more
pronounced the illusion.22 When it is lurking on the wall next to you, a
regular house spider can begin to look a lot like a menacing tarantula.
Warped perceptions, resulting from biases in the brain's predictions,
can also contribute to our social anxieties. When people feel shy, sad
or nervous, they tend to see photos of neutral faces as looking more
hostile compared with people who are in a calmer state of mind.23 To
make

matters worse, the (conscious or unconscious) expectation of rejection
leads them to linger on the potentially unfriendly faces for longer,
while ignoring any friendly smiles. In one memorable experiment,
psychologists tracked a group of university students' eye movements as
they watched videos of adolescents during their school breaks. They
found that someone's social success powerfully altered their experiences
of the videos. People who already felt popular and liked in their own
life tended to look at the people nodding, chatting and smiling, while
the people experiencing isolation and loneliness barely noticed any
signs of warmth. Instead, they were much more likely to focus on
expressions of unkindness or rejection.24 As the psychologist Mitch
Prinstein notes: 'It was as if they had watched a completely different
movie altogether -- focusing far more intently on cues that were barely
noticed by others at all.'25 You may have experienced this yourself
before a particularly difficult event, like public speaking: because of
our fears, the audience can seem to be full of bored or judgemental
faces. Or perhaps you simply wake up in a bad mood and notice that
everyone on the train to work appears especially unfriendly that
morning. These are temporary distortions. For many people, however, the
expectation of hostility can become deeply embedded from a young age --
with past rejections casting a long shadow over their entire social
world, so that they never truly experience the expressions of
friendliness around them. In each of these examples, the warped view of
the world appears totally objective. Thanks to the interaction between
our mood, the brain's predictions and the real sensory inputs, an
anxious or depressed person really is 'seeing' the world as a much more
threatening place, in just the same way that the witnesses at Gatwick
'saw' the drones. And this biased processing can have real behavioural
consequences, leading you to avoid the very situations that could help
to realign the brain's predictions. If an escalator seems much higher
than it really is, you are going to find it much harder to place your
foot on the first step; and if every face around you

appears to be frowning, you will be much less likely to strike up a
conversation with someone sitting next to you. Fortunately, you can
learn to neutralise these micro-illusions with training.26 Indeed,
exposure therapy -- in which people are encouraged to directly confront
their fears -- may work by recalibrating people's perceptions. In 2016,
a team of German researchers asked arachnophobes to don a virtual
reality helmet and wander through rooms containing lifelike
representations of spiders, with a simple goal: to stay calm and to
avoid running away from the threat. Not only did the participants' fears
of real spiders fall over the course of the session, but their estimates
of the spiders' sizes also became far more realistic.27 You can also
target the distorted perceptions directly, using a technique known as
cognitive bias modification. People with anxiety, for example, are given
straightforward computer games in which they are presented with a series
of facial expressions -- illustrated, for example, as fairy sprites
hiding in a mountain landscape. The participant's task is to quickly
find the smiling, happy face while ignoring the more hostile expression.
(If you are interested in trying this yourself, you could consider
downloading the Personal Zen app, which was developed by researchers at
City University of New York and -- at the time of writing -- offers a
free trial on most smartphones.) The aim is to readjust the brain's
visual processing so that it no longer accentuates the threatening
information in a scene. And many patients report significant benefits
from this treatment. Even a single session of a program like Personal
Zen seems to bring about short-term changes in people's feelings and
behaviour -- improving, for instance, their performance at public
speaking -- while more regular training leads to longer-lasting
benefits.28 The simple recognition of the brain's inherent subjectivity
has helped me to cope with dips in my mood. When I feel especially
anxious or depressed -- and the world around me seems to confirm my
fears -- I try to account for the fact that my emotions, and the
expectations that accompany them, might have biased my perception. Given
that negative

expectations can also bias our attention, I also make more of an effort
to look for actual unambiguous acts of friendliness -- essentially
replicating the bias modification games in a real-life city. Needless to
say, this strategy is no panacea for serious mental illness, but I find
that it often stops me from falling into the spiral of negative thinking
that would once have exacerbated and prolonged my low mood. It is just
one example of how, once we understand the power of expectation, we can
recalibrate our predictions to experience a healthier and happier view
of the world. TASTE IS IN THE MOUTH OF THE BEHOLDER The power of
expectation is particularly well known in the world of gastronomy, where
marketers and chefs have long harnessed the prediction machine to
increase people's enjoyment of their dishes.29 In one of the earliest
experiments into top-down effects on taste, from the 1960s, two American
scientists looked into people's perceptions of astronauts' meals, such
as a chocolate-flavoured health shake filled with protein, carbs and
vitamins. Without knowing the origins of the drink, people tended to
find the taste rather unappetising -- a poor comparison to typical
chocolate milk. When the drink was explicitly labelled 'space food',
however, the public's appreciation dramatically increased. The exotic
name -- associated, as it was, with cutting-edge science -- raised
expectations and, as a result, acted as a powerful flavour enhancer.30
We now know that this would have been the direct result of their
top-down processing, changing the flavour according to their
expectations. More recently, researchers at MIT approached drinkers in
two of the university's iconic pubs, the Muddy Charles and the Thirsty
Ear, for a simple taste test. Those who agreed were given a sample of a
regular beer (either Budweiser or Samuel Adams) and the unfamiliar 'MIT
Brew'. Like the 'space food', the MIT Brew sounded cutting-edge and
exciting -- as if it were prepared with advanced technology. Unbeknown
to the drinkers,

however, it was identical to the regular brands, except the scientists
had added a few drops of balsamic vinegar to each glass. The idea of
beer laced with vinegar may not initially sound appetising, but the
pub-goers loved the concoction, with around 60 per cent reporting a
strong preference for MIT Brew over the other drink. Knowledge of the
vinegar did not change that preference, provided it was given after the
tasting. This was not the case, however, if they were told about the
nature of the 'secret ingredient' before they had tasted it; then, only
around 30 per cent appreciated its unique mix of flavours over the other
sample. The effect of their expectation on the experience of the beer's
flavour was enough to halve MIT Brew's popularity.31 You may have
experienced something very similar yourself when you have tasted an
expensive bottle of wine. Thanks to altered expectations of quality,
knowledge of a higher price tag can result in a marked improvement in
flavour -- irrespective of the actual drink.32 Changes in appearance can
have similar effects. When scientists coloured white wine red,
participants noted much richer notes in its taste -- the traces of
'prune', 'chocolate' or 'tobacco' that are typically associated with
real red wines. And the power of expectations is so strong that even
wine experts fall for this gustatory illusion.33 The effects of our
preconceptions are evident in scans of the brain's responses to the
foods. When participants were given the basic umami flavouring MSG, for
instance, alongside a single sentence detailing its 'rich and delicious
taste', they showed greater activity in the regions processing gustatory
pleasure than those told that they were receiving 'monosodium glutamate'
or 'boiled vegetable water'.34 Sometimes, the exact same substance can
evoke intense pleasure or outright disgust, depending on someone's
expectations. A mixture of isovaleric and butyric acid, for example,
creates a slightly acrid odour that can be found in two familiar
substances: parmesan cheese and vomit. But your brain will process the
same aroma very differently, depending on how it is labelled, leading us
to either salivate or retch.35

These perceptual expectation effects are not really so different from
the unscrambling of the images on pages 12--13 -- in each case, the
labels are helping to make sense of ambiguous signals that could be
interpreted in multiple ways. Given these findings, it's little wonder
that people's tastes in food vary so much -- depending on their
expectations and associations, they may be experiencing completely
different things. If you are trying a new food for the first time, you
might apply these findings yourself by reading up on the meal
beforehand; by knowing why others enjoy the dish, you'll be priming your
brain to make sense of the gustatory signals so that you can more fully
appreciate the unfamiliar combination of flavours. This will be
especially important if you're travelling and the food is far outside
your usual comfort zone. The famously pungent durian, for example, will
be far less off-putting if you have been guided to recognise the
'overtones of hazelnut, apricot, caramelized banana and egg custard'
described by some connoisseurs, rather than the usual comparisons to
rotting flesh.36 You can use the same principles when you host a dinner
party. You may not be able to turn water into wine through thought or
prayer, but the way you describe your food will strongly influence the
ways that you and your guests appreciate it. So be sure to season your
dishes with some delicious words as you serve -- that verbal garnish may
be as important as the actual, physical ingredients. (We'll discover the
implications of our expectations for digestion and metabolism -- and the
prospect of weight loss -- in chapter 6.) SUPERCHARGED SENSES By
harnessing the prediction machine, we may even be able to sharpen the
overall acuity of our eyes and ears, allowing us to see and hear in high
definition. If that seems far-fetched, just consider how the branding of
sunglasses or headphones can affect people's visual and auditory
abilities. In the early 2010s, a team of Israeli and American
researchers asked

participants to wear a pair of shades and to then read off 84 words
under the glare of a bright light. Everyone had a pair of the same
quality, but the people who had been told they were wearing Ray-Ban
sunglasses made around half as many mistakes as those who were told
their shades came from a mid-market brand -- and completed the task more
quickly, in around 60 per cent of the time. Strikingly, the researchers
found exactly the same results in an equivalent audio task using
noise-cancelling headgear. People who believed they were wearing a more
prestigious brand (3M) were better able to hear a list of words above
construction noise, compared with participants who thought they'd been
given a lower-quality product, when everyone in fact had the same
gear.37 In both experiments, the participants' trust in the (allegedly)
highquality products had led them to believe that they would benefit
from heightened perception of the relevant sights and sounds -- and that
was what they experienced, even though there was no actual difference in
the technology. The expectation that they could see or hear better than
if they used another brand had apparently altered the brain's visual and
auditory processing, leading it to work harder to build richer and more
accurate simulations from the information hitting the eyes and ears. The
discovery echoes a study by Ellen Langer at Harvard University, which
found that people's beliefs can have a striking effect on their
longdistance vision. The participants were cadets from MIT's Reserve
Officers' Training Corps. They first took a standard eye test, offering
a baseline for their sight, before entering a flight simulator. Despite
it being a computer simulation, they were asked to treat the exercise as
seriously as possible: to imagine themselves in a real cockpit and to
react in the same ways as a real pilot. During the subsequent game, four
planes approached from the front, and the cadets were asked to read the
serial numbers written on their wings. Unknown to the cadets, this was
another hidden sight test -- the size of the numbers on the plane wings
were equivalent to the four lowest lines on a standard eye chart.

Langer suspected that the cadets would associate the experience of
piloting a plane with having exceptional eyesight, and that this, in
turn, would improve the acuity of their vision during the simulation --
and that was exactly what she found. Overall, 40 per cent of the group
could correctly read smaller text (on the sides of the plane wings) than
they had been able to perceive in the standard eye chart. A control
group, who had not been through a full flight simulation but were simply
presented with static images of the numbers on the wings, showed no
improvement at all. To confirm the effect, Langer conducted a second
experiment, in which she asked participants to perform some star jumps
-- an energetic exercise that, she said, might improve their sight.
Although the movements are unlikely to have changed the optics of the
eye over such a short period, these participants once again performed
better on a subsequent test of visual acuity, thanks to the belief that
athletes have clearer vision. For a final confirmation, Langer simply
reversed the order of the eye chart, with the smaller letters at the top
and the bigger letters at the bottom. She found that the participants
were able to read smaller letters than they had been able to on the
standard chart, apparently because they had built up the belief --
throughout years of previous examinations -- that it is easier to read
lines that are placed higher. In each of Langer's experiments, the
expectation of better vision boosted the brain's visual processing,
leading it to sharpen the slightly blurred images of the letters on the
retina.38 Strikingly, many of these people already had good vision --
they were boosting their sight beyond 20/20 -- but even those with
poorer eyesight showed significant improvements. Don't throw out your
spectacles or contact lenses just yet: such mental shifts almost
certainly can't make up for a serious optical deficiency.
(Short-sightedness is typically caused by a misshapen eyeball, and there
is no evidence that this apparently permanent anatomical change is the
product of our mind.) But Langer's results suggest that the adoption of
certain expectations could at least improve your vision with the lenses
you currently wear, ensuring that you see the world as sharply as
possibly.

Throughout this book, we will find that we are often poor judges of our
own abilities, and that it is possible to push the limits of what we can
achieve through a simple change of mindset. MULTIPLE REALITIES In her
autobiographical novel Seduction of the Minotaur, AnaÃ¯s Nin beautifully
describes the mismatched perceptions of the protagonist, Lillian, and
the painter Jay. 'Lillian was bewildered by the enormous discrepancy
which existed between Jay's models and what he painted,' we are told.
'Together they would walk along the same Seine river, she would see it
silky grey, sinuous and glittering, he would draw it opaque with
fermented mud, and a shoal of wine bottle corks and weeds caught in the
stagnant edges.' Jay, Nin writes, was a 'realist', intent on portraying
the world as objectively as possible. But was his perception actually
any more realistic than Lillian's? 'We do not see things as they are, we
see them as we are,' Lillian concludes, in one of Nin's best-known
lines. Our new understanding of the prediction machine reveals the
profound truth in this statement, across the breadth of human
experience. At the most extreme, expectations can shut down vision
completely -- as we saw with a patient like Sara. At other times, they
will create the perception of something that is not there. And on a
day-to-day basis, our preconceptions will alter what is already in front
of us -- transforming the taste of a food, the emotion written on a face
or the sight of the Seine. These subtle expectation effects may be less
dramatic than extreme hallucinations, but, as we have seen, their
consequences can be substantial, creating either vicious or virtuous
cycles out of our daily lives. To build on Nin's observations: what we
feel and think will determine what we experience, which will, in turn,
influence what we feel and what we think, in a neverending cycle.

This knowledge will be essential as we turn inwards to explore the
influence of expectations on our physical health in the following
chapters. The prediction machine receives many inputs from inside the
body, including the nociceptor nerves that respond to damage -- or the
possibility of damage -- to our organs and contribute to the sensation
of pain. Our expectations will influence the processing of those signals
-- it can tune them up, or down -- in just the same way that
expectations change our experiences of sight, sound, smell, taste and
physical touch. Sometimes, faulty predictions might even create the
illusion of pain out of nothing at all; or they might lead the agony of
a real physical wound to vanish. Even more mysteriously, however, the
brain's simulations can also produce measurable physiological changes.
As we shall see, our subjective expectations can become our body's
objective reality -- thanks to the awesome power of the prediction
machine.

How to think about . . . the sensual world Question your own objectivity
as an eyewitness. The brain's simulations of the world around you are
often right, but sometimes they are wrong -- and the humble knowledge of
this fact could help you to recognise illusions when they occur. If you
have a phobia, remember that your brain may exaggerate the threat -- so
it seems physically bigger and scarier than it really is. Exposure
therapy may help you to shrink this perceptual bias. If you have
anxiety, consider downloading an app -- such as Personal Zen -- that
aims to reconfigure your attention with regard to threats in your
environment. Whenever you are having a bad day, try to consider the ways
your mood, and the resulting expectations, could have biased your view
of events. Some situations are unquestionably bad, while other events
are more susceptible to expectation effects. Learning to separate the
two could prevent you from descending into overly negative thinking.
Boost your enjoyment of sensory experiences such as meals with the power
of language. The way we label foods affects their taste, so think of, or
look for, sumptuous descriptions of the dishes that you are serving to
yourself and your guests.

(Recognise this bulldog? It's the original of the high-contrast image on
here.)

OceanofPDF.com

2 A PIOUS FRAUD How beliefs can transform recovery from illness Few
scientific ideas have generated as much excitement -- or as much outrage
-- as the placebo effect and the potential of the mind--body connection.
From the birth of modern medicine in the eighteenth century, doctors
were acutely aware that certain 'sham' treatments could bring relief
simply through the patient's beliefs about them. But could these fake
cures ever heal the underlying problem? And even if they worked, didn't
the inherent dishonesty break the doctor's ethical code? These were
enormous questions that troubled none other than the third US president,
Thomas Jefferson. Writing to a friend in 1807, he expressed his fear
that some doctors were becoming over-zealous with their administration
of common medications -- such as mercury and opium -- which, he feared,
were often doing more harm than good. He believed that many complaints
could be better served with the illusion of a medical treatment.

'One of the most successful physicians I have ever known has assured me
that he used more bread pills, drops of colored water, and powders of
hickory ashes, than of all other medicines put together,' he wrote. The
deception may have seemed morally dubious, but it was preferable to
overprescribing potentially toxic substances that brought about no
further improvement for the patient. It was, Jefferson said, 'a pious
fraud'.1 Over the following decades, however, doctors became much more
sceptical about the benefits of belief. Placebos may bring emotional
comfort, they thought, but dummy pills and potions were of little
interest to modern medicine -- grounded, as it was, in biological
understanding. For some practitioners, placebos were better seen as a
diagnostic tool to identify potential malingerers and hypochondriacs: if
you found relief from a sham treatment, you didn't have a real disease.
By the mid-twentieth century, articles in medical journals derided
placebo responders as 'unintelligent', 'neurotic', 'ignorant' and
'inadequate'; The Lancet described the placebo effect itself as a
'humble humbug'. Why would anyone spend time researching such an inane
phenomenon?2 As a result of this continued scepticism, the science of
placebo has taken a long time to blossom, but we now know that positive
expectations can bring much more than emotional comfort, producing real
relief for many physical conditions, including asthma, Parkinson's,
heart disease and chronic pain. Even more astoundingly, the cure often
occurs through the same mechanisms as the actual drugs prescribed to
treat these ailments. The mind--body connection is real and potentially
powerful. The fact that we have evolved this remarkable gift for
self-healing is mysterious enough and its evolutionary origins are the
source of much debate among scientists. And there are other puzzles --
including the fact that the placebo effect is becoming more powerful
over time. How can a sham treatment, which is by its very definition
'inert' and chemically 'inactive', suddenly increase in potency? There
is in fact increasing evidence that people can respond to a placebo even
when they know they are taking a sham treatment -- a finding that seems
to defy reason.

The solution to these enigmas lies in the flourishing understanding of
the brain as a prediction machine. This is inspiring some truly
groundbreaking strategies to harness all the benefits of positive
beliefs without any deception at all. Dummy pills, it seems, are just
one way of packaging an expectation effect, and you can rethink your
illnesses and accelerate your eventual recovery using other very simple
strategies. With the over-prescription of many medications an increasing
worry, these psychological techniques could not be more urgent. More
than 200 years since Jefferson extolled the power of bread pills and
coloured water, we can tap into the mind--body connection with no need
for any kind of fraud, pious or otherwise. BELIEVING IS BEING The
renewed interest in the placebo effect began with an American
anaesthesiologist called Henry Beecher. Serving in Italy and France at
the end of the Second World War, he often had to treat soldiers with
truly horrific wounds -- torn flesh, shattered bones, and shrapnel
embedded in the head, chest and abdomen. Yet he was puzzled to observe
that many of his patients -- around 32 per cent -- reported feeling no
pain at all, while a further 44 per cent experienced only slight or
moderate discomfort. When offered the chance, three-quarters of these
people even refused the option of painkilling drugs. For Beecher, it
seemed that the relief of having been saved from the battlefield had
created a kind of euphoria that was, by itself, enough to numb their
injuries. The patient's interpretation of his illness had somehow
allowed the brain and the body to release its own natural pain relief --
a phenomenon that went far beyond medicine's understanding at the time.
Beecher's realisation proved to be a godsend, since morphine was in
short supply and soldiers sometimes had to undergo surgery without
painkillers -- whether they liked it or not. To create the illusion of
treatment, Beecher's nurse would sometimes inject the patient with a

saline solution while reassuring him that he was receiving the real
painkiller. The soldiers often responded surprisingly well to this
treatment. Indeed, Beecher estimated that the placebo was about 90 per
cent as effective as the actual drug; it even seemed to reduce the risk
of cardiovascular shock that can result from surgery without sedation
and analgesia, and which can be fatal.3 These soldiers, who had risked
life and limb for their country, were hardly the stereotypical
malingerers or neurotics who were normally thought to respond to
placebos. Nor could you argue that their war wounds were some kind of
imaginary disease. Evidently the placebo response was more prevalent and
more interesting than was commonly believed. Beecher marvelled at the
power of expectation to improve symptoms, but he was more concerned
about the implications for the testing of new treatments. Active drugs
are expensive and many have undesirable side effects -- so you would
want to be sure that they are at the very least more effective than a
sugar pill or an injection of saline solution. Beecher's research would
ultimately lead to the widespread use of the placebo-controlled clinical
trial, in which patients are randomly assigned to take either a fake
drug (such as a sugar pill) or the actual treatment under consideration.
Neither the doctors nor the patients know which one they are taking
until the end of the trial, when they are 'unblinded'. Once all the data
has been collected, the scientists compare the effects caused by the
placebo and the effects experienced by the patients receiving the actual
treatment. Only those treatments that significantly outstrip the placebo
gain approval. By the 1970s, the US Food and Drugs Administration was on
board with this protocol, and the placebo-controlled clinical trial was
soon recognised as the gold standard of medical regulation. It has been
an undoubted benefit to patients: it ensures that they are given
provably effective treatments, and it also allows scientists to check
the safety of drugs before they are given to the wider population.

Unfortunately, this set-up still frames the placebo response as a
nuisance; as long as the drug performs better than the sham treatment,
the placebo response is often ignored rather than exploited. But the
effects are at least recorded, providing ample data for researchers
interested in the role of expectation in medicine. And their discoveries
over the last couple of decades have been truly remarkable. Take the
potent painkilling effect that Beecher had observed on the battlefield
-- a finding that has been replicated again and again in
placebocontrolled clinical trials of analgesics. Overall, researchers
estimate that the placebo response can account for 50 per cent of the
pain relief afforded by the actual drug. As we saw in the last chapter,
this pain relief could be the result of shifts in subjective experience,
as the prediction machine recalibrates its expectations of suffering.
Yet it also appears to coincide with distinct physiological changes that
mimic the action of the drugs themselves. When people take a placebo to
replace morphine, for instance, the brain starts producing its own
opioids that can themselves soothe pain. To prove this, scientists
administered a placebo painkiller alongside the chemical naloxone, which
is used to treat morphine overdose by blocking the brain's opioid
receptors. Sure enough, the naloxone drastically reduced the placebo
pain relief in much the same way that it would have reversed the effects
of the real drug. That reaction would be impossible if the pain relief
was simply subjective.4 Instead, it seems that the brain has its own
'inner pharmacy', allowing it to create certain chemicals, such as
opioids, on demand. Equally breath-taking benefits can be seen in
treatments for Parkinson's disease. The illness is caused by a deficit
of dopamine in the brain. Besides being involved in feelings of pleasure
and reward, dopamine is essential for the smooth coordination of
movements, which is why patients with Parkinson's often suffer from
uncontrollable shaking. The drugs that treat the disease increase levels
of dopamine, or act as a substitute for the neurotransmitter by
stimulating the parts of the brain that normally

respond to it. That would seem to be impossible to achieve with an
impotent sugar pill. Yet various trials have shown that a placebo
treatment can improve the symptoms of Parkinson's patients by around 20
to 30 per cent.5 Once again, the expectation of improvement somehow
allows the brain to mine its own 'inner pharmacy', increasing the
brain's natural dopamine supply.6 Besides changing our brain chemistry,
placebos can tune the immune system. Allergies, for example, are caused
by an over-zealous reaction to typically harmless substances that the
body mistakes for a dangerous pathogen. Certain drugs can calm that
response -- and so can the mere expectation of relief. When people have
an allergic skin reaction, for instance, a placebo treatment that
ostensibly suppresses inflammation can reduce the itching and the size
of the weals, even though there is no active ingredient.7 For people
with asthma, meanwhile, an empty inhaler provides about 30 per cent of
the benefits of the drug salmeterol.8 A placebo effect may even explain
the benefits of certain forms of surgery, such as the fitting of
arterial stents. The procedure involves sliding a catheter through an
artery to the area of blockage. When that is in place, a little balloon,
covered in a wire mesh, is guided down the catheter. The balloon is then
inflated to widen the artery, leaving the wire mesh -- the stent -- in
place to hold the artery walls open. This surgery is often essential in
medical emergencies such as a heart attack (a situation in which a
placebo is unlikely to be of immediate assistance). But stents are also
used to ease blood circulation in patients suffering angina, with the
aim of reducing ongoing pain and discomfort -- and here the role of
expectation may be far more significant. This fact has only come to
light very recently, since, unlike drug development, doctors and
scientists are not always obliged to conduct placebo-controlled trials
for new operations. Instead, they can use other comparisons -- such as
'treatment as usual' -- which may not produce the same expectations as
the new procedure. To find out if a placebo effect could explain some of
the benefits of arterial stents, a team of cardiologists

from hospitals across the UK split 230 patients into two groups, with
half receiving the full surgery, and the other half receiving a 'sham'
surgery, in which the catheter was guided in and out of the artery
without the stent being put in place. (Like the placebo-controlled drug
trials, the patients were all informed they might not receive an actual
stent -- and the team made every effort to minimise the lingering
effects of the surgery.) Reporting their results in The Lancet, the
research team found that both groups were capable of greater physical
activity after the operation -- measured by their performance on a
treadmill -- and the benefits of the stent, over sham surgery, were too
small to be considered statistically significant.9 Needless to say, the
finding has been the source of much debate among cardiologists, and
ongoing research will need to replicate the finding before the medical
guidelines change. But given this carefully controlled study, it
certainly seems likely that much of the stent's benefits for angina
arise from the patients' expectations of improvement, rather than from
the physical change to the heart's plumbing. In some cases, a placebo
treatment could even be a lifesaver. In one trial of beta-blockers,
participants who regularly took a placebo were half as likely to die
during the study than those who were less diligent in taking pills.
Clearly, the placebo wasn't as effective as the active drug, if both
were taken at an equally high rate, but so-called 'placebo adherers'
nevertheless lived longer than people who only took pills -- either the
active drug or the dummy ones -- haphazardly.10 The longer life
expectancy of so-called 'placebo adherers' has now been demonstrated in
many other studies, making it extremely hard to disregard as some kind
of statistical fluke.11 One explanation is that the high compliance
simply reflects a healthier lifestyle in general. But the differences
remain even when you control for all kinds of variables -- such as
income, education, and whether someone smokes, drinks or overeats --
that would also predict someone's likelihood of dying. This leaves us
with the distinct possibility that the regular ritual of taking a pill
itself helps to

maintain a healthier body, thanks to the hopes of better health that
come from taking a potential medication.12 Exactly how and why we react
to placebos in all these ways is a matter of fierce debate, but many
researchers argue that this type of expectation effect comes from at
least two sources. The first is a general healing response, an evolved
reaction that allows the body to adapt to the presence of immediate
threats. When we have just been injured, for instance, we need to feel
pain to avoid further damage to the body -- making us more cautious in
our movement. If, however, we are in safety and being treated for our
injuries, pain serves less of a function, so we can afford for it to be
soothed. Similarly, inflammation is essential to deal with immediate
contact with a pathogen, but it can prevent other processes from kicking
in to heal the damage. It is therefore beneficial for the immune system
to rein in inflammation when it perceives that you are already on the
road to recovery. Anything that reduces fear and anxiety about your
illness -- including the sense that you are receiving medical care --
may produce this generalised healing response, which can be powerful in
its own right. Beecher's soldiers seemed to experience something like
this -- the mere fact of being away from the battlefield relieved much
of their pain -- but it will also be true whenever any of us receive
medical treatment. According to this theory, placebos are a powerful
symbol of care that can trigger this response. Importantly, the
prediction machine also evolved to fine-tune its actions based on
particular experiences, through a learning process called conditioning.
If you are taking a placebo painkiller expecting it to be morphine, the
release of endogenous opioids will be far stronger if you have already
taken morphine in the past, for example. Similarly, the placebotriggered
release of dopamine will be far stronger if someone has already taken a
Parkinson's drug -- and a placebo to reduce transplant rejection will be
more effective if someone has already taken a relevant
immunosuppressant. In each case, the brain is activating the systems
that

would make the most efficient use of the body's resources, based on its
previous memories and associations.13 With the right kind of messaging,
appealing to the right kind of experiences, it may be possible to turn
anything into a placebo. Scientists at Columbia and Stanford
universities even managed to persuade students that a plain bottle of
spring water was an energy drink containing 200mg of caffeine, and their
blood pressure responded commensurately.14 You may not even need to be
physically present to experience the benefits: a team from Switzerland
have shown that a placebo administered in a virtual reality environment
can reduce pain inflicted on a real-life limb.15 In general, however,
the prediction machine relies on many different cues to determine its
expectations, drawing on a wealth of associations learned in other areas
of life, and this means that certain forms of placebo are consistently
more potent than others.16 These factors can be as superficial as size
-- many people assume that bigger means better, and so, if people are
taking a pill, a larger tablet may render a bigger response than a
smaller tablet -- and form (capsules seem to be more effective than
tablets). We can also be influenced by price. Labelling a Parkinson's
treatment as 'cheap', for example, halved the placebo's benefits,
compared to an identical injection that was labelled 'expensive'.17 For
similar reasons, a drug's marketing can matter to an inordinate degree;
taking a placebo from a slickly designed Nurofen package -- with its
messages of 'targeted pain relief' -- is much more effective than a pill
that is labelled as generic, own-brand 'ibuprofen'. In one study, the
placebo Nurofen was so powerful that it matched the effects of the
active painkiller.18 That shouldn't be surprising: we have seen Nurofen
so often -- and have heard of its painkilling effects -- that we have
fewer doubts of its effects, whereas a generic drug may feel unfamiliar
and of a lower quality. More generally, injections tend to have stronger
effects than medications taken orally, and surgery is better still,
perhaps because it is simpler to understand and visualise its mechanism
compared to treatments that involve complex chemical reactions. We are
also swayed by the age of

the treatment; if a drug or medical device has just been approved and is
generating a lot of excitement, you may feel a larger placebo response
than if the treatment first emerged 30 years ago.19 Last, but not least,
there's the relationship between you and the healthcare provider. The
placebo effect will be far more potent if they seem caring and
competent.20 In an amazingly comprehensive way, the prediction machine
updates its simulations and coordinates the body's responses using any
cue that might hone its expectations of recovery. There is now no doubt
that expectations can -- and do -- shape our physical reality. The
million-dollar question, of course, is whether we can harness these
expectation effects responsibly. Jefferson might have viewed sham
treatments as a pious fraud, but it is against doctors' ethical code to
lie to a patient, meaning that the deliberate use of the placebo
response in general practice has long seemed out of the question -- at
least officially. (In practice, the use of placebos may not be so rare:
12 per cent of general practitioners in the UK report having given
saline injections or sugar pills at least once in their career.21) What
if that deception were unnecessary? What if we could know that our
treatment was a so-called sham, and still get better? It may sound
paradoxical, but, as we shall now see, knowledge of the placebo effect
can itself provoke a healing response -- equipping patients with the
mental tools to treat themselves. THE HONEST PLACEBO Signs of this
deception-free healing response may, in fact, have been hiding within
the medical literature. It's just no one had thought to look -- until
pharmaceutical companies started hitting a wall in their search for new
treatments. For decades after the birth of the clinical trial, drug
discovery experienced a kind of golden age, with a high proportion of
experiments revealing new and effective treatments for various
conditions -- making Big

Pharma more profitable than Big Oil. By the turn of the twenty-first
century, however, scientists began to notice that many of their clinical
trials were failing at greater and greater rates than before. The
failures came so fast, and so often, that some medical research
organisations even feared for their financial future.22 With intense
data mining, the scientists eventually found an answer. The trials were
all perfectly well designed, but the people in the placebo arm of the
trial seemed to be getting more and more relief from their pills, which
made it much harder to isolate the benefits of an actual drug with a
provable, statistically significant difference.23 If you look at tests
of painkillers in the 1990s, for example, the active drugs tended to
outperform the placebo by around 27 per cent. By 2013, that advantage
had dropped to just 9 per cent. Crucially, this was caused almost
entirely by the increased potency of the sham treatments, which brought
about 20 per cent more pain relief at the end of the period compared to
the beginning, while the active drugs did not see a similar rise.
(Apparently, they had reached an upper limit for the possible pain
relief.) If they were running a race, the real drugs had started out way
ahead, only for an unlikely straggler to somehow narrow their lead.
Compounding this mystery, the strange inflation of placebo power seemed
to be concentrated in the United States, while trials in Europe were
largely unaffected.24 How could this be possible? One potential
explanation came from the US's direct-to-consumer advertising. The
constant repetition of TV adverts could increase people's expectations
about the benefits of any drugs under consideration. These heightened
expectations could inflate the relief felt by those taking the dummy
pills -- amplifying the release of the brain's endogenous painkillers,
for instance -- to such a degree that it comes to overshadow the
additional benefits of the active ingredients taken by the non-placebo
group. Countries without direct-to-consumer advertising don't have this
constant reinforcement of positive expectations, meaning that the size
of the placebo response has remained more stable.

There is, however, an even more intriguing possibility: that the dummy
pills' increased strength has arisen from greater public knowledge of
the placebo response itself. This theory comes from Gary Bennett at the
University of California San Diego, who was part of a team showcasing
the rising placebo effect in the treatment of pain. He points out that
in the mid-twentieth century, most people knew very little about
placebos and tended to view them somewhat dimly. If you were in a
clinical trial, and you worried that you had been given a dummy pill,
your hopes of improvement may not have been high. But the recent
interest in placebos and their capacity to produce real physiological
effects has changed that notion, with the potential power of expectation
recently receiving considerable media coverage. Today, the prospect of
receiving a placebo does not seem so unattractive, since many people
would expect to receive some real relief, whether or not they get the
actual drug.25 And, thanks to the mind--body connection, that has become
a reality -- increasing the potency of the dummy pills to such an extent
that the actual drugs struggle to compete. Bennett suspected that media
coverage of the placebo effect may be especially common in the
English-speaking world -- explaining why the increase of placebos'
potency is particularly marked in the American trials but not across
Europe. To test the idea, he examined huge corpuses of digitised texts
in English, French, German, Italian and Spanish. As he had hypothesised,
the use of the word 'placebo' has risen dramatically in the
English-speaking world in recent decades, whereas its usage in other
countries has barely increased at all. Importantly, this growing
recognition was not limited to academic literature but could also be
seen in newspapers, popular magazines and the scripts of TV broadcasts
-- outlets where the message is most likely to reach the general public.
(Unfortunately, the analysis of the pain medication trials did not
provide the necessary data to check if the placebo response is
increasing in the UK as well as the US -- which would provide further
evidence for Bennett's hypothesis.)

The idea that the word placebo can itself evoke a placebo response may
sound absurd. Since the eighteenth century, the whole concept of the
placebo effect has centred on the premise that people must believe they
are receiving a 'real' treatment for there to be any noticeable benefit.
Jefferson wrote that the deception was a 'pious fraud' because it was
completely unavoidable. Beecher himself said that 'it does not matter in
the least what the placebo is made of or how much is used so long as it
is not detected as a placebo by the subject.'26 Yet various
groundbreaking studies have shown that a large number of people do
respond to a placebo even when they are fully aware that they are
receiving an inert pill. According to Bennett's hypothesis, this may be
most common in regions where the placebo effect is already well known,
but there is now plenty of evidence that 'open-label placebos' can be
equally potent elsewhere, provided scientists give participants a clear
explanation of the brain as a prediction machine with the power to
influence the body's responses.27 Take, for example, a trial treating
people with chronic back pain, run by the health psychologist ClÃ¡udia
Carvalho at a public hospital in Lisbon, Portugal -- the success of
which sent ripples across the global scientific community when it was
first published in 2016. The patients were given a bottle, which was
clearly labelled 'placebo pills, take twice a day', containing orange
gelatine capsules. Carvalho explained that the pills contained no active
ingredient, but that they could nevertheless have powerful effects on
the body through processes such as conditioning, and she then showed
participants a short video to consolidate the idea. To avoid adding to
their existing emotional strain, she also emphasised the fact that they
did not need to experience a continually optimistic mood -- an
unrealistic prospect for someone who is in constant pain -- for the
placebos to have an effect; it was the simple act of taking the pills
regularly that would be essential to the treatment's success. Three
weeks later, the impact was stark, with the participants reporting a 30
per cent reduction in scores assessing their 'usual' and 'maximum' pain,
a large improvement that was not seen in a control group of patients who

had continued as normal, without the addition of the open-label
placebos. A separate questionnaire also revealed a marked improvement in
their dayto-day activities, such as the ability to leave the home or
perform physically demanding jobs. Overall, the benefits of the
open-label placebos met the typical threshold for 'clinical
significance' -- a 30 per cent reduction in symptoms -- that you would
expect of an active treatment.28 Even more amazingly, Carvalho published
a follow-up paper in 2020 showing that these benefits had lingered for
five years after the original trial ended. The knowledge of the placebo
response seemed to have stuck with the participants, increasing their
overall capacity to cope with their condition.29 Carvalho's finding
echoes an observation made by many of the scientists I have interviewed
for this book -- that participants in experiments often find knowledge
of expectation effects to be highly empowering, with long-lasting
benefits that go far beyond the initial trial. Open-label placebos have
now proven successful in the treatment of a number of other conditions,
including migraine, irritable bowel syndrome, depression, attention
deficit hyperactivity disorder and menopausal hot flushes.30 They have
even helped to soothe the burning eyes, sore throats, runny noses and
itchy skin suffered by people with hay fever.31 But it is their
painkilling effects that continue to generate the greatest excitement,
since they offer a potential approach to reducing the opioid addiction
crisis.32 According to the US Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, 450,000 Americans died of an opioid overdose between 1999
and 2019, many of whom had been hooked on prescription pills.33 An
open-label placebo could reduce people's reliance on those drugs, with
the power of expectation helping the brain's natural analgesics to
slowly replace the pharmaceutical products, as the patients reduce their
dosage of the actual opioid. That may seem ambitious, but our knowledge
of the placebo effect offers some sophisticated strategies that could
maximise the chances of success. You can initially pair an actual drug
with a strong and evocative

smell, for instance, strengthening the body's response whenever it
receives a placebo pill matched to a similar odour. A recent study, led
by Leon Morales-Quezada at Harvard Medical School, did just that. The
participants were all in rehabilitation for severe injuries -- such as
damage to the spinal cord. For three days, they were given a strong
opioid alongside a clearly labelled placebo pill and asked to sniff a
swab laced with the strong smell of cardamom oil at the same time --
after which point they were encouraged to forgo the real drug whenever
possible. The results were incredible, surpassing the researchers'
wildest expectations. At best, they had expected that the placebo pills
might cut down the participants' opioid consumption by around a third.
In reality, the patients reduced their intake by 66 per cent -- without
any increase in their pain or discomfort.34 The open-label placebo had
allowed them to radically cut their dose of these potentially addictive
pills without any extra suffering. The aim now is to build larger,
extended trials, with the ultimate goal of weaning participants off
their pills completely. Anecdotally, MoralesQuezada told me of one
patient who managed to go opioid-free within just three days, using the
same technique. We need more evidence than a single case study, of
course. But, for the time being, his results offer another exciting
glimpse at the potential use of the placebo response to reduce
suffering, without the ethical complications that previously troubled
doctors. The power of the word placebo may be the bane of pharmaceutical
companies hoping to invent new drugs, but it could be an enormous boon
for many patients looking to avoid the risk of addiction or to overcome
its iron grip. NO PLACEBO, NO PROBLEM A few years ago, the medical
psychologist Johannes Laferton received a postcard from a former
patient. It was the kind of message that any scientist

would be thrilled to read. 'As promised, I send you and your friendly
colleague best greetings from Italy. You were so encouraging!' she
wrote. 'Before surgery, I did not expect to be able to spend my holidays
here at this wonderful place. I feel quite well.' Only three months
previously, the 67-year-old patient had undergone a heart bypass.
Needless to say, the 5- to 6-hour surgery is often traumatic for the
patient, and many people continue to suffer general disability many
months after the operation. Laferton was part of Winfried Rief's lab in
Marburg, Germany, and they hoped to ease the recovery process and
maximise the benefits of the operation through the mind--body connection
-- with no placebo pill in sight. The study was known as Psy-Heart, and
it involved two in-person meetings and three short telephone calls that
were designed to improve the patients' expectations of what was about to
occur. During these conversations, a psychologist would explain the
procedure in detail and describe the ways that it could help to
alleviate their coronary heart disease -- discussions that might be
skipped in a typical consultation but which helped to build up the
patients' beliefs in the operation's benefits. The patients were then
encouraged to form a personal 'recovery action plan', in which they laid
out some optimistic -- but reasonable -- outcomes from the surgery. (For
the 67-year-old patient who sent Laferton the postcard, this went from
smaller steps, such as gardening, to socialising and travelling with her
friends.) They were also taught a visualisation exercise and asked to
imagine their life six months after the operation.35 As a comparison,
the Marburg researchers set up a second group, who were given more
general emotional support in exactly the same number of sessions as
those undergoing the new intervention -- without explicitly discussing
their expectations of the treatment. This control mechanism set a very
high threshold, since experiencing empathy and social connection can
themselves trigger a healing response. For a second point of comparison,
the team therefore looked at the progress of patients who did

not receive any additional help at all but simply underwent the same
procedures offered to typical patients undergoing heart bypass surgery.
Immediate differences among the three groups could be seen in the length
of people's hospital stays. On average, the patients with enhanced
expectations were discharged around 4.7 days earlier than those
receiving the standard medical care, while the people receiving the
social support fell somewhere in between.36 When you consider the cost
of post-operative hospital care, that advantage alone should make the
intervention an attractive proposition for health services, with savings
that easily outweigh the expense of the psychologists' time, which came
to about 3 hours per patient. The benefits continued to accumulate in
the months following the operation. When questioned on the ways that
their discomfort affected their family life, recreation, sexual
behaviour and sleep, the patients who had been encouraged to develop
positive expectations tended to show the quickest recovery. By the end
of a six-month follow-up period, they also reported a greater capacity
to return to work compared to the participants who received the
emotional support or those offered the standard care.37 Importantly,
these improvements were not just self-reported but appeared to coincide
with objective, biological differences between the groups. For example,
the team measured levels of pro-inflammatory molecules, such as
interleukin-6 (IL-6). Besides producing general feelings of sickness,
these molecules are known to damage blood vessels -- potentially
reducing the benefits of the surgery and increasing the risk of further
heart disease. As Laferton and his colleagues had hoped, the patients
with improved expectations tended to show lower levels of IL-6 at the
six-month follow-up. The patients' improvements were probably a
combination of behavioural and psychosomatic changes -- perhaps through
some kind of 'virtuous cycle'. The enhanced expectations and associated
biological response eased their physical activities, which in turn
reinforced the positive beliefs about

their healing and contributed to further improvements, accelerating
their return to a happier and healthier life. How should we interpret
these findings? Psy-Heart clearly builds on the research into the
placebo effect and appears to work through a very similar mechanism --
yet it shows that you can do away with the sham or dummy treatment
altogether. Instead, the participants were reconfiguring the prediction
machine's expected outcomes using rational analysis to resolve unfounded
doubts and to set out a realistic vision of the treatment's benefits.
That approach may appeal more to patients who shy away from the use of
an open-label placebo -- which may feel too artificial or fake -- but
who are nevertheless open-minded about the possibility of rethinking
their outlook.38 Promisingly, it may be possible to integrate this kind
of expectation effect into many other medical procedures. Having helped
design the PsyHeart trial, Keith Petrie and colleagues in New Zealand
recently examined whether positive expectations could help people with
anaemia who were due to receive an iron infusion into the bloodstream.
Before they were hooked up to the infusion, the participants were shown
a graph demonstrating the changes to expect in their haemoglobin levels,
and the reasons that this would increase their body's energy supply.
Four weeks later, the scientists gave the participants a standard
questionnaire designed to measure their energy levels in daily life,
including any potential effects of fatigue on their memory,
concentration and physical activity. Sure enough, they found that
patients with the enhanced expectations of the treatment showed markedly
lower levels of fatigue than a control group who had instead talked
about practical measures, like diet and exercise, that could improve
health overall. By changing people's interpretation of the treatment and
their expectations of its success, the short conversation about the
treatment's mechanisms had maximised its effects.39 Sometimes, a single
sentence may make all the difference. It is common, after all, for
doctors to see patients with conditions that will naturally ease with
time. In these cases, no active treatment is necessary, but the doctor

can still accelerate the healing process with the words they say. In one
recent study, led by Kari Leibowitz at Stanford University, participants
were first provoked with a mild allergic reaction on the skin, leading
to an irritating itchiness. The participants then remained in the lab
for around 20 minutes afterwards. For some of them, the researchers
simply checked the state of the skin reaction without much comment; for
others, they explicitly described how the rash and irritation would soon
go away. Those reassurances became a self-fulfilling prophecy that
soothed the participants' symptoms, so that they recovered more quickly
than the control group.40 You might hope that this kind of exchange
would already be common in medicine. But Leibowitz points out that
visits to the doctor are sometimes seen as a waste of time by the
patient, unless a medicine is prescribed to validate their illness. Her
study shows that prescription-less visits do have value, since the
conversation can reduce patients' discomfort without any medication at
all. Leibowitz's findings recall another striking study, which found
that patients recover more quickly from the common cold, including a
reduced inflammation in the nose, if their doctors show a more
reassuring and empathetic attitude in interactions and stress the
fleeting nature of the infection.41 (On average they recovered a whole
day earlier than the people seeing a less reassuring physician -- a
significant change, considering that colds rarely last longer than a
week.) The words a doctor speaks are themselves 'biologically active'
and an essential element of any treatment. Importantly, none of these
exciting new treatments involve instilling a sense of false hope. Each
project simply used the facts at hand to help the patient understand the
process and their prognosis, and to frame their progress in the most
positive way possible. It's an approach that we will see again and again
in the rest of this book. When it comes to the mind--body connection,
knowledge really is power. THE WILL TO LIVE

Looking back, it's tempting to wonder how medicine might have progressed
if researchers had paid more attention to the kinds of effects that
Thomas Jefferson noted in 1807 -- when he first described the use of
dummy cures to prevent the over-prescription of active drugs such as
opium. He may have called it a 'pious fraud', but we have now seen how
you can prevent opioid misuse without any kind of deception. Honest
strategies to enhance patient expectations can and should be an
essential element of all evidence-based medicine. Jefferson himself did
not write on the subject of placebos again. There is, however, another
reason why he is of interest to researchers studying the mind--body
connection -- and that is the specific day that he died. The president's
health had started to deteriorate in 1825, with a series of intestinal
and urinary disorders. By June 1826, he was completely bedbound, beset
by a terrible fever, yet he survived until 4 July -- the fiftieth
anniversary of the signing of the Declaration of Independence.
Astonishingly, Jefferson's presidential predecessor, John Adams, died on
the same day in 1826. Having not yet heard the news of his rival's
passing, his last words were apparently, 'Thomas Jefferson survives.' Is
it simply a coincidence that the second and third presidents of the USA
died on this landmark occasion? Or had something more interesting
occurred? John Adams's son, John Quincy -- who was the sitting president
at the time -- described the timing of the two presidents' deaths as the
'visible and palpable remarks of Divine Favor'. Scientists don't
generally believe in that kind of godly intervention, so they have
looked for other answers. And they have argued that the timing of the
deaths may have resulted from a psychosomatic effect. Perhaps, in their
old age, the two former presidents experienced a great will to survive
until the momentous anniversary of the country they had helped to found
-- and once they had reached that day, their bodies quickly gave out. It
may sound fantastical, but, as we shall discover in the next chapter,
the prediction machine has a dark side that, among many other important

consequences, means that our thoughts and feelings really can determine
the time of our death.

How to think about . . . healing If you hear that a treatment's effects
can be partially explained by the placebo, don't panic! Remember that
the biological effects are still meaningful, even if they arise from
expectation. If you have a choice over medical treatment options, try to
bear in mind the factors that can influence the size of the placebo
component. All other things being equal, bigger tablets are more
effective than smaller tablets -- but capsules are better still.
Similarly, if you have a choice over your healthcare provider, try to
choose someone who you find to be empathetic and caring. Their attitude
could change the way you respond to their treatment. Try to find out --
from your healthcare provider, or from another credible source -- how
your treatment works, and the way that it might bring about its
benefits. That knowledge can strengthen the effects of the treatment.
Based on this information, try to visualise your recovery and, if
relevant, make a plan of your journey to better health. Doing so should
maximise your chances of improvement. If possible, meet other patients
who have benefited from the same therapy and are willing to share their
experiences. These conversations could help to shift your expectations
of the treatment and its success. Consider obtaining an open-label
placebo (which are commercially available from certain online
retailers). You should never use this as a replacement for actual
medications without the advice of a medical professional, but taken
alongside your existing treatments, they may enhance the benefits. Above
all, be realistic but optimistic about what the mind--body connection
can achieve.

OceanofPDF.com

3 DO NO HARM How expectations can hurt as well as heal -- and how to
break a curse Browse the American Psychological Association's dictionary
and you'll find a mysterious entry for 'bone pointing' syndrome. The
term refers to a tradition of the Aboriginal societies near the red sand
hills of central Australia. According to anthropologists visiting the
groups in the midtwentieth century, a shaman could dish out a deadly
punishment by pointing a human or kangaroo bone at the wrongdoer and
chanting a curse. Almost immediately, the victim of the curse would
become despondent. As the curse took effect, the body would weaken and
within days it would fail completely. It was, according to one shaman, a
'spear of thought' that killed you from within.1 Similar reports of
'voodoo death' can be found across the world.2 And as we saw with the
Sudden Unexpected Nocturnal Death Syndrome of the Hmong immigrants in
the United States, people reporting on these phenomena have often
assumed that those in 'scientific' societies would be immune to deadly
expectations. (The American Psychological Association

still lists it as a 'culture-bound syndrome', unique to specific
populations, rather than a condition that is universal to humanity.) The
historical and medical literature, however, tells a different story.3
Consider the notorious case of a man from Nashville, Tennessee, who was
diagnosed with oesophageal cancer in the 1970s. Surgeons successfully
removed the tumour, but further scans revealed that the cancer had
spread to his liver. He was told he would be lucky to live until
Christmas that year. In the end, he survived to celebrate the holiday
with his family, but only just: he died in early January. The man's fate
would have seemed like yet another tragic loss to a terrible illness,
except an autopsy revealed that the original diagnosis had been wrong:
he had a tumour on his liver, but it was small and operable -- it could
not have killed him. Could his own doom-laden thoughts have led to his
death? That was the conclusion of his doctor, Clifton Meador, who
described the misdiagnosis as a kind of 'hex'.4 For this poor man, the
dread of cancer appears to have provoked a response that was remarkably
similar to a paranormal curse. The Australian oncologist G.W. Milton
came to similar conclusions when diagnosing people with skin cancer.
'There is a small group of patients in whom the realization of impending
death is a blow so terrible that they are quite unable to adjust to it,
and they die rapidly before the malignancy seems to have developed
enough to cause death,' he wrote.5 Knowing about Aboriginal traditions,
he claimed that 'self-willed deaths' were simply another example of the
'bone-pointing syndrome' described by the Aboriginal societies. Many
scientists now believe these anecdotes represent an extreme version of
an expectation effect known as the nocebo response.6 As we learnt in the
introduction, placebo means 'I shall please', and nocebo means 'I shall
harm' -- and the nocebo response occurs when we believe the body to be
under threat. Through the actions of the prediction machine, such
expectations will change our physiology, so that the mere thought of
having a symptom or disease can make us ill.

Death by expectation may be the most extreme example, but the nocebo
effect is responsible for many other forms of suffering in our daily
lives. It can exacerbate the symptoms of allergies, migraines, back ache
and concussion; indeed, whenever we are unwell, a nocebo effect will
make our sickness worse. Negative expectations can also contribute to
the nasty side effects of the drugs that are meant to cure us of our
ailments -- and they are a major reason for people to discontinue their
medications. Thankfully, our new understanding of the brain as a
prediction machine provides us with innovative strategies to mitigate
those effects and neutralise our self-made curses. Combined with the
reframing techniques that we explored in the last chapter, these methods
should provide some much-needed relief for all kinds of pain and
discomfort. TOXIC THOUGHTS Like the placebo response, the potential
power of negative expectation has been known since the earliest days of
modern medicine, long before the nocebo response even had a name. The
surgeon John Noland Mackenzie was among the earliest pioneers to examine
a negative expectation effect in medicine. Working at Baltimore's Eye,
Ear and Throat Charity Hospital in the 1880s, he was asked to examine a
32-year-old woman with severe asthma combined with terrible hay fever.
When she was exposed to pollen, her nose and eyes would run and her
throat would itch so badly that she felt she must 'tear \[it\] out with
her nails'; on the worst occasions she would suffer hour-long sneezing
fits. The attacks were so uncomfortable that she had to spend much of
the summer in bed, and it was absolutely impossible for her to keep
flowers in the house. Even the sight of a distant hayfield was enough to
set off her paroxysms. Mackenzie doesn't say what sparked his
scepticism, but something about the woman's descriptions led him to
question the role of pollen in her symptoms. To test his hypothesis, he
acquired an artificial rose 'of such

exquisite workmanship that it presented a perfect counterfeit of the
original'. Before the patient arrived, he carefully wiped every leaf and
petal, removing any grains of pollen that could possibly trigger an
attack. The patient turned up in surprisingly good health, and after an
initial examination and breezy chat, Mackenzie casually revealed the
artificial rose from behind a screen. Her resulting distress could not
have been greater if he had revealed a bunch of real flowers: her voice
became hoarse, her nose blocked, and she had the irresistible urge to
sneeze -- all within a minute of seeing the object. Examining the woman
closely, Mackenzie found visible irritation in her nose and throat,
which were red and swollen -- she certainly wasn't faking the effects.
In this peculiar case, Mackenzie concluded that the 'association of
ideas' appeared to have been as potent as actual pollen granules.
Needless to say, the patient was amazed to discover the true nature of
the rose, and she had to inspect it in detail before she was fully
convinced that it was not a real flower. Despite her initial
incredulity, the realisation brought a happy ending to her illness
without any further treatment. On her next visit to the hospital, she
buried her nose in a large bunch of real roses without a single sneeze.7
A handful of equally ingenious studies revealing the power of negative
thoughts followed, piecemeal, over the subsequent decades. It was only
with the rise of clinical trials in the 1960s and '70s, however, that
research into these negative expectation effects began to intersect with
placebo research. People's beliefs about a sugar pill, scientists
discovered, could both heal their existing symptoms and create new
noxious side effects that mimic adverse reactions to real drugs -- often
at the same time. Henry Beecher, the war doctor and anaesthetist we met
in the last chapter, had, in fact, noted this possibility in 1955, with
his influential paper on the 'powerful placebo'. Drawing on a handful of
existing experiments, he reported that patients receiving the dummy
pills often experienced symptoms such as nausea, headache, dry mouth,
drowsiness and fatigue -- all the kinds of events that people might
report when taking

an actual drug. In one trial of anxiety medication, a member of the
placebo group even developed a diffuse rash that only cleared up after
they stopped taking the inert pills; another reported palpitations; a
third had serious diarrhoea within 10 minutes of taking the pills.8 More
than six decades later, we know that this phenomenon is worryingly
common. A team of researchers from Oxford, Cardiff and London recently
analysed the data from more than 1,200 placebocontrolled trials. They
found that around half the people receiving the dummy pill reported at
least one 'adverse event' in the average trial. And in 5 per cent of
cases these reactions were so severe that the participants discontinued
treatment altogether.9 Some of these symptoms may have been
misattributed and due to completely unrelated sources of discomfort, but
a significant number of symptoms appear to arise from the doctors' and
drug companies' warnings of certain side effects -- suggesting a highly
specific expectation effect. Take an investigation, published in 2007,
of finasteride -- a medication that is often used to treat men with an
enlarged prostate. The drug has been known to result in erectile
dysfunction and reduced libido, a side effect that features prominently
in leaflets and health websites.10 To find out if that information could
be exacerbating men's frustration, a team from the University of
Florence set up a year-long trial in which half the participants were
specifically warned about these possible side effects, while the other
half were not. They found that the explicit warnings increased the
prevalence of erectile dysfunction from around 10 per cent to up to 30
per cent -- a threefold increase in a quality-of-life-changing symptom,
caused by a single piece of information.11 Exactly the same patterns
could be seen in people taking aspirin to calm angina. They were six
times more likely to discontinue their treatment due to increased nausea
and indigestion if they had been warned of irritation to the stomach and
intestines.12 The nocebo response seems to be especially potent with
feelings of pain. You may have experienced this yourself when undergoing
small medical

procedures. How often does a doctor or nurse warn that 'this may hurt'
before giving an injection or taking a blood sample? The thinking behind
these words may be that it is best to allow the patient to steel
themself for the pain. In reality, the short phrase will have made that
pain more likely. Women receiving an epidural, for example, were told in
one study that 'you are going to feel a big bee sting; this is the worst
part of the procedure'. They reported much more discomfort than another
group who were reassured that they would remain comfortable throughout
the procedure.13 When someone is warned of pain, you can observe notable
differences in the signalling of the spinal cord and brainstem --
changes that would be highly unlikely if the participant was
deliberately exaggerating the effects for sympathy.14 Nocebo responses
can be so strong that they overpower the would-be positive effects of
active drugs. A numbing analgesic cream can make participants feel more
pain if they have been told to expect greater sensitivity, and those
sensations are accompanied by a rise in blood pressure that appears to
signal their distress. Similarly, a muscle relaxant can make people feel
more tense, if they are told it is in fact a stimulant.15 Exactly how
the prediction machine brings about these effects is a matter of ongoing
research, but in many cases it appears to be the direct reversal of the
placebo response -- a kind of evil mirror image to all the physiological
changes we saw in the last chapter. Whereas positive expectations can
trigger the natural release of dopamine and opioids, for example, our
negative expectations deactivate these same neurotransmitters.16 To make
matters worse, negative expectations of pain can trigger the release of
chemicals that actively increase our discomfort, such as the hormone
cholecystokinin (CCK), which boosts the transmission of pain signals17
-- the equivalent of attaching our nerves to a public address system,
ensuring that painful messages dominate everything else. Based on its
expectations of illness, the prediction machine will also instruct the
nervous, immune, circulatory and digestive systems in certain

ways that could result in inflammation, altered blood pressure, nausea
and the release of hormones that will further amplify our stress. Since
the prediction machine draws on its memories to plan its responses, your
chances of experiencing a nocebo side effect will depend on your
personal history. If you have suffered a bad reaction to one drug, you
are much more likely to experience the same side effects with another
treatment, even if it works through entirely different mechanisms -- and
even if it is a dummy pill.18 This situation is similar to the common
experience of associating sickness with certain foods. If you happened
to have a stomach bug after eating a certain meal, for years afterwards
the very thought of that dish could leave you feeling nauseated --
thanks to the over-protective prediction machine preparing you for
another onslaught. As we saw with the placebo response, our expectations
of events, and the resulting experience of symptoms, can also be swayed
by superficial factors. People may experience fewer side effects from
branded, rather than generic, drugs, for instance, perhaps because their
slicker marketing increases the patient's trust in the medication.19
Even tiny alterations to a drug's appearance can lead to a huge spike in
adverse reactions, a fact that GlaxoSmithKline discovered to its great
cost in the late 2000s. For decades, tens of thousands of New Zealanders
had been using a thyroid hormone replacement drug called Eltroxin, with
just 14 complaints of adverse events across 30 years. In 2007, however,
GSK decided to move the tablet's production to a new factory, which
necessitated a change in the tablet's formulation, resulting in a
slightly altered appearance -- from yellow to white -- and taste. The
active ingredient was still exactly the same, however: the
pharmaceutical company had simply altered the binding ingredients that
bulk up the pills, and extensive testing revealed that the drug was
absorbed and metabolised at the same rate. The patients should have been
able to carry on with their treatment without even noticing the
difference. Unfortunately, that reassuring information did not reach
patients in time, and many assumed that the altered appearance was a
sign of cost-

cutting and poorer production. As the pharmacies started to stock the
new pills, reports of totally new side effects, including headaches,
rashes, itchy eyes, blurred vision and nausea, began to roll in.
Needless to say, concerns soon reached the local media, which jumped on
the story. Within 18 months, the company had 1400 new reports of side
effects -- a roughly 2000-fold increase on the previous rate of one
report every couple of years.20 It took many more months for the fears
to die down and the number of adverse events to return to their previous
level.21 Lest we think something about New Zealanders made them uniquely
susceptible to this nocebo effect, a very similar health scare involving
a reformulation of the same drug engulfed France a few years later.22 If
you do not currently take any medication, you might assume that you
would be immune to negative expectation effects, but there are many
other ways that your health could be affected by a nocebo-like response.
We all have different 'illness beliefs' that change how we interpret our
bodily sensations, and these thoughts can have important consequences
for many common ailments. The neuroscientist Gina Rippon argues that the
experience of pre-menstrual syndrome can be influenced by expectation.
In one study, participants were given sham feedback about their position
in the menstrual cycle, and that false information turned out to be a
better predictor of the symptoms they reported than their actual
hormonal status.23 Motion sickness shows a similar pattern; for many, it
is the expectation of discomfort that brings about nausea during travel,
rather than the actual movements of a vehicle -- and altering people's
beliefs about their own susceptibility can miraculously settle their
stomachs.24 The same is true of the lingering symptoms of injuries such
as whiplash, back pain and mild concussion: there is strong evidence
that negative expectations can prolong people's suffering.25 One study
of mild traumatic brain injury, for example, found that measuring
people's initial beliefs about their future prognosis could successfully
predict the risk of actually developing post-concussion

syndrome in 80 per cent of cases. Indeed, the patient beliefs proved to
be a better indicator of lingering distress than the severity of the
patients' symptoms at the time of the impact.26 If you think that your
symptoms will last for a long time and are beyond your control, they are
far more likely to stay that way, all other things being equal. (This
should not be a reason to take a laissez-faire attitude to these
injuries, of course -- the fact that nocebo effects can worsen and
prolong the symptoms does not make concussion any less of a problem.)
Illness beliefs often vary between countries -- a fact that can explain
some puzzling geographical variation in people's symptoms. A comparison
of mild head injuries in North America and Eastern Europe found that
Canadians' post-concussive symptoms (such as dizziness or fatigue)
linger for months longer than the symptoms of comparable injuries in
Greeks or Lithuanians, and this discrepancy appears to reflect the
underlying expectations of each population.27 There is a danger that
nocebo responses will be mistaken for hypochondria, but that is a
terrible misreading of the science. In many cases, people's symptoms
will have started with a physical trigger, the effects of which are
amplified and prolonged by a nocebo response. For others, the cause may
be purely psychological, but that doesn't make the symptoms any less
serious. As Mackenzie's asthmatic patient showed us more than a century
ago, and many careful experiments have confirmed since, the expectations
of illness can themselves bring about observable changes to the body
that are just as 'real' as the effects of a material pathogen. The stark
truth is that nocebo responses are an inevitable consequence of the
human brain. Any time we feel unwell, our thoughts will be shaping our
symptoms -- and we ignore that fact at our own peril. THE HEART OF THE
MATTER How about those 'self-willed deaths'? Is death by expectation
possible? Over the past few years, doctors have documented a couple of
extreme

nocebo responses that would certainly lend credence to the possibility.
And while these dramatic cases may remain a rarity, they reveal
fascinating insights into a serious -- and currently under-recognised --
risk factor for cardiovascular disease that may be affecting many
people. Let's first consider the case of Mr A, reported by doctors in
Minnesota in 2007. Hurt badly by a recent break-up, Mr A had signed up
for the clinical trial of a new anti-depressant, in the hope that the
new treatment could relieve his feelings of hopelessness. Initially he
found that the pills worked, helping his mood to improve. The benefits
did not last long, however, and in the second month of the trial he
decided to end it all, eating all 29 of his remaining capsules. Quickly
regretting the decision, he asked his neighbour to drive him to the
emergency department of the local hospital in Jackson. 'Help me, I took
all my pills,' he told the staff as he entered -- before promptly
collapsing. When the doctors examined Mr A, he was pale, drowsy and
shaking, with worryingly low blood pressure, and they quickly attached
him to a drip. Over the next 4 hours, his condition failed to improve.
Yet there appeared to be no trace of the relevant toxins within his
system, so the medical team called in one of the doctors from the
clinical trial -- who confirmed that Mr A had never taken the active
drug. According to his physiological signs, he had nearly overdosed on
dummy pills.28 Fortunately, on learning the news he made a full physical
recovery. In an equally remarkable case from 2016, a German woman in
Greifswald underwent a trial for acupuncture to reduce the pain during
and after a caesarean section. To ensure her informed consent, the
patient had been told that there was a very small risk the acupuncture
could result in a 'vasovagal reaction' such as dizziness or fainting --
or, in extreme cases, 'cardiovascular collapse'. Soon after the
treatment started, the patient began sweating profusely. Her feet and
hands went cold, and her blood pressure plummeted to a dangerously low
level, with a heart rate of just 23 beats a minute. Fearful of these
changes, the team immediately put her on a drip and transferred her to
the delivery room, where she recovered enough

for the caesarean section to be performed -- but if the drop in blood
pressure had persisted, it could have easily put the patient and her
baby at risk. Needless to say, it was highly unlikely that the dangerous
drop in blood pressure would have arisen from the acupuncture, but the
patient had not even received the real therapy. She had been in a
control group, in which the acupuncturist had merely placed adhesive
tape over her body.29 Somehow, the prediction machine appears to have
disrupted the body's vital functions to the point of collapse -- and for
some people, that disruption really could lead to death. There are many
ways that this could happen. According to one leading theory, such a
rapid physiological decline could arise from high concentrations of
stress hormones known as catecholamines, which can be toxic for the
heart and which seem to be released under intense emotions. If left
unchecked, their spike could lead to an untimely death.30 That result
would, of course, be much more likely for someone with an existing heart
condition -- but if the response was strong enough, it could even kill
those in good health. Fearful expectations may have a gradual as well as
a sudden effect on people's mortality. Consider a now world-famous study
in Framingham, Massachusetts, that has tracked the health of thousands
of adults since 1948. In the mid-1960s, a subset of female participants
were asked whether they were 'more likely', 'as likely' or 'less likely'
to develop heart disease, compared with other people their age. The
researchers found that the women who had answered 'more likely' were
around 3.7 times more likely to experience fatal cardiac arrest over a
20-year period than the other members of the study. Importantly, the
women had developed and expressed this expectation before any signs of
cardiovascular disease had surfaced; given their health at that point,
their fears did not seem to have a good factual basis.31 Sceptics may
wonder whether behavioural differences between the participants might
explain this increased risk of death. No doubt lifestyle could have
played a role, yet the increased risk held up to scrutiny, even after
the researchers had considered many other health factors, including

the participants' body mass index, cholesterol levels, smoking habits or
reported levels of loneliness, all of which can damage the heart. For
this reason, many researchers believe that the negative expectations
themselves had created a physiological nocebo response, with heightened
levels of stress hormones and chronic inflammation that harmed the
women's health in the long term and directly contributed to their
eventual deaths. It is easy to imagine how, if you believe you are at
higher risk of heart disease, each day may be filled with doom-laden
thoughts, and every feeling of ill health could be interpreted as a sign
of your deterioration -- thoughts that eventually become a
self-fulfilling prophecy. The possibility of a slow-burning nocebo
effect fits with another recent study, which looked at people who were
already suffering from coronary artery disease. Soon after the onset of
their condition, the patients were asked to rate their level of
agreement with statements such as 'I doubt that I will ever fully
recover from my heart problems' or 'I can still live a long and healthy
life'. Regardless of the initial severity of their illness, the patients
with the more dismal expectations were significantly more likely to die
over the following decade, compared with patients who took a rosier view
of their chances of recovery.32 Once again, it could be that those
participants with negative expectations were less likely to take
proactive care of their health -- a factor that this study could not
fully control for -- but the researchers also noted pronounced stress in
certain patients, which, they hypothesise, contributed to the higher
mortality rate. We know, after all, that other kinds of highly emotional
strain can lead to increased mortality rates. People are about twice as
likely to suffer a heart attack or stroke in the 30 days following the
death of a spouse, for example, compared to people who have not suffered
a recent loss.33 It's striking that many victims of 'self-willed death'
-- including the Hmong immigrants to America, the Aboriginal
bone-pointing victims and G.W. Milton's cancer patients -- appear to
have experienced something akin to grief during their decline, as they
contemplated their own imminent ends.

An understanding of the prediction machine may also explain why people
tend to die on personally significant days -- which brings us back to
the deaths of Thomas Jefferson and John Adams on 4 July 1826. As
remarkable as that coincidence may seem, various studies have shown that
the risk of mortality throughout the year is not evenly distributed. One
analysis of the death records of more than 30 million Americans found
that people are more likely to die on or just after a significant
occasion than just before a big event. They found that death is 4 per
cent more likely to happen on a birthday, for example, than the
preceding two days. (Sadly, this phenomenon seems to be more pronounced
for children, who presumably attach an even greater importance to the
event -- and a greater desire to live to see it -- than adults.) Similar
patterns have now been described in many other countries, and the data
seems to rule out other potential explanations, such as increased
suicides or automobile accidents. In Mexico, a peaceful death on a
significant day is even considered to be a muerte hermosa or 'beautiful
death'. In these cases, the body is already ailing, but it appears to be
able to hold on until the event, after which expectations of death
precipitate a decline. Supporting this hypothesis, one analysis found
that the marked rise in deaths around New Year's Day -- a surprisingly
consistent phenomenon -- was especially high on 1 January 2000 compared
to other years. It seems natural that the mind would attach huge
importance to what were popularly understood as millennial celebrations,
creating a strong desire to live through a once-in-a-thousand-year
event.34 For Adams and Jefferson, the fiftieth anniversary of American
independence would have certainly constituted this kind of milestone.
Amazingly, the fifth president, James Monroe, also died on the same
date, five years later. As the New York Evening Post wrote at the time:
'Three of the four presidents who have left the scene of their
usefulness and glory expired on the anniversary of the national
birthday, a day which of all others, had it been permitted them to
choose, \[they\] would probably have selected for the termination of
their careers.'35 There is absolutely no

reason to think the timing of their deaths was a deliberate choice --
but it may have been an unconscious one, reflecting the prediction
machine's profound influence over our fates, right up until our last
breath.36 BREAKING THE CURSE So 'death by expectation' really could be
possible, and fears and anxieties about illness may even contribute to
heart disease in a surprising number of people. It's important to
remember, though, that the less extreme and more mundane nocebo effects
can still have powerful consequences for our everyday health and
well-being. The headaches I experienced when taking anti-depressant
pills, for example, were truly agonising. That discomfort wasn't going
to kill me, but it could have easily persuaded me to discontinue a
treatment that ultimately proved to be very effective, had I not
discovered that symptom's potentially psychosomatic origins.37 When you
consider the sheer prevalence of nocebo effects and the discomfort they
cause, a way of neutralising their power over us would be an amazing
advance for medicine. The question is, how? It is both a practical
problem and an ethical dilemma. Doctors famously pledge to 'first, do no
harm', but they are also obliged to obtain their patients' informed
consent before treatment. These directives can work at cross-purposes.
How can doctors honestly explain medical risks without inadvertently
inducing a nocebo response? Over the past few years, I have been
heartened to see that many scientists are already investigating possible
solutions to these paradoxical demands. One option involves
'personalised informed consent', in which a medical practitioner allows
the patient to decide whether they would like to hear about relatively
rare risks, or whether they would prefer that the doctor withholds such
information. This option still puts the patient in control of their
treatment, and it may be more ethical than automatically providing
information that could bring about a negative expectation effect.38

Each patient will have a different preference. Some might conclude that
remaining in the dark gives them the best chance at maintaining the
positive outlook that can, as we have seen, make all the difference. I
suspect my own fears are often much worse than the truth, though, and so
I would rather be told the relevant information so that my expectations
are at least based on objective fact. Fortunately, for patients like me
that prefer to know, it is possible to minimise the nocebo response by
changing the way the information itself is presented, using a strategy
known as reframing. Abundant psychological research shows that people
often respond very differently to the same piece of data depending on
how it is phrased. Framing is already a well-known and well-studied
tactic for advertising and marketing executives -- it is the reason that
foods are labelled as '95 per cent fat free' rather than '5 per cent
fat', despite both phrases conveying the same thing. And it looks likely
that the same technique could be employed to reduce nocebo side effects.
Consider a study from Australia's University of New South Wales in which
students believed they were signing up for a trial of a benzodiazepine
medication, an anti-anxiety drug. In reality, they all received a dummy
pill that would have no direct chemical effect on the body. In
accordance with the standard procedure, the students were told about
some of the expected benefits, such as muscle relaxation and lower heart
rate, as well as the potential side effects, which included headaches,
nausea, dizziness and drowsiness. In some cases, the information was
framed negatively, with the emphasis on the number of people who would
experience discomfort, such as: Possible side effects include
drowsiness. Approximately 27 out of 100 people will experience
drowsiness. In other cases, the information was framed more positively,
with an emphasis on the number of people who would remain side-effect
free, such as:

Possible side effects include drowsiness. However, 73 out of 100 people
will not experience drowsiness. Despite the fact that the two sentences
are tantamount to conveying the same statistic, the people in the
positive-framing group reported fewer short-term side effects upon
ingesting the pill.39 Whenever we are presented with this kind of
information as patients, we should question whether it could be reframed
more positively. Worst-case thinking doesn't prepare you -- it promotes
the worst case. Just as importantly, we can learn to reappraise the
symptoms that we do experience. Remember that nocebo responses can
exacerbate side effects that originate from the direct action of a drug.
In this case, there's no point pretending that the discomfort doesn't
exist, but medical practitioners can nevertheless change the way the
patient interprets their experiences and the meanings they assign to
them so as to minimise discomfort in the long run. The consequences for
the patient's well-being can be profound. In an extraordinary experiment
of this kind, researchers at Stanford University's Mind & Body Lab
helped treat a group of children and adolescents with severe peanut
allergy. The patients were all undergoing 'oral immunotherapy', which
involved gradually exposing the body to larger doses of peanut protein
over a six-month period. All being well, the patient should become less
and less sensitive to the allergen, until they can eventually eat a
whole peanut without a severe reaction; but the therapy itself can
sometimes result in unpleasant feelings, such as hives, an itchy mouth,
nasal congestion and stomach pain. Besides being a source of immediate
discomfort, these side effects often feel like the start of a fullblown
allergic reaction, leading to increased anxiety about the treatment and
a relatively high dropout rate. In reality, the side effects tend to
remain rather mild -- and rather than being the start of a dangerous
over-reaction, they can be seen as a sign that the immune system is
responding to the stimulus, which is an essential step in the process of
desensitisation.

Could knowledge of this fact change patients' attitudes to their side
effects, the researchers wondered. And might those altered attitudes
then change their experience of the overall treatment itself? To find
out, they designed an information programme that aimed to change the
patients' mindsets throughout the treatment by giving them written
pamphlets and holding lengthy discussions with a trained health
professional. In these sessions the researchers compared the side
effects to an athlete's sore muscles after training -- an uncomfortable
feeling that nevertheless signals the building of internal strength.
Along the way, the patients were given exercises that would reinforce
their understanding, such as writing a letter to their future self,
reminding themselves of the new ways to interpret their symptoms. A
control group went through similar meetings that focused more
exclusively on ways to manage the side effects, such as taking the
protein dose on a full stomach, drinking water or taking antihistamines.
While these discussions contained much practical advice, they always
framed the symptoms as an unfortunate consequence that had to be
endured, rather than a positive signal that the treatment was working.
For safety, both groups were also taught how to identify any
life-threatening symptoms, and experts were always available to discuss
any serious concerns. (If you suffer from an allergy yourself, please do
not try to create your own immunotherapy without medical supervision.)
The changes in the patients' feelings of anxiety were substantial, with
the positive reframing significantly reducing their worries about the
treatment. This positive mindset then reduced the reporting of actual
symptoms as the patients progressed to larger doses of the allergen and,
eventually, to real peanuts. Importantly, the benefits of reframing were
evident not only in the patients' subjective experiences, but also in
biological measures of the treatment's success. At the beginning and end
of the therapy, the patients were given blood tests that allowed the
researchers to detect an antibody, called IgG4, that is produced by the
body in response to the ingestion of peanut protein. If it is

present at suitable levels, IgG4 seems to inhibit other immune responses
that would lead to a full-scale allergic reaction.40 In the beginning of
the study, both groups showed very little IgG4 on blood tests. By the
end, however, the children and adolescents in the positive intervention
had ramped up production to a much higher level than that of the control
group, reducing the symptoms that they experienced as the trial
progressed. Like all expectation effects, the change brought about by
the altered beliefs can be explained by recognised physiological
mechanisms. Chronic worrying can trigger low-level inflammation, which
appears to disrupt the immune system's capacity to adapt, for example.
Once they were primed with positive information, the participants in the
intervention group may have been freed from this biological barrier,
allowing their bodies to respond more effectively to the increasing
doses of the peanut protein.41 Besides being a powerful example of the
mind--body connection in action, the peanut allergy study also provides
us with a perfect demonstration of a process known as reappraisal, in
which we look for positive interpretations of negative events. And as we
shall now see, we can apply this technique ourselves whenever we are
injured or ill. THE PAIN-RELIEF MINDSET Let's begin by assessing how you
currently think about pain or discomfort. Imagine you are suffering from
a migraine or bad back, or that you have broken your arm. If you are
like me, you may automatically fall into a trap of 'catastrophising'
thoughts, in which the appearance of a symptom leads to the expectation
that worse will follow. Psychologists measure catastrophising by asking
patients to rate, on a scale of 0 (never) to 4 (always), statements such
as: When I feel in pain . . . I worry all the time about whether the
pain will end It's awful and I think it will never get better

I become afraid the pain will get worse I can't seem to keep my pain out
of my mind I keep thinking of other painful events I wonder whether
something serious may happen

Each statement reflects a different type of catastrophic thinking;
together, they create a kind of self-perpetuating nocebo response.42 The
scale is a good predictor of the discomfort that people will experience
following an operation, for example, and how long they will have to stay
in hospital.43 The tendency to catastrophise also seems to contribute to
the severity of migraines and headaches, and to the symptoms of people
suffering from chronic joint and muscle pain.44 Given what we know about
the role of expectation in pain, the scientists Luana Colloca and Beth
Darnall go so far as to suggest that catastrophic thinking is 'like
picking up a can of gasoline and pouring it on a fire'.45 It's taking
the evolved responses to injury -- which could serve as a useful warning
in times of danger -- and then amplifying them beyond any possible
benefit. The adoption of a 'pain-relief mindset' can help to break this
vicious cycle. Patients can be taught, for instance, about the nature of
pain, including the psychological processes that can exacerbate our
discomfort and the fact that our mental state can powerfully influence
the symptoms.46 Once they have learned to identify the beginning of
catastrophic thinking, they are taught to reconsider the factual basis
of their anxieties. While pain can be a signal of danger, for instance,
the intensity of the sensation doesn't necessarily reflect actual tissue
damage. (A migraine can be agonising, for example, but is very rarely
the result of a serious neurological problem.) Similarly, if it feels
like the pain is neverending, it might help to remind yourself that you
have overcome previous episodes. And if you have come to associate
certain triggers, such as an important work meeting, with a flare-up, it
could be worth asking whether the connection is really as inevitable as
you assume.47

Each person may catastrophise in their own unique way, but as a general
principle you can ask yourself the following questions whenever you
notice yourself ruminating about your health: 'Is this thought negative
and alarming, positive and comforting, or neutral? What is the evidence
for and against this thought? Is there a more palatable way to think
about this?'48 Finally, you may try to remember a few reassuring
phrases, such as 'My pain is in my brain' and 'The sensations are real,
but temporary', that can counteract more general anxieties and that
emphasise the power of the brain's capacity to bring its own relief.49
Like any skill, reappraisal takes practice, but many studies have shown
impressive benefits for the patients who learn to apply it. More than
half of people with chronic pain report at least a 30 per cent reduction
in their symptoms when using this technique, with many patients
experiencing as much as 70 per cent improvement; reappraisal also
reduces the number of days that migraine sufferers lose to their
headaches.50 The technique could also help to relieve momentary
discomfort, such as if you have burnt yourself on your oven.51
Strikingly, the psychological therapy leads to some lasting changes in
the brain, including a reduction in the size of regions that are thought
to handle catastrophic thinking. It is as if reappraisers have turned
off the pain amplifiers. While most of the research in this domain so
far has focused on pain disorders, it's likely that this technique could
offer relief for other unpleasant conditions. Catastrophising is thought
to worsen the symptoms of asthma, which could feasibly respond to
reappraisal in the same way -- if you remind yourself, for example, that
your body is making sure you have enough oxygen.52 There are also some
signs that reappraisal reduces the severity of the common cold.53 If you
recognise your symptoms as a sign that your body is appropriately
fighting the virus, you may reduce your discomfort. By soothing the
anxiety around long-term illness and alleviating doomladen thoughts,
reappraisal may even benefit the health of your heart. One study found
that cognitive behavioural therapy (which includes sessions on

the best ways to reduce catastrophic thinking) after heart failure
successfully reduced the risk of developing further disease.54 We will
need many more studies on large numbers of patients to confirm that
finding and to refine these therapies, of course. But the importance of
nocebo responses to our overall health is undeniable. And, crucially,
these negative expectation effects can be neutralised. This
understanding could not be more urgent, since there is now strong
evidence that some nocebo responses can be contagious. As we shall
discover in the next chapter, the spread of negative expectations
between people has contributed to many modern health scares. Contrary to
the conclusions of the anthropologists and historians studying
'self-willed death', human beings in developed countries may be more
susceptible to suggestion than ever before -- and we need every possible
tool to counteract this very modern curse.

How to think about . . . pain and discomfort When you are warned about
the potential side effects of drugs, try to find out whether the same
symptoms were also observed in the placebo group in the drug trial.
(Your doctor may be able to provide that information, or you can often
find such statistics on government websites such as www.CDC.gov.) If so,
there's a good chance the side effects may be the result of a nocebo
response. Look more critically at the data representing the risks of
side effects and practise reframing. If you are told there is a 10 per
cent chance of developing a side effect, for example, try to focus on
the fact that 90 per cent of patients will remain free of that symptom.
If you do experience a side effect, try to ask whether it might be a
sign of the drug's healing action. Doing so will not only neutralise
your anxiety, but may also actually improve the benefits of the
treatment. Assess whether you are prone to 'pain catastrophising' using
the scale on here. If so, try to notice when you start to ruminate on
your symptoms. Awareness is the first step to breaking the vicious
cycle. When you find yourself falling into catastrophic thinking, ask
whether there is a good factual basis for your thoughts; if not, look
for a way to reinterpret the situation more positively. Remember your
understanding of the nocebo response and reinforce that knowledge
whenever you can. Some studies have found that it helps to write a
letter to yourself describing what you know; others suggest that you
could create a social media post sharing your thoughts.

OceanofPDF.com

4 THE ORIGINS OF MASS HYSTERIA How expectations spread within groups In
May 2006, Portugal was beset by mysterious outbreaks of illness. The
disease only appeared to afflict teenagers, who experienced dizziness,
breathing difficulties and skin rashes. Within a few days, around 300
students across the country had been affected. A virus or some kind of
poisoning seemed the most likely pathogens, according to some experts;
others believed it might be an allergic reaction to a certain kind of
caterpillar, or to dust in classrooms. None of the explanations seemed
truly convincing, however. As one health expert remarked: 'I don't know
any agent that is so selective it only attacks children.' Enquiries
eventually revealed that the popular teen soap Morangos com Acucar
(Strawberries with Sugar) was to blame. In the days before the first
reported cases, the main characters on the show had been infected by a
life-threatening virus that had led to very similar symptoms. Somehow,
the 'virus' had jumped from the small screen to a handful of viewers,
creating real physical symptoms -- despite the fact that the illness in
the programme was totally fictional. Those children had then passed it
on to their

classmates, leading the cases to multiply. Portuguese adults were
unlikely to have been dedicated viewers of the melodrama -- and were
less embedded in the teens' social networks -- so they were less likely
to develop the disease.1 Scientists call this kind of outbreak, with no
physical vector, a 'mass psychogenic illness'. (Whereas psychosomatic
can refer to our mental state exacerbating existing symptoms,
psychogenic means that the origin itself is purely psychological.) Other
notable cases range from mysterious dancing manias in the Middle Ages to
the emergence of strange, uncontrollable facial tics among YouTube
users.2 The experiences are very distressing for those concerned, yet
commentators in the past have often dismissed these conditions as
'imaginary', wilfully deceptive or the result of a mental weakness that
was of little relevance to most 'normal' people. Much like the 'voodoo
deaths', we have assumed that they are rare occurrences that happen to
other people. The Strawberries with Sugar outbreak shows us just how
easily psychogenic symptoms can be triggered in otherwise healthy
populations. In this case, the cause was soon established and the teens
recovered, but cutting-edge research suggests that the same process of
social contagion is helping to spread and amplify nocebo effects to
millions of people. And it's not just suggestible adolescents who are
affected; the research shows that anyone can be susceptible to the
social transmission of psychogenic illness. Indeed, there is a good
chance that you have 'caught' an expectation effect yourself, without
even realising it -- and it is only by learning to recognise the signs
that we can protect ourselves from being 'infected' again. MIRROR,
MIRROR IN THE BRAIN To understand the ways that a nocebo effect could
spread from person to person, we must first examine the origins of
social contagion more generally. This arises through an essential
component of the prediction

machine, named the mirror system, which allows us to build others'
physical and mental states into our simulations of the world.3 The story
begins with a monkey and some peanuts at the University of Parma in
Italy. In the early 1990s, Giacomo Rizzolatti's team of neuroscientists
were examining the neuronal activity that leads to purposeful movements
-- the messaging that tells your hand to pick up an ice-cream cone, for
example. To do so, they attached a sensor to a macaque's brain and
recorded the electrical activity of its neurons as it grasped for a toy
or brought a piece of food to its mouth. Over many trials, the
researchers found that distinct groups of brain cells lit up for each
action, with a separate pattern apparently representing the different
intentions. As an important step to deciphering the brain's 'neural
code', this was a significant finding in its own right. Just by chance,
however, they found that the monkey's brain would also burst into action
as it watched the researchers grasping its peanuts or toys -- even
though the monkey itself had remained motionless. Even more strikingly,
the readings showed an extraordinarily similar pattern of electrical
activity to that which the monkey had exhibited when it was grasping the
objects itself.4 The brain appeared to be reflecting what it saw and
then recreating the experience itself, leading the team to describe the
cells as neuroni specchio, 'mirror neurons'. This process, they claimed,
allows us to understand immediately what another person is doing,
without having to think about it consciously.5 Later research, in
monkeys and humans, revealed that the brain's mirror system responds to
feelings as well as actions. When we see another person expressing an
emotion, we show heightened activity in the regions involved in
emotional processing and in the regions involved in the display of those
feelings -- as if we were experiencing them ourselves. Importantly, this
internal mirroring can then lead to overt physical mimicry.6 Recordings
of electrical activity through the skin show that your own cheek muscles
begin to twitch, very slightly, when you see someone else smile; if they
frown, the muscles in your own eyebrows start to

contract; and if they have screwed their mouth in a look of disgust or
pain, you can't help but cringe a little -- all because of the automatic
activity of this mirror system. The tone and the speed of our speech
will also shift towards our conversation partner's voice. Even our
pupils tend to dilate or contract to match the person we are viewing.7
Without us even noticing it, the presence of another person can
therefore change the body as well as the mind. And these bodily effects
apparently have a purpose -- they increase our understanding of what the
other person is feeling.8 In one ingenious demonstration of this idea,
researchers recruited cosmetic surgery patients undergoing botox
injections, which temporarily paralyse the muscles of the face, and
asked them to describe the feelings people were displaying in various
photographs. The botox patients found it much harder to recognise the
emotions, compared with participants who had a 'skin filler' injection
that did not interfere with the facial muscles. The participants needed
the physical mirroring to fully appreciate what the people in the
pictures were feeling; without it, their emotional processing was
disrupted.9 Humans don't just communicate with facial expressions, of
course; we have words and symbols, which can also stimulate the brain's
mirror system. If you hear the word 'smile', you'll experience a trace
of activity in emotional processing areas and may even experience small
movements in the facial muscles themselves, as if you were actually on
the verge of breaking out into a grin. Like our direct mimicry of other
people's faces, this leads us to feel a shadow of the effects ourselves,
despite there being no objective reason for feeling happier.10 Quite by
chance, Rizzolatti's team -- and their monkey -- had therefore uncovered
a neural basis for empathy, capable of explaining how our feelings can
subtly pass from person to person through a kind of contagion. 'When
people use the expression "I feel your pain" to indicate both
comprehension and empathy, they may not realise just how literally true
their statement could be,' they later wrote.11

Most of the time, we experience only a weak reflection of another
person's feelings, of course. We don't feel full-blown joy whenever we
see a picture of a lottery winner or experience extreme anguish whenever
we see someone crying; their expressions are only going to modify what
we're already feeling. But even small effects can add up if we spend a
long time in someone's company, or if we have multiple interactions with
different people who are all showing similar emotional profiles. As an
illustration of how far someone's feelings can spread, imagine that you
become friends with someone with an astonishingly positive attitude, who
is incredibly satisfied with their life. You might feel a bit glad for
them, but could their joy really bring lasting happiness to your life
too? According to one detailed longitudinal survey -- the Framingham
Heart Study -- the answer is yes. Because of your regular interactions
with them, you would be 15 per cent more likely to score highly on the
survey's measure of life satisfaction -- despite no direct change in
your immediate circumstances. How about your friend's friend? The same
study found that their happiness will be passed on to your friend, who
passes it on to you, increasing your chances of happiness by about 10
per cent in the coming months. Your current satisfaction with life is
even influenced by a friend of a friend of a friend, who can increase
your chance of happiness by about 6 per cent. These are people you
almost certainly have never even met, and probably you don't even know
of their existence, but they are nevertheless influencing your
well-being through a chain of interactions.12 The discoveries of the
mirror system, and the extent of social contagion more generally, have
important consequences for our mental health, revealing just how much
our well-being depends on the concentric rings of our social circle. But
they can also shed light on the ways that symptoms spread through a
group during mass psychogenic illnesses. When we are in a group of
people who are all extremely concerned about the threat of a biological
weapon, for example, each person can begin to amplify the others' fears
-- creating a kind of echo chamber that puts everyone into a

state of panic.13 Even more importantly, our overactive empathic brain
might then begin to simulate feelings such as pain, nausea or vertigo
that another person is reporting. If we are lucky, this effect may not
be strong enough to have a real impact on our well-being. But if we are
already in a situation where illness seems likely, the simulations of
the mirror system could feed into the prediction machine's calculations,
creating or exaggerating a nocebo response. And the more we interact
with people who are unwell, see their suffering and talk about their
symptoms, the worse we will feel. Giuliana Mazzoni, a psychologist at
the University of Hull in the UK, was one of the first to reveal how
potent this process could be. She invited a small group of participants
to take part in a 'study of the individual reactions to environmental
substances'. In pairs, the subjects were asked to inhale a suspected
toxin that had been reported to produce headache, nausea, itchy skin and
drowsiness. (In reality, it was just clean air.) Unbeknown to the real
participants, however, the 'partners' in the trial were really actors
who had been told to deliberately feign the symptoms as they inhaled the
gas. The consequences of this observation were startling. People who saw
a partner in discomfort reported much severer symptoms themselves,
compared with people who did not see the reported side effects.14
Mazzoni's results were first published in the late 2000s, and we now
have a plethora of other studies showing that nocebo-like symptoms can
jump from person to person through social contagion. One study mimicking
a drug trial found that participants taking an innocuous pill reported
11 times as many symptoms -- such as nausea, dizziness and headaches --
after observing an undercover actor feigning sickness.15 Another
examined repeat visitors to blood donation clinics. It is not unusual
for people to feel faint or dizzy after their pint has been taken, but
these symptoms were twice as likely if the donor had just seen another
visitor on the verge of collapse.16

These socially contagious effects are highly specific: it's the
particular symptoms of the other person that are transmitted and
heightened during observation, rather than general feelings of
unwellness. And they occur over and above the typical nocebo response
you might get from a written or spoken warning from someone who is not
also displaying the symptoms.17 Tellingly, your susceptibility to these
effects seems to reflect your overall capacity for empathy and your
ability to dampen down those feelings, when necessary. One standard
measure of empathy asks people to rate statements such as 'I am often
quite touched by things that I see happen', 'When I watch a good movie,
I can very easily put myself in the place of a leading character' and
'When I see someone who badly needs help in an emergency, I go to
pieces'. Perhaps because they have a more reactive mirror system, people
who score highly on these kinds of questions are more likely to absorb
other people's signs of illness and report the same symptoms themselves;
they are also more likely to feel better, if someone else shows
relief.18 The most striking evidence of expectation contagion comes from
Fabrizio Benedetti at Italy's University of Turin. Benedetti has been at
the heart of the research into the placebo and nocebo effects and their
roles in our health. But he also happens to investigate the effects of
altitude on fitness, at the Plateau Rosa research facility, which sits
on a snow-clad mountain of the north-western Alps 3,500m above sea
level. The location -- which remains open for skiing throughout the year
-- provided an ideal setting to test the way that expectations of
illness can spread throughout a group in a non-clinical setting. The
study in question focused on the 'altitude headache', reported by many
climbers and skiers, which is thought to be a direct effect of thinning
air at great heights. There's little doubt physiology does play a direct
role in this phenomenon: to cope with low oxygen, our blood vessels
dilate, for example, which is thought to increase the pressure in the
brain's capillaries. A nocebo response should vastly increase the
discomfort, and Benedetti wanted to investigate whether social contagion
could spread and amplify

that negative expectation effect between people. To do so, he invited
121 students from the local medical and nursing schools to take a 3-hour
journey up to his high-altitude lab -- reachable through three
successive cable cars. The students were all attending the same course
and knew each other. Rather than warning each of them, individually, of
the potential effects of altitude, Benedetti's team selected just one
student -- the 'trigger' -- to be primed with the expectations of a
headache. This trigger was shown a flyer that explained the risk, and a
video of a sufferer in bed, grimacing with pain (the kind of scene that
is likely to spark empathic feelings). Afterwards, he or she was asked
to call the researchers two days before the trip to confirm the right
dose of aspirin to bring along. Benedetti's team did not tell the
student to pass on the message, but the trigger happened to mention it
to a few friends anyway, who then mentioned it to their own
acquaintances. By the time of the actual trip, news of the potential
risk had reached 35 others, all of whom had called the centre asking for
advice about the amount of aspirin to take with them. The effects on
their health during the course of the visit were staggering. When
Benedetti surveyed the group, 86 per cent of these primed students
experienced an altitude headache, compared with 53 per cent of the
students who had not heard of the risk from their classmate. What's
more, the average intensity of the headaches was also much greater for
the people who had been in touch with the trigger. Using saliva samples
taken after they had reached the high-altitude lab, Benedetti found that
these differences were even reflected in the participants' brain
chemistry, which showed an exaggerated response to many of the known
changes that occur in response to thinning air. The participants who had
spoken to the trigger showed higher levels of prostaglandin molecules,
for instance, which are thought to lie behind the vasodilation that may
cause altitude headaches. In a stroke of genius, Benedetti asked the
students to report how they'd heard about the headache, and who they'd
discussed it with since -- allowing him to map the spread of contagion
through the group. He found that the more times they had discussed the
symptoms, the worse their

headaches, and the higher the levels of the prostaglandins. Each
interaction had amplified their anxiety and made them feel more pain as
a result, with real changes in the neural chemistry.19 'It doesn't seem
to matter where expectations come from. They could be generated by a
doctor or a peer -- but the stronger expectations are, the stronger the
effects will be,' Benedetti told me. Perhaps counter-intuitively,
contagious expectation effects like this could serve a useful purpose --
particularly when the risk of a physically transmitted disease is high.
Imagine that you live in a region with dangerous ticks or
malaria-carrying mosquitoes. If you see people scratching around you, or
hear them talking about an itch, your brain can heighten your skin's
sensitivity, so that you are more likely to detect the presence of the
insects and remove them before they transmit disease. Similarly, if
you've been eating in a group and one of you falls ill, 'catching' their
nausea might feel unpleasant, but it could prevent you from continuing
to consume a potentially dangerous pathogen. Humans are social animals,
after all, and the prediction machine is simply using all the cues it
can to prepare you for potential illness or injury. Most of the time,
this functions perfectly well. In certain circumstances, however, it can
spark large outbreaks of sickness that have absolutely no physical
origin. THE THREE LAWS OF CONTAGION Now that we understand the mechanics
of how individuals mirror each other's physical symptoms, we can resolve
many medical mysteries -- and identify the precise conditions that make
a mass psychogenic illness more likely. If we return to Portugal in
2006, it is easy to imagine how the viewers of Strawberries with Sugar
may have felt so involved in the drama, with their brains' mirror system
recreating the characters' feelings of illness. Once a few of the teens
had started to demonstrate physical symptoms, their

displays of illness may have come to infect their classmates' minds, who
then infected others, in some cases leading to hospitalisations and
school closures. After the authorities started naming the plausible
causes -- like the presence of poisonous dust or dangerous caterpillars
-- the cases would have only multiplied until they eventually announced
the real psychogenic origin. Similar processes could lie behind many
reports of mass psychogenic illness throughout history. In the
pre-scientific age, these outbreaks took the form of violent
convulsions, fainting fits and even a series of dancing manias which
afflicted whole towns and villages in medieval and early modern Europe.
Across the Atlantic, an outbreak of mass psychogenic illness may have
even led to the Salem witch trials of 1692. The reports of paranormal
possession began with two cousins -- Betty Parris and Abigail Williams
-- who suffered from convulsive seizures, and within days it had spread
to the other adolescent girls in the town. Some modern doctors have
argued that the fits may have been caused by ergotism -- poisoning by a
fungus that had infected the residents' crops -- but others suggest that
the reports bear all the hallmarks of a mass psychogenic illness. It's
possible that one could lead to the other, of course -- perhaps Parris
or Williams had some kind of organic illness, but the symptoms then
spread to others through a contagious expectation effect.20 In the
nineteenth and twentieth centuries, these episodes became much rarer.
Mass psychogenic illnesses more regularly took the form of apparent
poisonings that turned out to have no physical origin. One of the most
noteworthy concerned the workers at a mill in Spartanburg, South
Carolina, who in 1962 began to experience nausea, cramps, bodily
weakness, dizziness and extreme fatigue. Rumours soon began circulating
that a poisonous insect had arrived in a shipment of textiles from
England. Within weeks, around 60 workers had fallen ill.Â Experts from
the Communicable Disease Center combed the entire plant for the culprit.
They found black ants, houseflies, gnats, beetles and mites -- but none
of these species could have caused the illness. In the end, they traced
the

outbreak to a 22-year-old mill worker, who told her friend that she
thought she'd been bitten, and subsequently fainted. All the other cases
then arose through social contagion. Interviewing the workers,
sociologists found that two factors could predict which particular
employees would become victims of illness. The first was the amount of
stress they had been experiencing recently: employees with marital
difficulties or family problems were more likely to be affected than
those with stable circumstances. The second was their connection to the
other victims: if they personally knew another sufferer, and had
interacted with them regularly, they were more likely to be struck
down.21 These could be considered the first two laws of contagion. The
third -- and last -- concerns the environment: whether there is a
feasible threat that would raise overall expectations of illness. It
seems unlikely that the mill workers had been worried for long about the
risk of English insects, but, in some climates, fears of impending
illness are never far from the mind, making the spread of symptoms far
more likely. This might explain why mass psychogenic illnesses appear to
be especially common during times of political upheaval or warfare. In
1983, for example, students and staff at a Palestinian girls' school in
the West Bank began to experience blurred vision and breathing problems,
accompanied by the smell of a rotten egg. As news of the outbreak
spread, nearly a thousand students in the area fell ill.Â Eventually,
epidemiologists managed to trace the outbreak at the original school to
a broken latrine emitting an unpleasant odour, which the girls had
interpreted as a poisonous gas. The closer the classrooms were to the
toilet, the more likely students were to have reported symptoms on the
first day. During their breaktime, those girls discussed the danger with
their friends, who discussed it with their friends -- just like the
students in Benedetti's altitude-sickness study. Soon the expectation of
illness spread across the whole school and -- as the reports became
better known -- to other establishments across the region.22

The US suffered similar outbreaks following the 9/11 attacks. In late
2001 and 2002 there were widespread fears of further Islamist attacks,
including the possibility of biological warfare. It began with reports
of rashes among Indianian schoolchildren and spread to northern
Virginia, then Pennsylvania, Oregon and Massachusetts. Strangely, the
symptoms seemed to be linked to the children's daily movements: the
rashes would become angrier in school but slowly calm down when children
returned home. Needless to say, the outbreaks caused tremendous anxiety
among parents, but scientists failed to identify a weapon or any other
environmental cause. They considered the use of pesticides, mould in the
buildings and even an allergic reaction to chemicals used to manufacture
textbooks -- but none of the explanations stood up to careful
scrutiny.23 An expectation effect, transmitted through social contagion,
may even shed light on the 'Havana syndrome' first experienced by US
diplomats and intelligence agents posted to Cuba. In the last days of
2016, a CIA operative in Havana arrived at the US embassy reporting
strange symptoms: dizziness, ear pain, tinnitus and a fuzzy head. The
strangest element was the apparent source of his discomfort: at home, he
had had the distinct impression that an intensely irritating loud noise
was following him from room to room. The sound only went away, he said,
when he opened his front door. As news of his experience spread, more
colleagues came forward to say that they too had noted the same bizarre
symptoms over the previous months. The descriptions of the sound varied
from extremely high-pitched ('a teapot on steroids') to a 'baffling
sensation akin to driving with the windows partially open in a car'.24
Some reported feeling shaken by a vibration or 'pressure' that woke them
up at night; others heard nothing at all, but still felt a sense of
disorientation, confusion and vertigo. What was clear was that it was
highly unpleasant and accompanied by concussionlike symptoms, leading
the US government to declare that an acoustic weapon was being used to
intimidate its diplomats and intelligence agents.

The fears soon spread to other countries' diplomats, with Canadian staff
reporting very similar symptoms, as well as nose bleeds and insomnia.
Then came apparent attacks of a similar nature from other countries,
thousands of miles from Havana: the State Department evacuated staff
from its embassy in Beijing, and consulates in Shanghai and Guangzhou,
after an outbreak. Acoustic scientists struggled to identify any
possible way that a soundwave could be directed, at distance and
sufficient intensity, to cause significant damage to the human brain.
Indeed, an analysis of a supposed recording of the sounds tormenting the
embassy staff revealed that the waves were the sound of cicadas. There
is still a lively scientific debate about the ultimate cause of these
symptoms, with some scientists arguing that it may have been the result
of a weapon emitting focused radiowaves. Others, however, are convinced
that the illness was psychogenic. The signs of Havana syndrome certainly
bear an uncanny resemblance to many of the other symptoms that are known
to arise from noxious expectations, and the tight-knit community of
expats, living under high stress in a foreign country, would provide a
fertile environment for psychogenic symptoms to spread from person to
person. As we saw with the Salem witch trials, the potential role of
psychosomatic illness does not preclude an environmental origin. Some --
currently unknown -- physical cause may have triggered illness in a
small group of people, the symptoms of which then spread through
observation and expectation to many others who had no direct contact
with the original threat.25 Most interesting, from my perspective, were
people's reactions to this possibility -- and how little they seemed to
understand the power of our expectations to create illness. 'To
artificially display all of these symptoms, you'd have to actually go
and research, practice, be the most consummate actor ever, and convince
one expert after another,' one of the doctors who had been involved in
the initial diagnosis said at the time.26 Senator Marco Rubio, who
chaired a special hearing on the attacks, took a similar

line, describing mass psychogenic illness as 'a bunch of people \[who\]
are just being hypochondriacs and making it up'.27 As the abundant
scientific research on expectation effects demonstrates, this could not
be further from the truth. There's nothing artificial or fantastical
about mass psychogenic illness -- it's a natural consequence of our
socially sensitive minds and the prediction machine's astonishing
capacity to pre-empt threats. VIRAL THOUGHTS While the mass psychogenic
illnesses discussed so far were extremely troubling events, they only
affected a limited number of people in isolated communities. And once
the physical risks had been eliminated, many of the patients' symptoms
began to dwindle. Other outbreaks have not been so easy to quell,
however -- thanks, in large part, to traditional and social media. These
health scares may start as regular nocebo effects -- caused by a fear of
the unknown or even a reasonable warning from a health professional --
which are then shared between near acquaintances. Once the cases have
reached a critical mass, documentaries, online articles and social media
posts will then spread the news far and wide -- often with highly
emotive first-person accounts that kick the brain's mirror system into
action. This, in turn, will lead many more people to develop symptoms,
and over a short period of time a relatively rare occurrence can start
to affect thousands, or even millions, of people. Let's first consider
the 'technopanic' caused by the introduction of new technologies. People
have often been fearful of innovation, setting up an anxiety that can
ease the transmission of a noxious expectation effect. This results in
the spread of symptoms, first through direct social interactions and
then through media coverage. As early as 1889, the British Medical
Journal reported a sharp uptick in cases of 'aural overpressure',
resulting in a continued buzzing in the ear, 'giddiness', 'nervous
excitability' and 'neuralgic pains'. The culprit? Alexander Graham
Bell's new-fangled

telephone.28 Similar outbreaks have accompanied the rise of the
telegraph, the radio and computer monitors -- devices that few today
would consider to be serious health risks.29 More recently, the rise of
wireless technology has resulted in reports of headaches,
breathlessness, insomnia, fatigue, tinnitus, dry eyes and memory
problems in the presence of Wi-Fi or 5G signals. While this may seem to
be a niche concern, 'electro-sensitivity' has affected a sizeable number
of people -- from 1.5 per cent in Sweden (around 150,000 people) to 4
per cent in the UK (around 2.6 million people).30 The sufferers believe
that long-term exposure to electromagnetic fields can disrupt the
signalling between neurons and may lead to cellular damage in the long
term. Yet laboratory studies show that the low doses experienced in our
homes or offices are certainly not powerful enough to cause any harm. To
find out whether a psychogenic origin might instead be the explanation,
James Rubin at King's College London invited 60 'electrosensitive'
people into his lab. He gave each participant a headband with a mobile
phone antenna above one ear. In some trials, it emitted a signal; in
others, it did not. For a period of 50 minutes, the participants were
asked to note any of the symptoms they experienced. If
electro-sensitivity arises from the physical effects of the
electromagnetic field, you would expect far more symptoms to have been
reported during the real exposure, compared to the sham trials. In
reality, the subjects in the control condition were actually a little
more likely to report problems, such as headache (despite the fact that
no electromagnetic waves were being emitted). That seriously undermines
the notion that side effects are caused by an inherent biological
reaction to the electromagnetism.31 'I've got no doubt in my mind that
people are genuinely experiencing physical symptoms,' Rubin told me. But
those symptoms are the result of expectation and social contagion, not
radiation. Rubin's study was published in 2006, and later experiments
have shown that healthy people, who have never experienced
electro-sensitivity before, are much more likely to report symptoms
after seeing an alarmist video

outlining the 'dangers'.32 Importantly, this online information often
includes clips of individuals directly sharing reports of their illness
-- and, as we have seen before, seeing and hearing someone with symptoms
makes it so much more likely that the nocebo effect will catch on.
Equally common -- but much more problematic for global health -- are
psychogenic reactions to vaccinations. Many people receiving the
influenza vaccination, for example, report that they have suffered
symptoms such as fever, headaches and muscle pain. Some even claim that
you can catch full-blown flu from the vaccine. (According to one recent
survey, around 43 per cent of US citizens now believe this to be the
case.33) The truth here is a little more complicated than in the reports
of electrosensitivity. There are various forms of flu vaccine, but any
flu vaccine delivered by injection contains either an inactivated form
of the virus or a single protein taken from the virus. In both cases,
the altered virus or its protein is unable to replicate within the body
-- meaning that the vaccine simply cannot lead to infection. It's
impossible. For injected vaccinations, clinical trials show that people
receiving a placebo are just as likely to exhibit the symptoms of flu as
the patients receiving the actual vaccine.34 According to the US Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, the only difference is that the real
vaccine is slightly more likely to make your arm feel sore at the site
of the injection.35 The case of certain flu vaccines delivered through a
nasal spray is more complicated. This contains an 'attenuated' virus,
which has been weakened but is still potentially active. The virulence
of the virus has been reduced so that it cannot lead to full-blown flu,
but there is some evidence that it can lead to mild symptoms, such as a
runny nose and moderate fever over the following days. Even so, trials
suggest that this direct biological action can only explain a minority
of the reports and that many people's symptoms -- particularly the
sensations of fatigue or headache -- may be psychogenic.36 In either
case, doctors' warnings might have given rise to some of the symptoms --
but the chances of experiencing them will be much greater if

you know of a relative or friend who has also felt that discomfort, or
if you have seen social media posts complaining of the side effects. And
the consequences of that social contagion can sometimes be dramatic.
During the 2009 swine flu outbreak, 46 Taiwanese middle school students
were taken to hospital with severe sickness following the vaccination,
yet doctors found that their symptoms were purely psychogenic.37 Mass
psychogenic illnesses of this kind have disrupted many other inoculation
programmes, including an outbreak in Colombia in 2014 during the rollout
of the HPV vaccination. It began with a few schoolgirls in Carmen de
BolÃ­var, who reported severe sickness after receiving the vaccine. Soon
videos of the unconscious and twitching girls were uploaded to YouTube
and shared in the mass media -- resulting in 600 further cases within
the following weeks.38 Once again, investigations showed that the
symptoms were purely psychogenic -- but the event had disastrous
consequences for the programme, with a huge drop in uptake over the
following years. Very similar patterns can be seen in the side effects
of statins. These drugs are widely prescribed to reduce blood
cholesterol, which can clog the arteries and increase the risk of heart
disease and stroke, and there is strong evidence that they can
significantly improve a patient's longevity. In the early 2010s,
however, patients started to raise concerns about side effects,
including chronic muscle pain, that appeared to arise from the drugs.39
These worries were covered by numerous media outlets, who interviewed
patients describing their agony and published photos of people
experiencing extreme pain -- just the kind of content that is going to
start activating the brain's mirror neuron system.40 As a result,
thousands of people began to report symptoms and stopped taking their
drugs. Placebo-controlled trials, however, have shown that the rate of
side effects among people taking statins is almost as high among people
taking an inert pill.41 (According to a review by the American Heart
Association, the difference is less than 1 per cent.42) Yet people's
fears have been difficult to quell, and the rapid rise in cases confirms
the ways that

individual patient reports, amplified by the media and shared widely on
social networks, can quickly create a mass psychogenic illness out of
relatively rare events. One comparison of 13 different countries found
that the accessibility of negative coverage online is directly
proportional to the percentage of patients experiencing side effects in
that region. In the US and UK -- where negative stories about statins
are most frequently encountered -- the proportion of patients reporting
muscle pain is about 10--12 per cent, whereas in Sweden or Japan it
hovers at around 2 per cent, which is much closer to the rates predicted
by placebo-controlled trials.43 Perhaps the most prevalent expectation
effect concerns the rise of certain food intolerances, which are
becoming increasingly common in Europe and the USA. Consider some of the
digestive problems associated with gluten, the proteins found in wheat,
rye and barley. Around 1 per cent of people are thought to suffer from
coeliac disease,44 which is caused by an overreactive immune system that
mistakes dietary gluten for a dangerous pathogen.45 The resulting damage
to the gut impairs the body's ability to absorb nutrients, and can lead
to anaemia and other deficiencies. A further 1 per cent of adults may be
affected by wheat allergy, in which other proteins in the grain, besides
gluten, trigger an exaggerated immune response, resulting in immediate
symptoms such as vomiting and itchiness.46 A third group, however,
report a less easily defined 'gluten sensitivity'. People with this
condition don't show the damage to the gut seen in coeliac disease, or
the release of antibodies that characterises wheat allergy, yet they
still report abdominal pain, bloating, diarrhoea and headaches.47 And
the latest research suggests that people's expectations may often be
responsible for this discomfort. In blinded trials, for instance,
suspected sufferers cut out all gluten from their diet for a few weeks
before they are asked to eat products such as bread or muffins that may
or may not contain the proteins. Combining the results of ten different
studies, a recent metaanalysis found that 16 per cent of people with
reported gluten sensitivity

actually responded to the gluten but not to the placebo, while a much
larger proportion -- around 40 per cent -- responded equally to both
groups of food, suggesting that expectation had played a large role in
their symptoms.48 (Importantly, many of these studies excluded placebo
foods that might have also contained 'FODMAP' carbohydrates that have
been touted as a potential cause of the symptoms.) Each person's case
will have to be individually assessed -- but based on these results, a
nocebo effect is a probable cause for a large number of sufferers. The
glut of lifestyle magazines and websites describing the dangers of wheat
-- and the continued dinner party conversations that have arisen from
this coverage -- has quickly accelerated the spread of these negative
expectations about the foods we eat. In the mid-2010s, the number of
people in the UK describing gluten sensitivity grew by 250 per cent over
three years, rising to around a third of the total population -- an
astonishing increase that is highly unlikely to arise from any physical
source.49 Data is sparse for other regions, but the trend does seem to
be catching on in many other countries.50 THE STENCH OF STIGMA These
examples are just some of the ways that expectation effects, spread or
amplified through social contagion, are currently afflicting world
health, but there are doubtless many more. Most recently, the
physiological effects of noxious beliefs may explain some people's
reactions to wearing masks during the Covid-19 pandemic -- with a
sizeable number of people arguing that the face coverings left them
short of breath and suffering from migraines. Most masks were made of
relatively light fabric that should not have obstructed breathing, but
the negative expectation of suffocation, amplified through social
contagion, could have contributed to the appearance of these symptoms.
Having heard members of my family describe these experiences, I
initially experienced some of the headaches and shortness of breath
myself.

My susceptibility isn't surprising; I score fairly highly on the test of
empathy (here) that is thought to reflect the reactivity of our mirror
neurons. Thanks to my knowledge of the nocebo effect, however, I was
able to question the origins of those symptoms, and I soon found an
online video of a cardiologist performing a workout in a surgical mask
-- without demonstrating any loss in his blood oxygen level. The
demonstration was enough to recalibrate my brain's predictions, and the
uncomfortable feelings soon went away -- providing me with another
example of our power to reframe and reinterpret our feelings. Any time
we have a new technology, medical procedure or change in diet, the
unfamiliarity of the innovation will create distrust and fear that could
lead noxious expectations to infect a population. The challenge for
health authorities is to distinguish between the actual physical risks
and the product of expectations, and to address people's needs
accordingly; to ignore either aspect will do the patients a great
disservice. In many cases, a person's symptoms do slowly decline once
the possibility of a physical threat has been eliminated and their brain
has updated its predictions -- but that can only work if the patient
trusts the experts bringing the news. If experts don't deliver the
message in a sensitive manner, patients are likely to discount the
psychogenic explanation and may even decide that there is some kind of
cover-up by the medical profession. This will not only exacerbate their
own suffering but also increase the chance that they will transmit the
expectation of illness to other people. This is why we urgently need
greater public awareness of expectation effects more generally.
Fortunately, there is now evidence that teaching people about nocebo
effects, and their power, can help protect them from future mental
pathogens. Keith Petrie and Fiona Crichton at the University of Auckland
in New Zealand, for instance, have documented the rise of 'wind turbine
syndrome' -- a mass psychogenic illness caused by a fear of the low
'infrasound' waves created by the sails of wind farms. The symptoms are
incredibly unpleasant, including headache, earache, tinnitus, nausea,
dizziness, heart palpitations, vibrations within the body, aching

joints, blurred vision, upset stomach and short-term memory problems --
but careful studies show that they all arise from people's expectations
and the social contagion of symptoms, whether or not infrasound waves
are actually present.51 Petrie and Crichton, however, found that a clear
explanation of the nocebo response, and the power of expectation to
create physical symptoms, could 'immunise' people from the illness.52 To
prevent needless suffering, this kind of information should be
incorporated into public health messaging about issues of emerging
concern that may be psychogenic in nature.53 On an individual level, we
can all try to be more discerning in the ways we think about potential
new health scares. Be aware that personal stories, while compelling, do
not provide strong evidence of a real danger and that the symptoms
people report may arise from many sources. Check that media reports are
based on reliable scientific research and look for comparisons of
symptoms in people who have and have not been exposed to the supposed
threat. (Like the placebo-controlled drug trials, any good study should
ideally include some kind of 'sham exposure' that can test whether
expectations have played a role.) If there is no difference between
those populations, you probably don't need to worry: the symptoms are
largely the product of expectations. Even if there is a difference, try
to take note of whether the absolute risk is high or low. For many
health scares -- like statin intolerance -- the purely biological side
effects are still very rare. (If you have serious concerns for your
health, you should of course consult a doctor.) As people increasingly
come to appreciate the power of expectation to create symptoms, we need
to abandon the stigma attached to psychogenic and psychosomatic
illnesses. Society has, after all, made important strides in advancing
our conversations around mental illnesses such as depression and
anxiety. Yet people are -- quite inexplicably -- much more dismissive of
conditions that may arise in the mind but then influence the body.
According to one of the specialists I spoke to, this stigma is sadly
prevalent

among medical professionals, who may communicate their disdain to their
patients. The truth is that we are all susceptible to expectation
effects that can bring about real physical discomfort. Discovering that
fact should be no more shameful than having a regular infection, a
broken bone or clinical depression. Psychogenic and psychosomatic
symptoms are a natural result of the brain's extraordinary prediction
machine, and a recognition of their psychological, social and cultural
origins will be essential as we move on to explore the consequences of
our expectations for exercise, diet, stress and sleep in the following
chapters.

How to think about . . . health scares Be aware of the people around
you, and the ways that your body might start to mimic their mental and
physical state through the brain's mirror neuron system. Bear in mind
the particular situations that are likely to give rise to a mass
psychogenic illness -- such as times of high political anxiety, the
introduction of new technologies, and the adoption of new medical
practices. Try not to associate 'unfamiliar' with 'dangerous'. When
considering cases near to you, remember the potential role of
coincidence. (A vaccine may have appeared to bring about an illness in
your friend, for example, but they probably caught the infection before
receiving the injection.) Apply critical thinking to the health coverage
you read. Look for reliable scientific sources and try to find data on
people who have and haven't been exposed to the alleged threat. Don't
just rely on anecdote or personal stories, however convincing they may
seem. If you feel sick with a potential psychogenic illness, seek
medical advice, but be openminded about the possibility that your
symptoms could be the result of an expectation effect. Once your beliefs
have become entrenched, it may be far harder to undo the effects. Avoid
stigmatising language when thinking about yourself or others. Stigma
will only make it harder to question the beliefs that may be causing an
illness or exacerbating its symptoms.

OceanofPDF.com

5 FASTER, STRONGER, FITTER How to take the pain out of exercise It is 18
July 1997, at stage 12 of the Tour de France, and Richard Virenque, of
the French Festina team, is preparing for the individual time trial in
Saint-Ãtienne. Virenque's specialism is the rugged mountain stages, not
the time trials, but he has heard of a new drug that will deliver a
spurt of energy for the 55-kilometre circuit, and so he asks his
physiotherapist, Willy Voet, to procure the 'magic potion'. The team are
no strangers to performanceenhancing drugs, so Voet's initial objections
are practical rather than moral; he fears trying a completely new
substance in the middle of the tournament, in case a bad reaction
scuppers Virenque's chances. After some persuasion, however, he agrees
to meet with the soigneur pushing the drug, and he is soon in possession
of a small jar of a mysterious white liquid, which he is told to inject
into Virenque's buttocks before the event. On the day of the race, Voet
faithfully delivers an injection -- and the results are breath-taking.
Virenque races head to head with his great rival Jan Ullrich for much of
the race. Although the German eventually wins with a time of 1 hour 16
minutes and 24 seconds, Virenque is 3 minutes and 4 seconds behind him
-- a much better result than he could have imagined.

'God I felt good!' he later told Voet. 'That stuff's just amazing.' It
was, Voet said, 'the time trial of his life'. Little did Virenque know
that there was no active ingredient in the magic potion. Before
delivering the injection, Voet had swapped the mysterious white
substance for a glucose solution. The confidence boost -- combined with
the cheering of the crowds -- was all Virenque needed to perform at his
best. This time, at least, he hadn't broken any rules. 'There is no
substitute for self-belief,' Voet would later write in his
autobiography. 'There was no more effective drug for Richard than the
public. A few injections of allez Richard going around his veins, a big
hit of adoration to raise his pain threshold, a course of worship to
make him feel invincible. That was the sort of gear Richard needed.'1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Stories of such dramatic performance boosts are commonplace in sport.
You can train your body day in, day out for years on end -- but
ultimately it is your mindset that will decide your physical limits. The
middle- and long-distance runner Paavo Nurmi (1897--1973) -- a nine-time
Olympic gold medallist nicknamed the Flying Finn -- expressed as much
when he said, 'Mind is everything; muscles, pieces of rubber. All that I
am, I am because of my mind.' So did Roger Bannister, the first man to
run the 4-minute mile, in 1954. 'It is the brain which determines how
hard the exercise systems can be pushed,' he wrote in his
autobiography.2 It's also the philosophy of the greatest marathon runner
of the twenty-first century, Eliud Kipchoge of Kenya. 'I always say I
don't run by my legs, but I run by heart and my mind,' he explained.
'What makes a person run more is their mind. If your mind is calm, and
well concentrated, then the whole body is controlled.'3 At the time of
writing, Kipchoge has won 13 of the 15 marathons he's entered -- and
holds the world record of 2 hours, 1 minute and 39 seconds.4

Despite the prevalence of this idea in sporting folklore, it has taken
sports scientists a century to understand the true power of our minds to
influence physical performance. Following the surge of interest in
medical placebos, however, researchers are now enthusiastically
investigating expectation effects in fitness and sport. At the heart of
this is new work on the brain's role in regulating our energy
expenditure and in creating the physical sensations of strain and
fatigue. The prediction machine estimates how far it can push the body
without causing damage, and when it believes it is reaching its limits,
it puts the brakes on our performance, creating the sense that we are
'hitting the wall' -- whether that is in the middle of a 5kilometre run
or the last stretch of an Ironman triathlon. These findings may help
professional athletes win world records, but they are even more relevant
for reluctant exercisers who struggle to maintain a fitness regimen. By
adopting the right mindset, even the most devoted couch potato can enjoy
more gain, and less pain, from their workouts. MIND OVER MUSCLE Much
like the research on placebos and nocebos, our new understanding of
exercise has come in fits and starts -- beginning with the work of the
Italian physiologist Angelo Mosso in the late nineteenth century. In
painstaking experiments at the University of Turin, he attached small
weights to people's middle fingers. The participants had to move the
fingers until they reached exhaustion, while Mosso recorded the strength
of the muscle contractions using an 'ergograph'. (Finger curls might
seem a rather trivial exercise, but it was appealing for the experiment
precisely because Mosso could control and measure the movements so
precisely.) As you might expect, the participants started out strong,
but the movements became more and more arduous over time as their
muscles fatigued, and physical exercise undertaken beforehand meant that
they experienced that fatigue after fewer movements. Importantly,
however, Mosso found that purely intellectual tasks -- such as lecturing
or grading university examinations -- could also lead to a more rapid
decline in their

muscular force. Based on this and many other experiments, he concluded
that our sense of fatigue comes from two different sources -- a 'psychic
process' from the exhaustion of the brain-based 'will', and the build-up
of chemical 'poisons' in the muscles themselves. 'Fatigue of the brain
reduces the strength of the muscles,' he wrote in La Fatica (Fatigue),
his great work on the subject. And if we want to increase endurance, we
need to train the mind as well as the body, he said -- the two are
intimately connected.5 If the course of scientific history were just,
Mosso would have been widely recognised for his work on physiology and
neuroscience -- and sports scientists would have continued to
investigate the many psychological factors that influence our strength
and endurance. But Mosso died in 1910, and later scientists focused
almost exclusively on biochemical changes in the muscles themselves. 'He
was essentially written out of history,' Timothy Noakes, a physiologist
at the University of Cape Town, told me. According to the prevailing
theory, our muscles tire when they run out of fuel in the form of the
molecule glycogen, which is stored in the tissue itself, and with the
build-up of toxic by-products such as lactic acid, which make it harder
for the fibres to contract, slowing your movements. (Since lactic acid
is also a product of fermentation, your muscles are essentially being
'pickled', according to this theory.) This would be especially
problematic with prolonged or intense exercise if our heart struggles to
pump enough fuel and oxygen around our body to replenish the supplies,
and if our muscles are working so hard we don't leave ourselves enough
time to convert the lactic acid back to glycogen. Other factors -- such
as dehydration and body temperature -- were also thought to play a role
in setting our physical limits, but the mind was thought to be of much
less importance. An athlete could try all they wanted to pace themselves
to avoid using up all their energy too soon, but if they pushed too
hard, they were going to 'hit the wall' and their psychology could do
little to recruit more muscle fibres or diminish the physical sense of
exhaustion. If one athlete is better than another, it is simply because
they are able to produce energy more efficiently with fewer toxic
by-products, thanks to their training and to the luck of the genetic
lottery.

This biochemical explanation of exhaustion has stuck for decades -- you
were probably taught it in biology classes at school. During the last
few years, however, the foundations of the theory have started to
crumble, with a series of puzzling discoveries. Notably, scientists have
tried and failed to find evidence that most athletes are performing at
maximum capacity, as predicted by the biochemical theory. Rather than
showing a plateau or decline at the point of exhaustion, for instance,
athletes' heart output and oxygen consumption appear to be high enough
to maintain their exercise for longer -- yet they still hit the wall
regardless. Even more problematic for the accepted theory are the
studies examining the activity of our muscles as they move. By attaching
electrodes to subjects' arms and legs, researchers have found that only
50--60 per cent of muscle fibres appear to be operating during prolonged
or intense exercise. If biochemical changes in muscle fibres were the
sole cause of physical fatigue, you'd expect many more of the fibres to
have been recruited to share the burden, before we reach exhaustion --
but that doesn't seem to be happening.6 'It's a simple disproof of the
prevailing theory,' Noakes told me. And while there is abundant evidence
that lactic acid accumulates during exercise, it has been difficult to
prove that it weakens and fatigues muscles in the ways we once assumed
-- with some studies suggesting that it may actually improve the
muscles' movements during times of extreme exertion.7 Given these
findings, it's very difficult to pinpoint any bodily change that can
convincingly explain the rapid onset of exhaustion. That's not to
mention the striking psychological effects long noted by athletes and
coaches. Careful experiments have confirmed that athletes perform
consistently better when they are in a head-to-head competition compared
with when they are training alone. They seem to draw on some kind of
hidden reserve that is only activated in certain contexts, which is hard
to explain if exhaustion is simply the result of depleted glycogen and
accumulated lactic acid.8 Perhaps most damningly of all, the biochemical
theory cannot explain the puzzling fact -- noted by Mosso and replicated
more recently -- that intellectual effort alone can lead to markedly
worse subsequent physical

performance. In 2009, researchers at Bangor University found that
cyclists experienced a 15 per cent reduction in stamina after they had
performed a gruelling 90-minute test designed to tax their memory and
concentration.9 True, the brain consumes glucose, but it seems highly
unlikely that a purely intellectual exercise could have such a large
effect on physical exhaustion, if feelings of fatigue were due solely to
the depletion of the muscles themselves. These enigmas have led a
growing number of sports scientists like Noakes to return to a
'psychobiological' theory of exhaustion that fully accepts the brain's
role in determining our physical limits, just as Mosso had proposed a
century ago.10 In their view, the brain uses its previous experience,
physiological sensations such as our core body temperature, its current
mood and sense of mental strain, and its predictions of the remaining
task to carefully judge how much exercise we are capable of performing,
and at what intensity. These calculations will determine how many muscle
fibres to recruit and the intensity of the movements that the body can
sustain, and if the brain senses that we risk over-exerting ourselves,
it will put the brakes on our movements, inhibiting the signals sent to
our muscles and creating an overall sense of fatigue that makes it
harder and harder to keep going.11 Although that feeling of exhaustion
is uncomfortable in the short term, it helps us to preserve some energy
for later on and keeps us from pushing ourselves to the point of injury.
The brain's estimates of what we can achieve are generally very
conservative, and that makes evolutionary sense: unless we are facing a
lifeor-death threat, it's generally better to play it safe to avoid
potential damage. But these predictions need to be flexible to adapt to
changing circumstances, meaning that it is often possible to release
some of those hidden reserves with small psychological nudges. Consider
a study by R. Hugh Morton at Massey University in New Zealand. In the
late 2000s, he asked a group of cyclists to take three identical rides,
during which they were asked to cycle as hard as they possibly could for
a few minutes -- to the point of exhaustion. In one of the trials, the
participants' clock was completely accurate; in the others, the clock
was wonky, running either 10

per cent too fast or 10 per cent too slow. If the brain's predictions
played no role in our feelings of fatigue, the difference on the clock
should have had no effect on their endurance. In reality, their stamina
increased by 18 per cent when the clock ran slow, and fell by around 2
per cent when it ran fast, compared to the accurate timekeeping. The
wonky time perception had led the participants' brains to estimate that
they had exerted more or less effort than they actually had -- and
adjusted their sense of exhaustion accordingly.12 Similar benefits could
be seen by getting cyclists to compete with themselves on a virtual
track that showed their current pacing alongside a previous performance.
Unbeknown to the participants, the avatar representing their previous
performance had been programmed to ride faster than their personal best
and, by resetting their expectations of what they could achieve, this
allowed the athletes to exceed their previous limits.13 Since the
prediction machine constantly updates its calculations with feedback
from the body, you can also boost performance by changing the
interpretation of those internal signals. Athletes usually find it
harder to exercise when they are hot, for example, with the brain
creating the sense of exhaustion to avoid the body overheating -- but
this can be manipulated. British cyclists riding in hot, humid
conditions had significantly greater stamina if they were told that
their core body temperature was slightly lower than it really was.14
Similarly, a study from 2019 gave cyclists falsely high readings of
their heart rate played through headphones. The feedback led their
brains to over-estimate their bodies' level of exertion, generating
greater feelings of exhaustion more quickly.15 Our understanding of the
psychobiological model of exhaustion is still growing, and there is an
increased interest in its neural origins. By placing electrodes on the
scalp as people perform exercise, researchers have started to locate the
brain regions involved in processing our expectations of exercise and
creating the sense of exhaustion. At the centre of it all is the
prefrontal cortex -- lying behind the forehead -- which uses our factual
knowledge of the exercise at hand, our previous experiences, and sensory
signals from across the body to predict its remaining physiological
budget

and the consequences of its exertions. It then transmits these
calculations to the motor cortex (which plans our movements) to control
our energy output accordingly -- and to stop us from continuing our
exercise when we are at risk of causing bodily damage.16 If he were
alive to see this research, Mosso might have considered these regions to
be the seat of 'the will'. But if you compare them to the neural areas
involved in the placebo and nocebo responses, you will see that they are
all components of the same prediction machine that controls so much of
our physical reality.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

This new theory of exhaustion, one that rightly places the brain as
controller of what the body can do, helps us to understand the influence
of placebo treatments in sport. If we consider Virenque's amazing time
trial in the 1997 Tour de France, the injection of the 'magic potion'
increased his perception of what he could achieve. His brain calculated
that it could devote more of the body's resources to the race without
risking injury, allowing his muscles to work harder on the track. The
fact that it was simply sugar water didn't matter: because of its
effects on the prediction machine, it still increased the amount of
energy that Virenque was able to expend. We may describe the substance
as 'inert', but in terms of its effects on performance, it was anything
but. Virenque's belief and the sense of ritual accompanying the
injection imbued the substance with power. Carefully controlled studies
show that a large proportion of all commercial sports supplements may
aid performance by enhancing someone's perceptions of their own
abilities, independently of any direct physiological effects.17
Caffeine, for instance, has long been considered a muscular stimulant
that can enhance performance in many sports -- yet that is largely a
product of our expectations about what it can do. In one study, student
weightlifters were given a shot of a bitter-tasting liquid, which they
were led to believe contained a high concentration of caffeine. In
reality, it

was a dose of decaf -- but they still managed to increase the number of
extensions by around 10 per cent above their previous limit.18 People
who have taken caffeine under the assumption that it is an inert
substance, meanwhile, tend to see a much smaller performance boost.19
Expectation effects may even lie behind some of the benefits of banned
drugs, including anabolic steroids and erythropoietin, a hormone that
stimulates the production of red blood cells. In a 3-kilometre race,
runners taking an inert saline injection raced 1.5 per cent faster than
a previous personal best if they believed they had taken a substance
similar to erythropoietin -- a slim but significant advantage that could
easily give them the edge in a close race, given that Olympic rankings
can often depend on a fraction-of-a-second difference in race times. In
other words, athletes such as Virenque may have no need for the doping
that risks their careers, if they are able to change their expectations
through other means.20 Coaches administering a placebo to an athlete
under the impression that it is an illegal drug may be a morally dubious
practice. But some scientists are concerned that coaches may find even
smarter ways to bend the rules around doping. It is possible, for
instance, to enhance placebo effects by using a banned substance during
training, then slowly changing the dose until the drug has been
completely replaced by an inert substance. The athlete will enter the
competition with inflated expectations of their success, and a vast
physical advantage as a result -- and they will be completely safe in
drug tests. Does this count as doping if the athlete hasn't actually
used the substance in the race itself? It may be legal by today's
competition rules -- but it hardly seems ethical. CAN'T EXERCISE, WON'T
EXERCISE? As important as the implications for professional athletes may
be, this new understanding of 'mind over muscle' is even more relevant
for casual exercisers. Many people struggle to stay active and fit for
the good of their own health because of their negative expectations
about their fitness -- and

the consequences of their inactivity for their health and longevity are
more serious than missing a spot on an Olympic podium. If you had bad
experiences in PE lessons at school, for example, you may have spent
your adult life living under the assumption that you aren't a 'sporty'
person. Or perhaps you were once much fitter, but now you're approaching
middle age you've begun to put weight on. You may assume that it will
always be an uphill struggle to bring your body back to its previous
state of health. Or maybe you have recently suffered an injury or
illness and have lost all confidence in your ability to get back in
shape. According to the new psychobiological view of fatigue, those
expectations could all change your subjective feelings of exhaustion and
your objective performance, making your exercise much harder than it
needs to be. But could we avoid such difficulties by recalibrating our
perceptions of our own abilities? One of the most rigorous studies
considered participants' 'maximum aerobic capacity' -- a standard
measure of someone's physical fitness. Participants are typically placed
on a treadmill and asked to run at increasing speeds, while staff
measure the volume of oxygen they are inhaling, until they have reached
exhaustion. The maximum aerobic capacity (also known as VO2 max) is the
peak rate of oxygen consumption over a 30-second period during this time
-- and it is meant to reflect how well the lungs and the heart are able
to deliver fuel to your muscles. The higher your VO2 max, the better
your endurance during exercise. To find out if positive feedback could
alter this basic measure of fitness, Jeff Montes and Gabriele Wulf at
the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, took a group of participants and
asked them to undergo two VO2 max tests. Although the first test was
accurately measured, the participants were given false feedback. In a
casual conversation, some were told that they were better than most
other members in the group, while others were given no context to their
score. Within a few days, they took the VO2 max test again. Those with
the enhanced expectations scored significantly better, while those in
the control group actually performed slightly worse. Overall, there

was a roughly 7 per cent difference between the groups. In other words,
how fit someone appeared -- according to the standard test of aerobic
capacity -- changed with how fit they thought they were.21 Besides
increasing aerobic capacity, heightened expectations of this kind can
also improve the efficiency of a runner's movements. In this experiment,
the participants were asked to run on a treadmill at a fixed, rather
than increasing, speed for 10 minutes. The researchers found that
raising the participants' expectations of their abilities led to a
significant decrease in oxygen consumption during the exercise. This
suggested that the muscles were burning less energy to maintain the same
pace.22 That's an important change that should, in turn, leave you with
greater resources later on, should you need them -- enhancing overall
endurance. Perhaps because of their reduced fatigue, these participants
were also more likely to experience a mood boost after exercise.
Astonishingly, our expectations of our physical abilities may override
certain genetic dispositions for exercise, according to a paper
published in 2019 in one of Nature's prestigious journals. The
scientists first performed a genetic test to identify whether their
participants were carrying a certain version of the CREB1 gene, which,
previous studies suggest, can reduce people's aerobic capacity and
increase their body temperature during exercise -- making the whole
experience harder and more unpleasant. The test was real and the
researchers kept a record of the results. The outcome given to
participants, however, was completely random, creating expectations that
they either were or were not 'naturally' good at exercise. And that had
an important effect on their physical endurance, with the negative
expectations reducing air flow in and out of the lungs, and the transfer
of oxygen and carbon dioxide -- resulting in lower overall stamina.
Importantly, the effects of the expectations appeared to exert more of
an influence than the actual gene type on some of these physiological
measures. When it came to the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide, the
participants' belief that they were genetically indisposed to exercise
proved to be more damaging to their performance than the actual gene.23

We can't all rely on scientists giving us false feedback, of course, but
there is some evidence that we can bring about similar changes
ourselves, without any deception. Cyclists improved their performance
after using a sports supplement, for instance, even if they had been
told that it was physiologically inert before they took it.24 In this
case, the supplements seem to be working like the open-label placebos
that have proven to be so effective for pain relief. An understanding of
the brain's potential to control physical performance is enough to bring
about a boost. So feel free to use any aids that work well for you.
Whether it's a favourite drink, fancy sportswear or motivational music,
it's the change in mindset that will bring the benefits. Grace Giles at
the US Army's Combat Capabilities Development Command Soldier Center,
meanwhile, has shown that reappraisal techniques can reduce people's
perceptions of exertion as they go about their exercise, so that it
feels less exhausting.25 As we've already seen in chapter 3, reappraisal
involves a slightly more dispassionate examination of our feelings and
an effort to consider whether they might be neutralised or even
interpreted in a more positive light. Many of us start forming negative
thoughts about exercise before we even walk out of the front door, so an
important first step is to focus on the immediate benefits you want to
get from this exercise -- such as feeling refreshed and energised at the
end of the workout. Further into the exercise, it can be easy to
interpret feelings of exertion -- such as breathlessness or aching
muscles -- as a sign of poor fitness. You may start to assume that this
is proof that you are just not cut out for exercise -- and the more you
focus on this thought, the worse you feel. In this case, try to consider
whether these sensations are, in fact, desirable. In just the same way
that we can reinterpret the side effects of drugs as a sign that a
medication is taking effect, we can rethink our aches and pains as
evidence that our exercise is really changing our body. If you are
breathless and your limbs are starting to feel heavy, that's a sign that
you are strengthening your muscles, expanding your lungs and increasing
your heart's stamina. The exercise is working.

Once you start exercising more regularly, you might still face days of
frustration -- when you simply don't seem capable of running as fast as
you want to or lifting as much weight as you would like. Rather than
dwelling on the feelings of failure, however, you can remind yourself
that simply doing any exercise at all is better than nothing; your body
is still benefiting. Perhaps you simply need to recover from a hard
week's work or from other stress in your life. That simple realisation
will make the session feel a lot less tiring than if you keep on
agonising over your poorer performance and beating yourself up for not
reaching your goal. You should still be mindful of potential strain or
over-exertion, of course, so be sure to test your abilities in small
steps and to consult your doctor if you have any concerns about your
safety. The aim is to avoid overinterpreting your struggles as a
reflection of an inherent inability, focusing instead on the overall arc
of progress through incremental steps. Research shows that simply
recognising that your physical fitness is within your control, and can
be improved over time, will ensure that you maintain your enthusiasm and
energy, rather than descending into self-defeating rumination -- a
seemingly obvious fact that many people nevertheless forget.26 As a
formerly reluctant exerciser myself, I have found that this kind of
reframing really does help to take the pain out of a workout. I hated PE
as a child, but, knowing the importance of physical activity, I have
tried to work out regularly for years. Yet it had always felt like a
burden; I often couldn't wait to get off the treadmill. Learning to
reframe the feelings of exertion, however, has helped me to feel much
more energised during and after my workouts. When I feel like I am about
to hit the wall, I find it particularly helpful to remind myself that my
body has hidden reserves of energy that can be untapped, and to imagine
my lungs expanding and my heart pumping more nutrients to my limbs. And
during the workout itself I make an effort to regularly remind myself of
the long-term benefits that exercise can bring. In addition to regular
cardio workouts, I now do high-intensity interval training five times a
week -- and it's genuinely the highlight of my day. I can

only describe the change of mindset as a big release, allowing my body
to perform the exercise that it was always capable of doing. INVISIBLE
EXERCISE With these techniques, we can all begin to ease ourselves into
a more active lifestyle. The power of reframing does not end in the gym,
though. Many everyday tasks can strengthen the body, even though they
look nothing like a typical workout; according to some ground-breaking
research, the meanings that we attach to those activities may determine
whether or not we reap the full benefits of the exercise. The existence
of 'invisible exercise' should not be a surprise -- our understanding of
it dates back to the very first study to examine the benefits of
physical activity. Soon after the Second World War, Jeremy Morris at the
UK's Medical Research Council wanted to understand why some people are
more prone to heart disease than others. Suspecting that exercise could
be the answer, he looked for a group of people of a similar social class
and status whose professions differed only in the amount of time they
spent being physically active. Men working on London's double-decker
buses proved to be the perfect population to study. Although their
educational and financial backgrounds were roughly the same, the drivers
spent most of their day sitting, while the conductors were constantly
active, climbing up and down the stairs to collect fares, issue tickets
and help passengers with their luggage. In total, the average conductor
climbed around 500--750 steps every day.27 Although this was relatively
gentle exercise -- compared to training for a marathon, say -- Morris
found that the daily activity roughly halved the bus conductors' risk of
heart failure. Morris became known as 'the man who invented exercise',
and his findings would inspire an avalanche of further research on the
benefits of exercise. The much-touted recommendation that we should aim
for 150 minutes of moderate exercise (or 75 minutes of vigorous
activity) per week

can be traced back to those London bus conductors. These guidelines are
regularly publicised -- but many of us are much less clear about what
actually counts as moderate or vigorous exercise, and that is important
when it comes to the formation of our fitness mindsets. To compare the
intensity of different activities, physiologists use a quantity known as
'metabolic equivalents' or METS -- which is the metabolic rate of the
exercise divided by the metabolic rate of resting. If an activity is 2
METS, for instance, you are burning twice as many calories as if you
were sitting and watching TV. Moderate exercises are between 3 and 6
METS, and vigorous exercises anything above 6 METS. It doesn't matter
whether you get this exercise in short bouts or a single session -- it's
the total time over the week that matters. And many everyday activities
and pastimes meet these requirements. Just consider the following
table.28 ACTIVITY

METABOLIC EQUIVALENT

Housekeeping Vacuum cleaning/washing the floor

3

Cleaning windows

3.2

Making the bed

3.3

Cooking/washing up

3.3

Moving furniture

5.8

DIY Carpentry (e.g.Â hammering nails)

3

Painting/wallpapering

3.3

Roofing

6

Gardening Trimming shrubs

3.5

Chopping wood

4.5

Mowing the lawn

6

Pleasure Walking the dog

3

Drumming

3.8

Outdoor play with children

5.8

Dancing

7.8

How many of us mow the lawn, play with our children or dance the night
away at a club without even realising that we're really working out?
Even the daily commute could count. A study from Imperial College London
has shown that roughly a third of all English people using public
transport already meet the governmental guidelines for physical activity
from their commutes to and from work -- by waiting for buses, walking to
or from the station, or changing trains.29 At the very least, a greater
appreciation of these kinds of activity should lead us to be more
positive about our own fitness -- a changed expectation that could
reconfigure the prediction machine so that other, more formal workouts
feel like less of a strain. Even more remarkably, however, this shift in
mindset might also determine the long-term benefits of the activities
themselves. By thinking of everyday activities as exercise rather than
work, it seems, we can become healthier. Consider a famous study by Alia
Crum and Ellen Langer at Harvard University, which I briefly describe in
the Introduction. As you might recall, their participants were cleaners
from seven different hotels. Crum and Langer suspected that few of these
cleaners would be aware of the sheer amount of exercise that their job
entails and, given the power of expectation to shape our physiology,
that this might prevent them from gaining the full benefits of their
daily workout. To test the idea, the scientists visited four of the
hotels and gave the cleaners information about the kind of physical
activity that counts as exercise, emphasising the fact that it 'does not
need to be hard or painful to be good for one's health . . . it is
simply a matter of moving one's muscles and burning calories'. They then
offered some details about the energetic demands of the cleaners' own
work -- that changing linen for 15 minutes burns 40 calories, vacuum
cleaning for

15 minutes burns 50 calories and cleaning bathrooms for 15 minutes burns
60 calories -- which, over the course of the week, should easily add up
to the US surgeon general's exercise recommendations. Besides offering
flyers containing these facts, the researchers also placed posters
conveying the information on bulletin boards in the cleaners' lounges,
so that they would have a daily reminder of the exercise they were
taking. A month later, the scientists visited the cleaners again to
measure any changes in their health. Despite reporting no alterations to
their diet or increased physical activity outside work, the cleaners who
received this information had lost about a kilogram each and their
average blood pressure had dropped from elevated to normal. The simple
shift in expectation -- and the meaning that they ascribed to their work
activities -- had changed their bodies, while the cleaners at the
remaining three hotels, who had not received the information, showed no
difference.30 It was, admittedly, a relatively small study -- and there
was always the possibility that, after they'd been given the
information, the cleaners had been putting a bit more 'oomph' into their
work. But a follow-up by Crum, who is now at Stanford University, and
her colleague Octavia Zahrt provides much more compelling evidence that
people's expectations really can influence the long-term benefits of
exercise through the mind--body connection. That study used data from
health surveys monitoring more than 60,000 people for up to 21 years.
Crum and Zahrt found that the 'perceived physical activity' of the
participants -- whether they felt they did more or less exercise than
the average person -- could predict their risk of mortality, even after
they had controlled for the amount of time they said they actually spent
exercising and other lifestyle factors, like diet. Importantly, some of
the participants in these surveys had worn accelerometers for part of
the study period -- yet the influence of their perceived physical
activity remained after the researchers had taken these objective
measures of physical activity into account. Overall, people who took a
more pessimistic view of their fitness were up to 71 per cent more
likely to die during the surveys, compared with those who thought they
were

more active than average -- whatever the status of their actual exercise
routine.31 As a science writer, I was initially amazed when I first
heard of this paper -- but the more I've dug into the science of
expectation, the less surprising it seems. We have seen, after all, how
things like blood pressure can change due to our expectations of a
pill's effect. If our expectations of a beta blocker can have a
noticeable effect on our health, why should our perceptions of our
physical fitness -- which we carry with us in every activity, every day
-- be any less important? When put like that, the really surprising
thing is that it has taken researchers so long to investigate the
possibility. We now know that many of the other benefits of exercise can
be the product of expectation. Exercise is known to improve people's
mood and mental health, for example, and it also acts as an analgesic,
reducing the symptoms of both acute and chronic pain. Both the mood
boost and the analgesia are thought to arise from the release of
endorphins. While that may be an automatic physiological reaction to
physical activity, people's beliefs appear to play a large role in
triggering the response -- and educating people about that potential
seems to enhance the effects.32 If you expect to feel more relaxed and
energised, or for your aches and pains to evaporate, you're more likely
to experience it. Could there be a danger that we could take this
message too far? If we begin to focus too much on reappraising our
existing activities, and improving our opinions of our existing fitness,
couldn't people become complacent -- and make even less effort to get
the exercise they need? Fortunately, the studies so far suggest that
this isn't likely to happen. You can encourage people to take a more
positive view of their fitness without pushing them into indolence.33
Governments would do well to remember that fact when they design health
campaigns encouraging exercise. According to this research, strict or
judgemental language -- which emphasises the population's current lack
of fitness -- will backfire compared to messages that allow people to
take a more optimistic approach. Instead, scientists like Crum and Zahrt
argue the messaging should reiterate the fact that even small
improvements can have significant long-term effects. The

recommendation of 30 minutes of moderate exercise a day, five days a
week, might be the gold standard, but even 15 minutes a day can increase
your life expectancy by three years.34 More generally, Zahrt and Crum's
studies suggest that we should avoid 'upward comparisons', constantly
judging ourselves against the people who are fitter than us. While
there's nothing wrong with a bit of aspirational thinking, it can easily
turn into feelings of inadequacy, as we come to form more negative
expectations of our fitness. Such perceptions may then reduce the
benefits of our workouts. This is especially important to remember when
we consider our social media feeds. Instagram and TikTok are full of
'fitspiration' or #fitspo accounts, with Photoshopped images of toned
bodies working out. The videos and photos are meant to be motivational,
but a study published in 2020 suggests they do more harm than good. The
participants (all female undergraduates in Adelaide) were first asked to
scroll through a set of images -- either attractive shots of exotic
travel locations or 18 pictures of fitness gurus completing their
workouts. The participants then spent 10 minutes on a treadmill,
exercising at the speed of their choice, and completed a series of
questionnaires about their feelings. Those viewing the fitspiration
images suffered on almost every measure. They had worse body image and
experienced greater feelings of fatigue during exercise; rather than
experiencing the 'runner's high', they were in a significantly worse
mood following the workout compared to those who had seen the travel
pictures.35 The pictures appeared to have damaged the participants'
perceptions of their own fitness, with negative self-comparisons leading
them to believe that they were less healthy than they really were. And
the resulting sense of inadequacy had rendered the exercise more arduous
and less enjoyable -- completely negating any of the claimed
motivational benefits. The need to form positive, but realistic,
personal goals is especially important when we consider one more
remarkable way to prime our mind and body for greater fitness and
health. Using nothing more than our

imagination, we can tweak the brain's predictions to increase the
strength of our muscles and finesse our physical performance. WORK THE
MIND, WORK THE BODY With 28 medals to his name (23 of which are gold),
the US swimmer Michael Phelps remains the most decorated Olympian of
all. Phelps's abilities appeared to defy the limits of the human body,
with some journalists questioning whether his feats were just 'too good
to be true'. Yet Phelps voluntarily signed up for many anti-doping tests
during his career and passed them all. Perhaps his amazing racing times
are better explained by another unnatural advantage -- his extraordinary
powers of visualisation. During training, and in preparation before a
big event, he would imagine the perfect race. 'I can see the start, the
strokes, the walls, the turns, the finish, the strategy, all of it,' he
wrote in his autobiography, No Limits.36 'Visualising like this is like
programming a race in my head, and that programming sometimes seems to
make it happen just as I imagined it.' It is this capacity -- rather
than a purely physical ability -- that helped him to become the greatest
Olympian, he believes. Scientific experiments have confirmed that the
effects of visualisation can be profound, for professional sportspeople
and casual exercisers alike.37 The most striking -- and surprising --
effects have been found in people's muscular strength. In one study,
scientists measured participants' forearm strength before they conducted
a form of mental training. The task was simple, if boring: they had to
spend 15 minutes a day, five days a week, imagining that they were
lifting a heavy object, such as a table, using their forearms. Some were
told to do this from an internal perspective, picturing the movements as
if they were lifting the weight themselves; others were asked to do this
from an external perspective -- as if they were viewing themselves from
outside their own body. The control group performed no practice at all.

Six weeks later, the results were staggering, with the first-person
internal visualisation producing an 11 per cent increase in strength --
despite this group not having physically lifted a single weight.38 Those
using the external perspective saw a more modest improvement of around 5
per cent (though the researchers could not be sure that this was
statistically significant), while the control group actually seemed
slightly weaker.

Change in arm strength after six weeks' mental training.

Like the other psychological techniques to improve fitness, these
findings would be inexplicable if strength was determined solely by
muscle mass.39 With the new psychobiological view of exercise, however,
it makes perfect sense. Remember that performance relies on the brain's
expectation of what the body can achieve and how arduous an exercise
will be, which it then uses to plan the force and exertion of muscles.
Mental imagery allows you to consciously refine these predictions and
increase the body's perceptions of its own abilities, boosting the
signals that it will send to the muscles and improving the coordination
of movement. As Noakes's work had shown, athletes do not normally
recruit the majority of their muscle fibres even during peak exertion,
but the imagery might be encouraging the body to summon up more of the
fibres that have been left unused. Brain scans of athletes engaging in
vivid visualisations of their events show that visualising exercise
activates areas of the primary motor cortex and basal ganglia that are
typically involved in planning and executing movements, as the brain
calculates exactly which muscles need to be

stimulated and the effects that will have on the body.40 And these
upgraded expectations will then translate to a real performance boost.
According to this theory, internal imagery is more successful than
external imagery because it leads you to make more detailed predictions
of the way you will feel during the exercise, so that your body can
execute the movements more effectively. Mental practice cannot, and
should not, replace physical practice, of course, but it allows athletes
to make the most of their rest periods and to avoid a loss of strength
after injury.41 People's muscles normally weaken when their limbs have
been placed in a plaster cast, for instance, but scientists from Ohio
University have found that a few minutes of mental practice a day can
reduce those losses by a half.42 For the rest of us, mental practice
should simply be another tool to maximise the benefits of our workouts.
If you find that going to the gym is a strain, and you want to change
your mindset about exercise, then regularly visualising its benefits
could make the whole process more appealing. Various studies -- in
adolescent, middle-aged and elderly participants -- have now shown that
regularly practising mental imagery of exercise, for a few minutes each
week, can increase people's motivation and enjoyment of their exercise
regimes, as well as their performance.43 When testing this for yourself,
try not to be over-ambitious in visualisations of your performance. You
don't want to set yourself up for disappointment -- which will reduce
your motivation -- or prepare yourself for over-exertion that could
result in injury. (The mind--body connection can only achieve so much,
without constant physical training.) As you visualise your exercises,
try also to focus on the positive sensations that you hope to feel
during exercise: the feeling of being energised and buzzing rather than
fatigued or exhausted, for example. Just like Phelps, you will be
're-programming' the mind--body connection, allowing yourself to
overcome the mental restraints that might have been hampering your
performance, so that exercise no longer feels like an insurmountable
challenge.

HIDDEN STRENGTH We still don't know the full extent of the brain's
influence over physical performance -- but anecdotal evidence suggests
that it may be truly immense. In 2012, for example, Alec Kornacki was
crushed by his BMW 525i while changing a tyre -- only for his
22-year-old daughter, Lauren, to lift the car to release him. 'It was
like a table with a short leg. It kind of balanced it back out and
shifted enough to free my dad,' she told ABC News.44 She went on to
perform CPR -- and saved his life. The phenomenon of ordinary people
showing incredible abilities in times of crisis is known as 'hysterical
strength' and it has been reported in people of all ages, from two
teenage girls who released their father from a 3,000pound tractor to a
septuagenarian who raised a Jeep to save his son-in-law.45 If these
events sound like the actions of the Hulk, well, it's not exactly a
coincidence. The creator of the comic strip, Jack Kirby, was apparently
inspired to create the character after seeing a mother lift a car off a
child, when sheer panic released hidden reserves of strength.46 Lifting
a car, even a relatively small distance, would normally lie beyond the
keenest bodybuilder. So what was going on? These astounding feats are
usually explained by an adrenaline rush, but according to some
scientists they can be better explained by an explosion of energy
emerging from the brain. While the prediction machine usually compares
its resources with the demands of the situation, and carefully
calculates how much exertion it can afford without risking total
depletion or injury, sheer emotional urgency can override the brain's
typically cautious control; it essentially decides that the task is so
important it is worth the risk of injury. As a result, it begins to fire
up more of the limbs' muscle fibres, producing an incredible explosive
force.47 Demonstrating hysterical strength is dangerous: torn muscles
and broken teeth are the usual consequences. And that's precisely why
the brain is normally so careful in parcelling out our efforts and
limiting our exertion, even when athletes are in a serious
career-defining competition. But these anecdotes nevertheless provide
the startling reminder that our physical

abilities are often limited by the brain as much as the body. We don't
often need to be able to lift a car, but most of us could do with a bit
of a helping hand in our fitness regime. If we can use expectation
effects to plumb even a small portion of the physical reserves shown by
Virenque, Phelps or Kornacki, we can all enjoy a fitter future.

How to think about . . . fitness Before you exercise, think carefully
about your aims for the session. How do you hope to feel at the end? And
what are your performance goals? You might hope to set a new personal
best or you might be looking for a quick mood boost -- either way,
you'll increase your motivation and help to calibrate the prediction
machine for the oncoming activity if you define what you want from the
activity before you start. Embrace any of the mental crutches that help
you to feel good about exercise. Certain foods, drinks, clothes or songs
will lead you to feel energised. As with the 'open-label placebos', you
can know that the advantages come from belief and still benefit -- so
use any aids that offer the best personal associations. Question your
assumptions about your innate disposition towards sport and exercise.
Remember that your expectations can be more important than known genetic
factors in determining your physiological response to a workout. Reframe
feelings of exertion and effort. Moderate aches and pains, and
sensations of fatigue, are proof that you are strengthening your body,
and remembering this fact can make the whole workout feel more enjoyable
and less exhausting. Recognise the physical activity you perform outside
your regular workouts -- during housework, commuting or your hobbies.
(You may even like to keep a diary for a week.) Thanks to an expectation
effect, you can optimise the physiological benefits of this exercise --
simply by paying more attention to it. Avoid 'upward comparisons' --
judging yourself harshly against other people -- since this will lead
you to form more negative impressions of your own fitness. During rest
periods, spend a few moments visualising yourself performing the
exercises of your next workout. This will increase your muscle strength
and prime your brain for better performance.

OceanofPDF.com

6 THE FOOD PARADOX Why indulgence is essential for healthy eating
Imagine you are considering a new diet to cut your calorie intake and to
curb your tendency to snack between meals. Of the following two daily
plans, which is the most likely to leave you feeling full and satisfied?
And which is the most likely to help you lose weight quickly?

The Super-Slimmer Wholesome meals for a healthy future

Breakfast Two wholemeal slices of smashed avocado toast Mango and
pineapple smoothie (no added sugar) Lunch Pole-and-line-caught tuna
niÃ§oise salad Glass of fresh organic orange juice Dinner

Low-fat organic chicken and asparagus braise Optional post-workout
revival snack No-thrills granola health bar Or: The Bon Viveur Delicious
and decadent meals to maximise pleasure Breakfast Full-butter croissant
Mexican chilli hot chocolate Lunch Spaghetti alla puttanesca (tomatoes,
anchovies and olives) Mixed fruit salad (pineapple, orange, melon,
mango, apple and blueberry) Dinner Fish pie with creamy mashed potato
crust Mixed leaves salad Optional post-workout reward: Two doughnut
bites If you have ever been on a diet before, the Super-Slimmer probably
seems like the best choice for quick weight loss. Without the
post-workout reviver (and assuming standard portion sizes), it would
amount to around 1,750 calories per day1 -- a decent reduction for the
average person, and enough to lead to steady weight loss. The downside,
of course, is that it might come with less overall satisfaction. The Bon
Viveur, on the other hand, seems packed full of calories. It starts out
with a croissant and hot chocolate, serves spaghetti for lunch, and
finishes with a pie! Surely that can't have less energy than the salad
and the chicken braise? You might choose this option if you want to
enjoy life -- but you might not expect it to help you lose weight
quickly. Yet it has even

fewer calories than the Super-Slimmer -- just 1,632 in total,2 if you
don't include the post-workout snack. When you do include the
post-workout treats, the mismatch between our expectations and reality
is even starker. The granola bar, which sounds like a 'sensible' snack,
is so heavily sweetened that it contains 279 calories overall -- more
than twice the 110 calories of the two mini-doughnuts. If you are
surprised by these figures, you are not alone: surveys show that most
people find it difficult to gauge the number of calories in foods, and
we are particularly prone to underestimating the content of products
that are typically marketed as health foods, with slogans like 'simple',
'wholesome' and 'guilt-free'. The most obvious consequence is that we
may consciously decide that we have a licence to snack more if we think
we've consumed less than we really have. The true effects may go much
deeper, however. Because of the influence of the brain's predictive
processing, our expectations of a food's nutrients will also directly
influence our bodies' responses to the food, including digestion (the
breakdown and absorption of nutrients in the gut) and metabolism (the
use of that fuel to power our cells). When we think we are eating fewer
calories than we actually are, the body responds as if that's the truth:
it feels less sated, so that you experience much worse hunger pangs, and
it stops burning so much energy to preserve its existing fat stores. We
are experiencing a 'deprivation mindset', which may make it much harder
to lose weight on a seemingly spartan diet than when eating meals packed
with your favourite comfort foods. Whatever particular diet plan we are
following, this expectation effect has the potential to make our weight
loss far harder than it needs to be. If we want to maintain a healthy
weight, then, we don't just have to change what we eat, we have to
change our whole way of thinking and talking about the food we're
ingesting. And a key part of that is to avoid seeing 'healthy' and
'pleasurable' as a dichotomy, and to recognise that a sense of
indulgence should be an essential ingredient in every meal.

IN SEARCH OF LOST MEALS To understand the ways that our brain's
predictions can influence hunger, digestion and metabolism, we must
first examine the ravenous appetite of one of neurology's most famous
patients, Henry Molaison.3 Born in Connecticut in 1926, Molaison was a
healthy middle-class boy until, in late childhood and early adolescence,
his parents and teachers noticed that he would often 'zone out'
mid-conversation for about 90 seconds, with an absent look on his face.
Doctors diagnosed a form of epilepsy, and from around Molaison's
fifteenth birthday the attacks became far more violent, with rhythmic
convulsions across his body that left him shaking and writhing on the
floor. Epileptic seizures are caused by sudden bursts of electrical
activity that stop brain cells from communicating with each other. When
Molaison failed to respond to medication, his team decided to operate,
removing a portion of each of his temporal lobes, where the attacks were
thought to originate. It worked: Molaison no longer experienced the
severe seizures that had plagued his life, but it soon became clear that
this relief had been achieved through a huge sacrifice. Although
Molaison could remember events from his past, he had completely lost his
ability to form new recollections. In the hospital, for example,
Molaison would meet the same staff, time and again, without remembering
ever having seen them before. You could tell him a surprising fact in
the morning, and he would be equally dumbfounded by the discovery in the
afternoon, as if he were hearing it for the very first time; he was, in
the words of the neuroscientist Suzanne Corkin, living in a 'permanent
present tense'. Over the subsequent decades, studies of Molaison --
known in the medical literature by his initials H.M. -- completely
revolutionised our understanding of the way the brain works. He enabled
scientists to link memory formation to an area of the brain known as the
hippocampus, which had been severely damaged in his operation, and
showed that we can learn some skills nonconsciously even when we have no
explicit memory of the learning event. Few people have had such an
influence on neurology and psychology as

Molaison, who died in 2008. He is now famous to science students across
the world. What is much less well known, however, is his contribution to
the understanding of appetite. The scientists studying Molaison had long
noted that he rarely reported being hungry, yet always seemed ready to
eat.4 In the early 1980s, Nancy Hebben at Harvard University and
colleagues decided to put this to the test by asking him to rate his
satiation on a scale of 0 (famished) to 100 (completely full) both
before and after his meals. If our appetite was mostly directed by
signals from the stomach, you would expect the rating to rise after the
meal; Molaison's memory deficit should have had no effect on how full he
felt. Yet Molaison gave the same ratings -- around 50 -- at both points.
Stuck in the 'permanent present', his hunger never seemed to change. To
see whether his memory deficit would also change his eating behaviour,
the scientists performed a dinner-time experiment. After Molaison had
eaten a meal, the staff at his care home cleared the table and, within
one minute, gave him a second meal. Amazingly, he ate almost all of it,
leaving only the salad. Even then, he showed only a moderate increase in
satiety, whereas most people would experience a complete loss of
appetite after two substantial meals.5 Without a memory of what he had
eaten, he seemed to have no way of regulating his food consumption.
Molaison might have been a one-off, of course, but studies of several
other amnesiacs have since come to similar conclusions. 'It's really
amazing to see,' says Suzanne Higgs at University of Birmingham in the
UK, who has conducted some of this research. She remembers one patient
looking at the clock when she asked him if he wanted to eat. 'It's like
he couldn't really figure out whether he was hungry or not, and that was
his only way of knowing whether it was appropriate to eat.' Another
amnesiac participant (not Higgs's) proved to be so ravenously hungry
after two large meals that he was ready to eat a third plateful; fearful
of the health impact of letting him eat so much food, the scientists
decided to remove the plate after he had consumed a few mouthfuls.

How could this be? There is no doubt that appetite comes partly from the
activity in the digestive system, the so-called 'bottom-up' sources of
information. When we eat, the gut starts to stretch to make room for the
food. We have sensors in the muscles surrounding the oesophagus and
gastrointestinal tract that can detect this movement. They pass their
signals through the vagal nerve into the brain, and help to create a
feeling of reward and satisfaction when we are full (or a bloated
feeling when we have eaten too much).6 The gut also has its own chemical
receptors that can detect the presence of nutrients, such as fat or
protein, and when they are stimulated they release hormones that curb
our hunger.7 The experiences of amnesiac patients like Molaison,
however, suggest that these sensory cues can only give us a crude
estimation of how much we've eaten. It seems that the prediction machine
has to draw on other topdown sources of information -- such as memory
and expectation -- to make sense of information coming in from the gut
and to create the sense of hunger or satiation. Without the capacity to
form a memory of the day's meals, Molaison's brain wasn't able to
contextualise bodily signals in this way, meaning that he would never
feel fully sated after a meal. You might reasonably wonder about the
relevance of these findings to your life today. But you don't need to
have brain damage to suffer a poor memory -- and even mild forgetfulness
appears to cause overeating.8 What's more, researchers like Higgs have
shown that even small changes to the ways we think about food -- past
and present -- can change the brain's assessment of what it has eaten,
with profound effects on our appetite. In one notable experiment, Higgs
invited a group of students into her lab after lunch to perform a taste
test on some cookies -- which, after completing a couple of
questionnaires, they were free to consume. Higgs found that simply
prompting the subjects to remember their lunch -- by spending a few
minutes noting down their recollection of what they had eaten -- reduced
their total consumption by about 45 per cent, compared to participants
who wrote about their general thoughts and feelings rather than their
food memories. It was a difference of around four cookies per person.
This was not the case for students who wrote about a meal from the day

before -- a more distant event that would have had little effect on
their feelings of satiety at that moment. Instead, it was expectations
of current satiety, based on recent memory, that seemed to matter.9 The
role of memory and expectation in creating a sense of satiety also
explains why the appearance of food can inordinately influence how much
we eat. In 2012, a team at the University of Bristol first showed their
participants a bowl of either 300ml or 500ml of cream of tomato soup,
which they were asked to eat. Unbeknown to the participants, however,
the bowl was rigged with a small pump that could either increase or
reduce the amount of soup that they actually consumed. As a result, some
participants believed they were eating 500ml of soup -- a relatively
large portion -- when they were actually eating a more standard 300ml,
and vice versa. Sure enough, the participants' hunger, over the next 3
hours, was largely determined by what they had remembered seeing rather
than the amount they had actually consumed. If they had eaten 300ml, but
seen 500ml in the bowl, they felt much less hungry than participants who
had eaten more but seen less. Their sense of fullness and satisfaction
was almost completely the result of their 'expected satiety': that is,
it was based on their visual memory of what they believed they had eaten
rather than the food they actually consumed.10 Exactly the same response
could be seen with students who had been brought into a lab to eat an
omelette for breakfast. Before completing questionnaires, they were
shown the ingredients of the omelette and asked to confirm that they
were not allergic to any of them. The twist was that some were shown
just two eggs and 30g of cheese, while others were shown four eggs and
60g of cheese. In reality, all the participants ate a three-egg omelette
with 45g of cheese -- but the initial presentation changed their satiety
and hunger for hours afterwards. Thanks to a lower expected satiety,
those shown the two eggs and a smaller lump of cheese subsequently ate
more pasta from a buffet at lunchtime, compared with those who had seen
the more generous spread of ingredients.11 Many of us form inaccurate
food memories like these every single day -- with serious effects on our
waistline. The unhealthy habit of working,

watching TV or surfing the internet while eating can act as a
distraction that impairs memory formation of the food that we have
consumed, reducing our expectation of feeling sated. 'It's actually
analogous to what we see with amnesiac patients, because you're not able
to encode those new meal memories,' says Higgs, who has investigated
this phenomenon. As a consequence, we not only eat more during the meal
itself, but we will also eat more snacks over the next few hours.12 Then
there is the presentation of manufactured foods, which can often disrupt
our ability to accurately assess the contents of what we are consuming.
In the past, our ancestors may have had a much better idea of the
ingredients that went into a dish. When we buy ready-made food and
drink, however, we have little idea of the true quantities of
ingredients that have gone into them. A smoothie, for example, contains
many portions of fruit, but it looks much smaller in the bottle. As the
brain calculates its daily intake, it remembers having eaten a lot less
than it would if it had seen the whole fruit bowl that went into the
smoothie, creating the expectation of hunger later in the day.13 The
marketing around supposed health foods can also skew the brain's
estimate of what it has eaten. A food can be labelled 'low fat' even if
it has high sugar content, simply because it has slightly reduced fat
compared to the standard product, for example. The result is greater
hunger later on. Various studies confirm that exactly the same food --
such as a pasta salad -- will lead to lower satiety when it is labelled
'healthy' compared with when it is specifically labelled 'hearty',
thanks to the expectation that it will be less satisfying.14 Indeed, the
deeply embedded association between the idea of healthy eating and
feelings of hunger can be so strong that eating a virtuous snack may be
worse than not having anything at all. Participants who were given a
'healthy' chocolate-flavoured protein bar, for example, were not only
less satisfied than people who had eaten the bar when it was labelled
'tasty' (see below), they actually felt hungrier than people who had
eaten nothing at all.15

Hunger after 'tasty' and 'healthy' chocolate bar.

Such expectation effects would be damaging enough for any dieter. But,
as we shall now see, the consequences do not end with our subjective
feelings of satiation; our beliefs about what we have eaten can also
influence our digestion and metabolism. Through the power of the
mind--body connection, our attitudes to food can even determine how well
we absorb crucial nutrients, such as iron, that are essential for our
health. MIND OVER MILKSHAKE When it comes to experiments examining
digestion, milkshakes are the staple. One reason is their palatability:
you'll be hard pushed to find someone who doesn't like a milkshake,
particularly among the student population that makes up the majority of
experimental subjects. Another is their capacity to disguise their
contents: once ingredients have been blitzed in a food processor, it is
naturally much harder to guess what went into them. This makes it far
easier for scientists to manipulate participants' expectations without
other factors -- such as familiarity with a particular foodstuff --
skewing their responses. A notable study examined the effects of
expectation on the subjects' ghrelin responses. Ghrelin is a hormone
secreted by the stomach when it is empty that binds to receptors in the
hypothalamus -- a region of the brain that is involved in regulating
many bodily functions. Ghrelin is often called the 'hunger hormone'
because it stimulates our appetite -- it is highest just

before we are about to eat, and lowest just after a meal. But it's
perhaps better seen as an energy regulator. When ghrelin levels are
high, the body reduces its resting metabolic rate -- so it is burning
less energy overall -- and starts to preserve its body fat in case of
further scarcity. It can also make us lethargic, so that we will 'waste'
less energy with exercise. When ghrelin levels are lower, in contrast,
the metabolic rate rises and we are more likely to release some of our
stored energy for use, in the knowledge that more supplies are on the
way, and we will become more physically active. In this way, ghrelin
helps to balance our energy input and output to ensure that we will
never run out of fuel.16 In the early 2010s, Alia Crum and colleagues at
Yale and Arizona State University invited participants into the lab on
two separate occasions to try out different recipes for a shake. One was
labelled in big letters as 'Indulgence: decadence you deserve'. Its
label encouraged the eater to: Indulge yourself with this rich and
creamy blend of all our premium ingredients -- sumptuously smooth ice
cream, satin whole milk, and sweet vanilla. It is heaven in a bottle and
irresistibly gratifying. Smooth, rich and delicious! On the nutritional
information, it claimed 620 calories in total (270 of which came from
fat), and it was accompanied by a picture of a glass cup loaded with ice
cream, chocolate sauce and sprinkles. The other was called a
'Sensi-Shake' for 'guilt-free satisfaction': Get sensible with the new
light, healthy Sensi-Shake. It has all the taste without the guilt -- no
fat, no added sugar, and only 140 calories. SensiShake is light and
tasty enough to enjoy every day. The illustration for this one was an
insipid-looking vanilla flower -- the flavour of the drink.

In reality, the shakes on both days were exactly the same, containing
380 calories each. To measure participants' ghrelin responses to these
manufactured expectations, Crum's team took blood samples at regular
intervals before and after they read the marketing material, and after
they had actually drunk the shakes. For the indulgent shake -- 'smooth,
rich and delicious' -- the ghrelin levels changed exactly as you would
hope after a hearty meal, dropping in line with the expected effects on
their hunger. For the 'sensible', 'guilt-free' shake, however, the
ghrelin levels barely changed at all. With a simple change of mindset
and no actual alteration of the shake's nutritional content, Crum's team
appeared to have shifted the hormonal profiles of the participants: in
one instance, it set them up for greater satiation and an increased
metabolism; on the other, it primed them for greater hunger and reduced
metabolism.17 'When people think they are eating healthily, that's
associated with the sense of deprivation,' Crum concludes.18 'And that
mindset matters in shaping our physiological response.' The immediate
effects of these mindsets can also be seen in the brain regions
associated with energy regulation. People taking a low-calorie drink
labelled as a 'treat' show a more pronounced response in the
hypothalamus, for instance, compared with those who had been given a
'healthy' drink. Indeed, the response to the 'treat' label looked very
similar to the activity observed when participants actually drank a
high-calorie Ben & Jerry's shake.19 Based solely on verbal information,
the brain was apparently adjusting its predicted energy intake and
expenditure -- irrespective of the actual content of the glass. Further
research has revealed that our expectations of food can shape everything
from the movement of food in the gut to our insulin response. Consider
an ingenious study by researchers at Purdue University in West
Lafayette, Indiana, who wanted to understand why sugary drinks fail to
sate our appetites. A bottle of Coca-Cola, after all, has as many
calories as a doughnut, but because of our low expectations we still
feel just as hungry after the drink -- and fail to compensate for the
energy intake by reducing

our consumption later in the day. Like Henry Molaison's ability to eat
meal after meal without satisfaction, this was hard to explain if you
believed that our hunger arises solely from the chemical sensing of
nutrients in the gut. But the Purdue researchers suspected that this was
due to a widespread assumption that liquids contain fewer calories than
foods, and are less satisfying -- an expectation that directly
influences the way they are digested, including the amount of time they
are held in the gut. In one strand of the experiment, participants were
given a cherryflavoured drink -- but before they drank it, the
experimenters gave one of two 'demonstrations' of the way the food would
react when it met gastric acid in the digestive system. Some were shown
the drink mixing into another liquid without changing form, while others
were shown the liquid solidifying into a mass -- a process that made the
nutrient content seem more tangible and substantial. The effects of the
manipulation were clear from participants' off-hand comments, which the
researchers recorded as they carried out the experiment. Those who
believed that the drink remained liquid in the stomach reported feeling
very little satiation from what they'd drunk -- 'It went right through
me' -- while those who believed that the liquid could transform into a
solid felt much fuller. 'It feels like I swallowed a rock,' one said.
'It is very surprising -- I feel like I ate a large meal,' said another.
One participant reported feeling so full they could barely finish the
glass. As Crum had also found, these reported sensations were reflected
in various objective measures. After taking the drink, participants also
swallowed a chemical tracker that allowed the scientists to trace the
course of the drink through the digestive tract. When the participants
believed that the liquid had taken a more solid form, it took longer to
pass from the mouth to the large intestine. By keeping the food in the
gut for longer, this slower transition could explain why these
participants felt fuller for longer. As a result, participants were less
likely to snack later, consuming around 400 fewer calories over the
course of the day compared with those who believed that the drink had
remained a liquid within their stomach.20

In everyday life, the sensory characteristics of a drink -- whether it
is thick and creamy or thin like water -- will influence these
expectations of satiety. Repeated experiments reveal that the more
viscous a liquid is, the more filling we expect it to be, and the more
pronounced the physiological response.21 Scientists are still getting to
grips with the true influence of our expectations on digestion, but an
under-appreciated study from the 1970s suggests that the effects may
even influence our absorption of vitamins and minerals. The scientists
in question were examining iron deficiency in Thailand, where it was
known to be more prevalent than in many other countries. Their first
experiments used a minced-up version of a Thai meal to deliver the
nutrient, and they found that the absorption was far lower than might be
expected, given the levels of iron participants had been given; it just
didn't seem feasible that their bodies could take up so little of the
nutrient from the meal without a serious health problem, and it would
have led to much worse anaemia than they were really experiencing. This
led the researchers to wonder whether the presentation of the meal -- in
the form of a relatively unappetising mush -- had distorted their
results. The food did, after all, resemble the kind of puree we might
serve to weaning babies, which is hardly the kind of dish most adults
will relish. To test this hypothesis, the researchers decided to
directly compare two forms of the meal -- a traditional Thai vegetable
curry, and a 'homogenised' version put through a food processor. The
results were astonishing: on average, the participants absorbed 70 per
cent more iron when the meal was presented in its traditional form
compared to the 'homogenised' paste.22 The team also examined whether
the effect would also be present across cultures, so they performed the
same test on Swedish participants eating a stereotypically Western meal
-- a hamburger served with mashed potatoes and green beans. Again, the
iron absorption was far higher when the food was served as a
recognisable meal compared with the puree.23 In these experiments the
presentation of food -- and the participants' resulting attitudes
towards it -- profoundly altered its effects on the body. When food
comes in an unfamiliar or unappetising form, we no longer have

expectations of satisfaction and enjoyment, which could have an
immediate effect on the release of digestive juices that help us to reap
its goodness. Many people -- including self-styled diet gurus -- view
eating as a purely chemical process, as if we are simply shovelling fuel
into a furnace. But these experiments all show that exactly the same
item can be nourishing and satiating, or unfulfilling and nutritionally
empty -- in large part because of our memories of what we have eaten,
our impressions of what it contains and the meanings that we ascribe to
it. MEANING-INFUSED MEALS Looking into the history of these ideas, I was
again surprised that mainstream science has taken so long to investigate
the role of expectation in diet and nutrition. More than a century ago,
the Russian scientist Ivan Pavlov found that he could train dogs to
associate food with certain cues, such as a hooter, a whistle or a
flashing light. (It is, apparently, a myth that he ever used a bell.24)
Eventually, the cue was enough to get them salivating without food even
being present, with the release of enzymes in the mouth that would
kickstart the breakdown of the food into its absorbable nutrients.
That's a basic expectation effect -- yet few scientists followed up on
this work to explore how our broader thinking about food might influence
digestion. Some clues about the effect our brains have on appetite and
digestion had even lurked in the studies of the placebo effect in
medicine. Patients who have been led to believe that they have undergone
surgery for obesity -- such as stapling the stomach or fitting a gastric
balloon -- often experience reduced appetite and substantial weight
loss, even if they had received a sham treatment; overall, they report
about 70 per cent of the benefits seen by the people receiving the real
operation.25 The research on expected satiety and its physiological
effects offers a very natural extension of those findings, yet it took
decades for scientists to make the connection. In hindsight, it seems
foolish to have ignored the intellectual, emotional and

cultural elements of what we eat, while focusing exclusively on the raw
nutritional content of food. This delay has been a great loss to world
health, since an understanding of the role of expectation may offer
exciting new tools in our fight against obesity, which currently affects
13 per cent of adults worldwide.26 While many health authorities
continue to launch campaigns promoting healthy eating, they have failed
to consider the ways that people's beliefs about food and nutrition may
be sabotaging their attempts to lose weight. You can take a test
yourself. In each of the following food pairs, does the first item have
more, fewer or roughly the same amount of calories as the second item? A
regular McDonald's hamburger

8.5 oz grilled ocean cod

A cup of low-fat yogurt

2/3 cup of ice cream

A banana

4 Hershey's Kisses

In reality, the calorie content is roughly equal -- yet most people
believe that the hamburger, ice cream and Hershey's Kisses are much more
calorific than the bananas, low-fat yogurt and grilled cod -- over- and
underestimating the food's true content by as much as 50 per cent. And
those errors make a real difference to people's weight; the greater the
mismatch in their estimates, the heavier they are.27 When researchers
examine our associations with different products, they find that people
are more likely to link foods like broccoli or salmon with words like
'hungry' or 'starved' -- associations that should reduce expected
satiety and increase their hunger at a later point.28 Surveys,
meanwhile, have asked participants to rate statements such as the
following: On a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree), do
you think that: There is usually a trade-off between healthiness and
tastiness of food There is no way to make food healthier without
sacrificing taste Things that are good for me rarely taste good

The researchers found a clear correlation between responses to these
statements and people's propensity for weight gain: the higher someone
scores (i.e.Â the more strongly they agree with these three statements),
the greater their Body Mass Index, a measure of weight relative to
height, and one of the best indicators of unhealthy fat accumulation.29
In the past, we might have imagined that these people have low
selfcontrol -- they simply didn't want to give up the momentary pleasure
of food -- but research on the expectation effect suggests that the
truth is more complicated.30 Imagine you visit a doctor who tells you
that you are at risk of obesity. You may respond with good intentions
and buy lots of low-calorie foods, but the very idea that they are
'healthy' -- and all the connotations that word has -- will set you up
for feelings of deprivation, with direct effects on your physiology.
After each meal, you may have higher levels of the 'hunger hormone'
ghrelin running through your body, and your gut may even empty its
contents more quickly, meaning that you will feel more ravenous and your
cravings will be more intense. The belief that dieting is inherently
difficult will have become a self-fulfilling prophecy. When faced with
such difficulties, it is not surprising that even someone with high
levels of willpower can struggle to make a lasting change to their
eating. I'll soon explain how we can individually overcome these
challenges. The fact remains, however, that our environment is
constantly pushing us into making these assumptions and we need to learn
to spot the messages that are creating the deprivation mindset,
including food marketing continues to reinforce the belief that healthy
foods are inherently less satisfying. In 2019 Alia Crum analysed the
menus of 26 American chain restaurants that all offer 'healthy eating'
options and examined the words they use to describe different kinds of
foods. She found that the entries for the standard offerings were much
more likely to include vocabulary that suggests emotions of enjoyment
('crazy', 'fun'), vice ('dangerous', 'sinful') and decadence ('bliss',
'succulent', 'mouth-watering') as well as the sensations of texture
('crispy', 'creamy', 'gooey') and taste ('tangy', 'flavorful') -- all of
which should suggest a satisfying experience. Health foods, in contrast,
were much more likely to contain words evoking simplicity ('plain',
'mild'), thinness ('lite',

'skinnylicious') and deprivation ('fat free', 'low carb'). These
descriptions were all about the things the foods weren't, in other
words, setting up the exact kind of deprivation mindset that will
amplify your hunger and send you straight to the cookie jar a few hours
later.31 Restaurant menus -- and food writing more generally -- do not
have to be like this. As Crum and her colleagues point out, you could
easily spice up the descriptions of vegetable dishes, say, with sensual
and emotive descriptions that evoke indulgence and enjoyment: 'zesty
ginger-turmeric sweet potatoes', 'sweet sizzlin' green beans and crispy
shallots' and 'slowroasted caramelized zucchini bites' in place of
'cholesterol-free sweet potatoes', 'light 'n' low-carb green beans and
shallots' and 'lighter-choice zucchini'. Not only does that make the
vegetables more appetising at the time -- increasing consumption by 29
per cent, according to one of Crum's studies -- but it should also help
to ensure that the eater is less likely to snack afterwards.32
Researchers at the University of Bristol have found that simply adding
the words 'fuller for longer' to a yogurt pot significantly increased
people's satiety up to 3 hours later.33 As researchers continue to
explore the ways our expectations affect digestion, it will be
especially important to recognise the importance of factors such as
poverty, which can also change the way we perceive certain foods. Low
socioeconomic status is a known risk factor for obesity, and there are
plenty of potential explanations for this: the relatively high cost of
fresh goods compared to convenience foods; a lack of time to prepare
nutritious meals; and a lack of access to healthcare and other support
that may guide someone in their weight loss. But recent studies from
Singapore suggest that an expectation effect, arising from the feeling
of financial insecurity, may also play a significant role. When people
are primed to feel poorer, and less secure, they tend to eat sweeter
snacks and opt for bigger portion sizes.34 And this seems to correspond
to observable changes in the body and brain's hormonal response to food.
The participants were first asked to complete an aptitude test, which
could ostensibly predict their future career success and income. In
reality,

the feedback was sham -- each person was told they had scored in the
bottom 19 per cent, setting them up with the fear that they would
struggle in Singapore's competitive society. To highlight and amplify
these worries, the researchers presented the participants with a picture
of a ladder, which, they were told, represented Singapore's social
structure. Their task was to decide where they thought they fell on the
ladder, and to compare themselves to the people at the very top. 'Think
about how the DIFFERENCES BETWEEN YOU might impact what you would talk
about, how the interaction is likely to go, and what you and the other
person might say to each other,' they were told. Once they had finished
with their task, the participants were given a milkshake, with blood
tests taken at regular points before and after. The results were very
similar to the effects seen in Crum's original study on food labels --
except here, it was people's feelings of social and financial insecurity
that had set them up with a sense of deprivation, which in turn
influenced their hormonal response. The participants who, because of the
sham feedback, had placed themselves low on Singapore's social ladder
tended to show higher levels of ghrelin when they received the snack,
and they felt less full as a result. Their bodies appeared to be primed
to start feeding up and storing fat.35 The participants were debriefed
after the experiment, so they should not have suffered any long-term
effects, but if you lived with similar feelings of vulnerability for
years on end, this altered hormonal response could slowly tip you
towards obesity, even if your choices of food were relatively healthy.
In our evolutionary past this would have been a sensible adaptive
response to hardship: if we have to worry about our resources in the
future, we need to make sure we make the most of what we have today, so
it makes sense to eat more while we can and slow our metabolism to build
up some reserves. Similar responses can be seen among other social
animals: those at the lower end of a group's pecking order tend to eat
more when the opportunity arises, and burn energy less quickly, allowing
them to build fat stores in case they end up facing shortages in the
future. All this would have once protected us in our vulnerability, but
in today's 'obesogenic' society --

where high-calorie food is relatively cheap and readily available --
such responses are likely to lead to worse health. THE INDULGENCE
MINDSET If we are looking to change our diet, how can we apply these
findings? While the new research does not lend itself to any particular
diet plan, many regimens involve some form of calorie restriction, and a
number of psychological principles can ease that process, curbing
cravings while also ensuring that you gain more pleasure and
satisfaction from your food. The most obvious step is to try to avoid
liquid calories in sweetened drinks. As we've seen throughout this
chapter, the expected satiety of most drinks is very low, meaning that
they are unlikely to reduce later cravings. When I am attempting to lose
weight, I even try to avoid juices and smoothies, since they will fill
me up less than solid food. If you can't live without them, at least try
to make them yourself rather than buying an offthe-shelf bottle, so that
you are more aware of the solids that went into them: the research
suggests this simple step could have a meaningful effect on your overall
satiation.36 Be especially wary of high-sugar sports recovery drinks.
According to one study, a single shake can contain 1,200 calories --
that's around half the average adult's recommended daily intake.37 In
addition to its liquid form, the fact that it is labelled 'healthy' will
set up the expectation of less satiation, resulting in greater snacking
later on.38 That's not necessarily an issue if you are simply looking
for a quick energy boost to replace calories burnt -- but it may lead to
overcompensation, and if your primary motivation is to lose weight, you
might prefer to find a more satisfying way of reviving yourself.
Secondly, you should maximise your pleasure in the food you eat. It can
be tempting, when dieting, to eat bland, forgettable meals, almost as an
act of penitence, but recent research suggests that flavour and texture
are especially important during weight loss, as they help to create the
sense of

indulgence that increases satiety and enhances our hormonal response to
food. As a result, I try to look for fiery, spicy options (such as the
spaghetti alla puttanesca mentioned in the introduction) and make the
most of intensely umami ingredients, such as anchovies or parmesan
cheese. The small number of calories that you add to that meal are more
than compensated for by the greater satiety that you experience later
on, which in turn reduces your subsequent snacking. According to this
research, the very worst thing you can do is to eat something
depressingly insipid that leaves you feeling deprived.39 Cultivating a
sense of indulgence is especially important for times when you enjoy an
inevitable treat. Although there may be the temptation to wallow in
guilt after you've eaten cake or ice cream, the research shows that you
should instead take maximum pleasure in the experience. One snack, after
all, should be no reason to throw all your good intentions to one side,
and with the right mindset you can make sure that it leaves you feeling
full, setting your body up to burn the energy you have ingested. If that
seems hard to believe, consider a study that followed 131 dieters over
three months. The participants who associated treats such as cake with
'guilt' tended to gain weight over that period, while participants who
associated cake with 'celebration' made progress towards their goals.40
It may be fashionable to label certain foods as 'sinful' or 'toxic', but
psychological research shows that we should avoid such harsh value
judgements if we want to make real changes to our eating behaviour. You
can amplify these effects by changing the way you frame food before,
during and after eating -- starting with a heightened sense of
anticipation at what you are about to taste. In a Canadian and French
study from 2016, researchers first encouraged participants to vividly
imagine the taste, smell and texture of various sweet treats. The
participants were then asked to state their desired portion of a
delicious-looking chocolate cake. You might expect that the previous
exercise would have increased their lust for the food, leading them to
opt for a bigger slice. But most of these participants showed exactly
the opposite reaction, opting for a smaller portion than those

who had not been primed to think about the sensory qualities. By having
thought more carefully about the pleasures of eating, they recognised
that they could get all the satisfaction they wanted from fewer
mouthfuls.41 The results chime with another experiment, which asked
participants to visualise eating either M&Ms or cheese before they were
presented with the real product. They subsequently ate substantially
smaller portions of the snacks compared to participants who had imagined
another activity.42 With a bit of anticipation about what you are
eating, it seems that you can make each bite more potent.43 Finally, you
should avoid distraction while you eat, and be sure to savour each
mouthful. It is a clichÃ©, but eating slowly, taking care to chew your
food, leaves you feeling more satisfied, since it increases the
'orosensory' experience of what you're eating, which can in turn trigger
a greater hormonal reaction to the food.44 And afterwards, try to make a
point of remembering what you have eaten. Whenever you feel tempted to
snack mindlessly, think back to your previous meal and try to recreate
the memory of eating it; as you remind your prediction machine to
incorporate those calories into its projections of energy balance, you
may find that you are less hungry than you had assumed. Don't expect
miracles. You can't turn a lettuce leaf into a feast with the power of
your mind, and it seems highly unlikely that a severe crash diet will
benefit from these small psychological steps. For more moderate
regimens, however, these mental shifts could make all the difference to
your waistline and -- just as importantly -- your mood. Whether you are
losing a few pounds or simply maintaining your current weight, each meal
should be seen as an indulgence and something to be celebrated. This
will benefit both your physical and your mental health. THE LIFE-SAVING
BENEFITS OF BEING A BON-VIVANT When applying these principles, eaters in
many countries could take inspiration from French culture. While the
belief that healthy foods are

inherently unsatisfying appears to be relatively widespread in the US,45
such attitudes are less pronounced in the UK and Australia,46 and in
France it appears to be more common to hold the exact opposite view. On
average, French people are also much more likely to 'strongly disagree'
with the statement that 'things that are good for me rarely taste good',
for example, while laboratory studies have shown that labelling a food
as 'healthy' does not reduce satisfaction and pleasure in the same way
that it does in other Western countries.47 Besides thinking more
positively about healthier foods, French people also tend to have few
negative connotations around treats and desserts. When asked to select a
word associated with different foods, such as 'ice cream best belongs
with: delicious or fattening', French people tend to opt for the more
pleasurable alternative, while people in the US tend to choose the word
with more negative connotations. French people are also more likely to
endorse statements like 'Enjoying food is one of the most important
pleasures in my life' compared to people in the US. There will be
individual variation among individual citizens of any country, of
course, and these attitudes may change with time -- but overall, French
people seem to have far more positive expectations about the food they
eat and its effects on their bodies. The effects of this indulgent,
celebratory attitude towards food can be seen in portion sizes and time
spent eating. Even when they are indulging in fast food, French people
tend to choose smaller servings -- since they know that they can gain
more pleasure from fewer mouthfuls -- and they spend more time eating
it, creating a more detailed memory that sets them up with the
expectation that they will feel sated for longer.48 And this appears to
make a real difference to their weight. According to the World Health
Organization, the average BMI in France is 25.3 -- lower than other
European countries, such as Germany (26.3), and significantly less than
Australia (27.2), the UK (27.3) and the USA (28.8).49 Besides explaining
cross-national gaps in BMI, such attitudes can help us to understand
puzzling health differences that cannot easily be explained by

the nutritional content of the diet itself. The typical French diet
contains a higher proportion of saturated fat from butter, cheese, eggs
and cream than a typical English or American diet, yet French people are
strikingly less likely to suffer from coronary heart disease than UK or
US citizens. This was once put down to their drinking habits, including
the moderate consumption of wine, which contains antioxidant and
anti-inflammatory chemicals that help to reduce the tissue damage that
comes with age. In reality, there are probably many different factors
that each play a small role, including each culture's expectations of
different foodstuffs and those foodstuffs' effects on our health and
well-being. Remember that people who believe they are more at risk of a
heart attack are four times more likely to suffer from heart disease,
even when all other factors are considered. In countries like the USA or
the UK, messaging around food appears to be engendering similar
self-fulfilling prophecies. As the authors of one study concluded: 'It
is not unreasonable to assume that when a major aspect of life becomes a
stress and source of substantial worry, as opposed to a pleasure,
effects might be seen in both the cardiovascular and immune systems.'50
Thanks to their more positive food culture, however, French people seem
less susceptible to this nocebo response. They know that -- in
moderation -- they can have their cake, and eat it too. We would all be
healthier for experiencing that same joie de vivre.

How to think about . . . eating Avoid distractions during meals and pay
attention to the food you are consuming. Try to cultivate strong
memories of the experience, which will help you to feel and stay sated.
If you are trying to cut down on snacks, remind yourself what you ate
for your last meal. You may find that recollection helps to curb hunger
pangs. Be aware of food descriptions that are creating a sense of
deprivation. Even if you are looking for low-calorie meals, try to find
products that evoke a feeling of indulgence. When dieting, pay
particular attention to flavour, texture and presentation -- anything
that will heighten your enjoyment of the food and leave you feeling more
satisfied afterwards. Avoid sweetened drinks. It is hard for the body to
adapt its energy regulation to their high-calorie content. Enjoy the
anticipation of food. This will prime your digestive response and help
you to feel more satisfied afterwards. Don't feel guilty about the
occasional treat; instead, relish the moment of pleasure.

OceanofPDF.com

7 DE-STRESSING STRESS How to turn negative feelings to your advantage In
the late nineteenth century, doctors, politicians and the clergy began
to wage war on a dangerous new vice that was threatening the world's
health -- and their battle cry can still be heard to this day. The vice
was neither opium nor absinthe, but anxiety. As early as 1872, the
British Medical Journal noted that the 'strained and hurried excitement
of these times' was exhausting people's nervous energy, leading to
mental and physical breakdowns and even a rise in heart disease. 'These
figures', it noted, 'warn us to take a little more care not to kill
ourselves for the sake of living.' The journal advocated a form of
mental 'hygiene' that stripped unnecessary stress from its readers'
lives.1 Men and women were frequently prescribed rest cures, and in the
US the perennially anxious could even attend 'Don't Worry' clubs, in
which members offered mutual support in their abstinence from anxiety.
The movement was founded in a small private parlour in New York City by
the musician and author Theodore Seward. Americans, he argued, were
'slaves to the worrying habit', which was the 'enemy which destroys
happiness': it

needed to be 'attacked' with 'resolute and persevering effort'.2 Seward
went so far as to call the Don't Worry movement an 'emancipation', and
he relished comparisons with the prohibition movement that was then
gaining ground.3 The idea soon caught on, and by the early 1900s the
great psychologist William James observed that a kind of 'religion of
healthy-mindedness' had taken hold. It was accompanied by a 'gospel of
relaxation', with the aim of turning the mind away from all negative
thoughts and feelings, while instead cultivating happiness from within.
'Complaints of the weather are getting to be forbidden in many
households,' he noted, 'and more and more people are considering it to
be bad form to speak of disagreeable situations.'4 The aim, he said, was
to 'act and speak as if cheerfulness were already there'.5 A steady
stream of medical research appeared to confirm the dangers of anxiety,
and by the 1980s they were considered to be an unquestionable truth,
sparking widespread media coverage. At the centre of this research was
the idea that our evolved stress response, suited to the real danger of
predators in the wild, went into overdrive at the slightest challenge --
triggering an intense 'fight-or-flight' response. 'The saber-toothed
tiger is long gone, but the modern jungle is no less perilous. The sense
of panic over a deadline, a tight plane connection, a reckless driver on
one's tail are the new beasts that can set the heart racing, the teeth
on edge, the sweat streaming,' one Time cover story from 1983 declared.
'Our mode of life itself, the way we live, is emerging as today's
principal cause of illness.' Yet again, the magazine's readers were
advised to take their thoughts into their own hands. 'Rule No.Â 1 is,
don't sweat the small stuff. Rule No.Â 2 is, it's all small stuff,' said
one cardiologist.6 The phrase 'stressed out' entered the English lexicon
the same year.7 From today's media coverage you might assume we are more
stressed out than ever before. We are frequently told that even small
repeated stressors -- such as the slight irritation of social media
feeds -- can pose a danger to our physical and mental health, and we're
constantly reminded of the best

strategies to relieve the burden, from gratitude journals and
mindfulness apps to 'forest bathing' in nature and expensive digital
detox retreats. Whether we like it or not, we are now all members of a
global Don't Worry club. But what if all the newspaper coverage, and
multimillion-selling books, and the inspirational speakers, and even the
scientists themselves, have got it wrong? No one wants to feel anxiety
if they can help it -- but recent research shows that many of our
responses to emotions are often a direct result of our beliefs. By
demonising unpleasant but inevitable feelings, we have been creating a
potent nocebo out of modern life. An appreciation of these expectation
effects can transform our approach to a whole range of experiences, from
burnout to sleeplessness -- and may even help us redefine the pursuit of
happiness itself. THE STRESS CASCADE To understand the traditional view
of anxiety, and why it is wrong, we must first meet a Hungarian-Canadian
scientist named Hans Selye, whose pioneering research at the height of
the Great Depression provided some of the first clear evidence for the
dangers of stress. Like so many great discoveries, Selye's research
began by mistake. His primary task had been to identify female sex
hormones, and to chart their effects on laboratory rats -- but he hit a
barrier when he found that the rats often fell sick in ways that just
didn't make sense, given the chemicals he was injecting. He initially
feared that his experiments were contaminated, until he began to notice
that the rats showed a very similar sickness response to a variety of
other experiences: if they underwent an operation, if they were placed
in the cold or heat, or if they were forced to exercise for too long on
their running wheels. How could such different circumstances all lead to
the same illness? Borrowing a term from mechanics, Selye began to
suspect that the general 'stress' of all these experiments was making
the rats sick, putting them in a state of alarm that eventually ended
with exhaustion and illness.

Years of subsequent research detailed the 'stress cascade', a kind of
physiological chain reaction that creates the state of alarm, and which
slowly increases wear and tear on the body. It begins in the brain, with
two small masses of grey matter called the amygdalae that read input
from all the senses and process their emotional content. When the
amygdalae identify a threat -- such as an oncoming predator -- they send
signals to the hypothalamus, the same command centre that monitors and
controls our energy balance and regulates many other elements of the
body's physiological state. Eventually, the message reaches the adrenal
glands, which start pumping out epinephrine, a hormone that has
widespread effects on the body. The most immediate consequences of
epinephrine release can be felt in the circulatory system. The heart
beats faster, but blood vessels towards the hands, feet and head
constrict -- a response that should prevent blood loss if you are
injured. Your breathing will become quick and shallow to provide you
with oxygen, and you'll experience a sugar rush, as the hormone releases
glucose stored in organs like the liver. To make sure that energy
reaches your muscles, the hormone puts digestion and other activities on
pause.8 Your mind, meanwhile, is primed to focus exclusively on the
perceived threat and any other dangers within your environment. This is
the fight-or-flight response and it is a perfect adaptation to an
immediate threat, such as physical attack. If the threat subsides -- if
the predator passes by, for instance -- then the epinephrine will ebb
away and you can quickly return to a more restful state. But if you
continue to feel danger, then a second wave of hormonal reactions
follows, including the release of cortisol, which keeps the brain and
body on high alert in the mid- to long term. It is this maintenance of
mental and physiological arousal -- over days, weeks or months -- that
was thought to lead to the exhaustion and sickness that Selye observed
in his laboratory rats, and which was believed to cause disease in
humans, too. The racing pulse and constricted blood vessels put extra
strain on the cardiovascular system. The continued fluctuations in

cortisol damp down the release of beneficial 'anabolic' hormones that
lead to tissue repair. These prolonged hormonal changes can also
contribute to chronic low-level inflammation, which can damage the walls
of the arteries and the tissues in the joints. The mind's
hypervigilance, meanwhile, reduces overall cognitive performance, since
it is devoting more resources to coping with the threat rather than
considering new and exciting ways of solving problems. According to
Selye, modern stressors such as professional competition, long commutes
and hectic social commitments all put us in this chronic state of
arousal, and the result was thought to be increased vulnerability to a
range of illnesses -- from arthritis to heart failure -- that had
started to plague people in industrialised countries. These 'diseases of
civilization', Selye declared, were 'the price we must pay for
successful, hard-working people who are subject to mental distress'.
Selye's investigations into the stress response were so influential that
he was nominated for the Nobel Prize in Medicine 17 times, and many
others would continue to mine this vein long after his passing in 1982.9
Right from the beginning, however, there were reasons to doubt the
claims made about stress. The animal subjects of many of the experiments
-- including Selye's initial studies -- were all placed under extreme
strain, generating a kind of blind panic. That's convenient to identify
stark physiological changes in the laboratory, but it's not necessarily
reflective of the kinds of mild pressures most of us experience. Studies
on humans, meanwhile, neglected to consider whether people's
expectations might be determining their responses to stress. If we think
back to the Don't Worry clubs in the late nineteenth century, it's clear
that our culture has long believed anxiety and nervous tension to be
dangerous -- particularly the stresses arising from industrialisation
and urbanisation. Because of the mind--body connection, this attitude
could shape people's actual responses to challenging events, creating a
self-fulfilling prophecy that may have skewed many of the initial
scientific findings. If this is correct, it should be possible to shift
someone's stress response simply by changing those beliefs.

GET STRESSED AND GROW Jeremy Jamieson, a psychologist at the University
of Rochester in New York State, has been at the forefront of the
scientific research exploring this tantalising possibility since the
late 2000s. His interest in the ways we frame anxiety stemmed from his
experiences as a student athlete. He noticed that some teammates would
often get pumped up and excited before a game, whereas they would feel
nervous and 'freak out' before an exam. These were both high-stakes
situations -- so why was the potential stress so helpful in one context
and detrimental in another? Jamieson suspected it was due to the way
they appraised the different events. On the sports field, the athletes
interpreted their jangling nerves as a sign of energy, but in the exam
hall, the same sensations were seen to be a sign of impending failure.
Those expectations could then become selffulfilling prophecies, shaping
the brain's and the body's responses to the stress. In an early
experiment to explore this idea, Jamieson recruited 60 students who were
planning on sitting the Graduate Record Examinations (a standardised
test that is often required to enter graduate schools in the US and
Canada). Before taking a practice exam in the laboratory, half of the
participants were provided with the following information: 'People think
that feeling anxious while taking a standardized test will make them do
poorly on the test. However, recent research suggests that arousal
doesn't hurt performance on these tests and can even help performance --
people who feel anxious during a test might actually do better. This
means that you shouldn't feel concerned if you do feel anxious while
taking today's GRE test. If you find yourself feeling anxious, simply
remind yourself that your arousal could be helping you do well.' This
small piece of guidance -- a minimal instruction that would have taken
less than a minute to read -- not only improved students' scores on the
mock exam, but these participants also performed better on the real test
a few months later. The differences were particularly notable in the
maths section, which is most likely to trigger fear and dread among
entrants. (So-called 'maths anxiety' is now considered a real and very

common condition.10) The average score of the control group was 706,
while those who had learned to see their anxious feelings as a source of
energy received 770. It was an astonishing improvement for such a short
and simple intervention, and it could easily sway someone's chances of
being admitted into their first-choice university.11 In a few sentences,
Jamieson had managed to shift the students' mindsets towards the
pumped-up, energised outlook of his sports teammates and away from the
fears that typically debilitated them -- with immediate and lasting
effects on their performance. Follow-up studies examined whether a
reappraisal of anxiety could alter people's biological responses too,
potentially mitigating some of the longterm damage that Selye and others
had warned of. Like participants in the first experiment, some of the
subjects in the new study were reminded that signs of physiological
arousal, such as a quickly beating heart or feelings of breathlessness,
which we normally associate with anxiety, are not necessarily harmful
but the body's natural response to challenge, and that increased
alertness could actually improve performance. The control group, in
contrast, were asked to ignore the feelings and put them 'out of their
mind' by focusing their attention on a specific point in the room.
Having read these instructions, the participants were then put through a
gruelling task, known as the Trier Social Stress Test, which is designed
to provoke heightened anxiety. They first had to make a short
presentation about their strengths and weaknesses -- increasing their
sense of vulnerability -- followed by an impromptu mental arithmetic
test. To make the task even harder, the people evaluating the
participants' performance had been instructed to have negative body
language, with crossed arms and frowning faces, meaning that the
participants lacked any encouraging feedback that might have quelled
their nerves. All the while, the scientists monitored the ways each
participant's body responded to the anxiety. The control group showed
all the signs you would expect of the classic stress cascade: the heart
was racing, but the peripheral vessels were

constricted, channelling blood to the body's core. Although they were
not in physical danger, they were reacting as if the body was preparing
for injury. The people who had reframed their anxious feelings, however,
showed a far healthier response. They certainly weren't 'relaxed' -- the
heart was still racing, but it was working more efficiently, with more
dilated vessels that allowed blood to flood throughout the body. That's
very similar to what happens when we exercise; it is energising the body
without putting strain on the cardiovascular system.12 It also allows
more blood to reach the brain, providing the cognitive boost that
Jamieson had also seen in the GRE results. Distraction didn't work, but
reframing did.13 Emerging evidence suggests that our expectations may
even influence the hormonal stress response. When people are taught that
stress can enhance their performance and contribute to personal growth,
they tend to show more muted fluctuations in cortisol -- just enough to
keep them more alert, without putting them in a long-lasting state of
fear.14 They also experience a sharper increase in beneficial 'anabolic'
hormones, such as DHEAS and testosterone, which can help to grow and
repair the body's tissues; for people who see stress as dangerous or
debilitating, there is barely any change.15 It is the relative ratios of
all of these hormones that really determine how much wear and tear the
body will suffer from a stressful episode -- and when people reappraise
the effects of stress, they strike a much healthier balance, as if
facing an achievable physical challenge rather than a serious
existential threat. Why does reappraisal have this power? For
researchers like Jamieson, it all comes down to the brain's predictions,
as it weighs up our mental and physical resources against the demands of
the task to plan the most appropriate response. If you see your anxiety
as debilitating and performance-reducing, you reinforce the expectation
that you are already at a disadvantage and that you are going to fail --
and the brain responds as if it is facing a threat and prepares the body
for danger and potential injury. But if you see the racing heartbeat as
a sign of energy for an important and potentially rewarding event, you
reaffirm the idea that you have everything

you need to thrive. 'The stress response, instead of becoming this thing
to be avoided, actually becomes a resource,' said Jamieson. The brain
can therefore afford to focus on the task at hand without being alert to
every possible threat, while the body can prepare to perform at its
maximum capacity, and to potentially grow from the experience, without
the risk of being wounded.16 Afterwards, the body can return more
quickly to all the other useful activities, like digestion, that it
normally performs during times of rest. Besides leading to these
physiological changes, attitudes to stress can also transform behaviour
and perception in quite profound ways. When faced with a difficult
challenge, people who see stress as enhancing tend to focus more on the
positive elements of a scene (such as the smiling faces in a crowded
room) rather than dwelling on potential signs of threat or hostility.
They also become more pro-active -- deliberately seeking feedback and
searching for constructive ways to cope, rather than trying to hide away
from the problems at hand. They even demonstrate more creativity. All
these changes mean that they are better equipped to find permanent
solutions to the challenges that were causing the distress in the first
place.17 We now know that our attitudes to stress can have a meaningful
impact on all kinds of situations. Reappraising feelings of anxiety has
improved people's performance in salary negotiations,18 for example,
while US Navy SEALs with a positive attitude to the stresses of their
job showed greater persistence and enhanced performance in training.19
The shift in mindset has also been proven to improve the experiences of
people diagnosed with chronic disorders such as social anxiety, helping
them to deal with their fears of social judgement more constructively.
Jamieson's team asked socially anxious individuals to take the Trier
Social Stress Test. By reappraising their feelings, the participants
were able to give their presentation with fewer visible signs of
anxiety; they fidgeted less and showed greater eye contact, and used
more open hand gestures and body language.20

While many experiments have examined the benefits over relatively short
periods, longitudinal studies suggest that these attitudes can also have
a significant impact on long-term health. A survey of German doctors and
teachers, for instance, found that people's attitudes to anxiety could
predict their overall psychological well-being over a year-long period.
Those who saw anxiety as a source of energy -- agreeing with statements
such as 'Feeling somewhat anxious makes me more active in problem
solving' -- were much less likely to suffer from emotional exhaustion
than those who viewed it as a sign of weakness or a threat to their
performance.21 Our expectations may even override the apparent link
between stress and heart disease -- one of the most persistent and
alarming messages about anxiety. An eight-year longitudinal study of
more than 28,000 people, for example, found that high levels of anxiety
and mental tension did indeed lead to a 43 per cent increase in
mortality -- but only if the participants believed that it was doing
them harm. People who were under high pressure, but who believed it to
have little effect on their health, were actually less likely to die
than those who experienced very little stress at all. That was true even
when the scientists controlled for a host of other lifestyle factors,
such as income, education, physical activity and smoking. Overall, the
authors calculate that the belief that stress is harmful leads to the
equivalent of around 20,000 preventable deaths a year in the US -- an
astonishing number of people who, like the Hmong immigrants that we met
in the introduction, are essentially dying from noxious expectations.22
\*\*\* As someone who has regularly suffered from anxiety, I was
initially a little sceptical of these findings. Often our feelings can
hit us like a runaway train -- and the idea of overcoming them through a
simple reappraisal sounded rather close to the unhelpful and irritating
refrain that we should simply 'get over it'. Jamieson, however,
emphasises that the aim is to change your interpretation of anxiety
rather than suppressing the feeling itself. That's a vital distinction,
since attempts to avoid or ignore our

feelings often reinforce uncomfortable emotions and add to their stigma.
(Why, after all, would you avoid a feeling if it could be good for you?)
With these new reappraisal techniques, you don't need to worry if you
still feel breathless and your heart is still racing: the simple point
to remember is that those responses are not a sign of weakness, and
should actually help you to perform at your best and to grow in the
future. Nor does reappraisal require any deception. You're rationally
questioning your assumptions about anxiety, and reinterpreting the
potential effects of your feelings based on substantial scientific
research rather than misinformation or unfounded optimism. As we saw
with the 'open-label placebos' in chapter 2, the approaches to pain
management in chapter 3 and the exercise reappraisals in chapter 5, it's
perfectly possible to see beneficial expectation effects without fooling
yourself into thinking something that isn't true. Needless to say, the
individual benefits will depend on your circumstances. Reappraisal can't
make up for a total lack of preparation before an exam or interview. But
when you have taken all the practical steps to deal with the situation
at hand, it ensures that your feelings are working for you, rather than
against you. Many of the existing methods of stress management depend on
the power of expectation. We are inundated with apps and books touting
the benefits of mindful breathing, for instance. While slow, deep
breaths may have some physiological effects -- they appear to stimulate
calmer brain activity, for example -- the responses are far greater when
people are offered an elaborate description of the apparent benefits.
The same is true of 'gratitude journals', which encourage you to note
down the things that you value in your life each day. According to
numerous magazine articles and websites, they are a proven way of
buffering the effects of anxiety, and some mental health practitioners
have even started to prescribe them as part of their therapy. It is
certainly true that the practice improves mood, compared to doing
nothing at all. Yet a large study published in 2020 found that the
effects were less impressive when the gratitude journals were compared
to 'active control' tasks -- such

as forming daily 'to do' lists, describing the day's schedule or keeping
a record of the day's thoughts (good and bad). This suggests that much
of benefit may arise from the general sense that we are doing something
constructive, rather than the specific exercises.23 In both cases, the
practices leave you feeling that you have more resources to cope with
the challenge, which should, in turn, change the way you frame the
problem and your anxiety. But if you don't have the expectation that
they are doing you good, you may struggle to notice the benefits. The
truth is that we all have different associations with a given activity
that may boost or undermine its benefits, and if singing in a choir,
reading a novel or playing Tetris leaves you feeling healthier and
happier than an hour's yoga practice, you would do far better to embrace
this fact than try to suppress your feelings with an activity that
leaves you bored and frustrated. One of the benefits of stress
reappraisal is that the potential interventions are incredibly cheap and
easy to roll out. A few years ago, undergraduates at Stanford University
received an email with some logistical information about their first
mid-term exam for their introductory psychology course. Buried within
the message was a paragraph about the potential benefits of anxiety --
of the kind that Jamieson used in his first experiment. The small prime
not only resulted in better results on the midterm exam itself but also
improved their overall performance over the whole course.24 If you are
struggling to imagine the potentially positive effects of anxiety, it
might help to identify existing situations in which you already cope
well with stress. Perhaps you're like the athletes who inspired
Jamieson's original research, and already understand that the pre-match
nerves help to pump you up before a game. If so, remembering how you
channel your energy on the sports field should help you reframe your
nerves before an exam or interview, for instance. You might also find it
useful to frame your anxieties in terms of your broader goals, so that
the sensations themselves can be read as a signal that

something is meaningful to your life.25 You're unlikely to feel anxious
about something you don't care about in the least. If you feel nervous
before a job interview, it's a sign of how much passion you feel for the
position that is at stake and your potential for growth. This way, you
stop seeing the difficult situation as a threat (which triggers the
fight-or-flight response) and start seeing it as a potential challenge
that can be overcome, which makes it easier to reframe nervous feelings
as a source of energy that can push you towards success. The benefits
appear to build with practice, so be ready to take small steps and allow
your confidence to grow over time.26 Such an approach helped one of
history's greatest tennis players, Billie Jean King, to turn her anxiety
to her advantage. As a fifth-grade schoolgirl, she was apparently so shy
that she refused to give an oral book report, with the mere suggestion
of public speaking triggering the classic fight-or-flight response. 'The
thought of getting up and talking in front of the class absolutely
terrified me,' she later wrote. 'I thought my heart would beat out of my
chest and I would die right there.' As her tennis career progressed,
however, she found a way to reframe those feelings, by focusing not on
her fears but on the potential for growth that came from difficult
challenges. 'I realised winning a tournament was the eventual -- and
desired! -- result of all my hard work, and whether I liked it or not,
the pressure of public speaking came with the privilege of winning.' Her
first speech -- at a junior tennis tournament -- was hesitant, but she
managed it without embarrassment or dying from the nerves. King soon
began to see that the same principle -- that pressure is privilege --
applied to all kinds of situations and that her anxiety was a sign of
her motivation to succeed. 'Great moments carry great weight -- that is
what pressure to perform is all about. And though it can be tough to
face that kind of pressure, very few people get the chance to experience
it.' With that realisation, she saw that she should embrace rather than
suppress feelings of stress -- a mindset that allowed her to get through
her first Grand Slam wins and the enormous media hype around the Battle
of the Sexes match against Bobby Riggs in 1973. As she wrote in her
memoir, 'At first, I

felt obligated to play Riggs, but I chose to embrace as a privilege the
pressure that threatened to overwhelm me. This changed my entire mindset
and allowed me to deal with the situation more calmly. And as time went
on, I began to see the match as something I got to do instead of
something I had to do.'27 The shy fifth-grader who feared that she would
die from her nerves at public speaking became one of our greatest
athletes and one of sport's most prominent spokespeople. Ultimately, the
use of reappraisal should be seen as one potential tool rather than a
'silver bullet' -- a useful instrument that can slowly help you to edge
out of your comfort zone. THE PARADOX OF HAPPINESS Given the potentially
energising effects of anxiety, we may need to rethink our
black-and-white views of many other emotions -- and maybe even the
'pursuit of happiness' itself. Since the end of the nineteenth century,
fears about anxiety have been tied to a more general philosophy of
positive thinking -- the idea that we should actively cultivate
happiness and optimism while 'attacking' any negative feeling. This was
the 'religion of healthy-mindedness' that the psychologist William James
described, and it inspired bestselling self-help writers such as Dale
Carnegie. The sentiment even hit the charts in 1988 with Bobby
McFerrin's song 'Don't Worry Be Happy'. While they are by no means
universally accepted, such ideas about the importance of striving for
happiness are rife in today's wellness literature. Just consider
Elizabeth Gilbert's bestselling memoir Eat, Pray, Love, in which she
recounts some advice from her Guru. 'Happiness is the consequence of
personal effort. You fight for it, strive for it, insist upon it, and
sometimes even travel around the world looking for it,' she writes. 'You
have to participate relentlessly in the manifestations of your own
blessings. And once you have achieved a state of happiness, you must
make a mighty

effort to keep swimming upward into that happiness forever, to stay
afloat on top of it. If you don't, you will leak away your innate
contentment.' As Iris Mauss, psychologist at the University of
California, Berkeley, told me: 'Wherever you look, you see books about
how happiness is good for you, and how you basically should make
yourself happier, almost as a duty.'28 And she has spent the last decade
showing the ways that message may backfire by adding to the stigma of
negative feelings. In 2011, for instance, she asked participants to rate
the following statements on a scale of 1 (strongly disagree) to 7
(strongly agree): How happy I am at any given moment says a lot about
how worthwhile my life is. If I don't feel happy, maybe there is
something wrong with me. I value things in life only to the extent that
they influence my personal happiness. I would like to be happier than I
generally am. Feeling happy is extremely important to me. I am concerned
about my happiness even when I feel happy. To have a meaningful life, I
need to feel happy most of the time.

This was the 'Valuing Happiness' score -- and we can guess that people
such as Gilbert would rate very highly on it. Alongside these beliefs,
Mauss also measured participants' subjective well-being: how content
they rated themselves at that time; the number of depressive symptoms
they exhibited; and the ratio of positive to negative emotions they were
experiencing (the so-called 'hedonic balance'). Contrary to the claims
of so many inspirational speakers and writers, Mauss found that the
people who valued happiness the most, and strove the hardest to achieve
it, were unhappier on every measure that she considered. Following the
'religion of healthy-mindedness' and striving to cultivate good feelings
in every moment would be just about the worst thing you could do for
your well-being. In a second experiment, Mauss asked half her
participants to read some text about the importance of happiness -- the
kind of material that is found in many newspapers or magazines. They
then watched a heartwarming film

about a figure skater who had won an Olympic gold. Once more, the
results were highly counter-intuitive: rather than savouring the joy of
the story, the participants who had read the article about happiness
were much less likely to be moved by the clip, compared to those who had
not read the article. They focused so much on how they should feel that
they were ultimately dissatisfied when the clip didn't bring the joy
they'd expected.29 The harder we try to be happy, the less happy we are,
partly due to a heightened sense of self-consciousness that makes it
hard to fully appreciate small, spontaneous pleasure. Equally important
are the ways that a constant fixation on happiness can lead us to frame
our negative feelings and the small, inevitable upsets that are part of
life as something inherently undesirable and damaging. To investigate
this possibility, scientists primed people to think about happiness by
seating them in a room filled with motivational posters and well-being
books before they completed a frustratingly difficult test. These
participants subsequently ruminated far more about their failure to find
the right answers compared to participants who had not been encouraged
to think about the benefits of positive feelings.30 The more you
stigmatise a feeling, it seems, the more likely you are to dwell on that
emotion when it does finally enter your life -- tipping your hedonic
balance from positive to negative and making it much harder to recover
from the emotional blow. You can see whether you fall into this trap
yourself. On a scale of 1 (never/very rarely true) to 7 (very
often/always true), how would you rate the following statements? I tell
myself I shouldn't be feeling the way that I'm feeling. I criticise
myself for having irrational or inappropriate emotions. When I have
distressing thoughts or images, I judge myself as good or bad, depending
what the thought or image is about. I think some of my emotions are bad
or inappropriate and I shouldn't feel them. I believe some of my
thoughts are abnormal or bad and I shouldn't think that way.

In a study of around one thousand participants, Mauss found that the
higher people scored on this questionnaire, the more likely they were to
report symptoms of depression and anxiety, and the worse they scored on
general measures of life satisfaction and psychological well-being.
People who reported accepting their thoughts and feelings, in contrast,
without characterising them as 'bad' or 'inappropriate', tended to have
better psychological health.31 Exactly the same patterns were evident in
a German survey published in 2016, which found that people who see
meaning in unpleasant feelings tend to be far happier than those who
would rather eliminate them. The researchers, based at the Max Planck
Institute for Human Development, asked their participants to rate
various emotions, such as nervousness, anger or feeling downcast, on
four dimensions: their unpleasantness, their appropriateness, their
utility and their meaningfulness. Disappointment, for example, may feel
unpleasant -- but you could recognise that it is a necessary means of
processing a failure and learning from previous mistakes, leading you to
rate it highly for appropriateness, utility and meaningfulness. Just as
Mauss's studies would predict, the participants who interpreted their
feelings in this way tended to fare much better on measures of mental
and physical well-being, including their risk of illnesses, such as
diabetes or cardiovascular disease, and even their muscle strength
(which was considered a general indicator of fitness). Indeed, the
capacity to see value in unpleasant emotions almost completely
eliminated any link between their health and the actual number of upsets
the person reported experiencing. Even if the participants reported
feeling distressed at multiple points during the three-week study
period, the act of accepting and assigning positive meanings to those
experiences helped them to recover more quickly, without leaving a
permanent mark on their physical and psychological well-being.32

\*\*\* For an example of how you might apply new meanings to an
uncomfortable emotion, imagine you have had a disagreement with your
boss, in which they unfairly scolded you for your lack of progress on an
important task. How would your anger influence your performance for the
rest of the day? You might think that it would result in nervous
agitation, distraction and impulsivity, shredding your concentration, or
you could believe that the feelings of anger would increase your
determination and resolve. Either set of expectations can make a
noticeable difference to your actual behaviour, as Maya Tamir at the
Hebrew University of Jerusalem has demonstrated. Tamir first asked her
participants to listen to various musical tracks -- a technique that is
commonly used to prime people's moods in the lab. Some listened to the
finale from the soundtrack of a horror film (The Curse of the Werewolf)
and two tracks by symphonic metal band Apocalyptica, all of which were
designed to get them feeling slightly angry, while others listened to
more relaxing ambient music. The researchers then paired each
participant with a partner, and asked them to complete a simple
negotiation game. The pair was presented with a pile of different
coloured chips that were assigned a monetary value and then asked to
agree on a way to divide the chips among themselves as best they could.
As an incentive to perform well, the participants were told they could
keep whatever money they made. To make the negotiation harder, however,
the value associated with each colour was different for each person --
something that was good for one side might not be to the other. In this
way, the study mimicked the same kind of wrangling as a divorce
proceeding, in which different objects may be more or less desirable to
each party. Just before the task, people were also given some friendly
advice, reportedly from previous participants. Some were told: 'I think
the most important part of the whole process is figuring out how to act
so you can get the most money for yourself. Throughout the negotiation,
I was persistent. Eventually I was reasonable and my partner gave me
what I wanted.' Others were told: 'I think the most important part of
the whole

process is figuring out how to act so you can get the most money for
yourself. Throughout the negotiation, I was persistent. Eventually I got
angry and my partner felt compelled to give me what I wanted.' The
participants' behaviour mirrored Jamieson's studies of anxiety. When
they were told their anger could be useful, they successfully turned
their frustrations to their advantage and performed significantly better
than the calmer participants. To confirm the expectation effect, Tamir
conducted a second study, using an action-based computer game requiring
fine motor skills. Once again, expectations shaped the way that people's
emotions influenced their performance. Angry participants killed about
twice as many enemies in the game when they were told anger was useful,
compared to when they were told that a cool head was necessary to
prevail. Overall, the angry participants were about three times better
than the calmer participants -- provided they knew about the benefits of
that emotion and its potential use as a source of energy.33 People with
high emotional intelligence already have expectations of anger's
benefits, Tamir has shown, and so may many athletes. Frustrated ice
hockey players tend to be more accurate in penalty shootouts than those
in a calmer frame of mind, for example, while basketball players take
more accurate shots when they believe they've been wronged.34 Clearly,
it will take more than an expectation effect to solve severe
anger-management issues, but Tamir's and Mauss's work underlines the
fact that many other negative emotions, besides anxiety, may be a
product of our expectations. We don't need to enjoy such feelings -- but
recognising their potential value will allow us to channel them more
effectively, and to recover more quickly once they have served their
purpose. By accepting the bad with the good, we can begin to resolve the
paradox of happiness. THE COMPLAINING GOOD SLEEPER

'How do people go to sleep?' Dorothy Parker asked in her story The
Little Hours. 'I'm afraid I've lost the knack.' Anyone who has suffered
short- or long-term insomnia can empathise with the narrator's struggles
-- including her thoughts of 'busting myself smartly over the temple
with the nightlight'. As strange as it may sound, difficulties with
sleep and their effects on our health and well-being often bear a
striking resemblance to waking stress responses. For one thing, insomnia
is often fuelled by the same ruminative, catastrophising thought process
that amplifies anxiety and decreases happiness.35 The more you fear not
falling asleep, the more the mind begins to race just before bed, and
the harder it is to actually drop off -- as Parker noted in her story.
This might explain why the placebo effect can account for about 50 per
cent of the success of sleeping pills: the expectation that they will
bring relief helps to cut through rumination. People's concerns about
sleep will lead them to underestimate how much sleep they actually are
getting, and erroneous beliefs about sleep loss will themselves become a
serious source of worry, setting off a vicious cycle. The prediction
machine will decide that we are ill equipped to deal with the day's
challenges, meaning that everything starts to feel more stressful --
with the accompanying physiological effects. As proof of this
expectation effect, various experiments have compared more objective
measures of sleep, such as recordings of nocturnal brain activity, with
the participants' subjective opinions of how much sleep they felt they
should be getting. Amazingly, the two facets are not very closely
linked. Around 10 per cent of people are complaining good sleepers, who
believe they are constantly sleep-deprived, even though they are
actually getting enough shut-eye. A further 16 per cent are
non-complaining bad sleepers, who -- for various reasons -- fail to
obtain the recommended 7 hours of unconsciousness a night but don't feel
anxious about their lack of sleep. And it's the complaining good
sleepers who are more likely to suffer from symptoms such as poor
concentration, fatigue, depression, anxiety and suicidal ideation, while
non-complaining bad sleepers are remarkably free

of ill effects. Even the objective physiological consequences of
insomnia seem to depend on expectations; it has been found to raise
blood pressure, for example -- but this only occurs among the
'complaining bad sleepers'.36 (The healthiest people, of course, are
those who have good sleep and a positive view of their slumbers.) To
further test the effects of our sleep beliefs, teams of scientists in
Colorado and Oxford provided a set of people with sham feedback about
their sleep quality -- essentially creating a sample of complaining good
sleepers. The following day, the scientists asked the participants to
complete tests of memory and attention. To test numerical processing,
people were asked to listen to a string of numbers, spaced 1.6 seconds
apart, and add up the last two digits each time they heard a new number;
to test their verbal fluency, they had to produce as many words as
possible beginning with a certain letter. In each case, the participants
performed exactly as if the sham feedback had been real. If they
believed their sleep was poor -- like the complaining good sleepers --
then they struggled to complete the mental arithmetic and vocabulary
tests; if they believed their sleep was better than average, their
mental abilities were much sharper. The negative expectations also
resulted in heightened feelings of fatigue and low mood.37 This
expectation effect is so strong that the author of one meta-analysis
concluded that 'worry about poor sleep is a stronger pathogen than poor
sleep'.38 A recognition of this fact should change the way we treat
sleeplessness. According to the CDC, around 8 per cent of the adult
population in the US regularly take medication to help them sleep --
amounting to around 17 million people in total.39 But according to the
work on complaining good sleepers, around 40 per cent of those people
have no objective problem with their sleep -- and may benefit from
breaking the cycle of maladaptive thoughts that are leading to their
daytime symptoms. One of the simplest ways to do this is to adopt a more
accepting attitude to feelings of restlessness, without thinking too
much about the

consequences for the following day. (Some studies have even found that
deliberately attempting to stay awake can, ironically, cure people's
insomnia by removing the sense of struggle that comes with
sleeplessness, though it is easy to see how that approach could backfire
over time.) Sure enough, people who are asked to passively monitor their
thoughts and feelings, without actively fighting them, take
significantly less time to fall asleep.40 We can also attempt to
reappraise specific assumptions about sleep, so that we acknowledge the
importance of a good night's rest without seeing moderate sleep loss as
a catastrophe. Along these lines, psychologists studying insomnia have
compiled a list of 'dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep',
which all promote an overly pessimistic view of insomnia. They include:
Misconceptions about the causes of insomnia ('I believe insomnia is
basically the result of ageing and there isn't much that can be done
about this problem' or 'I believe insomnia is essentially the result of
a chemical imbalance'). Diminished perception of control and
predictability of sleep ('When I sleep poorly on one night, I know it
will disturb my sleep schedule for the whole week'). Unrealistic sleep
expectations ('I need to catch up on any sleep loss'). Misattribution or
amplification of the consequences of insomnia ('Insomnia is destroying
my life' or 'I cannot function without a good night's sleep'). Faulty
beliefs about sleep-promoting practices ('When I have trouble sleeping,
I should stay in bed and try harder').

None of these beliefs have a strong factual basis: as the research on
noncomplaining bad sleepers shows, we are actually much more resilient
to moderate sleep loss than people assume. And people who are taught to
confront and question these expectations enjoy greater overall sleep
quality, relieved daytime fatigue and fewer depressive symptoms.41 The
trick is to take it slowly rather than hoping for immediate, total
relief, and you don't need to tackle every issue at once. You might
start out by observing whether you dropped off a little quicker than
expected, or

whether you managed to achieve a little more than you anticipated after
a night's disrupted sleep, for example, and then build on those small
gains. With time, you should find that the 'knack' of falling asleep,
and awaking refreshed, has returned. EUSTRESS Our understanding of the
way that our expectations shape the biological reality of our emotions
has only just started to flourish -- but it's not too early to reap its
fruits. Whether we are agonising about the working day or tossing and
turning in frustration at night, our interpretations of our feelings can
do more harm than the feelings themselves. Often just a simple
reassessment of our assumptions enables us to thrive. 'People need to be
reminded of how strong the influence of our brain is on our body,'
Jeremy Jamieson told me. It's not as if the components of the stress
circuit have their own sensory organs to automatically gauge a danger --
we are always responding to a complex mental construct formed from our
beliefs and expectations. And it's now within our power to change that
construct. 'We can tell it what to do -- and we do that through these
appraisal processes.' It may not be a panacea for every stress we face,
but I've certainly found that a quick reappraisal can be one useful tool
for coping with everyday anxieties that would once have left me feeling
unhappy and exhausted. Hans Selye himself -- the father of stress
research -- started to come to these conclusions in his last decade. He
had, after all, lived a busy and hectic life, with research, writing and
relentless international lecture tours, but he thrived on the constant
stream of challenges. And so, after four decades of describing the
dangers of stress, he began to suspect that our attitudes might play a
role in our responses. As he noted in 1977 in his autobiography, a kiss
from a lover could bring about many of the same changes -- the rushing
heart, the breathlessness -- that come from fear. The only difference is
the interpretation. Selye even coined a term, 'eustress', to

describe the energising, beneficial feelings that can come from taking
on new challenges, and argued that life would be meaningless without it.
Stress, he concluded, 'is not what happens to you, but the way you take
it'.42 With our advanced understanding of expectation effects, we can
finally put that sentiment into action -- a truce, perhaps, in the
century-old war on worry.

How to think about . . . stress, happiness and sleep Try to adopt an
accepting attitude to unpleasant feelings, rather than actively
suppressing them. When dealing with anxiety, consider the potential
benefits of the physical feelings. Fast breathing and a racing heart,
for instance, help to transmit oxygen and glucose to your body and
brain, providing you with the energy you need to cope with the
challenge, while sweating helps cool the body as it works hard to meet
its goals. Can you relabel your feelings? Anxiety can feel much like
excitement, for example, and reminding yourself of these similarities
can help you to feel more energised. If you have an imaginative mind,
visualising the ways that anxiety could boost your own performance in
specific situations can cement the message, leading to longer-term
effects. Regularly reinforce your knowledge of these expectation
effects. If you often feel stressed in the workplace, it might help to
have notes or posters outlining the principles of this chapter around
your desk, or to place reminders in an online calendar. If you struggle
to fall asleep, try to accept the feeling of restlessness without
judging it and remind yourself that you will still be able to function
the next day, even if your sleep has been less than optimal. Try to get
more objective data on your sleeping habits -- using, for instance, a
phone app or sleep monitoring device -- and consider whether you may be
a complaining good sleeper. If so, question your assumptions using the
'dysfunctional beliefs and attitudes about sleep' scale on here.

OceanofPDF.com

8 LIMITLESS WILLPOWER How to build endless reserves of self-control and
mental focus If you were watching closely during Barack Obama's
presidency, you might have noticed that he wore the same style of blue
or grey suit for almost all public occasions. This was not a fashion
statement, but a life hack: he thought that he could save his mental
reserves for the responsibilities of the presidency if he avoided having
to make small but irrelevant decisions that would sap his concentration.
Michelle would apparently roll her eyes at his behaviour. 'My wife makes
fun of how routinized I've become,' he said.1 But Obama is not alone in
this energy-saving scheme. Arianna Huffington, Steve Jobs, Richard
Branson and Mark Zuckerberg are all said to have simplified their
wardrobe as a way of preserving their brains for loftier tasks. 'I'd
feel I'm not doing my job if I spent any of my energy on things that are
silly or frivolous about my life,' Zuckerberg told one interviewer.2
Their reasoning was apparently based on solid scientific research, which
Obama cited in a Vanity Fair interview. For decades, researchers have
assumed that any kind of mental effort -- such as making decisions,

avoiding distraction or resisting temptation -- draws on the brain's
stores of glucose. When we wake up in the morning, we have that vital
fuel in abundance, but it dwindles every time we exercise our mind,
leading to lapses in concentration and self-control as the day
progresses. As one expert told the Financial Times: 'There is only so
much quality thinking your brain can do each day.'3 According to this
theory, the limits of our mental reserve could explain procrastination
at work. Every moment that we exercise self-control by concentrating on
the task at hand, it saps a little of our energy, until we eventually
can't resist the urge to take a look at Facebook, Twitter or YouTube.
And so we waste hours in the midafternoon lull, as the clock counts down
to the end of the day. Importantly, the same mental reserves are
believed to power many different tasks, meaning that effort in one area
can supposedly lead to lapses in another. This is said to be the reason
why some people feast on junk food following a hard day in the office:
after a long time concentrating, we lose the strength required to resist
the temptation of the cookie jar. Late-night splurges on Amazon and eBay
could similarly be blamed on a fatigued brain: when our mental reserves
are already down, we can't resist spending our money on useless goods we
later regret. Some authors have even claimed that our limited mental
reserves could explain why high-powered people cheat on their spouses.
With a relentless work schedule sapping his decision-making energy,
someone like Bill Clinton would have been almost helpless to control
himself, according to this theory. Does it have to be this way? The idea
that our mental resources are limited, and can become exhausted over
time, certainly chimes with many of our own experiences at home and at
work. We don't have to have a degree in psychology, after all, to
describe someone as having a 'short fuse', to think of our patience
'wearing thin' or to argue that you 'can't burn the candle at both
ends'. And that is precisely the problem with so much of this research:
like studies on stress, it failed to question whether we simply

place these limits on ourselves through an extremely prevalent
expectation effect. The truth is that most of us are only tapping a
small part of our potential, while a huge reservoir is just waiting to
be released. Intriguingly, some cultures already have the widespread
view that mental focus and selfcontrol increase with effort, and this is
reflected in people's behaviour. What we once assumed to be a biological
limit is really a cultural artefact, and by learning to change our
expectations we can make better use of the brain's enormous reserves.
This understanding can even help us to recognise the true power of
superstition and prayer -- for believers and atheists alike. THE
DEPLETED EGO The prevailing theories of mental focus and self-control --
which are often lumped together under the term 'willpower' -- can be
traced to the father of psychoanalysis, Sigmund Freud. He saw our psyche
as having three components: the id, the ego and the superego. The id was
unruly and impulsive, while the superego was chaste and censorious,
dictating the most moral or socially appropriate course of action. The
pragmatic ego stood between these two warring entities, reining in the
id on the instructions of the superego. But it needed energy to decide
what was best for us and to take the correct course of action:
otherwise, our baser impulses would get the upper hand.4 It was only in
the late 1990s that psychologists came to test Freud's theory
systematically, with Roy Baumeister leading the way. In his first
experiment, the psychologist recruited students under the guise of a
taste perception test. Arriving in the lab, the students found two bowls
on the table -- one full of radishes, and one full of cookies. As the
experimenter left the room, the luckier participants were told to feast
on two or three cookies; the unluckier ones were told to taste the
radishes, without taking a cookie. (Unbeknown to the participants, the
researchers were hidden

behind a two-way mirror to make sure they didn't cheat.) After they had
finished the tasting, the participants were given a complex geometric
task -- so complex, in fact, that it was actually impossible to solve.
If the participants wanted to stop, they were told that they could ring
a bell, and the scientists would come and collect them. Otherwise, they
were given 30 minutes to wrestle with the problem. Baumeister predicted
that the effort of tamping down the temptation to eat the cookies would
exhaust the participants' reserves of mental energy, so that the
radish-eaters would have less resilience on the problem-solving task.
And that was exactly what he found. On average, the people in the radish
group lasted around 8.5 minutes at the task before they gave up and rang
the bell, compared to 19 minutes for the participants who had been free
to eat the cookies -- a huge difference in mental stamina.5 Based on
these findings, Baumeister saw our willpower as a mental muscle that
tires with time. As an homage to Freud's theories, he described the
mental exhaustion that comes from exercising self-control and focus as
'ego depletion', and further research soon offered hundreds more
examples to support the theory.6 When subjects were asked to watch a
Robin Williams clip without laughing or smiling, for instance, they were
less able to focus on solving a series of anagrams.7 Or participants had
to ignore annoying messages popping up on screen, while listening to an
interview -- and they became more distractible on tests of logic and
reading comprehension as a result of their depleted mental resources.8
In one of the studies that apparently inspired Obama to pare down his
own decision-making, students were asked to pick courses for their
degree -- a choice with serious potential ramifications for their
academic success. Because of the mental depletion that came from
focusing on this decision, they were subsequently more likely to
procrastinate rather than study for a potentially important maths test.9
Studies on consumer behaviour, meanwhile, showed that depleted
participants, who had been forced to remain focused and engaged while
reading aloud the boring biographies of scientists, were subsequently
more likely to make impulse purchases.10

In each case, practising self-discipline and mental focus in one domain
-- whether resisting temptation, avoiding distraction, solving a
difficult problem, planning for the future or exercising emotional
restraint -- led to worse performance in another. The evidence appeared
to be concrete: we can only control our mind and behaviour for so long
before we begin to tire. These experiments were particularly striking
because the 'depleting' exercises were not especially taxing, in the
grand scheme of things, suggesting that many of the small trials that we
face every day might have similar effects. 'When you hold your tongue,
resist an urge to smoke, drink or eat, restrain aggression, postpone
using the toilet, feign mirth at an inane joke, push yourself to keep
working, it depletes some crucial energy and leaves you with less
available for meeting the next challenge,' Baumeister wrote in The
Psychologist magazine in 2012.11 Indeed, when Baumeister gave
participants a phone app prompting them to record their thoughts at
random intervals throughout the day, he found that the average person
spends about a quarter of their day resisting desires, from sex to time
on social media.12 With so many demands draining our resources, it's not
surprising that so many of us find it hard to maintain our willpower
from time to time. Brain scans were even able to identify a pair of
brain regions -- the prefrontal and anterior cingulate cortices -- that
appeared to be involved in all these different forms of ego control. But
to cement their theory, the researchers really needed to be able to
identify the fuel that became depleted over time. They settled on the
molecule glucose, which also powers our muscles, as the prime
candidate.13 Exercising our focus and willpower can, after all, feel
akin to a physical ordeal. The novelist Edward St Aubyn apparently has
to be wrapped in a towel as he writes, since he sweats so profusely
while creating his novels14 -- as if the intense concentration were
taxing his whole body. And the research shows that the effort of
self-control can indeed spill over into the body, leading to an increase
in perspiration.15

In support of the glucose theory, Baumeister points to studies using
positron emission tomography (PET) that can measure energy consumption
in the brain, and which show an increase in glucose metabolism in the
frontal regions of the brain as we engage in effortful tasks.16
Baumeister's own experiments also found an apparent correlation between
people's glucose levels and the effects of ego depletion: the lower
their blood sugar, the lower their willpower. Even more compellingly,
his team found that delivering a quick sugar rush, through a glass of
lemonade, restored participants' mental focus and self-control when they
were feeling depleted.17 The apparently rapid exhaustion of our brain's
resources -- often after just 5 minutes of mental activity! -- may sound
like bad news, but Baumeister's research nevertheless offered lots of
practical suggestions to make the most of our limited reserves. He found
that self-control and mental focus can become stronger with practice,
like a muscle -- and as we saw with the effects of ego depletion itself,
the benefits could spill over into multiple domains. Participants in one
of the first experiments were encouraged to correct their bad posture
over a two-week period, and they subsequently showed greater
perseverance on a laboratory test. People who committed to avoiding
snacks, meanwhile, were subsequently twice as likely to give up smoking,
while those who attempted to curb swearing in their everyday speech were
better able to stay patient with their romantic partners.18 Somehow, the
brain was learning how to expand its reserves and cope with depletion.
Baumeister argued that the surest way to boost overall self-control is
to change your environment, avoiding small, everyday ordeals that slowly
sap your energy, so you can spend it on the things that really matter.
If sweets are your particular vice, you might avoid having them in your
home or on your desk at work, so that you aren't exhausted by the
continual temptation to open the cookie jar. Or if you are easily
distracted by your phone during work, you might put it away in your
locker. And if you are the President of the USA, you might simplify your
wardrobe and diet to

eliminate unnecessary choices and preserve your decision-making energy
for matters of national importance. It all seemed so certain.19 Yet some
recent studies have questioned whether ego depletion is really as
inevitable as we once thought. Baumeister's theory, it seems, was
missing something essential: the power of belief to control the brain's
resources. THE MIND'S THE LIMIT Experience in any profession tells us
that some people find the same mental effort much more tiring than
others. Just think of the people you know. While some are exhausted at
the end of the working day, others seem to have boundless reserves that
allow them to read hundreds of novels, play in an orchestra or write a
screenplay. These individual differences may partly depend on our
beliefs about the tasks themselves. You might have been brought up to
think that reading is hard work, whereas playing music is a form of
relaxation, or vice versa, and those beliefs will determine how tiring
you find the respective activities. That's worth bearing in mind if
you're a parent, teacher or manager giving instructions to other people.
Dutch researchers have shown that simply being told that we may find an
exercise to be energising, rather than fatiguing, can reduce the sense
of depletion, so that participants are more persistent and focused -- so
don't over-emphasise the difficulty of a task before someone has tried
it for themselves.20 Even more powerful, however, are our expectations
about our own capabilities and our reactions to hard mental work in
general, according to some game-changing work by Veronika Job at the
University of Vienna in Austria. She has shown that our beliefs about
the brain's resources -- whether we see them as finite or non-limited --
can powerfully change our experience of ego depletion and our capacity
to remain self-controlled and focused under pressure.

Working with researchers at Stanford University in the late 2000s, Job
first created a questionnaire to test her participants' 'implicit
theories' of concentration and self-control, with a series of statements
that they had to score on a scale of 1 (strongly agree) to 6 (strongly
disagree). They included: When situations accumulate that challenge you
with temptations, it gets more and more difficult to resist the
temptations. Strenuous mental activity exhausts your resources, which
you need to refuel afterwards (e.g.Â through taking breaks, doing
nothing, watching television, eating snacks). When you have completed a
strenuous mental activity, you cannot start another activity immediately
with the same concentration because you have to recover your mental
energy again.

And: When you have been working on a strenuous mental task, you feel
energised and you are able to immediately start with another demanding
activity. If you have just resisted a strong temptation, you feel
strengthened and you can withstand any new temptations. Your mental
stamina fuels itself. Even after strenuous mental exertion, you can
continue doing more of it.

The people who agreed more with the first set of statements were
considered to have a 'limited' theory of the mind's resources, while
those who agreed with the second were said to have a 'non-limited'
theory of the mind's resources. (In the actual experiment, the
statements appeared in a single combined list, alongside other 'decoy'
statements that were added to avoid arousing the participants' suspicion
about the study's purpose.) After rating the statements, the
participants were given an arduous exercise in which they had to cross
out certain letters in every word on a typewritten page: a boring but
fiddly task that was deliberately designed to 'deplete' their resources.
Finally, they took the Stroop test, a standard test

of concentration in which different colour words appear in differently
coloured text. The participants' task is to report the colour of the
letters, irrespective of the word that is presented. (You might see the
word 'red' appearing in blue, 'black' appearing in orange, or 'yellow'
appearing in yellow. The correct answers would be blue, orange, and
yellow.) If all this sounds slightly tiresome, you can imagine how some
of the participants felt. And the people with the 'limited' mindset
reacted to the tasks in exactly the way you would predict from ego
depletion theory: the fiddly proofreading task exhausted their minds,
causing them to lose concentration on the Stroop test. As a result,
their accuracy was much worse than a control group who had taken the
Stroop test without having to complete the text-correction. The people
with a non-limited view of the mind, in contrast, showed no signs of
fatigue after the first exercise. They actually performed just as well
as the control group who had taken the Stroop test when fresh without
the dull-but-tiring proofreading task. Astonishingly, Job's results
seemed to show that the consequences of ego depletion are real -- but
only if you believe in it. Job next recruited a new set of participants
to see if she could determine their beliefs and whether that would alter
their performance. Instead of seeing the full questionnaire, half of the
subjects were shown the 'limited' statements given above, while the rest
were given the 'non-limited' statements -- a subtle intervention that
was meant to prime one or the other mindset. The participants were then
given the text-correction task and the Stroop test. And the effects were
huge: those who had been exposed to the idea that concentration can
build with effort were around twice as accurate on the Stroop test,
compared to the people who had been primed to think that their resources
would deplete.21 This proved causality: through nothing more than a
nudge towards one belief or another, she had strengthened or weakened
their willpower. Indeed, the people who had been primed with the
non-limited views actually performed better if they had taken the
so-called depleting task than if they hadn't exerted

themselves before the Stroop test. Their beliefs that mental effort
could be energising had become a reality. When I spoke to Job about this
work, she told me that when she first presented her ideas at a
colloquium in her native Switzerland other researchers were sceptical of
the possibility that expectations could have these effects. But these
game-changing findings have since been replicated many times -- with
evidence of significant long-term effects. Using participants' diaries
of their day-to-day activities, for example, Job found that people with
the non-limited view of their mind's resources were better able to
recover after a long and tiring day, with higher expectations about what
they were going to achieve the following morning, and achieved greater
productivity as a result. Amazingly, she found that people with the
non-limited view of the mind were actually more productive (than their
own average) after a particularly demanding day compared to a less
demanding day. Far from exhausting them, the extra difficulties had
boosted their stamina and galvanised their motivation to meet their
goals.22 The effects of these mindsets are especially salient during the
most stressful times, such as the run-up to exams. Those with the
limited mindset report greater fatigue throughout the period, which
leads to greater procrastination, and students' grades and emotional
well-being suffer as a consequence. Because of their depleted
self-control, they are also more likely to feast on junk food and resort
to impulsive spending to lift their mood -- the classic signs of ego
depletion. Those with the non-limited view, in contrast, find it much
easier to maintain their studies and achieve good grades, without
procrastinating or neglecting their health.23 Our beliefs about
willpower can even determine our responses to chronic illness. Job has
studied a cohort of people with diabetes, revealing that their mindsets
influenced how likely they were to follow doctors' orders. Overall,
people with the non-limited view of their willpower were more diligent
in acts of self-care (such as keeping a record of their blood sugar
levels), taking their medication and keeping their weight under
control.24 If you feel mentally exhausted at the end of the day, you may
be less

inclined to take care of yourself, but people with the non-limited view
of the mind did not fall into this trap and were healthier as a
consequence. The limited view of willpower may be far more common in the
West, but this attitude is not universal. Working with Krishna Savani at
Nanyang Technological University in Singapore, Job has shown that the
nonlimited view of the human mind is much more common among Indian
students than people in the US or Switzerland -- and their mental
stamina is much greater as a result.25 Job and Savani argue that the
greater prevalence of the non-limited belief in India may arise from
various religious traditions, including Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism:
adherents practise mentally taxing activities that are explicitly
designed to boost concentration and selfcontrol. They point to the yogic
practice of trataka, which involves concentrating your vision on a
single point -- such as a black dot or the tip of a candle flame --
while ignoring all other distractions. Trataka is essentially the kind
of attention task that would have been used by Western scientists to
deplete our resources. For practitioners of yoga, however, it is seen as
a way of 'cleansing' the mind, preparing it for further concentration,
and regular repetition of the exercise appears to cement the idea that
focused mental effort can be energising rather than fatiguing -- leading
to greater concentration and self-control in many areas of life.26 It is
interesting to contemplate how different the scientific understanding of
willpower could have been, if the first experiments on mental fatigue
had been conducted in a non-Western culture. A UNIFIED THEORY OF
WILLPOWER? These findings may seem to ring the death knell for ego
depletion theory. There is, however, a way of reconciling Baumeister's
and Job's theories if you think about the way the brain is managing its
energy levels. According to one view, the prediction machine is acting
like an accountant, parcelling out our resources so that we don't run
our supplies of glucose

(and whatever other sources of mental fuel) dangerously low. As we saw
in chapters 5 and 6, the body's sensors cannot judge our energy intake
or expenditure very accurately. This means our inner accountant can be
swayed by our expectations, including our beliefs about willpower. If
you see your resources as limited, it makes sense for your brain to
operate stingily, reducing its consumption of glucose after an effortful
activity. That way, it will eke out its remaining energy reserves and
avoid exhausting them before you have a chance to replenish them. In
such cases, the sense of depletion isn't just imagined. The brain really
is reducing its energy usage, a physiological consequence of your
expectations -- in just the same way we might all tighten our belts, and
reduce our spending, as we await the next pay cheque. If you think that
you have unlimited resources, however, the internal accountant is much
less of a miser, and it releases whatever supplies you need, since it no
longer fears running out. Your brain uses as much fuel as it needs in
the belief that more will be available, meaning that you can maintain a
consistent effort while studying, resisting temptation or making tough
decisions. It simply has no need to cut its energy expenditure and
reduce its performance. If true, this might explain why willpower grows
with practice: the exercises that Baumeister and others had set their
participants helped them to prove, to themselves, that their mental
resources were less easily depleted than they once thought, allowing
their brains to release the necessary fuel to maintain their focus and
self-control in many other situations. This new 'unified' theory could
solve many other mysteries about selfcontrol and concentration that
previously puzzled scientists. There had been signs, for instance, that
people's mental focus increases if they are led to believe they are near
the end of a task, but not if they feel they still have a long way to go
-- a finding that is hardly compatible with the original iteration of
ego depletion theory, but which makes sense when you consider the
brain's need to allocate resources. This theory might also

explain why people generally perform better on mentally taxing tasks if
they are paid to succeed. Given the immediate prospect of a reward, the
prediction machine -- even one that subscribes to the limited view -- is
more willing to risk exhaustion by devoting more resources to its
activities.27 The brain's internal book-keeping can also help us
understand why the mere taste of sugary drinks immediately improves
performance, even before the glucose can actually reach our neurons.
Some studies have even found that rinsing the mouth with sugar water,
before spitting it out, can improve performance. Once the glucose
receptors in the mouth have signalled that more fuel is coming, the
accountant knows that the brain can afford to spend its existing energy
more generously. Consistent with this idea, Job has shown that ingesting
sweet, sugary drinks tends to offer more relief to people with the
limited mindset -- who are more likely to feel that they are on the
verge of exhaustion, and to be parcelling out their existing reserves
conservatively -- than to people with the non-limited mindset.28 Many
other substances used to aid concentration may work through belief
rather than any direct effect of the chemicals themselves. When studied
in controlled trials that properly account for the influence of
expectation, the brain-boosting effects of caffeine were found primarily
to arise from our beliefs about its benefits. Indeed, one study found
that the mere smell of coffee is enough to lead to immediate
improvements in performance, thanks to its associations with mental
acuity. Even so-called smart drugs such as amphetamine salts -- used by
ambitious students and workers to enhance their concentration and focus
-- may work through altered expectations of our own capability,
independently of any biochemical effects.29 A WILL OF STEEL Just how
much willpower can any person use before they run out of gas? The
astonishingly prolific American writer Danielle Steel may offer some

surprising clues. One hundred and seventy-nine books into her career,
Steel revealed that she had achieved her success by working 20-hour
days, beginning at 8.30 in the morning, while resisting almost all
distractions. If she faces a creative challenge, she relies on her
boundless energy to keep on slogging through it. 'The more you shy away
from the material, the worse it gets. You're better off pushing
through,' she advised. Steel said that she fails to understand how she
could become exhausted by her work, an attitude that certainly sounds
very close to the non-limited beliefs about the mind that Job has
studied. She even has a sign in her office that reads: 'There are no
miracles. There is only discipline.'30 The interview, published in 2019,
soon went viral, with many newspapers and other outlets describing
Steel's powers of focus and selfcontrol as 'superhuman'. As the Guardian
pointed out at the time: 'It's one thing to be driven. It's quite
another to have to summon up and sustain the willpower to do the
driving.'31 This response is not surprising, considering that most
people believe even a short period of uninterrupted mental exertion is
tiring. Job's research suggests that many more of us could attain higher
levels of productivity, if we adopted the right mindset -- but Steel's
work ethic might ring some warning bells, too. One potential criticism
of Job's research is that non-limited beliefs about the brain could lead
us to push ourselves too hard, without permitting any pleasure in life.
Fortunately, extreme workaholism does not seem to be a common problem
for people with the non-limited beliefs, at least according to Job's
studies. Indeed, the research shows that they tend to be happier and
healthier than those who expect mental effort to be depleting, which is
hardly what you'd expect of the typical workaholic. One reason is that
they use their mental resources to plan their work effectively, without
wasting time on distractions. 'They are more efficient at reaching their
goals, which is a strong predictor of wellbeing,' Job told me. And once
they have left work, they will feel more energised to take care of the
rest of their life.

People with the limited beliefs, in contrast, tend to feel so depleted
that they fail to organise their work and feel more burdened as a
result; they then return home so exhausted that they find little energy
to enjoy their time off, either.32 Surprisingly, people with the limited
beliefs even suffer from worse sleep, since they don't have -- or don't
think they have -- the self-control to get an early night when they need
it and instead put off bedtime, a phenomenon called 'sleep
procrastination' that will compound their exhaustion.33 The truth is
that a boost to your willpower should help you to achieve whatever
work-life balance is best for you, whether that's an all-consuming
schedule like Steel's or a few hours of concentrated work followed by
plenty of time for play. Your mental resources will be there for you to
use, whenever you need them. If you have a limited mindset and want to
change your own expectations, simply learning about your vast mental
reserves can have immediate benefits on your focus and self-control. In
one experiment, participants read an article about the 'biology of
unlimited willpower', which described the (typically) abundant reserves
of glucose in our brain and the body's capacity to release more when we
need it. The message became a self-fulfilling prophecy: their
concentration and focus on cognitive tests actually increased with
greater workload once they had been told about the brain's available
resources.34 Once again, merely taking a few minutes to reappraise your
expectations can change something that was thought to be physiologically
intractable. As you process these new ideas, you might benefit from
thinking a little about the times you yourself have felt energised after
a demanding task in the past. Even if you have the limited beliefs about
the brain, there will have been times when you felt you were 'in the
zone' on a complex task, so fully absorbed by what you were doing that
you didn't feel time passing. You might have been engrossed in a novel
or playing a complex computer game late into the night, for example.
Those are both examples of your focus increasing with effort -- even
though you may not have recognised that fact at the time, since you were
enjoying yourself so much. Or consider

a moment when you found that exercising self-control left you feeling
stronger. Simply remembering that kind of event can open your mind to
the idea that your mental reserves of focus and self-control are much
deeper than you assumed. Once you have started to recognise this, you
can test your limits with small challenges. They should reflect a
realistic goal that you already feel highly motivated to achieve.35 (In
the classic ego depletion tests, people tend to find voluntary
activities, picked with a sense of autonomy, to be less fatiguing than
those imposed by others.) It could be as simple as avoiding the
temptations of social media for a whole day, to test whether you can
work more productively than you had previously imagined; if you tend to
find your evenings are wasted with unfulfilling activities, you might
try practising a hobby rather than watching TV for one evening -- to see
if this leaves you more energised than you had thought. Given Job and
Savani's research in India, you might even try the traditional yogic
exercise of trataka, in which you focus on a single point for a few
moments to 'cleanse' the mind and sharpen your concentration. Whatever
you do, don't start out by seeking to emulate Danielle Steel's prolonged
displays of willpower: if you attempt too much too quickly, you may
fail, and that will only cement the belief that your mental reserves are
limited and easily depleted.36 As we also saw with research on stress
(chapter 7), you should edge out of your comfort zone and then question
how you felt throughout. With time, you may find that you are more
capable of exercising self-control and concentration when you need it.
Parents and teachers might want to take particular note of these
findings. In education, self-control and concentration are often as
important for a child's academic success as natural intelligence, and
Job's research suggests new ways that these qualities may be cultivated
at a young age. The psychologist Kyla Haimovitz and colleagues recently
visited a nursery school in the San Francisco Bay Area and read the
four- and fiveyear-old children a simple story about a little girl who
had to exercise patience and determination -- while waiting to open a
present, buying an

ice cream or solving a difficult puzzle at school. At each challenge,
the character felt 'stronger and stronger' the longer she waited, or the
more she persevered -- a message that was designed to prime the children
with the non-limited view of willpower. After hearing the story, the
children were given a classic test of selfregulation: the option of
either having a small treat as soon as they felt like it, or waiting for
a full 13 minutes to have a bigger treat instead (which is pretty much
the hardest test of self-control you can give a pre-schooler). Overall,
74 per cent of children who had heard the inspiring story managed to
resist temptation, compared to just 45 per cent of a control group who
heard a different tale.37 Clearly, a single storybook is not going to
change a life, but with regular exposure to similar messages, children
should be better equipped to exercise their willpower in all kinds of
tasks, providing them with an in-built resilience during times of
pressure and exertion in later life. In the next chapter we will examine
more strategies through which teachers and business leaders can use
expectation effects to enhance the potential of whole groups of students
and employees. But to end our exploration of willpower, let's look at a
final means of boosting focus and self-control -- through prayer or
ritual. SECULAR SUPERSTITION Look into the biography of any elite
performer in sport or entertainment and there is a good chance they'll
have some kind of superstition or ritual. Most basketball players, for
example, develop a routine set of movements that they perform -- such as
dribbling, pausing, bouncing the ball and spinning it a certain number
of times, or even kissing it -- before taking their foul shot. Serena
Williams listens to the same song ('Flashdance . . . What a Feeling' by
Irene Cara) before she goes on court and bounces the ball exactly five
times before her first serve; Rafael Nadal always takes a

cold shower before each match and performs a characteristic series of
gestures as he waits for his opponent. In the arts, BeyoncÃ© prays and
performs a fixed set of stretching exercises before a performance, while
the ballerina Suzanne Farrell -- who is considered to have been one of
the US's greatest dancers -- always pinned a small toy mouse inside her
leotard. Superstitions and rituals are also prevalent among writers --
Dr Seuss would wear a lucky hat when he felt that he was blocked -- and
composers: Beethoven relied on coffee to fuel his creativity, and he
religiously counted out exactly 60 beans for each cup.38 Before I
learned about the power of expectation effects, I would have believed
these superstitions to be a kind of emotional crutch without any direct
benefits to performance. And I would have been mistaken. One study of
free throws in basketball found that players were around 12.4 percentage
points more accurate when they followed their personal routines before
the shot than when they deviated from the sequence. Overall, the total
success rate was 83.8 per cent with the exact routine, compared to 71.4
per cent without.39 Superstitions and rituals can also boost
perseverance and performance across a whole range of cognitive tasks,
and the advantages are often considerable. In a test of verbal
dexterity, for instance, the presence of a lucky charm brought a 50 per
cent improvement. Simply hearing a superstitious phrase -- such as
'break a leg' -- can even bring about a small advantage, according to
one study.40 Why would rituals enhance people's skills -- across so many
different domains -- in this way? One obvious explanation is that
superstitious beliefs and rituals help to quell anxiety by creating the
sense that you have more control over the situation. That is almost
certainly a factor. Equally importantly, however, they may lead us to
have more faith in our mental reserves, and our capacity to maintain
concentration and self-discipline. As a result, we can persevere, even
when others would begin to feel exhausted and start to give up, and with
the increased mental focus, we can avoid any distractions that might
limit our performance.

One study that directly tested the effects of superstitious beliefs on
willpower found that people who spend time in spiritual contemplation
sustain greater focus on tests of concentration than those who do not.41
If you are beginning to feel your discipline weakening, the belief in a
helping hand from some supernatural power can replenish your reserves.
Given these results, some researchers have speculated that the boost for
willpower could have been a primary reason that many cultures evolved
religious rituals and beliefs in the first place.42 In our evolutionary
past, the increased self-control might have helped them to rein in their
worst impulses (such as aggression or stealing from neighbours) and
forgo immediate pleasure (such as gorging on restricted food supplies)
for the future good of the group. Fortunately for atheists, you can
still benefit from certain rituals without any need for a higher power.
As we saw with 'open-label' studies in chapter 2, placebo treatments can
be effective even when participants are fully aware that they are taking
the sham drug -- apparently because the routine itself appears to
trigger the expectation that they will get better. Superstitions and
rituals seem to be no different, with strong evidence that they can
provide a boost even if people are fully aware that there is no rational
reason why they should work. In one beautifully bizarre experiment,
Alison Wood Brooks at Harvard University and colleagues invited
participants to perform a karaoke rendition of 'Don't Stop Believin'' by
Journey. To ensure that they made their best possible effort, the
subjects were told they would be judged for the accuracy of their
performance, as rated by the karaoke software, and they would be given a
bonus of up to \$5 for a pitch-perfect rendition of the song. Before the
performance began, around half of the participants were given the
following instructions: Please do the following ritual: Draw a picture
of how you are feeling right now. Sprinkle salt on your drawing. Count
to five out loud. Crinkle up

your paper. Throw your paper in the trash. The mere act of performing
the ritual -- which could have offered no direct benefit to their
singing -- boosted the participants' singing scores by 13 points out of
100, compared to control participants who had simply waited quietly
until they were asked to perform. Follow-up experiments revealed similar
improvements on a difficult maths test. And the exact framing of the
preparatory routine mattered. If it was called a 'ritual', the
participants saw the benefits, but not if they were asked to perform 'a
few random behaviours'. The connotations of the word clearly mattered in
boosting their ability to remain focused under pressure, in just the
same way that the word placebo brings its own medical benefits.43 The
adoption of secular rituals can also improve our resolve in some classic
tests of willpower that often leave us feeling depleted, including our
capacity to resist the temptation of a tasty treat. Participants in one
experiment were asked to perform some ritual gestures (sitting upright,
closing their eyes, bowing their head and counting to ten) before they
ate, while a control group performed a set of random movements. They
were then given a choice between a Snickers bar and a lower-calorie
fruit and cereal bar. On a subsequent questionnaire, the participants
who had performed the ritual were more likely to report greater feelings
of discipline, giving higher ratings to statements such as 'I felt
mentally strong when making this decision' and 'I felt sharp and focused
when making this decision'. And this was reflected in the food they
chose to eat. Around 64 per cent of those in the ritual condition chose
the healthier option over the chocolate bar, compared with 48 per cent
performing random movements without the sense of ritual.44 Given these
results, we might all consider adopting a few rituals that help to
engender a sense of control and focus. The aim should be to choose
something personally meaningful and straightforward: like the dieters
performing the ritual movements, you want something that easily evokes

feelings of inner strength. (If it is overly complex, the routine may
itself be difficult to maintain in the hour of need -- a burden that
could potentially add to your anxiety and lower your performance.) It
could be as simple as performing exactly the same sequence of stretches
each morning before work or having a particular voice warm-up that you
repeat before an important presentation, or saying a special mantra
before your discipline is about to be tested. I personally try to build
a ritual around my morning coffee before I start writing -- counting out
the number of beans like Beethoven to imbue it with a sense of
significance and to prime my mind for focused concentration. If you have
some favourite clothes or perfume, turn that into a lucky charm that you
use when you know you are going to have to act under pressure. Whether
you are a professional athlete, singer or public speaker, or you simply
want to have the self control to avoid procrastination and stop wasting
time, the only thing holding you back may be your expectations of your
own willpower. And a little manufactured 'luck' and sense of control
could be all you need to set you on the path to success.

How to think about . . . willpower A sense of autonomy -- the feeling
that you have control over your activities -- can reduce the sense of
ego depletion, even if you have the limited mindset. Where possible,
make an effort to establish your own routines rather than following
others' orders, and regularly remind yourself of their purpose and
meaning to you, personally. Try to recognise the instances when you
personally find mental effort to be invigorating. What difficult tasks
do you enjoy because of their difficulty? Reminding yourself of these
activities will help build up your beliefs in your potential. When you
find an activity to be draining, consider whether it is objectively more
difficult than the things you find energising, or whether it is just a
preconception. Do other people find it energising, for instance, and is
it objectively more difficult than the other activities that do not feel
so depleting? By questioning these assumptions, you may begin to see
that you are capable of much more than you thought. Establish your own
rituals and secular superstitions that will help you to establish a
feeling of control in times of high pressure. It could be a 'lucky'
charm that has positive associations or a set of reassuring gestures --
anything that feels personally significant and brings the promise of
success.

OceanofPDF.com

9 UNTAPPED GENIUS How to boost your own -- and others' -- intelligence,
creativity and memory Take a moment to consider the people around you --
your boss, your colleagues, your partner and your friends. Do you feel
smart when you're around them? Or do they leave you feeling slow-witted
and unoriginal, so that you are always struggling to play catch-up? How
about the people from your past like your schoolteachers or your
parents? Did they see your potential? Or did they underestimate you? In
chapter 4, we saw how we could catch psychogenic illnesses from others
through contagious nocebo effects. Now that we've examined the ways that
our beliefs can influence our resilience and willpower, it's time to
examine how the beliefs of the people around us can change our
intellectual abilities. Whenever we interact with another person, they
can transmit their opinions of us through subtle cues, and over time we
come to internalise those expectations as if they were true -- leading
to profound changes in our performance. If you have ever found that some
people bring out the best or worst in you, this is why.

The first clues to the existence of this phenomenon came from a seminal
experiment at Spruce Elementary School in South San Francisco.1 It was
the spring term of 1964, and the staff were busy with their own packed
schedules, when their principal, Lenore Jacobson, asked them to handle
one more demand. A psychologist called Robert Rosenthal, she said,
wanted to identify the children who were on the cusp of a sudden
'spurt', during which they would show accelerated growth compared with
their peers. To do so, he had designed a cognitive test that could
predict the child's trajectory, which he hoped to try out at the school.
Each child completed the exam, and after the summer term the teachers
were each given a shortlist of the children who were most likely to be
'bloomers'. As you might have come to expect, the supposed premise of
the research was, in fact, a sham. The bloomers had been picked at
random to see whether the teachers' enhanced expectations would
influence the children's progress over the following year. The test that
they'd been given in spring 1964 served as a baseline to measure those
intellectual gains. And for some alleged 'bloomers' the effects of the
teachers' enhanced expectations seemed to be truly remarkable. There was
Violet, a 'small, wiry tomboy with little black eyes'. She was the fifth
of six children, the daughter of a butcher and a housewife. The staff
across the school knew her for her defiance and her playground fights.
Despite these behavioural issues, however, her intelligence developed
tremendously over Grade 1, with a second test revealing that she had
gained 37 IQ points. That's an enormous increase in intellect, which
would have seemed impossible with intense individual tutoring, let alone
a standard elementary education. Then there was Mario, the son of a
factory worker and a typist, who was just starting Grade 2. He was
already known to be a bright little boy, even if his reading aloud was
sometimes faltering, and he still wrote letters as their mirror image.
Eight months after the first test, however, his intelligence had grown
by the equivalent of 69 IQ points.2 Not all the children showed such
remarkable progress. Overall, however, the bloomers' intellectual gains
were about twice as large as the other

children in their year, outstripping their classmates by 15.4 IQ points
in the first grade and 9.5 IQ points in the second grade.3 Importantly,
the teachers weren't simply paying more overt attention and giving more
care to these children. If anything, they were spending less time with
them. Instead, the teachers seem to have subtly communicated their
beliefs through daily interactions, which, in turn, led the children
themselves to take a more positive view of their own abilities --
beliefs that allowed their young minds to flourish. Rosenthal and
Jacobson's results were initially considered to be controversial. With
our newfound understanding of the expectation effect, however, the
bloomers' progress makes perfect sense. Traits like intelligence and
creativity can be influenced by our beliefs and, at least to some
degree, we often absorb assumptions from the people around us. Too often
those expectations act like brakes that slow our progress, but once you
release them it suddenly becomes much easier to reach your potential. As
we shall see, the implications of this research become political --
since there is strong evidence that expectation effects can increase
social equality. Fortunately, some cutting-edge techniques allow us to
break free from the limits imposed on us by others, so that we can
create our own selffulfilling prophecies. INSTANT BRAIN BOOST The very
idea that we could 'think ourselves smart' is itself rather shocking.
For much of psychology's history, our intelligence has been considered a
prime example of the nature versus nurture debate. Our genes are
supposed to be the biggest factor determining brainpower, followed by
factors like diet and the home environment. The effect of expectations
should be marginal. Some contrary evidence appeared to come from the
science of brain training. If you were interested in computer games in
the late 2000s, you may remember seeing a raft of apps that each claimed
to increase your

intelligence. The most famous games were Dr Kawashima's Brain Training,
which was available for the Nintendo DS and was publicised with
widespread advertisements by the actress Nicole Kidman; and Lumosity, a
website and app which, since inception, has had more than 100 million
users. Much like Roy Baumeister's theories of willpower, these companies
claimed that your brainpower was like a muscle -- and the more you
exercised it, the smarter you became. The apps typically included games
that were designed to increase your working memory, spatial reasoning,
cognitive flexibility and mental arithmetic -- all of the skills that
together are thought to determine your intelligence in a range of
different tasks. Users often reported increased mental clarity and
sharpened memories, and the academic literature appeared to prove the
point, recording noticeable differences in IQ after a few weeks of
regular training. Maybe nurture -- even in adulthood -- could give
nature a run for its money after all. Unfortunately, many of these
studies did not involve an 'active' control -- that is, a suitable
comparison that might lead the participants to believe they were making
some kind of useful effort.4 And for those that did involve a control,
the activity was often uninspiring -- such as watching an educational
DVD -- which may not have evoked the same feeling of mental engagement
as an interactive game.5 We've all attended boring classes, after all,
without noticing a sudden brain boost afterwards. As a result, the
expectations of improvement in each condition were probably very
different. Even more problematically, many of these studies had
recruited the participants -- most often university students -- with
adverts that overtly stated the fact that they would be taking part in a
'brain training experiment'. As a result, the students arrived at the
labs with some very strong assumptions about what they would experience.
To find out whether an expectation effect might have skewed the earlier
results, Cyrus Foroughi and colleagues at George Mason University in
Fairfax, Virginia, set about recruiting students using two separate
flyers, which they placed throughout the university campus.

The first very explicitly set up expectations of a large brain boost:
Brain Training & Cognitive Enhancement Numerous studies have shown that
working memory training can increase fluid intelligence Participate in a
study today! The second instead focused on the incentive of gaining
college credits: Email Today & Participate in a Study Need credits? Sign
up for a study today and earn up to 5 credits. Participate in a study
today! Each leaflet offered a different email address to register
interest in the study, allowing Foroughi and his colleagues to determine
which message each participant had seen before the test. Once they
arrived at the lab, the participants took two separate intelligence
tests -- providing a baseline score before they engaged in an hour's
brain training. They were then given a night's sleep before taking two
further intelligence tests on the following day. As Foroughi himself
points out, it would be highly unlikely that a single hour's training
could have a meaningful effect on intelligence. (A whole year of further
education, after all, is only thought to add, at most, around five
points to someone's IQ.) Yet that is exactly what his team found in the
high-expectation group, with those participants showing a huge 5--10
IQpoint gain on the two tests, while the control group showed
practically no improvement. Through the simple power of expectation, the
first group had experienced an instant brain boost. For further
evidence, Foroughi looked back through previous braintraining
experiments to check whether or not they had offered overt

advertising of the kind he'd used in his study, and to compare the size
of the effects to those studies that had not explained the proposed
benefits during recruitment. Sure enough, he found that the cognitive
gains were much greater for the experiments that had (unwittingly)
raised the participants' expectations.6 Foroughi's study was taken by
some to be evidence that brain training simply doesn't work. That
conclusion was an oversimplification. In reality, the study confirmed
that heading to the 'mind gym' and engaging in tough mental activities
really can strengthen your brain, at least in the short term -- but part
of that success comes from the hype. In her adverts for Dr Kawashima's
Brain Training, Nicole Kidman actually was making all the users a little
bit smarter.7 Similar expectation effects have now been documented in
tests of noninvasive brain stimulation. You can buy devices that apply
small electrical currents to the scalp, which are supposed to change the
activity of neurons underneath -- and they are sometimes touted as
offering an instant brain boost. There is still an academic debate over
whether the technology is as powerful as some claim, but at least some
of the effects seem to arise from people's assumptions about the
interventions and their own capacity to improve.8 IQ is only one way of
measuring our intellectual potential, of course. It's perhaps best seen
as an underlying brainpower that determines how quickly we process new
information. But we now know that many other measures of thinking
ability will also be susceptible to expectation effects. Consider
creativity and the capacity to come up with original solutions to
problems. Read any business magazine or website and you'll soon come
across an article offering tips on the best ways to improve the
originality of your ideas -- from taking a shot of vodka9 to lying
down.10 Like the braintraining studies, however, the experiments often
fail to consider people's beliefs on entering the lab. Most of us know,
after all, that writers like Ernest Hemingway sometimes had their
greatest flashes of inspiration while under the influence, meaning that
when we're given a drink and asked to

take a test of creative thinking, we're already primed to do better;
similarly, we may have heard that many writers, such as Truman Capote,
Vladimir Nabokov or (more recently) Phoebe Waller-Bridge, have preferred
to work in bed. Those assumptions are highly likely to have influenced
the results and, without adequate controls in place, we can't know if
it's the vodka (or supine posture) or our expectations about what vodka
(or supine posture) will do for us that make all the difference.11 To
see if enhanced beliefs can make us more creative, a team from the
Weizmann Institute of Science in Rehovot, Israel, primed people with the
expectation that a sniff of cinnamon could help them to come up with
more original ideas. As expected, these participants scored much higher
on a standard measure of creativity, in which they had to come up with
new and original uses for common household objects -- such as a shoe,
nail or button -- when they were exposed to the smell. Participants who
had simply been given the sniff test, without any expectation that the
perfume could lubricate their thinking, did not see these benefits.12
How about memory? Your expectations can't create knowledge where there
is none already: contrary to some more far-fetched claims of the
mind--body--spirit literature, you can't simply tell yourself that you
are fluent in French and speak like Audrey Tautou. But many of us have
absorbed more information than we realise, and a recent study of
students' general knowledge shows that an expectation effect can make it
easier, or harder, to retrieve those facts. The researchers led the
participants to believe that they were involved in a test of subliminal
messaging and that the answer to each question would be flashed,
momentarily, across the screen. If they were asked 'Who painted
Guernica? Picasso, DalÃ­, MirÃ³ or El Greco', for example, then Picasso
should appear just beforehand. The participants were told that the
writing would disappear before they were consciously aware of its
presence, but their subconscious mind would be able to pick it up.
'Follow your intuitions,' the researchers told them. 'On some level you
already know the answer.' In reality, of course, there were no
subliminal clues -- but the belief

that they had received a helping hand meant that the participants were
much more likely to pick the correct answer each time.13 How could this
be possible? Neuroscientists studying consciousness often talk about our
'mental workspace' -- which you could picture as a kind of whiteboard
that allows you to juggle a limited amount of information at any one
time. If you consider yourself to be a relatively slow-witted and
unoriginal thinker, then your anxieties about your abilities will be
cluttering that workspace. If you already have more faith in your
intellectual potential, however, then that workspace will be clearer for
you to hold more information -- and your thinking is going to be more
focused and less inhibited, allowing you to devote more attention to the
specific task at hand. That belief in your own abilities will also mean
that you are more likely to persist, even if the best solution doesn't
come immediately to mind. Expectation effects will be especially
important when we confront new difficulties that challenge our existing
abilities. Abundant research shows that moderate frustration -- which
often accompanies fresh challenges -- is actually a sign of learning; if
you find something difficult to comprehend or execute, you are more
likely to make lasting improvements in your skills, or to remember the
fact in the future, than if it is immediately easy. (It is for this
reason that neuroscientists tout the benefits of 'desirable
difficulties' for learning.) Unfortunately, most of us struggle to
realise this and instead start to develop the fear that we'll never
improve, which becomes selfdefeating. Some powerful experiments have
found that simply reminding yourself of the benefits of frustration can
remedy those problems, reducing the feelings of helplessness and freeing
up mental resources like working memory so that you will begin to
perform better over time.14 Once again, it's a self-fulfilling prophecy:
if you expect frustration to help you learn, it will; if you think
frustration is a sign you're out of your depth and always will be, it
is. You must beware the trap of overconfidence, of course -- simply
assuming that you are brilliant, at everything, without any foundation
for that self-

belief, could also set you up for failure and embarrassment. The aim is
to be realistic, preferably testing your abilities in small, incremental
steps. Don't begin with inflated expectations of huge leaps in your
abilities but simply question your assumptions and keep an open mind.
Even if you do not usually go so far as to wallow in feelings of
inadequacy, you might still assume that certain skills 'are not my
thing' -- but once you probe the origins of those beliefs, you may find
that you are actually a lot more capable than you'd once imagined,
releasing hidden potential that will improve your performance in the
future. THE POWER OF PYGMALION If our own beliefs can constrain or
release our intellectual potential, how about the beliefs of others
about us? After their study at Spruce Elementary, Rosenthal and Jacobson
detailed their findings in a book called Pygmalion in the Classroom. The
title was a nod to a classical myth told in Ovid's Metamorphoses, in
which a sculptor falls in love with a statue he has carved, leading the
gods to grant his wishes and bring her to life, and to George Bernard
Shaw's play Pygmalion, in which a flower girl learns to act like a
member of the aristocracy, thanks to her passionate teacher. (Pygmalion
is also the basis for the musical My Fair Lady, starring Audrey Hepburn,
which was -- perhaps coincidentally -- released the year the study took
place.) Back in the 1960s, the idea that beliefs could change outcomes
really did seem to be in the realm of fiction and mythology. Remember
that, in this period, expectation effects were still largely constrained
to medicine and, even there, they were seen as a distraction from the
'real' physiological actions of drugs. It's little wonder, then, that
contemporary psychologists were initially sceptical of the students'
huge improvements at Spruce Elementary. And there were some legitimate
reasons to question the results -- including the relatively small sample
of students, which may have inflated the apparent size of the effect.
Over the subsequent decades,

however, many more studies have confirmed that a teacher's expectations
can have either a positive or negative influence on a child's
education.15 If -- for whatever reason -- a teacher decides that the
pupil is less able, they will, quite unwittingly, place brakes on that
pupil's development, irrespective of the child's actual ability. Indeed,
and unfortunately, the research suggests that these losses in
performance may be more drastic than the brain gains that come from a
teacher's positive views.16 'I don't think there's now any doubt that
teacher expectations make a difference,' Christine Rubie-Davies, an
educationalist at the University of Auckland, who has extensively
investigated the Pygmalion effect, told me. In the last decade there has
been an explosion of new interest in the Pygmalion effect, with evidence
that the consequences of a teacher's expectations can be surprisingly
long-lasting. In the early 2010s, Nicole Sorhagen of Temple University
in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, analysed the results of a survey tracking
the progress of a thousand children in ten cities across the US. In the
children's first grade, their teachers had been asked to rate the
children's various academic skills -- subjective opinions that Sorhagen
was then able to compare with their actual performance on standardised
tests in the same year. If there was a discrepancy between the two, it
would suggest that the teachers had unfairly high or low expectations of
the child. She found that those early judgements could predict the
children's maths grades, reading comprehension and vocabulary at the age
of 15. The advantage of a teacher's high estimation, or the disadvantage
of an unreasonably low appraisal, had remained with the child through to
high school.17 Perhaps unsurprisingly, the idea has also caught the
attention of organisational psychologists looking for ways to increase
productivity, and it is now clear that other's expectations can be a
powerful force in the workplace, determining the performance of everyone
from Dutch police officers to clerks at the National City Bank of New
York. In each case, a leader's expectations boosted or limited their
employees' performance, in

just the same way that the teachers at Spruce Elementary had released
their pupils' intellectual potential. The most impressive study examined
Israeli soldiers undergoing a 15week combat command course, during which
they were tested on various tactical and practical skills.18 Priming a
leader to have positive expectations of a particular trainee was found
to improve the trainee's mean score by three standard deviations. This
means that the most average soldier under normal circumstances would
rise to the top 0.1 per cent of recruits, if the trainer believed them
to have high potential. Such huge effect sizes are exceptional -- there
seems to have been something about the Israel Defense Forces that was
especially conducive to this expectation effect and it should not be
expected elsewhere -- but the average effect size across professions is
still very large compared to most psychological interventions, leading
the average person to rise about 16 percentiles within their group, if
their leader has a positive view of them.19 Exactly how the expectations
are transmitted from the teacher or leader to their student or employee
will depend on the people involved and the specific situation. The most
obvious means would be overt praise or criticism; we all know that
encouragement can be helpful and criticism hurtful. But someone's
expectations are also evident in the goals they set, which can then
affect performance. If a teacher continually chooses more ambitious
tasks for their favourites, that provides further opportunities for
learning, while the rest of the group misses out on those opportunities.
Other signals may be subtler. Imagine you are asked a question and make
an error while answering. If someone has high expectations of your
abilities, they might rephrase their question or talk you through the
problem. Someone with lower expectations, however, may simply move on,
which subtly hints that they don't think you are going to learn from the
mistake.20 Perhaps most important are non-verbal cues. People are less
likely to smile and they make less eye contact if they have lower
expectations of you, for example -- small differences in interaction
that are nevertheless

easily perceived by children and adults. Even silence can be important:
a short pause can give you more of a chance to expand on your ideas,
instead of cutting you off. The psychologists describe all these subtle
signals as 'leakage', since people can accidentally communicate their
expectations even when they are trying to conceal their feelings.21
However the expectations are communicated, the research shows that they
are soon internalised by the people on the receiving end, reducing or
raising their motivation and self-belief. Often, we may not even be
consciously aware of the cues that cause us to feel this way -- but
those feelings will affect our performance. You might hope that, with
time and hard work, we could eventually prove ourselves, and a teacher's
or leader's beliefs about our abilities would update accordingly.
Unfortunately, exceeding someone's expectations can have
counter-intuitive consequences. While the teachers at Spruce Elementary
School embraced signs of precocity in the bloomers, Rosenthal and
Jacobson found that they took a harsher view of other children who had
not been labelled as bloomers, yet nevertheless made unexpected
progress. 'The more they gained, the more unfavourably they were rated,'
the psychologist and the principal noted in their write-up for
Scientific American.22 Once the teachers had formed a negative belief,
the child faced an uphill struggle to please them. This may be another
form of the human mind's 'confirmation bias': we are always looking for
reasons to support our existing opinions, and when the contradictory
evidence is quite literally staring us in the face, we will simply
choose to dismiss it rather than updating our beliefs. Like a dramatist
carefully crafting a narrative arc, we don't like the objects of our
expectations to go off script.23 THE BIAS BUBBLE The consequences of the
Pygmalion effect would not be so terrible if the majority of people were
accurate and fair in their judgements of others. In

most autobiographies, after all, you'll hear how a mentor saw the
amazing potential in the young star and -- through their relentless
encouragement -- helped them to recognise their own talents. And in
these few selected cases the mentors were entirely justified. For the
polymath Maya Angelou, it was Bertha Flowers, whose continued
encouragement inspired Angelou's love of literature and empowered her
with feelings of self-worth. 'I was respected not as Mrs Henderson's
grandchild or Bailey's sister but for just being Marguerite Johnson,'
she wrote.24 (Marguerite Johnson was Angelou's name at that time.) For
Oprah Winfrey, it was Mrs Duncan. 'I always, because of you, felt I
could take on the world,' Winfrey told Duncan, face to face, on her chat
show.25 And for the physicist Stephen Hawking, it was Dikran Tahta, who
saw through the young student's poor handwriting and natural laziness to
inspire his fascination with the universe. 'Behind every exceptional
person, there is an exceptional teacher,' Hawking claimed.26
Unfortunately, the psychological research reveals that most people's
capacity to detect a latent talent is far from exceptional. We judge
others, and are judged in turn, on small superficial differences,
meaning that the advantages of someone's warm expectations are often
unfairly bestowed. Just consider a bias known as the 'halo effect',
which causes us to assume that people with more symmetrical faces --
essentially, those who are more stereotypically attractive -- are also
more intelligent and competent. There is no logical reason for this;
it's pure prejudice. In the words of one paper's authors, we are
'blinded by beauty'.27 Sadly, we are judged on our appearance from a
young age -- and when those expectations are continually transmitted to
us through our parents, teachers, coaches and managers they can
determine our actual performance on many tasks for which our looks
should be completely irrelevant. The distorted perceptions eventually
become our reality.28 As the research on the general Pygmalion effect
has shown, the consequences can add up over time.29 Various studies have
confirmed that a child's looks can predict their teacher's expectations
and, in turn, their

academic achievement.30 And if you do slightly better at school, then
you might also get better work -- which can again be aided by people's
judgements of competence based on your looks. You will then be more
likely to get promotion and to earn a higher salary -- leading the
benefits to snowball. A study from the early 1990s, for instance, found
that ten years after graduating, an attractive MBA student earned around
\$10,000 more per year than the least attractive people in the class.31
Even something as supposedly inconsequential as the pitch of our voices
could influence our long-term success, through the cumulative advantages
(or disadvantages) that arise from the halo effect. In general, people
with deeper voices are considered to be more competent. When William
Mayew at Duke University in Durham, North Carolina, analysed recordings
of 792 CEOs from some of the USA's largest companies, he found that
those with the deepest voices tended to control the largest companies.
All other things being equal, they earned \$187,000 more per year.
(James Skinner, the CEO of McDonald's, had one of the lowest voices in
the sample. His average yearly earnings were \$14.71 million.)32 It also
appeared to influence their tenure -- how long they were allowed to stay
in their position. It is astonishing -- and frightening -- that such
superficial differences can have such a powerful influence over others'
perceptions of us and, as a result, over the trajectory of our lives.
And there are many other, far more important ways that expectations
based on stereotypes could be shaping people's actual abilities. The
British neuroscientist Gina Rippon, for instance, argues that adults'
expectations about gender roles start to shape children's brains from
the moment they are born. She describes babies as 'social sponges' and
argues that even subtle cues from parents, teachers or friends could
boost or diminish their burgeoning abilities in different fields by
bolstering their confidence or creating a sense of anxiety. A relative
might show slight surprise when a girl plays with a Lego set, for
instance, subtly signalling that this is unexpected and -- in the
child's

interpretation -- undesirable, and so she may be less likely to play
with the toy in the future. That lost play time may seem
inconsequential, but it would have helped to train spatial and
non-verbal reasoning skills -- meaning that when the girl grows up she
will be at a slight disadvantage compared to boys of a similar age. At
school, meanwhile, an adult might plant the seed of doubt in a girl's
head that makes her underperform in a maths test. Having had her fears
confirmed, she may then perform even worse in the next test, making her
less and less enthusiastic about the subject. Those initial expectations
could thereby harm her immediate performance and disrupt her long-term
learning, until -- for this child at least -- the idea that 'girls can't
do maths' has become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Such prejudices could
extend beyond education and into the workplace, making everything a
little more challenging than it needs to be, and over time they could
lead to the gender gap in science, technology, engineering and maths
careers. Some people still deny the importance of expectation and
instead argue that gender differences are innate. These sceptics will
point to brain scans that apparently show some kind of anatomical
difference between the brains of boys and girls, or men and women. There
are claims that males have larger brain regions associated with spatial
reasoning or numeracy, for example. Far from demonstrating an inherited
difference, however, the anatomical variation shown in these brain scans
is a reflection of our culture's gender bias. It is natural that the
brain responds to its environment and the skills that we have been
encouraged to practise. If you are a child playing with Lego, you are
actively changing your brain's wiring. As a result, these supposed
differences are simply another illustration of the ways that our
expectations -- and those of the people around us -- can have a real,
physical effect on our biology. Besides the apparent gender gap in
aptitude for certain academic realms, expectation effects also
exacerbate the consequences of economic inequality. There is now strong
evidence that teachers consistently

underestimate the abilities of poorer children. This is particularly
unfortunate, since the research shows that children from working-class
backgrounds could also benefit the most from teachers' positive
expectations, with the boosted brainpower helping to make up for the
reduced resources at home.33 If your circumstances are already set
against you, you need every ounce of confidence you can receive. The
consequences of flawed expectations are a particularly serious problem
for ethnic minorities (a fact that Jacobson and Rosenthal had, indeed,
noted in their original writing on the subject). There is abundant
evidence that many people -- who are not overtly racist -- hold implicit
prejudices based on ethnicity and that these biases can be communicated
non-consciously, with important consequences for academia and the
workplace. Proving this point, one major survey in the US tracked a
diverse sample of more than 8,500 pupils from kindergarten to eighth
grade, with a specific focus on their performance in maths. The study,
published in 2018, concluded that the effects of teacher expectations
'are stronger for white girls, minority girls, and minority boys than
they are for white boys'.34 Often these low expectations can permeate
the whole culture of an organisation. Staff at poorer, more ethnically
diverse schools are more likely to think that these students, as a
group, are 'less teachable' -- an attitude that will then prove itself
to be true, thanks to the teachers' own behaviour as much as the
students' difficult circumstances.35 You'll sometimes hear arguments
that minority or disadvantaged groups should simply strive to 'lean in'
and overcome these barriers, working hard to disprove the prevailing
cultural biases. That's a big ask, though. When people feel themselves
to be at risk of conforming to negative expectations about their group,
they experience a type of anxiety known as 'stereotype threat', which
damages their performance. Reflecting on the predicament -- even to
psych yourself up to work harder because you've been told something like
'You'll need to work twice as hard to get half as far' -- may only
increase that stress.36

As children, we were thrilled by fairy tales in which a random child was
blessed or cursed by a fairy godmother or a witch -- but the alarming
reality is that many people are subject to others' prophecies based on
nothing more than their race, gender or the appearance of their face,
and even the subtlest biases have the power to change the trajectory of
our whole life. If we continue to let low expectations go unchecked,
there will be many people with hidden talents who never felt the kind of
encouragement experienced by Hawking, Winfrey or Angelou, who never had
an exceptional teacher to bring out the exceptional individual. And the
world will be poorer for it. So, what is to be done? REWRITING THE
SCRIPT When Rosenthal and Jacobson first published their study, some
commentators assumed that they were trying to erase, or at least
discount, the other potential sources of inequality. 'If thousands upon
thousands of children are not learning to read, write, speak and
compute, it is not because of overcrowded classrooms, the effects of
poverty and social conditions, poorly developed educational programs and
materials, and inadequately trained teachers,' one New York Times
columnist opined sarcastically. 'No, the children are not learning
because the teachers don't expect them to learn.'37 It was an unfair
exaggeration of Jacobson and Rosenthal's views, but the importance of
structural factors is worth taking seriously. In addition to the effects
of people's implicit expectations, many people still have to contend
with overt sexism, racism and classism, not to mention the institutional
barriers that maintain inequality in the US, the UK and many other
countries. Addressing expectation effects will not magically resolve
these issues -- any more than we would expect a placebo to miraculously
cure a terminal illness.

Recognising this fact does not mean that we should abandon the
possibility and importance of psychological change, though. Five decades
on from that memorable experiment at Spruce Elementary, a growing body
of research has shown that teachers and leaders can change the ways that
they communicate their expectations of others. They may not be a
panacea, but these interventions will be an important first step to
maximising everyone's potential. Christine Rubie-Davies, at the
University of Auckland in New Zealand, led one of the most robust
attempts to rewrite teachers' scripts without deception. Working with
Rosenthal, she invited a group of 90 elementary and middle-school
teachers to take part in a randomised controlled trial. Half the
teachers were given regular professional development sessions examining
general ways to improve student engagement and achievement, while the
rest attended four workshops that looked specifically at the importance
of self-fulfilling prophecies. (Both the 'Pygmalion' workshops and the
standard professional development were roughly equivalent in terms of
the time and effort required.) At the workshops, Rubie-Davies first
educated the teachers about the power of expectation effects and the
ways they could affect academic performance, alongside some strategies
to increase all the students' expectations of themselves. These
techniques included things like working with each student to set clear
goals, establishing measures to make sure that regular feedback is given
to everyone (and not just the favourites) and finding ways to encourage
student autonomy -- making it clear to students that it is often within
their own power to solve their own problems. The teachers had also been
asked to film themselves in the classroom -- videos that were then
analysed in the subsequent workshops. The videos were the crux of the
trial's success, since they allowed the teachers to identify the many
ways that their low expectations could still be 'leaking' through
unconscious gestures, such as their body language and tone of voice. As
the previous work on the Pygmalion effect had shown, they were often
completely unaware of their biases. 'They suddenly realised that they

only asked the boys the maths questions, or they mostly interacted with
the white kids,' Rubie-Davies told me. 'It became a really powerful
learning experience.' The results were exactly as hoped -- leading to a
28 per cent improvement in the maths performance of students whose
teachers had gone to workshops compared to the students whose teachers
had undergone standard teacher training without any specific focus on
the Pygmalion effect.38 Clearly it is possible to change the way someone
communicates their expectations of others and to empower them with
greater self-belief -- and that can have a significant impact on their
(or our) lives.39 Ideally, these kinds of interventions would be common
in every educational institution and workplace -- and perhaps they will
be, when the concept of the expectation effect is widely known. In the
meantime, it is at least possible to buffer ourselves against others'
expectations. Since many of the negative effects are caused by
performance anxiety -- and the imposed expectation that we are somehow
not up to the task -- we can use some of the stress reappraisal
techniques, covered in chapter 7, to rethink the challenges we are
facing. While these methods were designed for all kinds of anxieties,
the available evidence suggests that they are especially effective at
countering negative stereotypes. When girls were taught the potential
benefits of anxious feelings -- to energise the brain and increase
performance -- they tended to achieve better grades on maths tests, for
example. Importantly, the intervention brought the greatest effects when
the girls had been explicitly reminded of the prevailing expectation
that they would perform worse, showing that the stress reappraisal had
helped to neutralise the stereotype threat.40 Alternatively, you might
engage in a process called self-affirmation. The name may sound
offputtingly like an exercise from a New Age manual, but don't let that
deter you. Self-affirmation, as defined by experimental psychologists,
is not an act of wishful thinking but a simple method to

neutralise some of the more unreasonable doubts that you may be
harbouring.41 Rather than drawing attention to the particular task in
question -- which may only trigger negative rumination about the
expected difficulties -- the aim is to focus on our general abilities
and values, quite unconnected to the problem we're facing. Acknowledging
those other personal qualities reinforces our belief in our own
resources, while also reminding us that our self-worth needn't hinge on
the challenge at hand. Less anxiety, in turn, frees up the mental
workspace from the negative thoughts that would be impeding our success,
improving our memory and concentration -- and helps to steel our resolve
to continue through difficult challenges. You could think of
self-affirmation as strengthening the foundations of our selfworth, so
that our ideas about ourselves are no longer so easily swayed by others'
opinions. Try it for yourself now, and you'll see how easy it is. First,
list ten characteristics -- such as sense of humour, creativity,
independence, social skills or athletic ability -- that personally
matter to you. Now take the most important one and briefly describe why
it matters, including a description of a time when it proved to be
especially significant within your life. It's the kind of short exercise
you could perform any time, anywhere -- but its simplicity belies its
power. In one of the first and most striking demonstrations, scientists
at the universities of Alberta and Arizona asked participants to perform
a test of spatial awareness, in which they had to match rotated shapes.
As noted before, spatial skills are often assumed to be a weak spot for
women -- just think of all the sexist jokes about women reading maps --
and, thanks to the expectation effect, this often does become a
self-fulfilling prophecy. Before the test, half the participants were
asked to complete the brief exercise in self-affirmation, while the
control group was instructed to write about another person's
characteristics. To check whether self-affirmation could help even when
the negative beliefs were highly salient, the experimenters deliberately
reminded the participants of the sexist

stereotype, saying, 'One thing we'll look at is how men and women differ
in their performance on the test, and how true the stereotype is, or the
generally held belief is, that women have more trouble with spatial
rotation tasks.'

Self-affirmation reduces gender differences in spatial reasoning.

The effects of the self-affirmation were remarkable, with the
intervention almost completely closing the gender gap in the
participants' results.42 The researchers found very similar patterns for
the maths scores. Men, in general, do not need their self-belief to be
bolstered (and so only showed modest gains) -- but women show a marked
improvement after practising self-affirmation. If you're still not
convinced, here's an equivalent graph for students taking a
college-level introductory physics exam -- another arena in which women
are typically expected to underperform. On the left is the control
condition. On the right are the results with a couple of
self-affirmation exercises, at the beginning of term and shortly before
the mid-term exam. As you can see, the gender gap had closed from around
10 per cent to just a couple of points. Confirming its protective
effects, the researchers found that the benefits of self-affirmation
were greatest for the women who had

previously bought into the sexist stereotype; in some way,
self-affirmation was acting as an antidote to the negative beliefs
transmitted by society.43 Besides reducing the gender gap,
self-affirmation can also remedy the negative expectations that are
often associated with poorer economic circumstances. A study in the UK
asked 11 to 14 year olds to write a selfaffirming essay in an English
class at the start of the academic year. Comparing the results of
children receiving free school meals with those of more affluent homes,
the researchers found that the simple exercise shrank the class
differences by 62 per cent.44

Self-affirmation reduces gender differences in physics performance. The
most breath-taking findings concern the academic achievement of Black
students in the USA. Like the UK students, Black students in this study
were asked to practise self-affirmation at the start of seventh grade,
with additional 'boosters' over the next couple of years. Despite each
session taking just 15 minutes to complete -- the briefest segment of
time in the school calendar -- the self-affirmation exercises reduced
the racial differences in individual exam grades by 40 per cent.45 Even
more amazingly, the effects could still be seen up to nine years after
the original intervention. Overall, 92 per cent of the Black children
who had engaged

in self-affirmation enrolled in college, compared with 78 per cent of
the Black children in the control group.46 Such large, long-term effects
suggest a virtuous cycle of change. Bolstering feelings of self-worth
against others' more negative expectations immediately boosts
performance, which can then build personal confidence for later tests.
With time, the simple step of appraising your abilities and values can
allow you to completely reject society's self-fulfilling prophecies,
creating a trajectory that is radically different from the prescribed
path.47 Self-affirmation is now one of the most reliably
tried-and-tested interventions to combat the effects of negative
stereotypes.48 If we are looking for new ways to reduce academic
inequality, its widespread use is really a no-brainer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Jacobson and Rosenthal concluded their Pygmalion study of Spruce
Elementary with some words from the George Bernard Shaw play, as Eliza
Doolittle describes the effects of others' expectations. 'You see,
really and truly, apart from the things anyone can pick up (the dressing
and the proper way of speaking, and so on) the difference between a lady
and a flower girl is not how she behaves, but how she's treated. I shall
always be a flower girl to Professor Higgins, because he always treats
me as a flower girl, and always will. But I know I can be a lady to you,
because you always treat me as a lady and always will.' (They even
describe it as 'Shaw's summary' of the effect.) The bittersweet tone of
Doolittle's words did not reflect Jacobson and Rosenthal's optimism.
Their writing at the time fizzed with excitement at the possibility that
we would soon be able to raise children's abilities through a deeper
understanding of the Pygmalion effect. Six decades later, though, and we
are still only just getting to that starting point.

The delay is frustrating, but we should not be surprised by how long it
has taken to finally reach that point. As we have seen throughout this
book, accepting the expectation effect requires us to overturn many of
our assumptions about the brain, the body and society -- and doing so
requires extraordinary evidence. With the recent resurgence of interest
in the expectation effect, however, we finally have the knowledge and
understanding to untap our own -- and others' -- potential through the
extraordinary power of the Pygmalion phenomenon. If all the world's a
stage, then our scripts are often written by the people around us. In
the past, we may have unknowingly played those roles like unwitting cast
members. But it needn't be that way. By learning to recognise the
scripts we have been assigned, we can decide to reject the narratives
that do not suit us -- and create our own destinies.

How to think about . . . intelligence, learning and creativity Try to
honestly assess your own abilities, and question whether you have
internalised negative expectations. Is there really good reason to think
you are inherently bad at maths or art, for instance? Or might you have
the capacity to improve? Once you have identified potential areas of
growth, try to test whether those negative assumptions are true by
looking for new challenges that push you out of your intellectual or
creative comfort zone. Throughout this process, recognise that any
moments of frustration are themselves a sign of effective learning and
reflect the importance of the task at hand. This simple reframing will,
by itself, increase your performance. If you feel especially anxious or
believe you may be suffering from stereotype threat, try to practise
self-affirmation (pages 198--201). This involves noting the many other
personal characteristics or values that matter to your identity and the
reasons that they are important to you, as a way of neutralising your
fears and negative expectations. If you are a teacher or manager, try to
think about the ways your own behaviours may be transmitting your
expectations to others, both verbally and non-verbally. You may not be
conscious of your body language or tone of voice, so it could be helpful
either to ask an outside observer to watch your interactions or to film
yourself interacting with your students or colleagues.

OceanofPDF.com

10 THE SUPER-AGERS Why you really are as young -- or old -- as you feel
For over a decade, Paddy Jones has been wowing audiences across the
world with her spicy salsa dancing. She came to fame on the Spanish
talent show TÃº SÃ­ Que Vales (You're Worth It) in 2009 and has since
found success in the UK, through Britain's Got Talent; in Germany, on
Das Supertalent; in Argentina, on the dancing show Bailando; and in
Italy, where she performed at the Sanremo Music Festival in 2018
alongside the band Lo Stato Sociale.1 Jones also happens to be in her
mid-80s, making her the world's oldest acrobatic salsa dancer, according
to Guinness World Records. Growing up in the UK, Jones had been a keen
dancer and had performed professionally before she married her husband,
David, at 22 and had four children. In retirement, the pair moved to
Spain, and it was the tragedy of her husband's death from cancer that
spurred her to take dance lessons. After trying all kinds of Latin
American styles, she soon fell in love with acrobatic salsa, during
which she is frequently thrown into the air by her dance partner, Nicko.
'I don't plead my age because I don't feel eighty, or

act it,' Jones told the media in 2014. She will only stop dancing, she
has said, when Nicko -- 40 years her junior -- gets tired.2 We have seen
the many ways in which our expectations can powerfully influence our
mental and physical well-being -- altering our perception, our
biological responses to diet, exercise and stress, and our cognitive
abilities. And now I want to show you how all these expectation effects
may powerfully converge to change the way we age. The fact that your
beliefs could add or subtract years from your life is, in my opinion,
the most striking and important consequence of this new understanding of
the brain's prediction machine -- and the reason I believe that the
mind--body connection needs to be taken so seriously. Before we
continue, please give honest answers to the following four questions: 1.
Do things get better, worse or stay the same as you get older? 2. In
each pair of the following words, which one do you associate with
retirement and beyond: uninvolved or involved; unable or able; dependent
or independent; idle or busy? 3. When does middle age end and old age
begin? 4. Based purely on your subjective experience (rather than your
actual, chronological age), how old do you feel today?

As we shall see, your responses to these, and similar, questions may be
as -- or more -- important for your future health as your current health
status. Indeed, many scientists are coming to the conclusion that your
beliefs about the ageing process may be as important for your long-term
well-being as your actual age.3 Through multiple pathways, your
expectations set the speed of your cells' biological clocks, determining
everything from trivial aches and pains to your risk of heart disease,
dementia and death. The youthful mindset of someone like Paddy Jones is,
it turns out, a kind of elixir of youth. IF YOU COULD TURN BACK TIME . .
.

The first hints that our thoughts and expectations could either
accelerate or decelerate the ageing process came from a remarkable
experiment by the psychologist Ellen Langer at Harvard University.
Langer is known for being something of a maverick researcher; she was
one of the first to examine the benefits of mindfulness, long before the
subject became a fashionable object of scientific study. (She was also
the researcher who examined the ways that expectation can influence
eyesight -- see chapter 1.) In 1979, Langer decided to investigate the
mind--body connection by asking a group of 70 and 80 year olds to
pretend that they were living in the year 1959 again. The participants
were recruited through local newspaper adverts. First, they were given
various tests that would normally be used to diagnose agerelated
problems and then they were asked to perform a memory test alongside
other cognitive tasks -- such as finding their way through
penciland-paper mazes -- that were designed to measure the speed of the
brain's processing, which is commonly assumed to slow down in old age.
Langer's team also tested the participants' eyesight and hearing, and
the flexibility of their joints. The researchers then brought the
participants to a week-long retreat at a monastery in Peterborough, New
Hampshire, which had been redecorated to look as if it had been stuck in
a time-warp from the late 1950s. Everything, from the magazines in the
living room to the music playing on the radio (such as the crooning of
Perry Como, Nat 'King' Cole and Rosemary Clooney) and the films
available to watch (Some Like It Hot, North by Northwest, and Ben-Hur),
was carefully chosen for historical accuracy. To ensure that the
environment changed the participants' mindsets, the researchers also
asked them to write a biography of themselves for that era, in the
present tense, and gave them explicit instructions to live as if it were
1959, without discussing anything that had occurred since that point.
Instead, the participants were encouraged to discuss the politics and
the sporting events of two decades previously. The

aim was to evoke their younger and fitter selves through all these
associations. To create a comparison, the researchers ran a second
retreat a week later. While factors like the dÃ©cor, diet and social
contact remained the same, these participants were asked to reminisce
about the past, without actually acting as if they were younger. When
they wrote a biography describing their lives, they did so in the past
tense, for instance, rather than the present -- a seemingly small
difference that meant their mindset was still focused on their current
age. Most of the participants showed some improvements from the baseline
battery of tests to the after-retreat ones, but it was those in the
first group -- who had more fully immersed themselves in the world of
1959 -- who saw the greatest benefits. Sixty-three per cent made a
significant gain on the cognitive tests, for example, compared to just
44 per cent in the control condition. Their vision became sharper, their
joints more flexible, and their hands more dextrous, as some of the
inflammation from their arthritis receded. The change was even
noticeable in their appearance: as their posture improved, they became
taller and walked more easily. Langer took photos of the participants
before and after the retreat; observers, who were not told about the
purpose of the experiment, rated the second pictures as looking
considerably younger than the first. It was as if she had actually
turned the clocks back.4 As enticing as these findings might seem,
Langer's experiment suffered from the same flaws as some of the other
early mindset studies (and, indeed, much other psychological research
from that era). Most serious was the size of the sample. There were just
eight members in the immersive group and eight in the control group,
which is not typically considered to be large enough to draw general
conclusions about the population as a whole. Extraordinary claims need
extraordinary evidence, after all -- and the idea that our mindset could
somehow influence our physical ageing is about as extraordinary as
scientific theories come.

Becca Levy, at the Yale School of Public Health, has been leading the
way to provide sufficient evidence to support the astonishing claim. In
one of her earliest -- and most eye-catching -- papers, she examined
data from the Ohio Longitudinal Study of Aging and Retirement. The
founders of the study had selected more than 1,100 participants, who had
turned 50 by 1 July 1975, and then followed their progress over the
subsequent decades. The participants had also been asked at the study's
start to rate their agreement with statements such as: I have as much
pep as I did last year As you get older, you are less useful Things keep
getting worse as I get older

Based on these scores, Levy's team divided the participants into two
groups -- those with a positive perception of their own ageing, and
those with a negative self-perception of ageing -- and examined the risk
of mortality in each case. She found the average person with a more
positive attitude to ageing lived on for 22.6 years after the study
commenced, while the average person with poorer perceptions of ageing
survived for just 15 years -- a difference of around 7.5 years. This
link remained even when other known risk factors, such as their
socioeconomic status or their feelings of loneliness, had been taken
into account. The implications of the finding are as remarkable today as
they were in 2002, when the study was first published. 'If a previously
unidentified virus was found to diminish life expectancy by over seven
years, considerable effort would probably be devoted to identifying the
cause and implementing a remedy,' Levy and her team wrote in their
paper. 'In the present case, one of the likely causes is known:
societally sanctioned denigration of the aged.'5 Later studies have
since reinforced the link between people's expectations and their
physical ageing, while dismissing some of the more obvious -- and less
interesting -- explanations. You might expect that people's attitudes
would reflect their decline rather than contribute to the

degeneration, for example. Yet that can't fully explain the most
eyecatching results. Levy looked at the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of
Aging, for instance, which had followed the progress of hundreds of
people from the late 1950s to the early twenty-first century. Beginning
in 1968, the participants were questioned about their attitudes to old
age -- such as their level of agreement with the statement 'Old people
are helpless'. With an average age of 36, it is unlikely that most of
the participants would have started to suffer serious age-related
disabilities; their opinions of ageing were much more likely to have
come from the culture around them than any personal experience. And Levy
found that those views could predict their subsequent risk of illnesses
such as angina, congestive heart failures, myocardial infarctions and
strokes up to 38 years later, even when she controlled for pre-existing
factors such as obesity, smoking habits or a family history of
cardiovascular disease.6 Positive attitudes to ageing even seem to
protect us from certain kinds of dementia. Although the precise causes
of Alzheimer's disease are still being researched, we know many of the
neurological changes that accompany the illness, including the build-up
of a protein called beta-amyloid between cells. As these clumps -- named
plaques -- accumulate, they destroy the synapses that are essential for
brain signalling. Patients with Alzheimer's also develop tangles of
another protein, tau, within the brain cells themselves. We now know
that certain gene variants -- most notably 'APOE Îµ4' -- can render you
more vulnerable to the disease. But those inherited differences do not
seal your fate; many people with APOE Îµ4 never develop dementia. To find
out whether your attitudes to ageing might change the odds of being
struck with the disease, Levy looked again at the medical records of the
people within the long-term cohort studies that had measured people's
attitudes to ageing, one of which had fortuitously included regular MRI
scans during the study and brain autopsies after death. She found that
people's expectations became inscribed all over their brain, with a
markedly increased accumulation of the beta-amyloid plaques and tau

protein tangles among those who had previously shown a negative view of
ageing. These people also showed pronounced damage to the hippocampus,
the sea-horse-shaped region deep in the brain that is responsible for
memory formation.7 A follow-up study found that the effects of attitudes
toward ageing were particularly pronounced among the people carrying the
high risk Îµ4 variant of the APOE gene. For them, positive expectations
of ageing halved their risk of developing dementia compared with people
carrying the high-risk variant who assumed that ageing came with a
mental and physical decline. Indeed, among people with positive
expectations of ageing, the high-risk variant of the gene barely seemed
to increase the risk of dementia at all.8

The effects of age beliefs on dementia incidence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It would be hard to overestimate the importance of these findings. So
much has been said about purely biological risk factors that can
accelerate the progression of disease as we get older. Yet, according to
this research, our own thoughts are equally, if not more, potent. High
blood cholesterol levels, for example, are thought to reduce the average
life expectancy by up to four years -- much less than the
seven-and-a-half-year reduction caused by taking a dim view of our
future health.9

Like any medical risk, the personal danger to ourselves of a negative
attitude to ageing will depend on many different factors. Even the
simple question of how you define 'old' could determine the size of the
effects, according to a seminal study of Whitehall civil servants
working for the UK government. The Whitehall studies are most famous for
showing that social status can affect our health, revealing that people
on the lower rungs have a much greater health burden than those at the
top of the competitive hierarchy. But in the early 1990s, the civil
servants were asked to define when middle age ended and old age began.
And it turned out that the earlier they saw the onset of old age, the
more likely they were to experience declining health at a younger age
themselves. Over the following decade, people who believed that old age
began at 60 or younger were around 40 per cent more likely to develop
coronary heart disease than those who believed that middle age finished
at 70 or older.10 In other words, it seems that you may be able to
escape some of the effects by deciding that you haven't yet reached the
relevant age bracket. This brings us to the fourth and final question on
here, in which I asked you to estimate your 'subjective age' -- how old
you feel inside, as opposed to your actual chronological age. The idea
that you're 'as young as you feel' is something of a clichÃ©, but studies
examining thousands of participants have shown that people with a lower
subjective age tend to enjoy greater physical and mental health.11 How
could this be? One possible answer is that the lower subjective age
leads you to think that you are the exception to the normal decline that
you expect in other people. This belief allows you to retain more
positive expectations of your health as the years go by, shielding you
from the damaging effects of the negative stereotypes that are normally
so influential.12 This, essentially, is what Langer was trying to
achieve in her time-warp study way back in 1979. In the monastery, set
up to replicate the dÃ©cor and culture of the late 1950s, she hoped to
turn back the participants' subjective ages by 20 years. When they had
entered the house, they still

felt like elderly people in their 70s and 80s, with all the perceived
burden that this entailed. By the end, however, they left the monastery
with the reinvigorated sense of themselves as 50 and 60 year olds, ages
when they had more energy and a greater sense of purpose in their lives.
And, at least for that small sample of participants, it seemed to have
worked. Mentally -- and, to a lesser but still a significant extent,
physically -- they appeared to have temporarily turned back the clocks.
STEREOTYPE EMBODIMENT THEORY Where do our negative expectations come
from? And how do they wield such power over our well-being? To answer
these questions, we need to understand a process known as 'stereotype
embodiment'. The writer Martin Amis provides a useful illustration. If
the dancer Paddy Jones represents the optimum attitude to ageing, then
Amis offers us the polar opposite. In an interview in 2010, he decried
the 'silver tsunami' of the ageing population. 'There'll be a population
of demented very old people, like an invasion of terrible immigrants,
stinking out the restaurants and cafes and shops,' he said. 'I can
imagine a sort of civil war between the old and the young in 10 or 15
years' time.' He flippantly called for 'euthanasia booths' on every
street corner, and, at literary festivals, he described the ageing
process as starring in your own 'low-budget horror film, saving the
worst till last'.13 It is hard to imagine a harsher view of the elderly
than to believe that death is preferable to healthy ageing. As literary
critics pointed out at the time, Amis's novels had long expressed fear
and disgust of ageing, filled as they are with negative stereotypes of
older generations. (The age of 20, he claimed in his first novel,
represented the end of youth.14) And as Amis aged himself, he often
became filled with fear about his own fate. 'Your youth evaporates in
your early 40s when you look in the mirror,' he told the Smithsonian
magazine. 'And then it becomes a full-time job pretending you're not
going to die.'15 In his 60s, he could already see his own talents
dwindling, describing the

loss of 'energy and musicality' in his writing. The 'waterfall' of
creativity he had once felt was drying up.16 According to the scientific
research, Amis's experience represents a common trajectory. We pick up
our negative views of the old in youth, when they are initially directed
to other people. At a certain point, however, something changes in our
own lives -- we reach a milestone age, or we retire, or we go grey --
leading us to realise the stereotypes now apply to us. At this point, we
begin to live out a self-fulfilling prophecy, as the stereotypes become
'embodied', precipitating our physical and cognitive decline.17 There
are multiple -- simultaneous, but potentially interconnected -- pathways
to stereotype embodiment. The first is purely psychological. Consider
the apparent loss of memory. When presented with negative stereotypes,
older people tend to lose confidence in their mental abilities and
prefer instead to rely on artificial crutches -- like shopping lists or
the car GPS -- rather than committing things to memory. Yet research
suggests that they can often remember far more than they suspect, if
they are forced to rely on their memory alone, and that making a
concerted effort to exercise their minds should slow the decline.18
Problems with concentration can similarly arise from negative
expectations; the more someone fears being distracted and proving the
negative stereotype, the harder it is to actually focus. For many
people, the shrinking attention span is an illusion that does not
necessarily reflect a biological reality.19 Gerben Westerhof at the
University of Twente in the Netherlands has shown that something as
inconsequential as viewing an ageist TV advert can have these effects on
people's thinking: seeing an older adult acting incompetently leads
older viewers to suffer from impaired cognition. Such expectation
effects may start out being temporary, but over time they could become
ingrained, leading to more permanent decline.20 The second pathway is
behavioural and motivational. If we assume that our body is set to
become feeble and weak -- and we see our environment as being more
daunting than it really is -- we will be discouraged from hard

exercise and may find any exercise we do engage in as much more
physically tiring, thanks to our negative expectations. Even everyday
movements -- like walking pace -- become slower and less energetic when
people are expecting a steep decline.21 This may explain why Levy has
found a strong correlation between people's attitudes to ageing and
their risk of obesity as they get older.22 Thirdly, and finally, we have
the psychosomatic route to becoming the stereotype we fear. Our
expectations of frailty can amplify the body's aches and pains, or
increase feelings like nausea and dizziness -- a nocebo response that
could contribute to the general perception of 'feeling unwell' that many
older people report.23 Through changes to our respiration and
metabolism, physical activity may actually become more difficult. (We
have seen, after all, how people who take a dim view of their own
fitness tend to have a harder time exercising and are less likely to
gain so much benefit from it afterwards.) Even more importantly, our
negative expectations may provoke an unhealthy stress response, with
far-reaching effects on our long-term health. Remember that the
prediction machine carefully weighs up our abilities to respond to a new
threat or challenge, and uses these calculations to calibrate the
release of hormones such as adrenalin and cortisol, which prepare us to
deal with an immediate threat at the expense of long-term health, and
DHEAS, which is involved in tissue maintenance and repair, and which is
released in greater quantities when we see an event as a positive
challenge. The prediction machine also controls the cardiovascular
response, determining whether our vessels constrict (to prevent blood
loss in the face of a threat) or dilate (to allow the brain and limbs to
become oxygenated, allowing us to rise to a challenge), and whether you
need to preserve energy or whether you can release your stores to
confront the situation. If you consider yourself to be weaker, dimmer
and more vulnerable, as a result of your age, you would be more likely
to see a difficulty as a negative threat rather than a positive
challenge -- resulting in

the more damaging stress responses that could wreak havoc on the body
over time. This has been apparent in laboratory experiments. Elderly
people who have been primed with negative age stereotypes tend to have
higher systolic blood pressure in response to stressful challenges,
while those who have seen positive stereotypes demonstrate a more muted
reaction.24 In the longterm, Levy has found that people's cortisol
levels steadily rise by roughly 40 per cent from people's fiftieth to
eightieth birthdays, if they have negative attitudes to ageing. Those
with positive views, in contrast, show a 10 per cent decrease in
cortisol over the same period, as they settle into the next stage of
their life.25 That chronic stress response can then trigger chronic
inflammation, which causes general wear and tear on our tissues and is a
known contributor to various illnesses, including arthritis, heart
disease and Alzheimer's. Sure enough, one of Levy's recent studies found
that negative attitudes to ageing could predict heightened inflammation
four years later, which, in turn, contributed to an increased risk of
death over the following two years.26 The consequences of our negative
expectations can even be seen within the nuclei of the individual cells,
where our genetic blueprint is stored. Our genes are wrapped tightly in
each cell's chromosomes, which have tiny protective caps -- called
telomeres -- that keep the DNA stable and stop it from becoming frayed
and damaged. (For this reason, telomeres are often compared to aglets,
the plastic tips at the end of shoelaces -- a comparison that may be
technically apt but nevertheless lacks a certain poetry, given just how
important our telomeres are to our survival.) At birth our telomeres are
long and strong, but they can be worn down by chronic stress and become
shorter over our lifespan. Shorter telomeres reduce a cell's capacity to
replicate without error, and without a long-enough telomere, a cell may
be unable to divide at all.27 The length of our telomeres can vary
between people of the same chronological age, depending on lifestyle
factors, including inflammation and stress, and this does seem to
predict people's longevity and risk of

disease. Levy's stereotype embodiment theory would predict that people
with negative expectations of ageing should have shorter telomeres --
and they do.28 Through things like stress and inflammation, our
attitudes to ageing can also affect the expression of the individual
genes tucked inside those chromosomes. Within each cell, we have small
attachments to the DNA that can either 'turn on' or 'turn off'
individual genes. This light-switching determines which proteins the
cell produces and, ultimately, how it functions. Certain patterns of
activation or deactivation become more prevalent as we age and may
explain many of the changes associated with old age, including our
increased vulnerability to diseases. Importantly, people with negative
attitudes to old age demonstrate more of these characteristic
age-related changes, while people with more positive attitudes have a
slower 'epigenetic clock'.29 Levy speculates that this may explain why
people with the positive view of ageing seem to be less vulnerable to
dementia, even if they carry the higher-risk variant of the APOE gene.
Worse stress may lead to epigenetic changes that heighten the gene's
effects in the people with the negative views -- increasing their
vulnerability to the disease -- whereas it may be muted in the people
who have more positive expectations of the ageing process.30 Some of
these changes may be reversible.31 We know that an enzyme called
telomerase can help to repair the caps at the ends of our chromosomes --
and activating that enzyme seems to reverse some of the effects of
premature ageing. Perhaps, in the future, we will find drugs that
prevent our cells from gathering any wear and tear. For now, it seems
certain that we can at least slow our decline by living a healthier
lifestyle and by changing our expectations of what it means to be old.
AGE AIN'T NOTHING BUT A NUMBER?

If we want to reappraise the true limits that come with age, let's first
meet some more people who, like Paddy Jones, have confounded society's
ageist expectations of what we can achieve later in life. Take Hiromu
Inada from Chiba in Japan. He started swimming, running and cycling 18
years ago, and entered his first triathlon a year later. The sport
became something of an obsession, and he eventually graduated to the
Hawaii Ironman event in Kailua-Kona -- an extreme endurance competition
that requires the entrants to swim 3.86km (2.4 miles), cycle 180.25km
(112 miles) and then run a full 42km (26.2 miles) marathon. To be able
to do so, Inada has developed a ruthless training schedule. He wakes at
4.30 each morning and hits the gym at 6 a.m. His training often
continues until after sunset, and he only takes one day off each week.
By 2020, Inada had completed the Ironman three times, with finishing
times that hover around 16 hours and 50 minutes. Simply making it to the
finishing line of an Ironman tournament would be a remarkable
achievement for most people of any age. But Inada only began his
training when he retired from his job as a news reporter -- in his 60s.
He competed in his first Olympic-distance triathlon a few years later
and only began competing in the Ironman events when he was in his early
80s. His latest record came in 2018, a little over a month away from his
86th birthday. As the work on subjective ageing would predict, Inada has
maintained a youthful outlook, and he does not view age as a barrier to
extraordinary achievement. He says that even at 70 he felt 'very young',
and his training has helped to stave off a decline since then. Equally
impressive is the Swiss runner Albert Stricker, who completed an
ultramarathon in Basel in Switzerland at the age of 95. Like Inada, he
only started his sport after retirement, aged 65, and only ran his first
full marathon aged 90. His training consists of 5--10km runs every
weekday. The aim, in the Basel event, was to run as far as you could for
12 hours solid; Stricker covered around 53km (33 miles) in total. You
may imagine that this kind of exertion would cause serious bodily damage
to someone of this age, but medical tests by Beat Knechtle at the
Institute of Primary

Care, University of Zurich, revealed that Stricker had completely
recovered from the event within five days.32 It's fair to say that
Jones, Inada and Stricker will not be troubling the records of elite
younger athletes any time soon; all other things being equal, younger
people will have a physical advantage. But this trio nevertheless
demonstrates that an extraordinarily high level of fitness -- even
extreme endurance -- can be achieved later into life. Knechtle's
analyses of male ultramarathon runners found that there's around an 8
per cent drop in performance for each decade lived.33 And even that
decline may be falling, as older athletes become more competitive and
find better ways to train. In the 1980s, for example, the 60--64 year
olds were competing at around 60 per cent capacity of the under-40s in
Ironman tournaments; now, it's more than 70 per cent.34 The truth is, we
still don't know how well we can preserve our fitness into old age --
since so few people have tried to push their bodies to these limits. But
we have more than enough evidence to show that our potential as we age
is much greater than is commonly believed. These patterns match studies
of less extreme exercisers, which show that -- when treated correctly,
and if you adopt the right lifestyle and the right mindset -- the human
body can be much more resilient to the passage of time than most of us
imagine. As we appraise the cognitive effects of ageing, we should
remember the astonishing bursts of creativity shown by certain artists
as they reached the average retirement age. Consider Penelope
Fitzgerald. Having worked in various jobs, including teaching, she
published her first novel at the age of 60 and won the Booker Prize two
years later. At the age of 80, she won the US National Book Critics
Circle Award for her final novel, The Blue Flower -- a book often
considered to be her masterpiece.35 'You can see her becoming a better
writer as she aged,' wrote the New Yorker critic James Wood, 'more
serious and expansive, more confident and supple'.36 It's hardly the
creative drought that Martin Amis had described. In the visual arts,
Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse both found renewed inspiration towards
the ends of their lives. At around the age of 60, Picasso

turned to ceramics, creating more than 3,500 works that fused painting,
printmaking and sculpture.37 Matisse, meanwhile, picked up scissors and
paper to produce his astonishing 'cut-outs', which he described as
'carving into colour'. They remain some of his most celebrated works.38
These extraordinary stories are all worth bearing in mind, since the
simple recognition of our capacity to control our ageing, be it through
mindset or lifestyle changes, can itself provide a kind of counter-charm
against the negative stereotypes of getting older. Consider a study,
published in 2018, of 60 to 90 year olds by David Weiss at Columbia
University. He first tested whether his participants endorsed
essentialist views, such as: To a large extent, a person's age
biologically determines his or her abilities. Or whether they considered
ageing to be a malleable process, endorsing statements such as: No
matter at what point in life, you can always influence your own ageing.
Note that these beliefs, in themselves, do not necessarily reflect a
'good' or 'bad' view of ageing -- but simply whether the process is
controllable. After they had completed the survey, Weiss asked the
participants to take a quiz that consisted of questions about dementia
and physical disability -- an exercise designed to evoke the typical
stereotypes of older people. Finally, he asked them to complete a memory
test and measured the stress response. He found that the people who saw
ageing as a biological inevitability were far more likely to be affected
by the negative stereotypes in the dementia quiz, showing greater stress
and a reduced performance in the memory test. That makes sense: if you
assume that you have no control over your biology, then the thoughts of
decline are going to be much scarier. The people who felt that they had
more control over their fate showed the exact opposite response, however
-- they tended to do better on the test

after being primed with all those thoughts of frailty and decline.39
Their feelings of empowerment had allowed them to prove themselves to be
exceptions to our pessimistic predictions of ageing and, as a result,
the challenge of confronting those negative stereotypes had actually
energised their performance. You don't need to have the ambition to be
an Ironman athlete, an award-winning novelist or a prolific artist to
understand that ageing can be a far more exciting prospect than the doom
and gloom depicted by the likes of Martin Amis; their stories simply
show us the extraordinary limits of what is possible. The way we age is
very much within our power: the more we remember that fact, the easier
we will find it to confront the negative expectations thrust on us by
society and to choose our own path. As Hiromu Inada told the Japan Times
in 2019: 'I hope everyone can see and be encouraged that you can do the
same things as the younger generation.'40 ELIXIRS OF LIFE A broader
recognition of these age-related expectation effects cannot come quickly
enough. In 2015, there were around 901 million people aged 60 years and
above -- 12.3 per cent of the global population. By 2030, that number
will have risen to 1.4 billion (16.4 per cent of the global population)
and by 2050, it will have increased to 2.1 billion (21.3 per cent of the
global population).41 At current rates of diagnosis, 152 million of
those people may have dementia by the middle of this century.42 Doctors
today often talk about the healthspan (those years lived without serious
disability or illness) as opposed to the lifespan -- the idea being that
living a good life, without illness, is the true goal, rather than
simply extending the number of years you survive.43 But by raising our
expectations of the ageing process, we have the astonishing possibility
of adding years to both. It is little wonder that scientists have been
investigating the best ways to apply this research on a large scale.

As part of her continuing research on the effects of ageism, Levy
invited elderly participants -- aged between 61 and 99 -- to play a
simple computer game, while positive age-related words (such as 'wise',
'spry' and 'creative') flashed briefly on the screen. Although the
participants could not have perceived the words consciously, they must
have absorbed the message, as Levy found that their attitudes towards
ageing improved significantly over the course of four weekly sessions.
And this newfound optimism translated to a remarkable improvement in
their physical well-being: they were more mobile, and their gait and
posture had begun to resemble those of a younger person. Amazingly,
these benefits -- gained from implicit messaging -- even surpassed the
results of a physical exercise regimen that encouraged gentle activity
three times a week for six months.44 Levy's experiment was an important
proof of concept to demonstrate how powerful unconscious cues can be in
changing people's expectations and the benefits that can bring. Given
these results, some researchers have speculated that similar cues could
be added to certain films or TV programmes, though such messaging would
have to contend with some people's discomfort at the idea of subliminal
manipulation.45 For now, it may be more realistic to focus on conscious
change, without the use of any hidden cues. The most exciting
interventions combine education about ageing stereotypes with other
activities, like physical exercise, which allow people to test their own
abilities and gain some firsthand evidence of the ways that their
expectations may have been limiting their lives. The benefits have been
remarkable. Elderly residents of Los Angeles, for instance, were given
weekly lessons on the physical potential of the ageing body and brain,
and on the ways that negative stereotypes might be holding them back,
followed by an hour's gym class to reinforce the learning. After the
lessons had finished, their mobility had increased tremendously -- from
24,749 to 30,707 steps per week, a 24 per cent increase, according to
the readings on their pedometers. Crucially, the physical benefits
seemed to follow changes to their attitudes to ageing -- the

more positive their thinking, the more active they became. The
participants also reported better day-to-day functioning and reduced
pain from chronic conditions (like arthritis).46 These results have
since been replicated many times with many populations. In some cases,
the altered expectations were found to double the participants' physical
activity, long after the intervention had finished, with improvements
above and beyond standard fitness regimens that had not deliberately
targeted participants' expectations about ageing.47 While it is hard to
pick apart the precise reasons for such improvement, it seems likely
that the intervention acted on all three elements of 'stereotype
embodiment' -- the psychological, behavioural and psychosomatic factors.
The participants' positive expectations reduced age-related stress and
improved the way they felt, physically and mentally, and this, in turn,
meant that they became more likely to exercise. Ideally, these kinds of
interventions will soon be provided by health services across the world.
In the meantime, we can all start applying a bit of critical thinking to
our own thoughts. If you feel that you may be too old for a certain
activity, start questioning the foundations for that expectation. Does
it arise from a real physical disability that you actually feel at this
moment? Or have you been infected by the messages of others? And is it
time to push yourself out of your comfort zone with a new activity you
were once too scared to try? When it comes to our cognitive decline,
there is now good evidence that learning new skills in middle and old
age can help to maintain memory and concentration, and, crucially, build
your confidence in your own abilities, reversing some of your more
negative expectations and sparking a virtuous cycle.48 When I spoke to
Paddy Jones, she was careful to emphasise the potential role of luck in
her good health. But she agrees that many people have needlessly
pessimistic views of their capabilities, over what could be their golden
years, and encourages them to question those views. Since she came to
fame, she has received many messages from people who have been inspired
to take up new activities, and she hopes that others will follow

their lead. 'If you feel that there's something that you want to do, and
it inspires you, try it! And if you find you can't do it, then look for
something else that you can achieve.' Re-evaluating your attitudes to
age and ageing will be especially important when you face a serious life
event, like retirement. Paddy Jones and the ultra-endurance athletes
Hiromu Inada and Albert Stricker all took up their sports after
finishing their earlier careers. At a time when many people start
thinking more pessimistically about their ageing, they had found a way
to challenge those attitudes and continually prove their own abilities
-- and we could all learn from their experiences, however grand or
modest our own ambitions may be. AN AGELESS SOCIETY? In November 2019, I
was lucky enough to visit the province of Nuoro on the east coast of
Sardinia. Its rugged mountains rise steeply from the Mediterranean Sea,
and its 200,000 inhabitants live in small villages and towns dotted
throughout the valleys.49 Farming -- of goats and pigs -- is still the
main way of living. In the past, Nuoro was most famous for being the
birthplace of the Nobel Prize-winning writer Grazia Deledda. Today, it
is perhaps best known for having one of the highest concentrations of
centenarians in the world. When adjusted for the size of the overall
population, they have about three times as many people over 100 as the
rest of Sardinia, and ten times as many as the USA.50 There are many
scientific theories for their incredible longevity. Sardinia's
population has been isolated for large periods of history and has a
unique genetic profile as a result. As we've already seen, however, our
genes cannot seal our fate; a study from 2018 found that just 7 per cent
of the differences can be attributed to our genes.51 There's also the
diet, which is spartan but nutritious, and high in antioxidants that are
known to

prevent cellular damage; and exercise, with some farmers continuing to
work into their 70s and 80s. Considering our knowledge of expectation
effects and their power over our lives, however, I can't help but wonder
whether a large part of Sardinians' amazing lifespans is down to their
culture, which holds great respect for the older members of the
community. Dr Raffaele Sestu, a doctor in the small town of Arzana,
certainly thinks so. He has worked with dozens of centenarians in his
practice and says that most are treated with reverence, as the head of
the family, well into their old age. 'Someone who knows they have a
role, and who believes in him- or herself, lives a better life, and more
easily lives longer than a hundred,' he told me.52 Sadly, this attitude
seems to be missing in many industrialised countries across the
Americas, Europe and Asia, where fewer and fewer people live in
intergenerational households, and older people are more often treated as
a burden rather than a valued member of the family.53 This mindset is a
disadvantage for children and grandchildren, as well as grandparents:
various studies show that regular contact with elders can lead younger
people to develop more positive views of ageing. As those children reach
adulthood and middle age, those experiences will help them to remember
what healthy ageing can look like. People who do not have that regular
contact, in contrast, are more easily swayed by the ageist stereotypes
in the media.54 When you do not regularly see people of a certain
demographic, it can be easy to either ridicule or disparage them. It is
a sad irony that our medical care has been able to increase life
expectancy, and yet -- due to other social changes -- we have come to
view those resilient long-livers as a nuisance rather than people to be
cherished and respected. Places like Nuoro -- where age is seen as a
strength -- might be much rarer today than they were in the past, but it
needn't be this way. On a personal level we might try to build bridges
between generations, befriending people who are older and younger than
us. But as a society we need to go much further and tackle ageism just
as we do racism, homophobia and other kinds of prejudice. Every time we
lazily use ageist

stereotypes, we are effectively spreading a deadly pathogen that will,
in time, come to hurt ourselves as much as others. When it comes to the
expectation effects surrounding ageing, we all have the choice to either
perpetuate these toxic ideas or help to change them. And we need to act
now; our lives, and those of the people we love, may literally depend on
it.

How to think about . . . ageing Rather than idealising youthfulness,
focus on all the things that you can gain from living a longer life --
including experience, knowledge, and improved emotional regulation and
decision making. Remember that many of the things that we typically
associate with ageing -- such as physical weakness -- are within your
control and can be improved with a healthier lifestyle. Avoid
attributing sickness to your age, since this will reinforce the idea of
an inevitable decline. People with a positive view of ageing tend to
recover from illness more quickly than those with negative expectations.
Look out for good role models -- people like Paddy Jones or Hiromu Inada
-- who have challenged society's expectations. Be aware of your media
diet -- many films and TV series will reinforce offensive stereotypes
about older people. Try to watch stories or documentaries that deal with
ageing more sensitively -- or at least engage more critically with what
you do watch. If you are young or middle-aged, befriend people outside
of your own age group -- the research shows that doing so, alone, can
improve expectations of ageing.

OceanofPDF.com

EPILOGUE

Let's return to the Hmong in the United States and the Sudden Unexpected
Nocturnal Death Syndrome at the hands of the dab tsog. During the 1980s
-- at the very worst point of the crisis -- it seemed incredible that
believing in your impending doom could increase your actual risk of
mortality. Yet that harmful prediction is perfectly in keeping with the
cutting-edge recognition of expectation effects, and their power, that
has emerged in the twenty-first century. Inspired by this research, some
doctors have started to take action. The Mercy Medical Center in
California, for instance, actively works with shamans to improve the
treatment of the area's large Hmong community. It started with a single
case study, when a Hmong man appeared to be dying from a gangrenous
bowel. None of the treatments he was offered seemed to be taking action,
but well-wishers from the community asked the staff to allow a Hmong
healer to help. The hospital eventually relented and the shaman
performed his rituals -- including placing a sword above the ward door
to scare off evil spirits. Despite his initial prognosis, the man
subsequently made a full recovery and returned to being an active member
of the local Hmong community. 'Physicians experience these "miracles"
from time to time,' a spokesman from the Mercy Medical Center explained.
'But this case really illustrated to them the power of these ceremonies.
Healing isn't just about medicine,

it's about people.' The centre has subsequently trained 140 shamans to
work alongside doctors in the hospital, supporting the standard medical
procedures with their rituals. The policy has encouraged more people to
seek treatment from the hospital and -- anecdotally, at least -- has
improved the way the patients respond to medical care.1

------------------------------------------------------------------------

I hope that after reading this book it will now be clear that we are all
shaped by our beliefs in such ways. While these kinds of events may seem
miraculous, they are astonishingly commonplace for people of every faith
-- or those with no religion at all. Whether we are undergoing surgery,
protecting our health and fitness, coping with prolonged stress or
working under enormous pressure, our expectations will shape our
psychological and physiological responses to our circumstances. The
brain evolved to make predictions, drawing on our own previous
experiences, our observations of others and our cultural norms -- a
process that underlies our very perception of reality, and prepares the
mind and the body for whatever it has to face. And we now know the ways
we can reappraise those expectations to create our own self-fulfilling
prophecies. Throughout these chapters, I have tried to be clear that the
growing recognition of expectation effects in no way downplays the
enormous challenges our society as a whole is facing today and will no
doubt face in the future too. We can't just wish away financial
uncertainty or social injustice: expectation effects are not a cure-all
for every problem we encounter. They can, however, be a useful tool to
build our own personal resilience, and occasionally they may even allow
us to thrive despite the difficulties, equipping us with the strength to
bring about real change. Ideally, practising these skills should become
a habit -- so that whatever we are doing, and whatever new message we
encounter, we probe and question the framing to see if we are
accidentally forming a negative self-

fulfilling prophecy with no rational basis. I've certainly found that
doing so has changed my own life, since I first learnt about the nocebo
origins of my anti-depressant side effects. Knowledge of the expectation
effect has changed the way I eat and exercise, my attitudes to sleep and
my thoughts about ageing. Much of this book was written during the
Covid-19 pandemic, and I found that the techniques explained here were
often invaluable in helping me to cope with the loneliness and stresses
of the continual lockdowns. I hope that you will find this
ground-breaking understanding of the brain to be equally fruitful in
your own life. You may have already seen some benefits; knowledge is
power, and simply reading about the science of the expectation effect
and its consequences can shift your mindset and have a measurable impact
on your life. If, however, you find that you are struggling to apply
certain elements of this research, you might consider the following
three strategies to gently nudge you out of your rut. Like all the other
advice in this book, these last techniques are inspired by robust
scientific evidence and, taken together, they will address the most
commonly encountered problems. Remember that your mind is a 'work in
progress' Let's begin with the idea of neuroplasticity -- the brain's
ability to rewire and change -- which can itself be subject to an
expectation effect. In the early days of neuroscience, brains were
thought to be static entities. While children's minds might be pliable
-- up to a point -- the capacity for neural change was meant to
disappear after adolescence, making it much harder to alter our
abilities and personality traits. 'In adult centres the nerve paths are
something fixed, ended, immutable,' the founder of modern neuroscience,
Santiago RamÃ³n y Cajal, wrote in 1928.2 That would indeed be bad news
for undoing your existing thinking habits. Whenever I discuss
expectation effects, some sceptics ask whether we are 'wired' to see the
world in a certain way, and whether certain expectations are simply too
deeply ingrained to change.

Thankfully, we now know that there is very little reason to be so
pessimistic about our capacity for self-transformation. Through
meticulous research, neuroscientists have shown that the brain's wiring
is constantly changing -- it strengthens some connections and prunes
others, and sometimes adds whole new networks in response to your
circumstances. Those connections will then determine your abilities. At
its most extreme, this process allows people who were born deaf or blind
to adapt to cochlear or retinal implants; while their brains are
initially unable to make sense of the new information, they soon rewire
to build sounds and images. But socalled neuroplasticity occurs whenever
we learn a new skill. Even some personality traits, such as neuroticism
or introversion, which were once thought to be completely immovable, can
change over a lifetime. Whatever your current situation, your brain may
be much more malleable than you might think. And making a change will be
easier if you hold certain attitudes. Carol Dweck at Stanford University
has found that some people believe their abilities to be fixed and
immutable: either they are good at something, or not. Others believe in
their capacity for improvement, no matter what their initial aptitude.
In general, people with the 'growth mindset' tend to progress more
quickly than people with a 'fixed mindset'. The growth mindset is well
known in education, but it is now becoming apparent that people's
understanding of the brain's inherent malleability can have far-reaching
consequences for many other kinds of personal change. People with
anxiety or depression are more likely to benefit from treatments such as
cognitive behavioural therapy if they have a growth mindset, for
example, than people who have a fixed mindset.3 Given these kinds of
results, researchers are now looking at interventions that encourage the
growth mindset in a range of settings. They have found that simply
teaching people about the brain's capacity to change can itself improve
people's physical and mental health, as people realise that they do not
need to become stuck in their current thinking habits.4

If you find you are stuck in a rut as you try to apply a particular
expectation effect, and you are struggling to reframe events in a more
productive or positive way, you should try to remind yourself of the
brain's plasticity. Rather than assuming that you are destined to fall
into the same traps again and again, picture your own brain rewiring as
you learn to see the world in a new way. Since it's much easier to
believe in the growth mindset when you have already experienced change,
you may also find that it helps to focus on small, achievable goals that
can prove your capacity for personal transformation before steadily
increasing your ambitions, and try, along the way, to view any failures
as a useful learning experience. You have had a whole lifetime to build
your current worldview, after all, so it is only natural that positive
change will take time. In the words of one research team studying the
growth mindset: 'Everyone's brain is a work in progress!'5 Take an
outside view Even if you have a growth mindset, you may sometimes find
it hard to apply an expectation effect in the heat of a particularly
challenging moment. Reframing your pain, anxiety or fatigue can sound
easy in theory -- but it's much harder when you're already in discomfort
and struggling to hold yourself together. In these situations, the first
thing to remember is that you don't have to ignore those uncomfortable
feelings, a feat that would be extraordinarily difficult to achieve and
counterproductive. These expectation effects work by adjusting your
assumptions about the feelings' meaning and consequences rather than
immediately changing the feelings themselves. You can remind yourself
that your physical symptoms are a sign of the body's healing, for
example, without actively suppressing the actual sensation of pain;
similarly, you can remember the fact that anxiety is energising, while
still feeling stressed. In both cases, the shift in thinking should lead
to healthier responses -- without needing to deny, swallow or change the
feelings themselves.

To make that process of reframing easier, you might also try a technique
known as self-distancing, developed by Ethan Kross, a psychologist at
the University of Michigan. According to Kross's research, our emotions
are often too immediate for us to think objectively about our situation;
instead, they drag us into negative rumination, churning over the same
fearful or unhappy thoughts that will, in turn, make us feel worse and
less rational. By forcing ourselves to take an outside perspective of
the situation, however, he argues that we can all put an end to that
negative ruminative cycle. There are many ways to self-distance. You can
imagine looking back at your current event from some time in the future,
months or years away. Or you can imagine that you are an observer,
watching the situation unfold from outside your body. The technique I
personally find most useful is to imagine that I am advising a friend in
the same situation. There is now a wealth of evidence showing that these
self-distancing strategies can gently relieve people's distress in a
range of situations, which, in turn, allows them to reframe the
situation more constructively. When facing a stressful event like public
speaking, for example, people who selfdistance are more likely to view
the event as a positive challenge and a chance to prove themselves,
rather than seeing it as a potential threat that could lead to
embarrassment and failure.6 As we've seen, that kind of mental shift
pushes the body towards a healthier stress response.7 This public
speaking example is just one of many in which selfdistancing has been
proven to shift thinking from negative rumination to more constructive
reappraisals of the situation at hand -- making it an incredibly useful
tool for personal transformation. If I were trying to reframe my sense
of pain from an illness, for example, I might think how I would reassure
a friend in distress, reminding them, for instance, about the very real
chances of recovery and the benefits of their treatment -- thoughts that
are much easier to express when you feel a little bit removed from the
situation. The same goes for my thoughts about ageing; I'm far less
likely to build up a dismal view of my own future, if I imagine that I
am talking to

someone else rather than myself. Instead, I'd be keen to emphasise all
the opportunities that are still out there. Whichever expectation
effects you are trying to apply, a few moments of self-distancing should
put you in a more constructive frame of mind, so that you can more
easily identify your preconceptions and adjust your beliefs to healthier
ways of thinking. Be kind to yourself My final piece of advice concerns
your sense of responsibility. Knowledge of the prediction machine, and
of our power to shape our responses to events through techniques like
reframing, can be awe-inspiring. But there is also the danger that such
awareness can create a sense of guilt or blame. If your nerves got the
better of you during a speech, it's your fault for seeing stress as
debilitating, you might think. If you're tired and can't face working
another hour, it's because you've got the wrong mindset about willpower!
If you're not as fit as you once were, you've been thinking yourself
old! These sentiments could not be further from my own views or those of
the scientists exploring expectation effects -- and the spread of these
ideas would be the very worst outcome, to my mind. Like any tools, the
strategies described in this book will suit some individuals better than
others, and will be more applicable to certain situations than others.
If you find that a particular technique doesn't work for you, move on,
and maybe -- if you feel ready -- return to it at a later date. The very
last thing you want to do is to beat yourself up or imagine that your
inability to change your mindset is a sign of personal failure.
Psychologists across the globe are coming to understand that an attitude
of 'self-compassion' is crucial for any personal transformation. This
mindset involves acknowledging and accepting the many other factors that
could contribute to your difficulties and recognising the fact that many
other people will also share your difficulties; you are not alone in
your struggles. Self-compassion is, in itself, good for our mental and
physical health -- but, equally importantly, it gives us a sense of
safety that makes it much

easier to forge new habits and effect positive change in our own lives.
And that includes the use of reappraisal techniques that we've seen
throughout this book.8 The trick is to acknowledge your potential for
improvement, without being overly critical -- in much the same way you
might advise a family member. We should all adopt a self-compassionate
attitude whenever we apply an expectation effect. The fact that we may
have been holding unhealthy or harmful beliefs should be no source of
shame, and there will, inevitably, be times when we struggle to shift
our mindset. Like any skill, you simply need practice to bring about
permanent change. Whatever you hope to achieve with the expectation
effect, try to keep an open mind when testing the different techniques,
forgive any failures and celebrate any successes. If you think that you
are capable of personal transformation -- and you are willing to forgive
your mistakes -- you can make that your self-fulfilling prophecy.
Shakespeare expressed it best more than 400 years ago, with Hamlet
declaring that 'There is nothing either good or bad but thinking makes
it so.' And with that realisation, we can all take our fates into our
own hands. OceanofPDF.com

NOTES

INTRODUCTION 1.

Crum, A.J., and Langer, E.J. (2007). Mind-set matters: Exercise and the
placebo effect. Psychological Science, 18(2), 165--71.

2.  

Sharpless, B.A., and Barber, J.P. (2011). Lifetime prevalence rates of
sleep paralysis: a systematic review. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 15(5),
311-- 15. 3. For a fascinating and in-depth discussion of the many
factors that contributed to the Hmong deaths in the USA, see: Adler,
S.R. (2011). Sleep Paralysis: Night-mares, Nocebos, and the Mind-Body
Connection. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 4.

Zheng, J., Zheng, D., Su, T., and Cheng, J. (2018). Sudden unexplained
nocturnal death syndrome: The hundred years' enigma. Journal of the
American Heart Association, 7(5), e007837.

5.  

Alia Crum described the implications of mindsets at the World Economic
Forum in January 2018:
https://sparq.stanford.edu/sparqhealth-director-crum-discusses-mindsets-world-economic-forum-video.

CHAPTER 1: The Prediction Machine

1.

These descriptions of the drone attacks are indebted to Shackle, S.
(2020). The mystery of the Gatwick drone. Guardian, 1 December.
https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2020/dec/01/the-mystery-ofthe-gatwick-drone.
See also: Jarvis, J. (2018). Gatwick drone latest. Evening Standard, 23
December.
https://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/Gatwick-drone-latest-police-sayit-is-a-possibility-there-was-never-a-drone-a4024626.html.

2.  

The term 'prediction machine' was introduced by Professor Andy Clark in
his book Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind
(2016). Oxford: Oxford University Press. Others refer to it as the
'prediction engine' -- but for clarity and consistency, I shall use
Clark's term throughout. 3. von Helmholtz, H. (1925). Treatise on
Physiological Optics, vol.Â 3, ed. James P.C. Southall, 1--37.
Birmingham, AL: Optical Society of America. 'It may often be rather hard
to say how much of our apperceptions (Anschauungen) as derived by the
sense of sight is due directly to sensation, and how much of them, on
the other hand, is due to experience and training.' See also: Meyering,
T.C. (1989). Helmholtz's Theory of Unconscious Inferences. Historical
Roots of Cognitive Science, 181--208. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-2423-9_10.
4.

Foa, M. (2015). Georges Seurat: The Art of Vision, 21. New Haven, CT:
Yale University Press. 5. For an in-depth discussion of predictive
coding and its many implications, see Clark, A. (2016). Surfing
Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the Embodied Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press; Hohwy, J. (2013). The Predictive Mind. Oxford: Oxford
University Press. See also: De Lange, F.P., Heilbron, M., and Kok, P.
(2018). How do expectations shape perception? Trends in Cognitive
Sciences, 22(9), 764--79; O'Callaghan, C., Kveraga, K., Shine, J.M.,
Adams Jr, R.B., and Bar, M. (2017). Predictions penetrate perception:
Converging

insights from brain, behaviour and disorder. Consciousness and
Cognition, 47, 63--74. 6.

Barrett, L.F. (2017). How Emotions Are Made: The Secret Life of the
Brain, 60. London: Pan Macmillan.

7.  

Fenske, M.J., Aminoff, E., Gronau, N., and Bar, M. (2006). Top-down
facilitation of visual object recognition: Object-based and contextbased
contributions. Progress in Brain Research, 155, 3--21.

8.  

Bar, M., Kassam, K.S., Ghuman, A.S., Boshyan, J., Schmid, A.M., Dale,
A.M., . . . and Halgren, E. (2006). Top-down facilitation of visual
recognition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 103(2),
449--54.

9.  

Madrigal, A. (2014). Things you cannot unsee. Atlantic, 5 May.
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/05/10-thingsyou-cant-unsee-and-what-that-says-about-your-brain/361335.

10. Brugger, P., and Brugger, S. (1993). The Easter bunny in October: Is
    it disguised as a duck? Perceptual and Motor Skills, 76(2), 577--8.
    See the following for a discussion of this paper's interpretation in
    light of modern theories of predictive processing: SeriÃ¨s, P., and
    Seitz, A. (2013). Learning what to expect (in visual perception).
    Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 668.
11. Liu, J., Li, J., Feng, L., Li, L., Tian, J., and Lee, K. (2014).
    Seeing Jesus in toast: Neural and behavioral correlates of face
    pareidolia. Cortex, 53, 60--77. See also: Aru, J., Tulver, K., and
    Bachmann, T. (2018). It's all in your head: Expectations create
    illusory perception in a dual-task setup. Consciousness and
    Cognition, 65, 197--208; Barik, K., Jones, R., Bhattacharya, J., and
    Saha, G. (2019). Investigating the influence of prior expectation in
    face pareidolia using spatial pattern. In Machine Intelligence and
    Signal Analysis, 437--51. Singapore: Springer.
12. 

Merckelbach, H., and van de Ven, V. (2001). Another White Christmas:
fantasy proneness and reports of 'hallucinatory experiences'

in undergraduate students. Journal of Behavior Therapy and Experimental
Psychiatry, 32(3), 137--44; Crowe, S.F., Barot, J., Caldow, S.,
d'Aspromonte, J., Dell'Orso, J., Di Clemente, A., . . . and Sapega, S.
(2011). The effect of caffeine and stress on auditory hallucinations in
a non-clinical sample. Personality and Individual Differences, 50(5),
626-- 30. 13. As noted above, when we hallucinate something, the brain
activity is very similar to the responses to actual physical images.
Summerfield, C., Egner, T., Mangels, J., and Hirsch, J. (2006).
Mistaking a house for a face: Neural correlates of misperception in
healthy humans. Cerebral Cortex, 16(4), 500--8. 14. These details come
from Huntford, R. (2000). Scott and Amundsen: Their Race to the South
Pole, 567. London: Abacus. 15. Hartley-Parkinson, R. (2019). Mum claims
she can see Jesus in flames of Notre Dame Cathedral. Metro, 17 April.
https://metro.co.uk/2019/04/17/mum-claims-can-see-jesus-flamesnotre-dame-cathedral-9225760.
16. Dunning, D., and Balcetis, E. (2013). Wishful seeing: How
preferences shape visual perception. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 22(1), 33--7. See also: Balcetis, E. (2014). Wishful seeing.
Psychologist, 27(1), 22--25.
https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume-27/january2014/wishful-seeing.
17. Greene, B. (2017). How does consciousness happen?
https://blog.ted.com/how-does-consciousness-happen-anil-seth-speaksat-ted2017.
18. https://rarediseases.org/rare-diseases/fnd/ 19. This case study is
described in detail in the following paper: Yeo, J.M., Carson, A., and
Stone, J. (2019). Seeing again: treatment of functional visual loss.
Practical Neurology, 19(2), 168--72. Enormous thanks to Jon Stone for
clarifying some details.

20. For a description of this kind of process, see: Pezzulo, G. (2014).
Why do you fear the bogeyman? An embodied predictive coding model of
perceptual inference. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience,
14(3), 902--11. 21. Teachman, B.A., Stefanucci, J.K., Clerkin, E.M.,
Cody, M.W., and Proffitt, D.R. (2008). A new mode of fear expression:
Perceptual bias in height fear. Emotion, 8(2), 296. 22.

Vasey, M.W., Vilensky, M.R., Heath, J.H., Harbaugh, C.N., Buffington,
A.G., and Fazio, R.H. (2012). It was as big as my head, I swear! Biased
spider size estimation in spider phobia. Journal of Anxiety Disorders,
26(1), 20--4; Basanovic, J., Dean, L., Riskind, J.H., and MacLeod, C.
(2019). High spider-fearful and low spider-fearful individuals
differentially perceive the speed of approaching, but not receding,
spider stimuli. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 43(2), 514--21.

23. Jolij, J., and Meurs, M. (2011). Music alters visual perception.
    PLoS One, 6(4), e18861. See also: Siegel, E.H., Wormwood, J.B.,
    Quigley, K.S., and Barrett, L.F. (2018). Seeing what you feel:
    Affect drives visual perception of structurally neutral faces.
    Psychological Science, 29(4), 496--503; Wormwood, J.B., Siegel,
    E.H., Kopec, J., Quigley, K.S., and Barrett, L.F. (2019). You are
    what I feel: A test of the affective realism hypothesis. Emotion,
    19(5), 788--98. 'The present findings are consistent with recent
    empirical work demonstrating that one's affective state may
    influence how positive or negative a neutral target face looks to
    the perceiver in a very literal way (Siegel et al., 2018): neutral
    faces were perceived as looking more smiling when presented
    concurrent with suppressed affectively positive stimuli and as
    looking more scowling when presented concurrent with suppressed
    affectively negative stimuli.' Otten, M., Seth, A.K., and Pinto, Y.
    (2017). A social Bayesian brain: How social knowledge can shape
    visual perception. Brain and Cognition, 112, 69--77. O'Callaghan,
    C., Kveraga, K., Shine, J.M., Adams Jr, R.B., and Bar, M. (2016).

Convergent evidence for top-down effects from the 'predictive brain'.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 39, e254. 24. Bangee, M., Harris, R.A.,
Bridges, N., Rotenberg, K.J., and Qualter, P. (2014). Loneliness and
attention to social threat in young adults: Findings from an eye tracker
study. Personality and Individual Differences, 63, 16--23. 25.
Prinstein, M. (2018). The Popularity Illusion, Kindle edition, location
2110. London: Ebury. 26. See the following for a summary of these
perceptual effects, their implications for issues like anxiety and
depression, and the potential treatment: Herz, N., Baror, S., and Bar,
M. (2020). Overarching states of mind. Trends in Cognitive Sciences,
24(3), 184--99; Kube, T., Schwarting, R., Rozenkrantz, L., Glombiewski,
J.A., and Rief, W. (2020). Distorted cognitive processes in major
depression: A predictive processing perspective. Biological Psychiatry,
87(5), 388--98; Sussman, T.J., Jin, J., and Mohanty, A. (2016). Top-down
and bottom-up factors in threat-related perception and attention in
anxiety. Biological Psychology, 121, 160--72. 27. Shiban, Y., Fruth,
M.B., Pauli, P., Kinateder, M., Reichenberger, J., and MÃ¼hlberger, A.
(2016). Treatment effect on biases in size estimation in spider phobia.
Biological Psychology, 121, 146--52. 28. Dennis, T.A., and O'Toole, L.J.
(2014). Mental health on the go: Effects of a gamified attention-bias
modification mobile application in trait-anxious adults. Clinical
Psychological Science, 2(5), 576--90; Mogg, K., and Bradley, B.P.
(2016). Anxiety and attention to threat: Cognitive mechanisms and
treatment with attention bias modification. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 87, 76--108; Kress, L., and Aue, T. (2019). Learning to look at
the bright side of life: Attention bias modification training enhances
optimism bias. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 13, 222; Kuckertz, J.M.,
Schofield, C.A., Clerkin, E.M., Primack, J., Boettcher, H., Weisberg,
R.B., . . . and Beard, C. (2019).

Attentional bias modification for social anxiety disorder: What do
patients think and why does it matter? Behavioural and Cognitive
Psychotherapy, 47(1), 16--38; Abado, E., Aue, T., and Okon-Singer, H.
(2020). The missing pieces of the puzzle: A review on the interactive
nature of a-priori expectancies and attention bias toward threat. Brain
Sciences, 10(10), 745; Jones, E.B., and Sharpe, L. (2017). Cognitive
bias modification: A review of meta-analyses. Journal of Affective
Disorders, 223, 175--83; Gober, C. D., Lazarov, A., and Bar-Haim, Y.
(2021). From cognitive targets to symptom reduction: overview of
attention and interpretation bias modification research. Evidence-Based
Mental Health, 24(1), 42--6. 29. See the following for a thorough
description of gustatory expectation effects and their relation to
predictive coding: Piqueras-Fiszman, B., and Spence, C. (2015). Sensory
expectations based on productextrinsic food cues: An interdisciplinary
review of the empirical evidence and theoretical accounts. Food Quality
and Preference, 40, 165--79. 30. Spence, C., and Piqueras-Fiszman, B.
(2014). The Perfect Meal: The Multisensory Science of Food and Dining.
Chichester: John Wiley and Sons. 31. Lee, L., Frederick, S., and Ariely,
D. (2006). Try it, you'll like it: The influence of expectation,
consumption, and revelation on preferences for beer. Psychological
Science, 17(12), 1054--8. 32.

Plassmann, H., O'Doherty, J., Shiv, B., and Rangel, A. (2008). Marketing
actions can modulate neural representations of experienced pleasantness.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105(3), 1050--4. 33.
Clark, A. (2016). Surfing Uncertainty: Prediction, Action, and the
Embodied Mind, 55--6. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 34.

Grabenhorst, F., Rolls, E.T., and Bilderbeck, A. (2007). How cognition
modulates affective responses to taste and flavor: Top-down

influences on the orbitofrontal and pregenual cingulate cortices.
Cerebral Cortex, 18(7), 1549--59. 35. Herz, R.S., and von Clef, J.
(2001). The influence of verbal labeling on the perception of odors:
Evidence for olfactory illusions? Perception, 30(3), 381--91. 36.
Fuller, T. (2013). A love letter to a smelly fruit. New York Times, 3
December.
https://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/08/travel/a-love-letterto-a-smelly-fruit.html.
37. Amar, M., Ariely, D., Bar-Hillel, M., Carmon, Z., and Ofir, C.
(2011). Brand Names Act Like Marketing Placebos. Available at:
http://www.ratio.huji.ac.il/sites/default/files/publications/dp566.pdf.
38. Langer, E., Djikic, M., Pirson, M., Madenci, A., and Donohue, R.
(2010). Believing is seeing: Using mindlessness (mindfully) to improve
visual acuity. Psychological Science, 21(5), 661--6. See also: Pirson,
M., Ie, A., and Langer, E. (2012). Seeing what we know, knowing what we
see: Challenging the limits of visual acuity. Journal of Adult
Development, 19(2), 59--65. Some may argue that the differences in
visual acuity are merely 'imagined'. For an elegant experiment
demonstrating that top-down processing can produce objectively sharper
vision, see: Lupyan, G. (2017). Objective effects of knowledge on visual
perception. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and
Performance, 43(4), 794.

CHAPTER 2: A pious fraud 1.

Blease, C., Annoni, M., and Hutchinson, P. (2018). Editors' introduction
to special section on meaning response and the placebo effect.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 61(3), 349--52. See also: letter
from Thomas Jefferson to Caspar Wistar, 21 June 1807. Available at:
http://memory.loc.gov/service/mss/mtj/mtj1/038/038_0687_0692.pdf.

2.

Raglin, J., Szabo, A., Lindheimer, J.B., and Beedie, C. (2020).
Understanding placebo and nocebo effects in the context of sport: A
psychological perspective. European Journal of Sport Science, 1--9;
Aronson, J. (1999). Please, please me. BMJ, 318(7185), 716; Kaptchuk,
T.J. (1998). Powerful placebo: The dark side of the randomised
controlled trial. The Lancet, 351(9117), 1722--5; De Craen, A.J.,
Kaptchuk, T.J., Tijssen, J.G., and Kleijnen, J. (1999). Placebos and
placebo effects in medicine: historical overview. Journal of the Royal
Society of Medicine, 92(10), 511--15.

3.  

Details of Beecher's wartime experiments, and his overall influence in
medicine, can be found in the following: Beecher, H.K. (1946). Pain in
men wounded in battle. Annals of Surgery, 123(1), 96; Benedetti, F.
(2016). Beecher as clinical investigator: Pain and the placebo effect.
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 59(1), 37--45; Gross, L. (2017).
Putting placebos to the test. PLoS Biology, 15(2), e2001998; Evans, D.
(2004). Placebo. London: HarperCollins; Best, M., and Neuhauser, D.
(2010). Henry K. Beecher: Pain, belief and truth at the bedside. The
powerful placebo, ethical research and anaesthesia safety. BMJ Quality
and Safety, 19(5), 466--8.

4.  

Colloca, L. The placebo effect in pain therapies. Annual Review of
Pharmacology and Toxicology 59 (2019), 191--211.

5.  

https://www.apdaparkinson.org/article/the-placebo-effect-in-clinicaltrials-in-parkinsons-disease.

6.  

Lidstone, S.C., Schulzer, M., Dinelle, K., Mak, E., Sossi, V., Ruth,
T.J., . . . and Stoessl, A.J. (2010). Effects of expectation on
placebo-induced dopamine release in Parkinson disease. Archives of
General Psychiatry, 67(8), 857--65; Quattrone, A., Barbagallo, G.,
Cerasa, A., and Stoessl, A.J. (2018). Neurobiology of placebo effect in
Parkinson's disease: What we have learned and where we are going.
Movement Disorders, 33(8), 1213--27.

7.

Vits, S., Cesko, E., Benson, S., Rueckert, A., Hillen, U., Schadendorf,
D., and Schedlowski, M. (2013). Cognitive factors mediate placebo
responses in patients with house dust mite allergy. PLoS One, 8(11),
e79576. It's worth noting that various factors may influence the placebo
responses here, including the patient's existing beliefs and the
attitude of the physician. See Howe, L.C., Goyer, J.P., and Crum, A.J.
(2017). Harnessing the placebo effect: Exploring the influence of
physician characteristics on placebo response. Health Psychology,
36(11), 1074; Leibowitz, K.A., Hardebeck, E.J., Goyer, J.P., and Crum,
A.J. (2019). The role of patient beliefs in open-label placebo effects.
Health Psychology, 38(7), 613; Darragh, M., Chang, J.W., Booth, R.J.,
and Consedine, N.S. (2015). The placebo effect in inflammatory skin
reactions: The influence of verbal suggestion on itch and weal size.
Journal of Psychosomatic Research, 78(5), 489--94; Pfaar, O., Agache,
I., Bergmann, K.C., Bindslev-Jensen, C., Bousquet, J., Creticos, P.S., .
. . and Frew, A.J. (2021). Placebo effects in allergen immunotherapy: An
EAACI Task Force Position Paper. Allergy, 76(3), 629--47.

8.  

Kemeny, M.E., Rosenwasser, L.J., Panettieri, R.A., Rose, R.M.,
BergSmith, S.M., and Kline, J.N. (2007). Placebo response in asthma: A
robust and objective phenomenon. Journal of Allergy and Clinical
Immunology, 119(6), 1375--81. Placebos seem to have very large effects
on patients' subjective distress, but the differences can also be noted
in objective measures of their breathing. See Luc, F., Prieur, E.,
Whitmore, G.A., Gibson, P.G., Vandemheen, K.L., and Aaron, S.D. (2019).
Placebo effects in clinical trials evaluating patients with uncontrolled
persistent asthma. Annals of the American Thoracic Society, 16(9),
1124--30.

9.  

Al-Lamee, R., Thompson, D., Dehbi, H.M., Sen, S., Tang, K., Davies, J.,
. . . and Nijjer, S.S. (2018). Percutaneous coronary intervention in
stable angina (ORBITA): A double-blind, randomised controlled trial. The
Lancet, 391(10115), 31--40.

10.

Horwitz, R.I., Viscoli, C.M., Donaldson, R.M., Murray, C.J., Ransohoff,
D.F., Berkman, L., . . . and Sindelar, J. (1990). Treatment adherence
and risk of death after a myocardial infarction. The Lancet, 336(8714),
542--5; for a discussion, see: Brown, W.A. (1998). Harnessing the
placebo effect. Hospital Practice, 33(7), 107--16.

11. 

See, for instance: Simpson, S.H., Eurich, D.T., Majumdar, S.R., Padwal,
R.S., Tsuyuki, R.T., Varney, J., and Johnson, J.A. (2006). A
meta-analysis of the association between adherence to drug therapy and
mortality. BMJ, 333(7557), 15; Pressman, A., Avins, A.L., Neuhaus, J.,
Ackerson, L., and Rudd, P. (2012). Adherence to placebo and mortality in
the Beta Blocker Evaluation of Survival Trial (BEST). Contemporary
Clinical Trials, 33(3), 492--8.

12. 

This argument has been proposed by numerous scientists. See: Moerman,
D.E. (2002). Meaning, Medicine, and the 'Placebo Effect', 116--21.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; Chewning, B. (2006). The healthy
adherer and the placebo effect. BMJ, 333(7557), 18; Wilson, I.B. (2010).
Adherence, placebo effects, and mortality. Journal of General Internal
Medicine, 25(12), 1270--2; Yue, Z., Cai, C., Ai-Fang, Y., Feng-Min, T.,
Li, C., and Bin, W. (2014). The effect of placebo adherence on reducing
cardiovascular mortality: A metaanalysis. Clinical Research in
Cardiology, 103(3), 229--35.

13. The preceding three paragraphs synthesise various explanations for
    the placebo effect, including: Petrie, K.J., and Rief, W. (2019).
    Psychobiological mechanisms of placebo and nocebo effects: Pathways
    to improve treatments and reduce side effects. Annual Review of
    Psychology, 70, 599--625; Colloca, L., and Barsky, A.J. (2020).
    Placebo and nocebo effects. New England Journal of Medicine, 382(6),
    554--61; Colagiuri, B., Schenk, L.A., Kessler, M.D., Dorsey, S.G.,
    and Colloca, L. (2015). The placebo effect: From concepts to genes.
    Neuroscience, 307, 171--90; Ongaro, G., and Kaptchuk, T.J. (2019).
    Symptom perception, placebo effects, and the Bayesian brain. Pain,
    160(1), 1;

Koban, L., Jepma, M., LÃ³pez-SolÃ , M., and Wager, T.D. (2019). Different
brain networks mediate the effects of social and conditioned
expectations on pain. Nature Communications, 10(1), 1--13; Miller, F.G.,
Colloca, L., and Kaptchuk, T.J. (2009). The placebo effect: Illness and
interpersonal healing. Perspectives in Biology and Medicine, 52(4), 518;
Trimmer, P.C., Marshall, J.A., Fromhage, L., McNamara, J.M., and
Houston, A.I. (2013). Understanding the placebo effect from an
evolutionary perspective. Evolution and Human Behavior, 34(1), 8-- 15;
Meissner, K. (2011). The placebo effect and the autonomic nervous
system: Evidence for an intimate relationship. Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 366(1572),
1808-- 17. 14. Crum, A.J., Phillips, D.J., Goyer, J.P., Akinola, M., and
Higgins, E.T. (2016). Transforming water: Social influence moderates
psychological, physiological, and functional response to a placebo
product. PLoS One, 11(11), e0167121. See also:
https://sparq.stanford.edu/director-crumpublishes-intriguing-study-placebo-effects.
15.

Ho, J.T., Krummenacher, P., Lesur, M.R., and Lenggenhager, B. (2020).
Real bodies not required? Placebo analgesia and pain perception in
immersive virtual and augmented reality. bioRxiv.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.12.18.423276v1.abstrac t.

16. 

Buckalew, L.W., and Ross, S. (1981). Relationship of perceptual
characteristics to efficacy of placebos. Psychological Reports, 49(3),
955-- 61.

17. Faasse, K., and Martin, L.R. (2018). The power of labeling in nocebo
    effects. International Review of Neurobiology, 139, 379--406.
18. Faasse, K., Martin, L.R., Grey, A., Gamble, G., and Petrie, K.J.
    (2016). Impact of brand or generic labeling on medication
    effectiveness and side effects. Health Psychology, 35(2), 187.

19. Walach, H., and Jonas, W.B. (2004). Placebo research: The evidence
base for harnessing self-healing capacities. Journal of Alternative and
Complementary Medicine, 10 (Supplement 1), S-103. 20.

Howe, L.C., Goyer, J.P., and Crum, A.J. (2017). Harnessing the placebo
effect: Exploring the influence of physician characteristics on placebo
response. Health Psychology, 36(11), 1074.

21. Howick, J., Bishop, F.L., Heneghan, C., Wolstenholme, J., Stevens,
    S., Hobbs, F.R., and Lewith, G. (2013). Placebo use in the United
    Kingdom: Results from a national survey of primary care
    practitioners. PLoS One, 8(3), e58247.
22. Silberman, S. (2009). Placebos are getting more effective. Drug
    makers are desperate to know why. Wired Magazine, 17, 1--8.
23. Walsh, B.T., Seidman, S.N., Sysko, R., and Gould, M. (2002). Placebo
    response in studies of major depression: variable, substantial, and
    growing. JAMA, 287(14), 1840--7; Dunlop, B.W., Thase, M.E., Wun,
    C.C., Fayyad, R., Guico-Pabia, C.J., Musgnung, J., and Ninan, P.T.
    (2012). A meta-analysis of factors impacting detection of
    antidepressant efficacy in clinical trials: The importance of
    academic sites. Neuropsychopharmacology, 37(13), 2830--6.
24. Tuttle, A.H., Tohyama, S., Ramsay, T., Kimmelman, J., Schweinhardt,
    P., Bennett, G.J., and Mogil, J.S. (2015). Increasing placebo
    responses over time in US clinical trials of neuropathic pain. Pain,
    156(12), 2616--26. For a breakdown of the statistics, see
    Marchant, J. (2015). Strong placebo response thwarts painkiller
    trials. Nature News.
    https://www.nature.com/news/strong-placebo-response-thwartspainkiller-trials-1.18511?WT.mc_id=TWT_NatureNews.
25. 

Bennett, G.J. (2018). Does the word 'placebo' evoke a placebo response?
Pain, 159(10), 1928--31.

26. Beecher, H.K. (1955). The powerful placebo. Journal of the American
    Medical Association, 159(17), 1602--6. (The emphasis, within the
    quote, is my own.)

27. For evidence that an explanation can heighten the effects of
openlabel placebos, see: Locher, C., Nascimento, A.F., Kirsch, I.,
Kossowsky, J., Meyer, A., and Gaab, J. (2017). Is the rationale more
important than deception? A randomized controlled trial of open-label
placebo analgesia. Pain, 158(12), 2320--8; Wei, H., Zhou, L., Zhang, H.,
Chen, J., Lu, X., and Hu, L. (2018). The influence of expectation on
nondeceptive placebo and nocebo effects. Pain Research and Management.
doi: 10.1155/2018/8459429. 28. Carvalho, C., Caetano, J.M., Cunha, L.,
Rebouta, P., Kaptchuk, T.J., and Kirsch, I. (2016). Open-label placebo
treatment in chronic low back pain: A randomized controlled trial. Pain,
157(12), 2766. 29. Carvalho, C., Pais, M., Cunha, L., Rebouta, P.,
Kaptchuk, T.J., and Kirsch, I. (2020). Open-label placebo for chronic
low back pain: A 5year follow-up. Pain, 162(5), 1521--7. 30. Kaptchuk,
T. J., and Miller, F. G. (2018). Open label placebo: can honestly
prescribed placebos evoke meaningful therapeutic benefits?. BMJ
(Clinical research ed.), 363, k3889. doi: 10.1136/bmj.k3889. 31.
Schaefer, M., Sahin, T., and Berstecher, B. (2018). Why do open-label
placebos work? A randomized controlled trial of an open-label placebo
induction with and without extended information about the placebo effect
in allergic rhinitis. PLoS One, 13(3), e0192758. 32. Bernstein, M.H.,
Magill, M., Beaudoin, F.L., Becker, S.J., and Rich, J.D. (2018).
Harnessing the placebo effect: A promising method for curbing the opioid
crisis? Addiction, 113(11), 2144--5. 33.

CDC, Opioid data analysis and
https://www.cdc.gov/drugoverdose/data/analysis.html.

resources,

34. 

Morales-Quezada, L., Mesia-Toledo, I., Estudillo-Guerra, A., O'Connor,
K.C., Schneider, J.C., Sohn, D.J., . . . and Zafonte, R. (2020).
Conditioning open-label placebo: A pilot pharmacobehavioral approach for
opioid dose reduction and pain control. Pain Reports, 5(4). See also:
Flowers, K.M., Patton, M.E., Hruschak, V.J., Fields,

K.G., Schwartz, E., Zeballos, J., . . . and Schreiber, K.L. (2021).
Conditioned open-label placebo for opioid reduction after spine surgery:
a randomised controlled trial. Pain, 162(6), 1828--1839. 35. Laferton,
J.A., Mora, M.S., Auer, C.J., Moosdorf, R., and Rief, W. (2013).
Enhancing the efficacy of heart surgery by optimizing patients'
preoperative expectations: Study protocol of a randomized controlled
trial. American Heart Journal, 165(1), 1--7. See the following for a
more elaborate description of the theory behind these kinds of
interventions: Doering, B.K., Glombiewski, J.A., and Rief, W. (2018).
Expectationfocused psychotherapy to improve clinical outcomes.
International Review of Neurobiology, 138, 257--70. 36.

Auer, C.J., Laferton, J.A., Shedden-Mora, M.C., Salzmann, S., Moosdorf,
R., and Rief, W. (2017). Optimizing preoperative expectations leads to a
shorter length of hospital stay in CABG patients: Further results of the
randomized controlled PSY-HEART trial. Journal of Psychosomatic
Research, 97, 82--9.

37. Rief, W., Shedden-Mora, M.C., Laferton, J.A., Auer, C., Petrie,
    K.J., Salzmann, S., . . . and Moosdorf, R. (2017). Preoperative
    optimization of patient expectations improves long-term outcome in
    heart surgery patients: Results of the randomized controlled
    PSY-HEART trial. BMC Medicine, 15(1), 1--13.
38. For further evidence of the potential for people's expectations to
    shape the success of surgical procedures, see: Auer, C.J.,
    Glombiewski, J.A., Doering, B.K., Winkler, A., Laferton, J.A.,
    Broadbent, E., and Rief, W. (2016). Patients' expectations predict
    surgery outcomes: A metaanalysis. International Journal of
    Behavioral Medicine, 23(1), 49--62; Kube, T., Glombiewski, J.A., and
    Rief, W. (2018). Using different expectation mechanisms to optimize
    treatment of patients with medical conditions: A systematic review.
    Psychosomatic Medicine, 80(6), 535--43; Van Der Meij, E., Anema,
    J.R., Leclercq, W.K., Bongers, M.Y., Consten, E.C., Koops, S.E.S., .
    . . and Huirne, J.A.

(2018). Personalised perioperative care by e-health after
intermediategrade abdominal surgery: A multicentre, single-blind,
randomised, placebo-controlled trial. The Lancet, 392(10141), 51--9;
Laferton, J.A., Oeltjen, L., Neubauer, K., Ebert, D.D., and Munder, T.
(2020). The effects of patients' expectations on surgery outcome in
total hip and knee arthroplasty: A prognostic factor meta-analysis.
Health Psychology Review, 1--17. 39. Akroyd, A., Gunn, K.N., Rankin, S.,
Douglas, M., KleinstÃ¤uber, M., Rief, W., and Petrie, K.J. (2020).
Optimizing patient expectations to improve therapeutic response to
medical treatment: A randomized controlled trial of iron infusion
therapy. British Journal of Health Psychology, 25(3), 639--51. 40.
Leibowitz, K.A., Hardebeck, E.J., Goyer, J.P., and Crum, A.J. (2018).
Physician assurance reduces patient symptoms in US adults: An
experimental study. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 33(12), 2051--
2. 41. Rakel, D., Barrett, B., Zhang, Z., Hoeft, T., Chewning, B.,
Marchand, L., and Scheder, J. (2011). Perception of empathy in the
therapeutic encounter: Effects on the common cold. Patient Education and
Counseling, 85(3), 390--7.

CHAPTER 3: Do no harm 1.

Rose, R. (1956). Living Magic: The Realities Underlying the Psychical
Practices and Beliefs of Australian Aborigines, 28--47. New York: Rand
McNally.

2.  

See also: Cannon, W.B. (1942). 'Voodoo' death. American Anthropologist,
44(2), 169--81; Benson, H. (1997). The nocebo effect: History and
physiology. Preventive Medicine, 26(5), 612--15; Byard, R. (1988).
Traditional medicine of aboriginal Australia. CMAJ: Canadian Medical
Association Journal, 139(8), 792. For a discussion of alternative

explanations of these deaths: Lester, D. (2009). Voodoo death. OMEGA:
Journal of Death and Dying, 59(1), 1--18. 3.

For a summary of medical theories of voodoo death, see: Samuels,
M.A.Â (2007). 'Voodoo' death revisited: The modern lessons of
neurocardiology. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 74(Suppl 1), S8--
S16; Morse, D.R., Martin, J., and Moshonov, J. (1991). Psychosomatically
induced death relative to stress, hypnosis, mind control, and voodoo:
Review and possible mechanisms. Stress Medicine, 7(4), 213--32.

4.  

Meador, C.K. (1992). Hex death: Voodoo magic or persuasion? Southern
Medical Journal, 85(3), 244--7.

5.  

Milton, G.W. (1973). Self-willed death or the bone-pointing syndrome.
The Lancet, 301(7817), 1435--6. For many similar accounts, see: Benson,
H. (1997). The nocebo effect: History and physiology. Preventive
Medicine, 26(5), 612--15.

6.  

The potential link between the nocebo effect and voodoo death is very
widely recognised. See, for example: Edwards, I.R., Graedon, J., and
Graedon, T. (2010). Placebo harm. Drug Safety, 33(6), 439--41;
Benedetti, F. (2013). Placebo and the new physiology of the doctor--
patient relationship. Physiological Reviews, 93(3), 1207--46; Cheyne,
J.A., and Pennycook, G. (2013). Sleep paralysis postepisode distress:
Modeling potential effects of episode characteristics, general
psychological distress, beliefs, and cognitive style. Clinical
Psychological Science, 1(2), 135--48.

7.  

Mackenzie, J.N. (1886). The production of the so-called 'rose cold' by
means of an artificial rose, with remarks and historical notes. American
Journal of the Medical Sciences, 91(181), 45. While this is based on a
single anecdote, modern research shows that the mere expectation of a
hay fever attack can indeed bring about symptoms in sufferers:
Besedovsky, L., Benischke, M., Fischer, J., Yazdi, A.S., and Born, J.
(2020). Human sleep consolidates allergic responses conditioned to the

environmental context of an allergen exposure. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 117(20), 10983--8. See also: Jewett, D.L.,
Fein, G., and Greenberg, M.H. (1990). A double-blind study of symptom
provocation to determine food sensitivity. New England Journal of
Medicine, 323(7), 429--33. 8.

Beecher, H.K. (1955). The powerful placebo. Journal of the American
Medical Association, 159(17), 1602--6.

9.  

Howick, J., Webster, R., Kirby, N., and Hood, K. (2018). Rapid overview
of systematic reviews of nocebo effects reported by patients taking
placebos in clinical trials. Trials, 19(1), 1--8. See also: Mahr, A.,
Golmard, C., Pham, E., Iordache, L., Deville, L., and Faure, P. (2017).
Types, frequencies, and burden of nonspecific adverse events of drugs:
Analysis of randomized placebo-controlled clinical trials.
Pharmacoepidemiology and Drug Safety, 26(7), 731--41.

10. https://www.nhs.uk/medicines/finasteride.
11. 

Mondaini, N., Gontero, P., Giubilei, G., Lombardi, G., Cai, T., Gavazzi,
A., and Bartoletti, R. (2007). Finasteride 5 mg and sexual side effects:
How many of these are related to a nocebo phenomenon? Journal of Sexual
Medicine, 4(6), 1708--12.

12. Myers, M.G., Cairns, J.A., and Singer, J. (1987). The consent form
    as a possible cause of side effects. Clinical Pharmacology and
    Therapeutics, 42(3), 250--3.
13. Varelmann, D., Pancaro, C., Cappiello, E.C., and Camann, W.R.
    (2010). Nocebo-induced hyperalgesia during local anesthetic
    injection. Anesthesia and Analgesia, 110(3), 868--70.
14. 

Tinnermann, A., Geuter, S., Sprenger, C., Finsterbusch, J., and BÃ¼chel,
C. (2017). Interactions between brain and spinal cord mediate value
effects in nocebo hyperalgesia. Science, 358(6359), 105--8.

15. Aslaksen, P.M., Zwarg, M.L., Eilertsen, H.-I.H., Gorecka, M.M., and
    BjÃ¸rkedal, E. (2015). Opposite effects of the same drug. Pain,
    156(1),

39--46; Flaten, M.A., Simonsen, T., and Olsen, H. (1999). Drugrelated
information generates placebo and nocebo responses that modify the drug
response. Psychosomatic Medicine, 61(2), 250--5. 16. Scott, D.J.,
Stohler, C.S., Egnatuk, C.M., Wang, H., Koeppe, R.A., and Zubieta, J.K.
(2008). Placebo and nocebo effects are defined by opposite opioid and
dopaminergic responses. Archives of General Psychiatry, 65(2), 220--31.
17. Enck, P., Benedetti, F., and Schedlowski, M. (2008). New insights
into the placebo and nocebo responses. Neuron, 59(2), 195--206. 18.
PlanÃ¨s, S., Villier, C., and Mallaret, M. (2016). The nocebo effect of
drugs. Pharmacology Research and Perspectives, 4(2), e00208; Liccardi,
G., Senna, G., Russo, M., Bonadonna, P., Crivellaro, M., Dama, A., . . .
and Passalacqua, G. (2004). Evaluation of the nocebo effect during oral
challenge in patients with adverse drug reactions. Journal of
Investigational Allergology and Clinical Immunology 14(2), 104--7. 19.
Faasse, K., Cundy, T., Gamble, G., and Petrie, K.J. (2013). The effect
of an apparent change to a branded or generic medication on drug
effectiveness and side effects. Psychosomatic Medicine, 75(1), 90--6.
20. Faasse, K., Cundy, T., and Petrie, K.J. (2009). Thyroxine: Anatomy
of a health scare. BMJ, 339. See also: Faasse, K., Cundy, T., Gamble,
G., and Petrie, K.J. (2013). The effect of an apparent change to a
branded or generic medication on drug effectiveness and side effects.
Psychosomatic Medicine, 75(1), 90--6; MacKrill, K., and Petrie, K.J.
(2018). What is associated with increased side effects and lower
perceived efficacy following switching to a generic medicine? A New
Zealand cross-sectional patient survey. BMJ Open, 8(10), e023667. For a
full analysis, see: Faasse, K., and Martin, L.R. (2018). The power of
labeling in nocebo effects. International Review of Neurobiology, 139,
379--406. 21. Blasini, M., Corsi, N., Klinger, R., and Colloca, L.
(2017). Nocebo and pain: An overview of the psychoneurobiological
mechanisms. Pain

Reports, 2(2). 22. Sciama, Y. (2017). France brings back a phased-out
drug after patients rebel against its replacement. Science, 27
September.
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2017/09/france-brings-back-phasedout-drug-after-patients-rebel-against-its-replacement.
23. Rippon, G. (2019). The Gendered Brain, 29. London: Bodley Head;
Ruble, D.N. (1977). Premenstrual symptoms: A reinterpretation. Science,
197(4300), 291--2. 24. Horing, B., Weimer, K., Schrade, D., Muth, E.R.,
Scisco, J.L., Enck, P., and Klosterhalfen, S. (2013). Reduction of
motion sickness with an enhanced placebo instruction: An experimental
study with healthy participants. Psychosomatic Medicine, 75(5),
497--504; Eden, D., and Zuk, Y. (1995). Seasickness as a self-fulfilling
prophecy: Raising selfefficacy to boost performance at sea. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 80(5), 628. 25. Ferrari, R., Obelieniene, D.,
Darlington, P., Gervais, R., and Green, P. (2002). Laypersons'
expectation of the sequelae of whiplash injury: A cross-cultural
comparative study between Canada and Lithuania. Medical Science Monitor,
8(11), CR728--CR734; Buchbinder, R., and Jolley, D. (2005). Effects of a
media campaign on back beliefs is sustained three years after its
cessation. Spine, 30(11), 1323--30; Polich, G., Iaccarino, M.A.,
Kaptchuk, T.J., Morales-Quezada, L., and Zafonte, R. (2020). Nocebo
effects in concussion: Is all that is told beneficial? American Journal
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 99(1), 71--80. 26. Whittaker,
R., Kemp, S., and House, A. (2007). Illness perceptions and outcome in
mild head injury: a longitudinal study. Journal of Neurology,
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 78(6), 644--6. See also: Hou, R.,
Moss-Morris, R., Peveler, R., Mogg, K., Bradley, B.P., and Belli, A.
(2012). When a minor head injury results in enduring symptoms: A
prospective investigation of risk factors for postconcussional syndrome

after mild traumatic brain injury. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery
and Psychiatry, 83(2), 217--23. 27. Polich, G., Iaccarino, M.A.,
Kaptchuk, T.J., Morales-Quezada, L., and Zafonte, R. (2020). Nocebo
effects in concussion: Is all that is told beneficial? American Journal
of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, 99(1), 71--80. 28.

Reeves, R.R., Ladner, M.E., Hart, R.H., and Burke, R.S. (2007). Nocebo
effects with antidepressant clinical drug trial placebos. General
Hospital Psychiatry, 29(3), 275--7.

29. Usichenko, T.I., Hacker, H., and Hesse, T. (2016). Nocebo effect of
    informed consent: Circulatory collapse before elective caesarean
    section. International Journal of Obstetric Anesthesia, 27, 95--6.
30. Samuels, M.A.Â (2007). Voodoo death revisited: The modern lessons of
    neurocardiology. Cleveland Clinic Journal of Medicine, 74 (Suppl 1),
    S8-- S16. See also: Amanzio, M., Howick, J., Bartoli, M., Cipriani,
    G.E., and Kong, J. (2020). How do nocebo phenomena provide a
    theoretical framework for the COVID--19 pandemic? Frontiers in
    Psychology, 1,
31. doi: 10.3389/ fpsyg.2020.589884.
32. 

Eaker, E.D., Pinsky, J., and Castelli, W.P. (1992). Myocardial
infarction and coronary death among women: Psychosocial predictors from
a 20-year follow-up of women in the Framingham Study. American Journal
of Epidemiology, 135(8), 854--64. See also: Olshansky, B. (2007).
Placebo and nocebo in cardiovascular health: Implications for
healthcare, research, and the doctor--patient relationship. Journal of
the American College of Cardiology, 49(4), 415--21.

32. Barefoot, J.C., Brummett, B.H., Williams, R.B., Siegler, I.C.,
    Helms, M.J., Boyle, S.H., . . . and Mark, D.B. (2011). Recovery
    expectations and long-term prognosis of patients with coronary heart
    disease. Archives of Internal Medicine, 171(10), 929--35.
33. Carey, I.M., Shah, S.M., DeWilde, S., Harris, T., Victor, C.R., and
    Cook, D.G. (2014). Increased risk of acute cardiovascular events
    after

partner bereavement: A matched cohort study. JAMA Internal Medicine,
174(4), 598--605. 34. Shimizu, M., and Pelham, B.W. (2008). Postponing a
date with the grim reaper: Ceremonial events and mortality. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 30(1), 36--45; Wilches-GutiÃ©rrez, J.L.,
Arenas-Monreal, L., Paulo-Maya, A., PelÃ¡ez-Ballestas, I., and Idrovo,
A.J. (2012). A 'beautiful death': Mortality, death, and holidays in a
Mexican municipality. Social Science and Medicine, 74(5), 775--82;
AjdacicGross, V., KnÃ¶pfli, D., Landolt, K., Gostynski, M., Engelter,
S.T., Lyrer, P.A., . . . and RÃ¶ssler, W. (2012). Death has a preference
for birthdays: An analysis of death time series. Annals of Epidemiology,
22(8), 603--6; Kelly, G.E., and Kelleher, C.C. (2018). Happy birthday?
An observational study. Journal of Epidemioliogy and Community Health,
72(12), 1168--72. See also: Phillips, D.P., and Feldman, K.A. (1973). A
dip in deaths before ceremonial occasions: Some new relationships
between social integration and mortality. American Sociological Review,
678--96; Byers, B., Zeller, R.A., and Byers, P.Y. (1991). Birthdate and
mortality: An evaluation of the death-dip/death-rise phenomenon.
Sociological Focus, 24(1), 13--28; Phillips, D.P., Van Voorhees, C.A.,
and Ruth, T.E. (1992). The birthday: Lifeline or deadline? Psychosomatic
Medicine, 54(5), 532--42. 35. National Constitution Center. (2021).
Three presidents die on July 4th: Just a coincidence?
https://constitutioncenter.org/blog/threepresidents-die-on-july-4th-just-a-coincidence.
36. See the following for a broad discussion of all these phenomena:
Ray, O. (2004). How the mind hurts and heals the body. American
Psychologist, 59(1), 29. 37. Pan, Y., Kinitz, T., Stapic, M., and
Nestoriuc, Y. (2019). Minimizing drug adverse events by informing about
the nocebo effect: An experimental study. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 10,
504.

38. Howick, J. (2020). Unethical informed consent caused by overlooking
poorly measured nocebo effects. Journal of Medical Ethics. doi:
10.1136/medethics-2019-105903. See also: Colloca, L. (2017). Tell me the
truth and I will not be harmed: Informed consents and nocebo effects.
American Journal of Bioethics, 17(6), 46--8. 39. Faasse, K., Huynh, A.,
Pearson, S., Geers, A.L., Helfer, S.G., and Colagiuri, B. (2019). The
influence of side effect information framing on nocebo effects. Annals
of Behavioral Medicine, 53(7), 621--9. 40. James, L.K., and Till, S.J.
(2016). Potential mechanisms for IgG4 inhibition of immediate
hypersensitivity reactions. Current Allergy and Asthma Reports, 16(3),
1--7; Couzin-Frankel, J. (2018). A revolutionary treatment for allergies
to peanuts and other foods is going mainstream. Science, 18 October.
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2018/10/revolutionary-treatmentallergies-peanuts-and-other-foods-going-mainstream-do-benefits.
41. Howe, L.C., Leibowitz, K.A., Perry, M.A., Bitler, J.M., Block, W.,
Kaptchuk, T.J., . . . and Crum, A.J. (2019). Changing patient mindsets
about non-life-threatening symptoms during oral immunotherapy: A
randomized clinical trial. Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology:
In Practice, 7(5), 1550--9; Positive mindset about side effects of
peanutallergy treatment improves outcomes.
https://med.stanford.edu/news/all-news/2019/02/positive-mindsetabout-side-effects-of-peanut-allergy-treatment.html.
See the following for a broader discussion of these mindset effects and
their therapeutic potential: Leibowitz, K.A., Howe, L.C., and Crum, A.J.
(2021). Changing mindsets about side effects. BMJ Open, 11(2), e040134.
42. For evidence of pain catastrophising's effects on opioid signalling,
see King, C.D., Goodin, B., Kindler, L.L., Caudle, R.M., Edwards, R.R.,
Gravenstein, N., . . . and Fillingim, R.B. (2013). Reduction of
conditioned pain modulation in humans by naltrexone: An exploratory
study of the effects of pain catastrophizing. Journal of

Behavioral Medicine, 36(3), 315--27; VÃ¶gtle, E., Barke, A., and
KrÃ¶nerHerwig, B. (2013). Nocebo hyperalgesia induced by social
observational learning. Pain, 154(8), 1427--33. 43. Granot, M., and
Ferber, S.G. (2005). The roles of pain catastrophizing and anxiety in
the prediction of postoperative pain intensity: A prospective study.
Clinical Journal of Pain, 21(5), 439--45; Witvrouw, E., Pattyn, E.,
Almqvist, K.F., Crombez, G., Accoe, C., Cambier, D., and Verdonk, R.
(2009). Catastrophic thinking about pain as a predictor of length of
hospital stay after total knee arthroplasty: A prospective study. Knee
Surgery, Sports Traumatology, Arthroscopy, 17(10), 1189-- 94. 44.
Drahovzal, D.N., Stewart, S.H., and Sullivan, M.J. (2006). Tendency to
catastrophize somatic sensations: Pain catastrophizing and anxiety
sensitivity in predicting headache. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 35(4),
226--35; Mortazavi Nasiri, F.S., Pakdaman, S., Dehghani, M., and Togha,
M. (2017). The relationship between pain catastrophizing and
headache-related disability: The mediating role of pain intensity.
Japanese Psychological Research, 59(4), 266--74; Martinez-Calderon, J.,
Jensen, M.P., Morales-Asencio, J.M., and Luque-Suarez, A. (2019). Pain
catastrophizing and function in individuals with chronic musculoskeletal
pain. Clinical Journal of Pain, 35(3), 279--293. 45.

Darnall, B.D., and Colloca, L. (2018). Optimizing placebo and minimizing
nocebo to reduce pain, catastrophizing, and opioid use: A review of the
science and an evidence-informed clinical toolkit. International Review
of Neurobiology, 139, 129--57.

46. 

Darnall, B.D., and Colloca, L. (2018). Optimizing placebo and minimizing
nocebo to reduce pain, catastrophizing, and opioid use: A review of the
science and an evidence-informed clinical toolkit. International Review
of Neurobiology, 139, 129--57.

47. Seng, E.K. (2018). Using cognitive behavioral therapy techniques to
    treat migraine. Journal of Health Service Psychology, 44(2), 68--73.

48.

Ehde, D.M., and Jensen, M.P. (2004). Feasibility of a cognitive
restructuring intervention for treatment of chronic pain in persons with
disabilities. Rehabilitation Psychology, 49(3), 254.

49. Lumley, M.A., and Schubiner, H. (2019). Psychological therapy for
    centralized pain: An integrative assessment and treatment model.
    Psychosomatic Medicine, 81(2), 114--24.
50. Lumley, M.A., and Schubiner, H. (2019). Psychological therapy for
    centralized pain: An integrative assessment and treatment model.
    Psychosomatic Medicine, 81(2), 114--24. Similar results can be found
    for people with auto-immune disorders: Karademas, E.C., Dimitraki,
    G., Papastefanakis, E., Ktistaki, G., Repa, A., Gergianaki, I., . .
    . and Simos, P. (2018). Emotion regulation contributes to the
    well-being of patients with autoimmune diseases through
    illness-related emotions: A prospective study. Journal of Health
    Psychology, 1359105318787010; Nahman-Averbuch, H., Schneider, V.J.,
    Chamberlin, L.A., Van Diest, A.M.K., Peugh, J.L., Lee, G.R., . . .
    and King, C.D. (2021). Identification of neural and psychophysical
    predictors of headache reduction after cognitive behavioral therapy
    in adolescents with migraine. Pain, 162(2), 372--81.
51. 

Adamczyk, A.K., Ligeza, T.S., and Wyczesany, M. (2020). The dynamics of
pain reappraisal: The joint contribution of cognitive change and mental
load. Cognitive, Affective, and Behavioral Neuroscience, 1--18.

52. De Peuter, S., Lemaigre, V., Van Diest, I., and Van den Bergh, O.
    (2008). Illness-specific catastrophic thinking and over-perception
    in asthma. Health Psychology, 27(1), 93.
53. Brown, R.L., Shahane, A.D., Chen, M.A., and Fagundes, C.P. (2020).
    Cognitive reappraisal and nasal cytokine production following
    experimental rhinovirus infection. Brain, Behavior, and
    ImmunityHealth, 1, 100012.

54. Dekker, R.L., Moser, D.K., Peden, A.R., and Lennie, T.A. (2012).
Cognitive therapy improves three-month outcomes in hospitalized patients
with heart failure. Journal of Cardiac Failure, 18(1), 10--20. See also
Norlund, F., Olsson, E.M., Pingel, R., Held, C., SvÃ¤rdsudd, K.,
Gulliksson, M., and Burell, G. (2017). Psychological mediators related
to clinical outcome in cognitive behavioural therapy for coronary heart
disease: A sub-analysis from the SUPRIM trial. European Journal of
Preventive Cardiology, 24(9), 917--925. See the following for the
proposed physiological and behavioural mechanisms: Celano, C.M.,
Villegas, A.C., Albanese, A.M., Gaggin, H.K., and Huffman, J.C. (2018).
Depression and anxiety in heart failure: A review. Harvard Review of
Psychiatry, 26(4), 175.

CHAPTER 4: The origins of mass hysteria 1.

Escola encerra devido a alergis. CM, 18 May 2006.
https://www.cmjornal.pt/portugal/detalhe/escola-encerra-devido-aalergias;
TelevÃ­rus volta a atacar. CM, 18 May 2006.
https://www.cmjornal.pt/portugal/detalhe/televirus-volta-a-atacar.

2.  

Bartholomew, R.E., Wessely, S., and Rubin, G.J. (2012). Mass psychogenic
illness and the social network: Is it changing the pattern of outbreaks?
Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 105(12), 509--12.

3.  

Kilner, J.M., Friston, K.J., and Frith, C.D. (2007). Predictive coding:
An account of the mirror neuron system. Cognitive Processing, 8(3),
159--66.

4.  

See Di Pellegrino, G., Fadiga, L., Fogassi, L., Gallese, V., and
Rizzolatti, G. (1992). Understanding motor events: A neurophysiological
study. Experimental Brain Research, 91(1), 176--80; Lametti, D. (2009).
Mirroring behavior. Scientific American, 9 June.
https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/mirroring-behavior;
Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., and Gallese, V. (2006). Mirrors in the
mind.

Scientific American, 295(5), 54--61; and Blakeslee, S. (2006). Cells
that read minds. New York Times, 10 January.
https://www.nytimes.com/2006/01/10/science/cells-that-readminds.html. 5.

Bentivoglio, L. (2012). Rizzolati: 'Ecco perchÃ¨ i sentimenti sono
contagiosi'. La Repubblica, 27 August.
https://parma.repubblica.it/cronaca/2012/08/27/news/rizzolatti_ecco_pe
rch_i_sentimenti_sono_contagiosi-41547512.

6.  

Bastiaansen, J.A., Thioux, M., and Keysers, C. (2009). Evidence for
mirror systems in emotions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal
Society B: Biological Sciences, 364(1528), 2391--404.

7.  

Much of the research discussed in this section is covered in the
following review paper: Hatfield, E., Carpenter, M., and Rapson, R.L.
(2014). Emotional contagion as a precursor to collective emotions.
Collective Emotions, 108--22. For additional details, see: Laird, J.D.,
Alibozak, T., Davainis, D., Deignan, K., Fontanella, K., Hong, J., . . .
and Pacheco, C. (1994). Individual differences in the effects of
spontaneous mimicry on emotional contagion. Motivation and Emotion,
18(3), 231--47; Carsten, T., Desmet, C., Krebs, R.M., and Brass, M.
(2018). Pupillary contagion is independent of the emotional expression
of the face. Emotion, 19(8), 1343--52.

8.  

Likowski, K.U., MÃ¼hlberger, A., Gerdes, A., Wieser, M.J., Pauli, P., and
Weyers, P. (2012). Facial mimicry and the mirror neuron system:
Simultaneous acquisition of facial electromyography and functional
magnetic resonance imaging. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 6, 214.

9.  

Neal, D.T., and Chartrand, T.L. (2011). Embodied emotion perception:
Amplifying and dampening facial feedback modulates emotion perception
accuracy. Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2(6), 673--8.
For a recent replication, see: Borgomaneri, S., Bolloni, C., Sessa, P.,
and Avenanti, A. (2020). Blocking facial mimicry affects recognition of
facial and body expressions. PLoS One,

15(2), e0229364. See also the following meta-analysis, which confirms
the subtle effect of facial feedback on participants' emotions: Coles,
N.A., Larsen, J.T., and Lench, H.C. (2019). A meta-analysis of the
facial feedback literature: Effects of facial feedback on emotional
experience are small and variable. Psychological Bulletin, 145(6), 610.
10.

Havas, D.A., Glenberg, A.M., and Rinck, M. (2007). Emotion simulation
during language comprehension. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 14(3),
436--41; Foroni, F., and Semin, G.R. (2009). Language that puts you in
touch with your bodily feelings: The multimodal responsiveness of
affective expressions. Psychological Science, 20(8), 974--80.

11. Rizzolatti, G., Fogassi, L., and Gallese, V. (2006). Mirrors in the
    mind. Scientific American, 295(5), 54--61.
12. Christakis, N.A., and Fowler, J.H. (2009). Connected: The Surprising
    Power of Our Social Networks and How they Shape Our Lives, 50--2.
    New York: Little, Brown Spark.
13. Faasse, K., and Petrie, K.J. (2016). From me to you: The effect of
    social modeling on treatment outcomes. Current Directions in
    Psychological Science, 25(6), 438--43.
14. Mazzoni G., Foan L., Hyland M.E., Kirsch I. (2010). The effects of
    observation and gender on psychogenic symptoms. Health Psychology
    29, 181--5; Lorber, W., Mazzoni, G., and Kirsch, I. (2007). Illness
    by suggestion: Expectancy, modeling, and gender in the production of
    psychosomatic symptoms. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 33(1),
    112--16.
15. Broderick, J.E., Kaplan-Liss, E., and Bass, E. (2011). Experimental
    induction of psychogenic illness in the context of a medical event
    and media exposure. American Journal of Disaster Medicine, 6(3),
    163.
16. 

Ditto, B., Byrne, N., Holly, C., and Balegh, S. (2014). Social contagion
of vasovagal reactions in the blood collection clinic: A possible
example of mass psychogenic illness. Health Psychology, 33(7), 639.

17. Faasse, K., Yeom, B., Parkes, B., Kearney, J., and Petrie, K.J.
(2018). The influence of social modeling, gender, and empathy on
treatment side effects. Annals of Behavioral Medicine, 52(7), 560--70.
18. Colloca, L., and Benedetti, F. (2009). Placebo analgesia induced by
social observational learning. Pain, 144(1--2), 28--34; Åwider, K., and
BÄbel, P. (2013). The effect of the sex of a model on nocebo
hyperalgesia induced by social observational learning. Pain, 154(8),
1312--17. 19.

Benedetti, F., Durando, J., and Vighetti, S. (2014). Nocebo and placebo
modulation of hypobaric hypoxia headache involves the
cyclooxygenase-prostaglandins pathway. Pain, 155(5), 921--8.

20. Caporael, L.R. (1976). Ergotism: The Satan loosed in Salem? Science,
    192(4234), 21--6.
21. 

Hatfield, E., Carpenter, M., and Rapson, R.L. (2014). Emotional
contagion as a precursor to collective emotions. Collective Emotions,
108--22. Some further details (including the true location of the mill)
come from Baloh, R.W., and Bartholomew, R.E. (2020). A short history of
spider, insect, and worm scares. In Havana Syndrome: Mass Psychogenic
Illness and the Real Story Behind the Embassy Mystery and Hysteria,
151--66. Cham: Copernicus.

22. Baloh, R.W., and Bartholomew, R.E. (2020). A short history of
    spider, insect, and worm scares. In Havana Syndrome, 151--66. Cham:
    Copernicus.
23. Talbot, M. (2002). Hysteria hysteria. New York Times Magazine. 2
    June.
    https://www.nytimes.com/2002/06/02/magazine/hysteriahysteria.html.
24. Koran, L., and Oppmann, P. (2018). US embassy in Cuba to reduce
    staff indefinitely after 'health attacks'. CNN, 2 March.
    https://edition.cnn.com/2018/03/02/politics/us-embassy-cuba-staffreductions-attacks/index.html.

25. See Baloh and Bartholomew's Havana Syndrome (Cham) for a full
description of its psychogenic origins. See also: Stone, R. (2018).
Sonic attack or mass paranoia. Science, doi:10.1126/science.aau5386;
Hitt, J. (2019). The real story behind the Havana embassy mystery.
Vanity Fair, 6 January.
https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2019/01/the-realstory-behind-the-havana-embassy-mystery;
Leighton, T.G. (2018). Ultrasound in air -- Guidelines, applications,
public exposures, and claims of attacks in Cuba and China. Journal of
the Acoustical Society of America, 144(4), 2473--89; Bartholomew, R.E.,
and Baloh, R.W. (2020). Challenging the diagnosis of 'Havana Syndrome'
as a novel clinical entity. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine,
113(1), 7--11. The possibility that psychogenic contagion was amplifying
and prolonging symptoms is discussed in: National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering, and Medicine (2020). An Assessment of Illness in US
Government Employees and Their Families at Overseas Embassies. Although
this report raises the possibility of a real weapon, other scientists
remain unconvinced: see Vergano, D. (2020). Scientists are slamming a
report saying microwave attacks could have caused 'Havana syndrome' in
US diplomats. BuzzFeed, 7 December.
https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/danvergano/microwave-attackshavana-syndrome-diplomats.
26. Entous, A., and Anderson, J.L. (2018). The mystery of the Havana
syndrome. New Yorker, 9 November.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2018/11/19/the-mystery-of-thehavana-syndrome.
27.

Cited in Baloh, R.W., and Bartholomew, R.E. (2020). Havana Syndrome:
Mass Psychogenic Illness and the Real Story Behind the Embassy Mystery
and Hysteria, 21. Cham: Copernicus.

28. The telephone as a cause of ear troubles (1889). British Medical
    Journal, 2(1499), 671--72.

29. Rubin, G.J., Burns, M., and Wessely, S. (2014). Possible
psychological mechanisms for 'wind turbine syndrome': On the windmills
of your mind. Noise and Health, 16(69), 116. 30. Andrianome, S., De
Seze, R., Braun, A., and Selmaoui, B. (2018). Descriptive self-reporting
survey of people with idiopathic environmental intolerance attributed to
electromagnetic fields (IEIEMF): Similarities and comparisons with
previous studies. Journal of Public Health, 26(4), 461--73. 31. Rubin,
G.J., Hahn, G., Everitt, B.S., Cleare, A.J., and Wessely, S. (2006). Are
some people sensitive to mobile phone signals? Within participants
double blind randomised provocation study. British Medical Journal,
332(7546), 886--91. 32. Verrender, A., Loughran, S.P., Dalecki, A.,
Freudenstein, F., and Croft, R.J. (2018). Can explicit suggestions about
the harmfulness of EMF exposure exacerbate a nocebo response in healthy
controls? Environmental Research, 166, 409--17. 33. Nyhan, B., and
Reifler, J. (2015). Does correcting myths about the flu vaccine work? An
experimental evaluation of the effects of corrective information.
Vaccine, 33(3), 459--64. 34. Nichol, K.L., Margolis, K.L., Lind, A.,
Murdoch, M., McFadden, R., Hauge, M., . . . and Drake, M. (1996). Side
effects associated with influenza vaccination in healthy working adults:
A randomized, placebo-controlled trial. Archives of Internal Medicine,
156(14), 1546-- 50; World Health Organization (2012). Information sheet:
observed rate of vaccine reactions: influenza vaccine.
https://www.who.int/vaccine_safety/initiative/tools/Influenza_Vaccine
\_rates_information_sheet.pdf?ua=1. 35.

CDC. Misconceptions about seasonal flu and flu vaccines.
https://www.cdc.gov/flu/prevent/misconceptions.htm.

36. World Health Organization (2012). Information sheet: observed rate
    of vaccine reactions: influenza vaccine.

https://www.who.int/vaccine_safety/initiative/tools/Influenza_Vaccine
\_rates_information_sheet.pdf?ua=1; Tosh, P.K., Boyce, T.G., and Poland,
G.A. (2008). Flu myths: Dispelling the myths associated with live
attenuated influenza vaccine. Mayo Clinic Proceedings 83(1), 77-- 84.
37. Huang, W.T., Hsu, C.C., Lee, P.I., and Chuang, J.H. (2010). Mass
psychogenic illness in nationwide in-school vaccination for pandemic
influenza A (H1N1) 2009, Taiwan, November 2009--January 2010.
Eurosurveillance, 15(21), 19575. 38. Simas, C., Munoz, N., Arregoces,
L., and Larson, H.J. (2019). HPV vaccine confidence and cases of mass
psychogenic illness following immunization in Carmen de Bolivar,
Colombia. Human Vaccines and Immunotherapeutics, 15(1), 163--6. 39.
Matthews, A., Herrett, E., Gasparrini, A., Van Staa, T., Goldacre, B.,
Smeeth, L., and Bhaskaran, K. (2016). Impact of statin-related media
coverage on use of statins: Interrupted time series analysis with UK
primary care data. BMJ, 353, i3283. doi: 10.1136/bmj.i3283. 40. See, for
example, Rogers, L. (2015). Crippled by statins. Daily Mail, 3 November.
https://www.dailymail.co.uk/health/article3300937/Crippled-statins-Cholesterol-busting-drugs-left-Davidwheelchair-doctors-insisted-taking-them.html.
41. Finegold, J.A., Manisty, C.H., Goldacre, B., Barron, A.J., and
Francis, D.P. (2014). What proportion of symptomatic side effects in
patients taking statins are genuinely caused by the drug? Systematic
review of randomized placebo-controlled trials to aid individual patient
choice. European Journal of Preventive Cardiology, 21(4), 464--74. 42.
Newman, C.B., Preiss, D., Tobert, J.A., Jacobson, T.A., Page, R.L.,
Goldstein, L.B., . . . and Duell, P.B. (2019). Statin safety and
associated adverse events: A scientific statement from the American
Heart Association. Arteriosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology,
39(2), e38--e81.

43. Khan, S., Holbrook, A., and Shah, B.R. (2018). Does Googling lead to
statin intolerance? International Journal of Cardiology, 262, 25--7. 44.
Singh, P., Arora, A., Strand, T.A., Leffler, D.A., Catassi, C., Green,
P.H., . . . and Makharia, G.K. (2018). Global prevalence of celiac
disease: Systematic review and meta-analysis. Clinical Gastroenterology
and Hepatology, 16(6), 823--36. 45.
https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/coeliac-disease. 46. Cianferoni, A.
(2016). Wheat allergy: Diagnosis and management. Journal of Asthma and
Allergy, 9, 13. 47.

Servick, K. (2018). The war on gluten. Science.
https://www.sciencemag.org/news/2018/05/what-s-really-behindgluten-sensitivity.

48. Molina-Infante, J., and Carroccio, A. (2017). Suspected nonceliac
    gluten sensitivity confirmed in few patients after gluten challenge
    in double-blind, placebo-controlled trials. Clinical
    Gastroenterology and Hepatology, 15(3), 339--48. See the following
    for a separate metaanalysis showing a large nocebo effect: Lionetti,
    E., Pulvirenti, A., Vallorani, M., Catassi, G., Verma, A.K., Gatti,
    S., and Catassi, C. (2017). Re-challenge studies in non-celiac
    gluten sensitivity: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Frontiers
    in Physiology, 8, 621. The role of expectation in gluten sensitivity
    is described in the following: Petrie, K.J., and Rief, W. (2019).
    Psychobiological mechanisms of placebo and nocebo effects: Pathways
    to improve treatments and reduce side effects. Annual Review of
    Psychology, 70, 599--625. The following link contains the British
    Nutrition Foundation's interpretation of the study:
    https://www.nutrition.org.uk/bnfevents/events/252nutritionscience/researchspotlight/1043-2017issue3.html.
49. Croall, I.D., Trott, N., Rej, A., Aziz, I., O'Brien, D.J., George,
    H.A., . . . and Hadjivassiliou, M. (2019). A population survey of
    dietary attitudes towards gluten. Nutrients, 11(6), 1276.

50.

Unalp-Arida, A., Ruhl, C.E., Brantner, T.L., Everhart, J.E., and Murray,
J.A. (2017). Less hidden celiac disease but increased gluten avoidance
without a diagnosis in the United States: Findings from the National
Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys from 2009 to 2014. Mayo Clinic
Proceedings 92(1), 30--8; Cabrera-ChÃ¡vez, F., Dezar, G.V.,
Islas-Zamorano, A.P., Espinoza-Alderete, J.G., Vergara-JimÃ©nez, M.J.,
MagaÃ±a-Ordorica, D., and Ontiveros, N. (2017). Prevalence of
self-reported gluten sensitivity and adherence to a gluten-free diet in
Argentinian adult population. Nutrients, 9(1), 81.

51. Crichton, F., Dodd, G., Schmid, G., Gamble, G., and Petrie, K.J.
    (2014). Can expectations produce symptoms from infrasound associated
    with wind turbines? Health Psychology, 33(4), 360; Crichton, F.,
    Chapman, S., Cundy, T., and Petrie, K.J. (2014). The link between
    health complaints and wind turbines: Support for the nocebo
    expectations hypothesis. Frontiers in Public Health, 2, 220.
52. Crichton, F., and Petrie, K.J. (2015). Health complaints and wind
    turbines: The efficacy of explaining the nocebo response to reduce
    symptom reporting. Environmental Research, 140, 449--55.
53. Framing can also help. See, for instance: Mao, A., Barnes, K.,
    Sharpe, L., Geers, A.L., Helfer, S.G., Faasse, K., and Colagiuri, B.
    (2021). Using positive attribute framing to attenuate nocebo side
    effects: A cybersickness study. Annals of Behavioral Medicine. doi:
    10.1093/abm/kaaa115.

CHAPTER 5: Faster, stronger, fitter 1. 2.

Voet, W. (2001). Breaking the Chain, 104. London: Yellow Jersey.

Bannister, R. (2014). Twin Tracks: The Autobiography, Kindle edition,
location 828. London: Robson Press. 3.
https://www.olympicchannel.com/en/stories/features/detail/eliudkipchoge-marathon-olympics-world-record.

4.

Gonzalez, R. (2019). How Eliud Kipchoge pulled off his epic, sub-2hour
marathon. Wired, 14 October.
https://www.wired.com/story/howeliud-kipchoge-pulled-off-his-epic-sub-2-hour-marathon.

5.  

Giulio, C.D., Daniele, F., and Tipton, C.M. (2006). Angelo Mosso and
muscular fatigue: 116 years after the first Congress of Physiologists:
IUPS commemoration. Advances in Physiology Education, 30(2), 51--7.

6.  

Noakes, T.D.O. (2012). Fatigue is a brain-derived emotion that regulates
the exercise behavior to ensure the protection of whole body
homeostasis. Frontiers in Physiology, 3, 82.

7.  

Cairns, S. P. (2006). Lactic acid and exercise performance. Sports
Medicine, 36(4), 279--91. See also:
https://www.livescience.com/lacticacid.html.

8.  

Corbett, J., Barwood, M.J., Ouzounoglou, A., Thelwell, R., and Dicks, M.
(2012). Influence of competition on performance and pacing during
cycling exercise. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 44(3),
509--15.

9.  

Marcora, S.M., Staiano, W., and Manning, V. (2009). Mental fatigue
impairs physical performance in humans. Journal of Applied Physiology,
106(3), 857--64.

10. For a thorough discussion of the traditional model of fatigue, and
    the need to separate the psychological sense of effort from the
    physiological changes, see: Noakes T.D. (2012). The Central Governor
    Model in 2012: Eight new papers deepen our understanding of the
    regulation of human exercise performance. British Journal of Sports
    Medicine 46, 1--3. There has been controversy over the exact
    formulation of the psychobiological theory of fatigue, though the
    description in the text describes the common features. See Venhorst,
    A., Micklewright, D., and Noakes, T.D. (2018). Towards a
    threedimensional framework of centrally regulated and goal-directed
    exercise behaviour: A narrative review. British Journal of Sports
    Medicine, 52(15), 957--66.

11. For some direct evidence of this part of the process, see
Piedimonte, A., Benedetti, F., and Carlino, E. (2015). Placebo-induced
decrease in fatigue: Evidence for a central action on the preparatory
phase of movement. European Journal of Neuroscience, 41(4), 492--7. 12.
Morton, R.H. (2009). Deception by manipulating the clock calibration
influences cycle ergometer endurance time in males. Journal of Science
and Medicine in Sport, 12, 332--7. 13. Stone, M., Thomas, K., Wilkinson,
M., Jones, A., St Clair Gibson, A., and Thompson, K. (2012). Effects of
deception on exercise performance: Implications for determinants of
fatigue in humans. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise, 44(3),
534--41. 14. Castle, P.C., Maxwell, N., Allchorn, A., Mauger, A.R., and
White, D.K. (2012). Deception of ambient and body core temperature
improves self paced cycling in hot, humid conditions. European Journal
of Applied Physiology, 112(1), 377--85. 15. Iodice, P., Porciello, G.,
Bufalari, I., Barca, L., and Pezzulo, G. (2019). An interoceptive
illusion of effort induced by false heart-rate feedback. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 116(28), 13897--902. 16. McMorris, T.,
Barwood, M., and Corbett, J. (2018). Central fatigue theory and
endurance exercise: Toward an interoceptive model. Neuroscience and
Biobehavioral Reviews, 93, 93--107; Holgado, D., and Sanabria, D.
(2020). Does self-paced exercise depend on executive processing? A
narrative review of the current evidence. International Review of Sport
and Exercise Psychology, 1--24; Hyland-Monks, R., Cronin, L.,
McNaughton, L., and Marchant, D. (2018). The role of executive function
in the self-regulation of endurance performance: A critical review.
Progress in Brain Research, 240, 353--70. 17. Broelz, E.K., Wolf, S.,
Schneeweiss, P., Niess, A.M., Enck, P., and Weimer, K. (2018).
Increasing effort without noticing: A randomized controlled pilot study
about the ergogenic placebo effect in endurance

athletes and the role of supplement salience. PLoS One, 13(6), e0198388.
18.

Pollo, A., Carlino, E., and Benedetti, F. (2008). The top-down influence
of ergogenic placebos on muscle work and fatigue. European Journal of
Neuroscience, 28(2), 379--88.

19. 

Hurst, P., Schipof-Godart, L., Szabo, A., Raglin, J., Hettinga, F.,
Roelands, B., . . . and Beedie, C. (2020). The placebo and nocebo effect
on sports performance: A systematic review. European Journal of Sport
Science, 20(3), 279--92.

20. Ibid.
21. Montes, J., Wulf, G., and Navalta, J.W. (2018). Maximal aerobic
    capacity can be increased by enhancing performers' expectancies.
    Journal of Sports Medicine and Physical Fitness, 58(5), 744--9.
22. 

Stoate, I., Wulf, G., and Lewthwaite, R. (2012). Enhanced expectancies
improve movement efficiency in runners. Journal of Sports Sciences,
30(8), 815--23.

23. Turnwald, B.P., Goyer, J.P., Boles, D.Z., Silder, A., Delp, S.L.,
    and Crum, A.J. (2019). Learning one's genetic risk changes
    physiology independent of actual genetic risk. Nature Human
    Behaviour, 3(1), 48--
24. 
25. Saito, T., Barreto, G., Saunders, B., and Gualano, B. (2020). Is
    openlabel placebo a new ergogenic aid? A commentary on existing
    studies and guidelines for future research. Sports Medicine, 50(7),
    1231--2. See also: Broelz, E.K., Wolf, S., Schneeweiss, P., Niess,
    A.M., Enck, P., and Weimer, K. (2018). Increasing effort without
    noticing: A randomized controlled pilot study about the ergogenic
    placebo effect in endurance athletes and the role of supplement
    salience. PLoS One, 13(6), e0198388.
26. Giles, G.E., Cantelon, J.A., Eddy, M.D., BrunyÃ©, T.T., Urry, H.L.,
    Taylor, H.A., . . . and Kanarek, R.B. (2018). Cognitive reappraisal
    reduces perceived exertion during endurance exercise. Motivation and

Emotion, 42(4), 482--96. Some of the advice given here is based on an
interview with Giles, and my own experience of practising cognitive
reappraisal. For another example of cognitive reappraisal, see: Arthur,
T.G., Wilson, M.R., Moore, L.J., Wylie, L.J., and Vine, S.J. (2019).
Examining the effect of challenge and threat states on endurance
exercise capabilities. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 44, 51--9. And
see the following for a discussion of emotional intelligence and its
relation to psychological basis of fatigue: Rubaltelli, E., Agnoli, S.,
and Leo, I. (2018). Emotional intelligence impact on half marathon
finish times. Personality and Individual Differences, 128, 107--12. 26.
Orvidas, K., Burnette, J.L., and Russell, V.M. (2018). Mindsets applied
to fitness: Growth beliefs predict exercise efficacy, value and
frequency. Psychology of Sport and Exercise, 36, 156--61. 27. Morris,
J.N., Heady, J.A., Raffle, P.A.B., Roberts, C.G., and Parks, J.W.
(1953). Coronary heart-disease and physical activity of work. The
Lancet, 262(6796), 1111--20; Kuper, S. (2009). The man who invented
exercise. Financial Times, 12 September.
https://www.ft.com/content/e6ff90ea-9da2-11de-9f4a-00144feabdc0;
Paffenbarger Jr, R.S., Blair, S.N., and Lee, I.M. (2001). A history of
physical activity, cardiovascular health and longevity: The scientific
contributions of Jeremy N. Morris, DSc, DPH, FRCP. International Journal
of Epidemiology, 30(5), 1184--92. 28.

Source:
https://sites.google.com/site/compendiumofphysicalactivities/home. Se e
also: Wilson, C. (2010). The truth about exercise. New Scientist,
205(2742), 34--7.

29. 

Patterson, R., Webb, E., Millett, C., and Laverty, A.A. (2018). Physical
activity accrued as part of public transport use in England. Journal of
Public Health.

30. Crum, A.J., and Langer, E.J. (2007). Mind-set matters: Exercise and
    the placebo effect. Psychological Science, 18(2), 165--71.

31. Zahrt, O.H., and Crum, A.J. (2017). Perceived physical activity and
mortality: Evidence from three nationally representative US samples.
Health Psychology, 36(11), 1017. A similar study, looking at people's
health complaints: Baceviciene, M., Jankauskiene, R., and Emeljanovas,
A. (2019). Self-perception of physical activity and fitness is related
to lower psychosomatic health symptoms in adolescents with unhealthy
lifestyles. BMC Public Health, 19(1), 980. 32.

Lindheimer, J.B., O'Connor, P.J., and Dishman, R.K. (2015). Quantifying
the placebo effect in psychological outcomes of exercise training: A
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Sports Medicine, 45(5), 693--711;
Jones, M.D., Valenzuela, T., Booth, J., Taylor, J.L., and Barry, B.K.
(2017). Explicit education about exercise-induced hypoalgesia influences
pain responses to acute exercise in healthy adults: A randomized
controlled trial. Journal of Pain, 18(11), 1409--16; Vaegter, H.B.,
Thinggaard, P., Madsen, C.H., Hasenbring, M., and Thorlund, J.B. (2020).
Power of words: Influence of preexercise information on hypoalgesia
after exercise-randomized controlled trial. Medicine and Science in
Sports and Exercise, 52(11), 2373--9.

33. 

Zahrt, O.H., and Crum, A.J. (2019). Effects of physical activity
recommendations on mindset, behavior and perceived health. Preventive
Medicine Reports, 101027.

34. Wen, C.P., Wai, J.P.M., Tsai, M.K., Yang, Y.C., Cheng, T.Y.D., Lee,
    M.C., . . . and Wu, X. (2011). Minimum amount of physical activity
    for reduced mortality and extended life expectancy: A prospective
    cohort study. The Lancet, 378(9798), 1244--53. See also: Curfman, G.
    (2015). Exercise: You may need less than you think.
    https://www.health.harvard.edu/blog/how-much-exercise-do-youreally-need-less-than-you-think-201512088770.
35. Prichard, I., Kavanagh, E., Mulgrew, K.E., Lim, M.S., and
    Tiggemann, M. (2020). The effect of Instagram #fitspiration images
    on young women's mood, body image, and exercise behaviour. Body
    Image, 33, 1--6. See also: Robinson, L., Prichard, I., Nikolaidis,
    A., Drummond,

C., Drummond, M., and Tiggemann, M. (2017). Idealised media images: The
effect of fitspiration imagery on body satisfaction and exercise
behaviour. Body Image, 22, 65--71. 36. Phelps, M., with Abrahamson, A.
(2008). No Limits: The Will to Succeed, 8. New York: Free Press. Cited
in: Moran, A., Campbell, M., Holmes, P., and MacIntyre, T. (2012).
Mental imagery, action observation and skill learning. Skill Acquisition
in Sport: Research, Theory and Practice, 94. 37. Moran, A., Campbell,
M., Holmes, P., and MacIntyre, T. (2012). Mental imagery, action
observation and skill learning. Skill Acquisition in Sport: Research,
Theory and Practice, 94. See also: Slimani, M., Tod, D., Chaabene, H.,
Miarka, B., and Chamari, K. (2016). Effects of mental imagery on
muscular strength in healthy and patient participants: A systematic
review. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 15(3), 434. 38. Yao,
W.X., Ranganathan, V.K., Allexandre, D., Siemionow, V., and Yue, G.H.
(2013). Kinesthetic imagery training of forceful muscle contractions
increases brain signal and muscle strength. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 7, 561. See the following for a comparison of physical and
mental practice, and various combinations of both styles of training:
Reiser, M., BÃ¼sch, D., and Munzert, J. (2011). Strength gains by motor
imagery with different ratios of physical to mental practice. Frontiers
in Psychology, 2, 194. 39. While this has been the view for many
decades, the latest evidence suggests that the size of our muscles and
muscular strength are largely independent. Loenneke, J.P., Buckner,
S.L., Dankel, S.J., and Abe, T. (2019). Exercise-induced changes in
muscle size do not contribute to exercise-induced changes in muscle
strength. Sports medicine, 49(7), 987--91. 40. Ridderinkhof, K.R., and
Brass, M. (2015). How kinesthetic motor imagery works: A
predictive-processing theory of visualization in sports

and motor expertise. Journal of Physiology -- Paris, 109(1--3), 53--63.
See the following for a discussion of its relation to the
psychobiological model of exercise: Slimani, M., Tod, D., Chaabene, H.,
Miarka, B., and Chamari, K. (2016). Effects of mental imagery on
muscular strength in healthy and patient participants: A systematic
review. Journal of Sports Science and Medicine, 15(3), 434. 41.

Lebon, F., Collet, C., and Guillot, A. (2010). Benefits of motor imagery
training on muscle strength. Journal of Strength and Conditioning
Research, 24(6), 1680--7.

42. Clark, B.C., Mahato, N.K., Nakazawa, M., Law, T.D., and Thomas, J.S.
    (2014). The power of the mind: The cortex as a critical determinant
    of muscle strength/weakness. Journal of Neurophysiology, 112(12),
    3219--26.
43. 

See, for example: Najafabadi, M.G., Memari, A.H., Kordi, R.,
Shayestehfar, M., and Eshghi, M.A.Â (2017). Mental training can improve
physical activity behavior in adolescent girls. Journal of Sport and
Health Science, 6(3), 327--32; Cooke, L.M., Duncan, L.R., Deck, S.J.,
Hall, C.R., and Rodgers, W.M. (2020). An examination of changes in
exercise identity during a mental imagery intervention for female
exercise initiates. International Journal of Sport and Exercise
Psychology, 18(4), 534--50; Robin, N., Toussaint, L., Coudevylle, G.R.,
Ruart, S., Hue, O., and Sinnapah, S. (2018). Text messages promoting
mental imagery increase self-reported physical activity in older adults:
A randomized controlled study. Journal of Aging and Physical Activity,
26(3), 462--70.

44. Newcomb, A. (2012). Super strength: Daughter rescues dad trapped
    under car. ABC News, 1 August.
    https://abcnews.go.com/US/superhero-woman-lifts-car-off-dad/story?
    id=16907591#.UMay9Hfeba4. See also: Hadhazy, A. (2016). How it's
    possible for an ordinary person to lift a car. BBC Future, 2 May.

https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20160501-how-its-possible-for-anordinary-person-to-lift-a-car.
45.

Oregon man pinned under 3,000-pound tractor saved by teen daughters. Fox
News, 11 April 2013.
https://www.foxnews.com/us/oregon-man-pinned-under-3000-poundtractor-saved-by-teen-daughters;
Septuagenarian superhero? Man lifts car off son-in-law. NPR, 22 July
2013.
https://www.npr.org/2013/07/22/204444515/septuagenarian-superheroman-lifts-car-off-son-in-law.

46. Liptak, A. (2015). The Incredible Hulk was inspired by a woman
    saving her baby. Gizmodo, 30 August.
    https://io9.gizmodo.com/theincredible-hulk-was-inspired-by-a-woman-saving-her-1727562968.
47. Evans, D.R., Boggero, I.A., and Segerstrom, S.C. (2016). The nature
    of self-regulatory fatigue and 'ego depletion': Lessons from
    physical fatigue. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 20(4),
    291--310.

CHAPTER 6: The food paradox 1.

Calorie content: avocado toast (501 kcal); smoothie (209 kcal); tuna
niÃ§oise salad (455 kcal); orange juice (105 kcal); chicken and asparagus
braise (480 kcal); fruit-and-nut granola bar (279 kcal). Sources:
www.bbcgoodfood.com, www.pret.co.uk.

2.  

Calorie content: croissant (291 kcal); hot chocolate (260 kcal);
spaghetti alla puttanesca (495 kcal); fruit salad (111 kcal); fish pie
(455 kcal); salad (20 kcal); mini doughnuts (110 kcal). Sources:
www.pret.co.uk, www.bbcgoodfood.com, www.sainsburys.co.uk.

3.  

In the discussion of Henry Molaison's life that follows, I am indebted
to Corkin, S. (2014). Permanent Present Tense. London: Penguin.

4.  

Ibid., 210.

5.  

For descriptions of this experiment and its implications for the role of
memory in appetite, see Rozin, P., Dow, S., Moscovitch, M., and

Rajaram, S. (1998). What causes humans to begin and end a meal? A role
for memory for what has been eaten, as evidenced by a study of multiple
meal eating in amnesic patients. Psychological Science, 9(5), 392--6;
and Higgs, S. (2005). Memory and its role in appetite regulation.
Physiology and Behavior, 85(1), 67--72. 6.

Berthoud, H.R. (2008). Vagal and hormonal gut--brain communication: From
satiation to satisfaction. Neurogastroenterology and Motility, 20,
64--72.

7.  

Desai, A.J., Dong, M., Harikumar, K.G., and Miller, L.J. (2016).
Cholecystokinin-induced satiety, a key gut servomechanism that is
affected by the membrane microenvironment of this receptor.
International Journal of Obesity Supplements, 6(1), S22--S27.

8.  

Martin, A.A., Davidson, T.L., and McCrory, M.A.Â (2018). Deficits in
episodic memory are related to uncontrolled eating in a sample of
healthy adults. Appetite, 124, 33--42.

9.  

Higgs, S. (2002). Memory for recent eating and its influence on
subsequent food intake. Appetite, 39(2), 159--66. Higgs has also found
that the effect of memory depends on someone's overall level of
inhibition. See Higgs, S., Williamson, A.C., and Attwood, A.S. (2008).
Recall of recent lunch and its effect on subsequent snack intake.
Physiology and Behavior, 94(3), 454--62.

10. Brunstrom, J.M., Burn, J.F., Sell, N.R., Collingwood, J.M., Rogers,
    P.J., Wilkinson, L.L., . . . and Ferriday, D. (2012). Episodic
    memory and appetite regulation in humans. PLoS One, 7(12), e50707.
11. Brown, S.D., Duncan, J., Crabtree, D., Powell, D., Hudson, M., and
    Allan, J.L. (2020). We are what we (think we) eat: The effect of
    expected satiety on subsequent calorie consumption. Appetite,
    104717.
12. Higgs, S., and Woodward, M. (2009). Television watching during lunch
    increases afternoon snack intake of young women. Appetite, 52(1),
    39--43; Higgs, S. (2015). Manipulations of attention during eating
    and their effects on later snack intake. Appetite, 92, 287--94. See

the following for a review of these findings: Higgs, S., and Spetter,
M.S. (2018). Cognitive control of eating: The role of memory in appetite
and weight gain. Current Obesity Reports, 7(1), 50--9. 13. Brunstrom,
J.M., Brown, S., Hinton, E.C., Rogers, P.J., and Fay, S.H. (2011).
'Expected satiety' changes hunger and fullness in the intermeal
interval. Appetite, 56(2), 310--15. 14. Vadiveloo, M., Morwitz, V., and
Chandon, P. (2013). The interplay of health claims and taste importance
on food consumption and selfreported satiety. Appetite, 71, 349--56. 15.
Finkelstein, S.R., and Fishbach, A. (2010). When healthy food makes you
hungry. Journal of Consumer Research, 37(3), 357--67. 16.

Abizaid, A., and Horvath, T.L. (2012). Ghrelin and the central
regulation of feeding and energy balance. Indian Journal of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, 16 (Suppl 3), S617.

17. Crum, A.J., Corbin, W.R., Brownell, K.D., and Salovey, P. (2011).
    Mind over milkshakes: Mindsets, not just nutrients, determine
    ghrelin response. Health Psychology, 30(4), 424. See the following
    for a peer commentary on the results and their potential
    implications for weight management: Tomiyama, A.J., and Mann, T.
    (2011). Commentary on Crum, Corbin, Brownell, and Salovey (2011).
    Health Psychology, 30(4), 430--1.
18. I spoke to Alia Crum for the following article: Robson, D. (2018).
    Mind over matter. New Scientist, 239(3192), 28--32.
19. Veldhuizen, M.G., Nachtigal, D.J., Flammer, L.J., de Araujo, I.E.,
    and Small, D.M. (2013). Verbal descriptors influence hypothalamic
    response to low-calorie drinks. Molecular Metabolism, 2(3), 270--80.
20. Cassady, B.A., Considine, R.V., and Mattes, R.D. (2012). Beverage
    consumption, appetite, and energy intake: What did you expect?
    American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 95(3), 587--93.
21. Yeomans, M.R., Re, R., Wickham, M., Lundholm, H., and Chambers, L.
    (2016). Beyond expectations: The physiological basis of sensory

enhancement of satiety. International Journal of Obesity, 40(11), 1693--
8; Zhu, Y., Hsu, W.H., and Hollis, J.H. (2013). The impact of food
viscosity on eating rate, subjective appetite, glycemic response and
gastric emptying rate. PLoS One, 8(6), e67482. 22. Hallberg, L.,
BjÃ¶rn-Rasmussen, E., Rossander, L., and Suwanik, R. (1977). Iron
absorption from Southeast Asian diets. II. Role of various factors that
might explain low absorption. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition,
30(4), 539--48. 23.

BjÃ¶rn-Rasmussen, E., Hallberg, L., Magnusson, B., Rossander, L.,
Svanberg, B., and Arvidsson, B. (1976). Measurement of iron absorption
from composite meals. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 29(7),
772--8; Hallberg, L., BjÃ¶rn-Rasmussen, E., Rossander, L., and Suwanik,
R. (1977). Iron absorption from Southeast Asian diets. II. Role of
various factors that might explain low absorption. American Journal of
Clinical Nutrition, 30(4), 539--48. For a more recent analysis of these
results, see: Satter, E. (2007). Eating competence: Definition and
evidence for the Satter Eating Competence model. Journal of Nutrition
Education and Behavior, 39(5), S142--S153.

24. 

Todes, D.P. (2014). Ivan Pavlov in 22 surprising facts.
https://blog.oup.com/2014/11/ivan-pavlov-surprising-facts.

25. Jonas, W.B., Crawford, C., Colloca, L., Kaptchuk, T.J., Moseley, B.,
    Miller, F.G., . . . and Meissner, K. (2015). To what extent are
    surgery and invasive procedures effective beyond a placebo response?
    A systematic review with meta-analysis of randomised,
    sham-controlled trials. BMJ Open, 5(12), e009655.
26. 

https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/obesity-andoverweight.

27. 

Carels, R.A., Harper, J., and Konrad, K. (2006). Qualitative perceptions
and caloric estimations of healthy and unhealthy foods by behavioral
weight-loss participants. Appetite, 46(2), 199--206.

28. Suher, J., Raghunathan, R., and Hoyer, W.D. (2016). Eating healthy
or feeling empty? How the 'healthy = less filling' intuition influences
satiety. Journal of the Association for Consumer Research, 1(1), 26--40.
29. Briers, B., Huh, Y.E., Chan, E., and Mukhopadhyay, A. (2020). The
unhealthy = tasty belief is associated with BMI through reduced
consumption of vegetables: a cross-national and mediational analysis.
Appetite, 150, 104639. See also: Cooremans, K., Geuens, M., and
Pandelaere, M. (2017). Cross-national investigation of the drivers of
obesity: Re-assessment of past findings and avenues for the future.
Appetite, 114, 360--7. 30.

Raghunathan, R., Naylor, R.W., and Hoyer, W.D. (2006). The unhealthy =
tasty intuition and its effects on taste inferences, enjoyment, and
choice of food products. Journal of Marketing, 70(4), 170--84.

31. Turnwald, B.P., Jurafsky, D., Conner, A., and Crum, A.J. (2017).
    Reading between the menu lines: Are restaurants' descriptions of
    'healthy' foods unappealing? Health Psychology, 36(11), 1034.
32. 

Turnwald, B.P., Boles, D.Z., and Crum, A.J. (2017). Association between
indulgent descriptions and vegetable consumption: Twisted carrots and
dynamite beets. JAMA Internal Medicine, 177(8), 1216--18; Turnwald,
B.P., Bertoldo, J.D., Perry, M.A., Policastro, P., Timmons, M., Bosso,
C., . . . and Gardner, C.D. (2019). Increasing vegetable intake by
emphasizing tasty and enjoyable attributes: A randomized controlled
multisite intervention for taste-focused labeling. Psychological
Science, 30(11), 1603--15.

33. Fay, S.H., Hinton, E.C., Rogers, P.J., and Brunstrom, J.M. (2011).
    Product labelling can confer sustained increases in expected and
    actual satiety. Appetite, 57(2), 557.
34. 

Cheon, B.K., and Hong, Y.Y. (2017). Mere experience of low subjective
socioeconomic status stimulates appetite and food intake. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, 114(1), 72--7.

35. Sim, A.Y., Lim, E.X., Leow, M.K., and Cheon, B.K. (2018). Low
subjective socioeconomic status stimulates orexigenic hormone ghrelin: A
randomised trial. Psychoneuroendocrinology, 89, 103--12. 36. Brunstrom,
J.M., Brown, S., Hinton, E.C., Rogers, P.J., and Fay, S.H. (2011).
'Expected satiety' changes hunger and fullness in the intermeal
interval. Appetite, 56(2), 310--15. 37.

https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/the-hidden-dangersof-protein-powders.

38. Mandel, N., and Brannon, D. (2017). Sugar, perceived healthfulness,
    and satiety: When does a sugary preload lead people to eat more?
    Appetite, 114, 338--49.
39. Yeomans, M.R. (2015). Cued satiety: How consumer expectations modify
    responses to ingested nutrients. Nutrition Bulletin, 40(2), 100--3.
40. 

Kuijer, R.G., and Boyce, J.A. (2014). Chocolate cake. Guilt or
celebration? Associations with healthy eating attitudes, perceived
behavioural control, intentions and weight loss. Appetite, 74, 48--54.

41. Cornil, Y., and Chandon, P. (2016). Pleasure as a substitute for
    size: How multisensory imagery can make people happier with smaller
    food portions. Journal of Marketing Research, 53(5), 847--64. The
    following paper found a similar effect with food writing -- the
    richer the description of a cake, the less people wanted to eat, and
    the more satisfied they felt after eating it: Policastro, P.,
    Harris, C., and Chapman, G. (2019). Tasting with your eyes: Sensory
    description substitutes for portion size. Appetite, 139, 42--9.
42. Morewedge, C.K., Huh, Y.E., and Vosgerau, J. (2010). Thought for
    food: Imagined consumption reduces actual consumption. Science,
    330(6010), 1530--3.
43. There is even evidence that the anticipation of food can alter the
    ghrelin suppression, after eating: Ott, V., Friedrich, M., Zemlin,
    J., Lehnert, H., Schultes, B., Born, J., and Hallschmid, M. (2012).
    Meal

anticipation potentiates postprandial ghrelin suppression in humans.
Psychoneuroendocrinology, 37(7), 1096--1100. 44. Bosworth, M.L.,
Ferriday, D., Lai, S.H.S., Godinot, N., Martin, N., Martin, A.A., . . .
and Brunstrom, J.M. (2016). Eating slowly increases satiety and promotes
memory of a larger portion size during the intermeal interval. Appetite,
100(101), 225. 45.

Raghunathan, R., Naylor, R.W., and Hoyer, W.D. (2006). The unhealthy =
tasty intuition and its effects on taste inferences, enjoyment and
choice of food products. Journal of Marketing, 70(4), 170--84.

46. Briers, B., Huh, Y.E., Chan, E., and Mukhopadhyay, A. (2020). The
    unhealthy = tasty belief is associated with BMI through reduced
    consumption of vegetables: A cross-national and mediational
    analysis. Appetite, 150, 104639.
47. Werle, C.O., Trendel, O., and Ardito, G. (2013). Unhealthy food is
    not tastier for everybody: The 'healthy = tasty' French intuition.
    Food Quality and Preference, 28(1), 116--21.
48. Rozin, P., Kabnick, K., Pete, E., Fischler, C., and Shields, C.
    (2003). The ecology of eating: Smaller portion sizes in France than
    in the United States help explain the French paradox. Psychological
    Science, 14(5), 450--4.
49. 

World Health Organization. (2014). Global Status Report on
Noncommunicable Diseases 2014.

50. Rozin, P., Fischler, C., Imada, S., Sarubin, A., and
    Wrzesniewski, A. (1999). Attitudes to food and the role of food in
    life in the USA, Japan, Flemish Belgium and France: Possible
    implications for the diet-- health debate. Appetite, 33(2), 163--80.

CHAPTER 7: De-stressing stress 1.

Increase of heart-disease. British Medical Journal 1(586) (1872), 317.

2.

Theodore Seward starts 'Don't Worry' clubs. The Gazette (York, PA), 17
January 1898, 3; Don't Worry circles, New York Times, 19 December 1897,
7.

3.  

Seward, T. (1898). The Don't Worry Movement: A Wave of Spiritual
Emancipation (self-published).

4.  

James, W. (1902). The Varieties of Religious Experience, 94. New York:
Longman.

5.  

James, W. (1963). Pragmatism, and Other Essays, 237. New York:
Washington Square Press.

6.  

Wallis, C., Mehrtens, R., and Thompson, D. (1983). Stress: Can we cope?
Time, 121(23), 48--54.

7.  

https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/stressed-out.

8.  

https://www.health.harvard.edu/staying-healthy/understanding-thestress-response.
See also: Burrows, V.L. (2015). The medicalization of stress: Hans Selye
and the transformation of the postwar medical marketplace. Unpublished
PhD thesis, City University of New York.
https://academicworks.cuny.edu/gc_etds/877.

9.  

The preceding paragraphs are indebted to: Jackson, M. (2014). Stress,
Shock, and Adaptation in the Twentieth Century, esp.Â ch.Â 1. Rochester,
NY: University of Rochester Press; Burrows, V.L. (2015). The
medicalization of stress: Hans Selye and the transformation of the
postwar medical marketplace. Unpublished PhD thesis, City University of
New York. See the following for a modern description of the
physiological and mental changes caused by threat: Mendes, W.B., and
Park, J. (2014). Neurobiological concomitants of motivational states.
Advances in Motivation Science 1, 233--70.

10. Jamieson, J.P., Peters, B.J., Greenwood, E.J., and Altose, A.J.
    (2016). Reappraising stress arousal improves performance and reduces
    evaluation anxiety in classroom exam situations. Social
    Psychological and Personality Science, 7(6), 579--87.

11.

Jamieson, J.P., Mendes, W.B., Blackstock, E., and Schmader, T. (2010).
Turning the knots in your stomach into bows: Reappraising arousal
improves performance on the GRE. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 46(1), 208--12.

12. Jamieson, J.P., Nock, M.K., and Mendes, W.B. (2012). Mind over
    matter: Reappraising arousal improves cardiovascular and cognitive
    responses to stress. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
    141(3),
13. Further interpretation (and information on recovery): Jamieson,
    J.P., Mendes, W.B., and Nock, M.K. (2013). Improving acute stress
    responses: The power of reappraisal. Current Directions in
    Psychological Science, 22(1), 51--6. See also: Mendes, W.B., and
    Park, J. (2014). Neurobiological concomitants of motivational
    states. Advances in Motivation Science, 1, 233--70; Trotman, G.P.,
    Williams, S.E., Quinton, M.L., and van Zanten, J.J.V. (2018).
    Challenge and threat states: Examining cardiovascular, cognitive and
    affective responses to two distinct laboratory stress tasks.
    International Journal of Psychophysiology, 126, 42--51.
14. See the following for a thorough analysis of stress appraisals, the
    cardiovascular responses and the link to performance: Behnke, M.,
    and Kaczmarek, L.D. (2018). Successful performance and
    cardiovascular markers of challenge and threat: A meta-analysis.
    International Journal of Psychophysiology, 130, 73--7
15. Crum, A.J., Salovey, P., and Achor, S. (2013). Rethinking stress:
    The role of mindsets in determining the stress response. Journal of
    Personality and Social Psychology, 104(4), 716.
16. Crum, A.J., Akinola, M., Martin, A., and Fath, S. (2017). The role
    of stress mindset in shaping cognitive, emotional, and physiological
    responses to challenging and threatening stress. Anxiety, Stress,
    and Coping, 30(4), 379--95; John-Henderson, N.A., Rheinschmidt,
    M.L., and Mendoza-Denton, R. (2015). Cytokine responses and math

performance: The role of stereotype threat and anxiety reappraisals.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 56, 203--6. 16. See the
following for a general description of the differences between 'threat'
and 'challenge' states: Blascovich, J., and Mendes, W.B. (2010). Social
psychophysiology and embodiment. In S.T. Fiske, D.T. Gilbert, and G.
Lindzey (eds), The Handbook of Social Psychology, 5th ed., 194--227. New
York: Wiley. 17. Crum, A.J., Akinola, M., Martin, A., and Fath, S.
(2017). The role of stress mindset in shaping cognitive, emotional, and
physiological responses to challenging and threatening stress. Anxiety,
Stress, and Coping, 30(4), 379--95. 18. Akinola, M., Fridman, I., Mor,
S., Morris, M.W., and Crum, A.J. (2016). Adaptive appraisals of anxiety
moderate the association between cortisol reactivity and performance in
salary negotiations. PLOS One, 11(12), e0167977. 19. Smith, E.N., Young,
M.D., and Crum, A.J. (2020). Stress, mindsets, and success in Navy SEALs
special warfare training. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 2962. 20.
Beltzer, M.L., Nock, M.K., Peters, B.J., and Jamieson, J.P. (2014).
Rethinking butterflies: The affective, physiological, and performance
effects of reappraising arousal during social evaluation. Emotion,
14(4), 761. 21. Strack, J., Lopes, P.N., and Esteves, F. (2015). Will
you thrive under pressure or burn out? Linking anxiety motivation and
emotional exhaustion. Cognition and Emotion, 29(4), 578--91. For further
examples, see: Kim, J., Shin, Y., Tsukayama, E., and Park, D. (2020).
Stress mindset predicts job turnover among preschool teachers. Journal
of School Psychology, 78, 13--22; Keech, J.J., Cole, K.L., Hagger, M.S.,
and Hamilton, K. (2020). The association between stress mindset and
physical and psychological wellbeing: Testing a stress beliefs model in
police officers. Psychology and Health, 35(11), 1306--25; Casper, A.,

Sonnentag, S., and Tremmel, S. (2017). Mindset matters: The role of
employees' stress mindset for day-specific reactions to workload
anticipation. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology,
26(6), 798--810. 22.

Keller, A., Litzelman, K., Wisk, L.E., Maddox, T., Cheng, E.R.,
Creswell, P.D., and Witt, W.P. (2012). Does the perception that stress
affects health matter? The association with health and mortality. Health
Psychology, 31(5), 677. See the following for a near-exact replication
of this result: Nabi, H., KivimÃ¤ki, M., Batty, G.D., Shipley, M.J.,
Britton, A., Brunner, E.J., . . . and Singh-Manoux, A. (2013). Increased
risk of coronary heart disease among individuals reporting adverse
impact of stress on their health: The Whitehall II prospective cohort
study. European Heart Journal, 34(34), 2697--705.

23. 

Szabo, A., and Kocsis, Ã. (2017). Psychological effects of
deepbreathing: The impact of expectancy-priming. Psychology, Health and
Medicine, 22(5), 564--9; Cregg, D.R., and Cheavens, J.S. (2020).
Gratitude interventions: Effective self-help? A meta-analysis of the
impact on symptoms of depression and anxiety. Journal of Happiness
Studies, 1--33.

24. Brady, S.T., Hard, B.M., and Gross, J.J. (2018). Reappraising test
    anxiety increases academic performance of first-year college
    students. Journal of Educational Psychology, 110(3), 395.
25. The advice in this section is based on the following paper: Keech,
    J.J., Hagger, M.S., and Hamilton, K. (2019). Changing stress
    mindsets with a novel imagery intervention: A randomized controlled
    trial. Emotion. 21(1), 123--136. See also the following resources:
    http://socialstresslab.wixsite.com/urochester/research;
    https://mbl.stanford.edu/interventions/rethink-stress.
26. 

Jentsch, V.L., and Wolf, O.T. (2020). The impact of emotion regulation
on cardiovascular, neuroendocrine and psychological stress responses.
Biological Psychology, 107893.

27. King, B.J. (2008). Pressure is Privilege, 102--3. New York:
LifeTime. 28. I interviewed Mauss for the following article: Robson, D.
(2018). Why the quickest route to happiness may be to do nothing. BBC
Future, 18 December.
https://www.bbc.com/future/article/20181218-whats-thequickest-way-to-happiness-do-nothing.
29. Mauss, I.B., Tamir, M., Anderson, C.L., and Savino, N.S. (2011). Can
seeking happiness make people unhappy? Paradoxical effects of valuing
happiness. Emotion, 11(4), 807. For a review of further research, see:
Gruber, J., Mauss, I.B., and Tamir, M. (2011). A dark side of happiness?
How, when, and why happiness is not always good. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 6(3), 222--33. 30. McGuirk, L., Kuppens, P.,
Kingston, R., and Bastian, B. (2018). Does a culture of happiness
increase rumination over failure? Emotion, 18(5), 755. 31.

Ford, B.Q., Lam, P., John, O.P., and Mauss, I.B. (2018). The
psychological health benefits of accepting negative emotions and
thoughts: Laboratory, diary, and longitudinal evidence. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 115(6), 1075. See also: Shallcross,
A.J., Troy, A.S., Boland, M., and Mauss, I.B. (2010). Let it be:
Accepting negative emotional experiences predicts decreased negative
affect and depressive symptoms. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 48,
921--9.

32. Luong, G., Wrzus, C., Wagner, G.G., and Riediger, M. (2016). When
    bad moods may not be so bad: Valuing negative affect is associated
    with weakened affect--health links. Emotion, 16(3), 387--401.
33. Tamir, M., and Bigman, Y.E. (2018). Expectations influence how
    emotions shape behavior. Emotion, 18(1), 15. See also: Tamir, M.,
    and Ford, B.Q. (2012). When feeling bad is expected to be good:
    Emotion regulation and outcome expectancies in social conflicts.
    Emotion, 12(4), 807.

34. Ford, B.Q., and Tamir, M. (2012). When getting angry is smart:
Emotional preferences and emotional intelligence. Emotion, 12(4), 685;
Axt, J., and Oishi, S. (2016). When unfair treatment helps performance.
Motivation and Emotion, 40(2), 243--57. 35.

Thakral, M., Von Korff, M., McCurry, S.M., Morin, C.M., and Vitiello,
M.V. (2020). Changes in dysfunctional beliefs about sleep after
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: A systematic literature
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 49, 101230. See also:
Courtauld, H., Notebaert, L., Milkins, B., Kyle, S.D., and Clarke, P.J.
(2017). Individuals with clinically significant insomnia symptoms are
characterised by a negative sleep-related expectancy bias: Results from
a cognitive-experimental assessment. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 95,
71--8.

36. 

Lichstein, K.L. (2017). Insomnia identity. Behaviour Research and
Therapy, 97, 230--41. See also: Woosley, J.A., Lichstein, K.L., Taylor,
D.J., Riedel, B.W., and Bush, A.J. (2016). Insomnia complaint versus
sleep diary parameters: Predictions of suicidal ideation. Suicide and
LifeThreatening Behavior, 46(1), 88--95.

37. Draganich, C., and Erdal, K. (2014). Placebo sleep affects cognitive
    functioning. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
    and Cognition, 40(3), 857; Gavriloff, D., Sheaves, B., Juss, A.,
    Espie, C.A., Miller, C.B., and Kyle, S.D. (2018). Sham sleep
    feedback delivered via actigraphy biases daytime symptom reports in
    people with insomnia: Implications for insomnia disorder and
    wearable devices. Journal of Sleep Research, 27(6), e12726. See
    also: Rahman, S.A., Rood, D., Trent, N., Solet, J., Langer, E.J.,
    and Lockley, S.W. (2020). Manipulating sleep duration perception
    changes cognitive performance -- an exploratory analysis. Journal of
    Psychosomatic Research, 132,
38. 
39. 

Personal communication with Kenneth Lichstein, University of Alabama, 26
April 2018.

39. https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/68/wr/mm6849a5.htm. 40. Espie,
C.A., Broomfield, N.M., MacMahon, K.M., Macphee, L.M., and Taylor, L.M.
(2006). The attention--intention--effort pathway in the development of
psychophysiologic insomnia: A theoretical review. Sleep Medicine
Reviews, 10(4), 215--45. 41.

Thakral, M., Von Korff, M., McCurry, S.M., Morin, C.M., and Vitiello,
M.V. (2020). Changes in dysfunctional beliefs about sleep after
cognitive behavioral therapy for insomnia: A systematic literature
review and meta-analysis. Sleep Medicine Reviews, 49, 101230. See also:
Eidelman, P., Talbot, L., Ivers, H., BÃ©langer, L., Morin, C.M., and
Harvey, A.G. (2016). Change in dysfunctional beliefs about sleep in
behavior therapy, cognitive therapy, and cognitive-behavioral therapy
for insomnia. Behavior Therapy, 47(1), 102--15.

42. Selye, H. (1979). The Stress of My Life: A Scientist's Memoirs, 117.
    New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. For more information about Selye's
    invention of the term 'eustress', see: Szabo, S., Tache, Y., and
    Somogyi, A. (2012). The legacy of Hans Selye and the origins of
    stress research: A retrospective 75 years after his landmark brief
    'letter' to the editor of Nature. Stress, 15(5), 472--8.

CHAPTER 8: Limitless willpower 1.

Lewis, M. (2012). Obama's way. Vanity Fair, 11 September.
https://www.vanityfair.com/news/2012/10/michael-lewis-profilebarack-obama.

2.  

Elkins, K. (2017). Billionaires Mark Zuckerberg and John Paul DeJoria
use a simple wardrobe trick to boost productivity. CNBC, 5 January.
https://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/05/mark-zuckerberg-and-john-pauldejorias-simple-wardrobe-trick.html.

3.  

De Vita, E. (2015). Creative thinking: Why a morning routine helps
conserve your brainpower. Financial Times, 22 February.

https://www.ft.com/content/3d07fcea-b37b-11e4-9449-00144feab7de. 4.

Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., and Tice, D.M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1252.

5.  

Ibid.

6.  

Inzlicht, M., Berkman, E., and Elkins-Brown, N. (2016). The neuroscience
of 'ego depletion'. Social Neuroscience: Biological Approaches to Social
Psychology, 101--23.

7.  

Baumeister, R.F., Bratslavsky, E., Muraven, M., and Tice, D.M. (1998).
Ego depletion: Is the active self a limited resource? Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 74(5), 1252.

8.  

Schmeichel, B.J., Vohs, K.D., and Baumeister, R.F. (2003). Intellectual
performance and ego depletion: Role of the self in logical reasoning and
other information processing. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 85(1), 33; Schmeichel, B.J. (2007). Attention control,
memory updating, and emotion regulation temporarily reduce the capacity
for executive control. Journal of Experimental Psychology: General,
136(2), 241.

9.  

Vohs, K.D., Baumeister, R.F., Schmeichel, B.J., Twenge, J.M., Nelson,
N.M., and Tice, D.M. (2014). Making choices impairs subsequent
selfcontrol: A limited-resource account of decision making,
selfregulation, and active initiative. Motivation Science, 1(S), 19--42.

10. Vohs, K.D., and Faber, R.J. (2007). Spent resources: Self-regulatory
    resource availability affects impulse buying. Journal of Consumer
    Research, 33(4), 537--47.
11. 

Baumeister, R.F. (2012). Self-control: The moral muscle. The
Psychologist, 25(2), 112--15.
https://thepsychologist.bps.org.uk/volume25/edition-2/self-control-%E2%80%93-moral-muscle.

12. Hofmann, W., Vohs, K.D., and Baumeister, R.F. (2012). What people
    desire, feel conflicted about, and try to resist in everyday life.

Psychological Science, 23(6), 582--8. 13. Baumeister, R.F., and Vohs,
K.D. (2016). Strength model of selfregulation as limited resource:
Assessment, controversies, update. Advances in Experimental Social
Psychology 54, 67--127. 14.

Parker, I. (2014). Inheritance. New Yorker, 2
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/06/02/inheritance.

June.

15. Sheppes, G., Catran, E., and Meiran, N. (2009). Reappraisal (but not
    distraction) is going to make you sweat: Physiological evidence for
    selfcontrol effort. International Journal of Psychophysiology,
    71(2), 91--6; Wagstaff, C.R. (2014). Emotion regulation and sport
    performance. Journal of Sport and Exercise Psychology, 36(4),
    401--12.
16. 

See the following for a description of these PET scans, and Baumeister's
own research in this area: Baumeister, R.F., and Vohs, K.D. (2016).
Strength model of self-regulation as limited resource: Assessment,
controversies, update. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 54,
67--127.

17. Gailliot, M.T., Baumeister, R.F., DeWall, C.N., Maner, J.K., Plant,
    E.A., Tice, D.M., . . . and Schmeichel, B.J. (2007). Self-control
    relies on glucose as a limited energy source: Willpower is more than
    a metaphor. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92(2),
    325.
18. Baumeister, R.F., and Vohs, K.D. (2016). Strength model of
    selfregulation as limited resource: Assessment, controversies,
    update. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology 54, 67--127.
19. 

For recent large-scale studies confirming the existence of ego
depletion, see: Dang, J., Liu, Y., Liu, X., and Mao, L. (2017). The ego
could be depleted, providing initial exertion is depleting: A
preregistered experiment of the ego depletion effect. Social Psychology,
48(4), 242--5; Garrison, K.E., Finley, A.J., and Schmeichel, B.J.
(2019). Ego depletion reduces attention control: Evidence from two
high-powered preregistered experiments. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 45(5), 728--39; Dang, J., Barker, P., Baumert, A.,

Bentvelzen, M., Berkman, E., Buchholz, N., . . . and Zinkernagel, A.
(2021). A multilab replication of the ego depletion effect. Social
Psychological and Personality Science, 12(1), 14--24. 20. Martijn, C.,
TenbÃ¼lt, P., Merckelbach, H., Dreezens, E., and de Vries, N.K. (2002).
Getting a grip on ourselves: Challenging expectancies about loss of
energy after self-control. Social Cognition, 20(6), 441--60. See also:
Clarkson, J.J., Hirt, E.R., Jia, L., and Alexander, M.B. (2010). When
perception is more than reality: The effects of perceived versus actual
resource depletion on self-regulatory behavior. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 98(1), 29. The following has a review of similar
studies: Klinger, J.A., Scholer, A.A., Hui, C.M., and Molden, D.C.
(2018). Effortful experiences of self-control foster lay theories that
self-control is limited. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 78,
1--13. 21. Job, V., Dweck, C.S., and Walton, G.M. (2010). Ego depletion:
Is it all in your head? Implicit theories about willpower affect
self-regulation. Psychological Science, 21(11), 1686--93. See also:
Miller, E.M., Walton, G.M., Dweck, C.S., Job, V., Trzesniewski, K.H.,
and McClure, S.M. (2012). Theories of willpower affect sustained
learning. PLoS One, 7(6), e38680; Chow, J.T., Hui, C.M., and Lau, S.
(2015). A depleted mind feels inefficacious: Ego-depletion reduces
self-efficacy to exert further self-control. European Journal of Social
Psychology, 45(6), 754-- 68. 22. Bernecker, K., and Job, V. (2015).
Beliefs about willpower moderate the effect of previous day demands on
next day's expectations and effective goal striving. Frontiers in
Psychology, 6, 1496. 23. See the longitudinal study in: Job, V., Dweck,
C.S., and Walton, G.M. (2010). Ego depletion: Is it all in your head?
Implicit theories about will-power affect self-regulation. Psychological
Science, 21(11), 1686--93. See also: Job, V., Walton, G.M., Bernecker,
K., and Dweck, C.S. (2015). Implicit theories about willpower predict
self-regulation and

grades in everyday life. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
108(4), 637; Bernecker, K., Herrmann, M., BrandstÃ¤tter, V., and Job, V.
(2017). Implicit theories about willpower predict subjective wellbeing.
Journal of Personality, 85(2), 136--50. 24. Bernecker, K., and Job, V.
(2015). Beliefs about willpower are related to therapy adherence and
psychological adjustment in patients with type 2 diabetes. Basic and
Applied Social Psychology, 37(3), 188--95. For a review of these
findings, see also: Job, V., Sieber, V., Rothermund, K., and Nikitin, J.
(2018). Age differences in implicit theories about willpower: Why older
people endorse a nonlimited theory. Psychology and Aging, 33(6), 940.
25. A full description of these experiments, along with hypotheses about
the cultural origins of these mindsets and the effects on education, can
be found in: Savani, K., and Job, V. (2017). Reverse ego-depletion: Acts
of self-control can improve subsequent performance in Indian cultural
contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113(4), 589. 26.

Scientific evidence supports the idea that trataka can improve
concentration, potentially through the expectation effects that Job and
Savani have described. See: Raghavendra, B.R., and Singh, P. (2016).
Immediate effect of yogic visual concentration on cognitive performance.
Journal of Traditional and Complementary Medicine, 6(1), 34--6.

27. Descriptions of the conservation theory of ego depletion, and the
    evidence, can be found in Baumeister, R.F., and Vohs, K.D. (2016).
    Strength model of self-regulation as limited resource: Assessment,
    controversies, update. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology,
    54, 67--127.
28. Job, V., Walton, G.M., Bernecker, K., and Dweck, C.S. (2013).
    Beliefs about willpower determine the impact of glucose on
    self-control. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    110(37), 14837--42.

29. Madzharov, A., Ye, N., Morrin, M., and Block, L. (2018). The impact
of coffee-like scent on expectations and performance. Journal of
Environmental Psychology, 57, 83--6; Denson, T.F., Jacobson, M., Von
Hippel, W., Kemp, R.I., and Mak, T. (2012). Caffeine expectancies but
not caffeine reduce depletion-induced aggression. Psychology of
Addictive Behaviors, 26(1), 140; Cropsey, K.L., Schiavon, S., Hendricks,
P.S., Froelich, M., Lentowicz, I., and Fargason, R. (2017).
Mixedamphetamine salts expectancies among college students: Is stimulant
induced cognitive enhancement a placebo effect? Drug and Alcohol
Dependence, 178, 302--9. 30. Leach, S. (2019). How the hell has Danielle
Steel managed to write 179 books? Glamour, 9 May.
https://www.glamour.com/story/daniellesteel-books-interview; Jordan, T.
(2018). Danielle Steel: 'I know an idea is right for me when it just
clicks'. New York Times, 2 February.
https://www.nytimes.com/2018/02/02/books/review/danielle-steel-fallfrom-grace-best-seller.html.
31. Burkeman, O. (2019). Danielle Steel works 20 hours a day, but is
that to be envied? Guardian, 31 May.
https://www.theguardian.com/money/oliver-burkemancolumn/2019/may/31/danielle-steel-work-20-hour-day.
32. Konze, A.K., Rivkin, W., and Schmidt, K.H. (2019). Can faith move
mountains? How implicit theories about willpower moderate the adverse
effect of daily emotional dissonance on ego-depletion at work and its
spill-over to the home-domain. European Journal of Work and
Organizational Psychology, 28(2), 37--149. See also the following paper,
for an example of the ways that ego depletion can destroy our free time:
Reinecke, L., Hartmann, T., and Eden, A. (2014). The guilty couch
potato: The role of ego depletion in reducing recovery through media
use. Journal of Communication, 64(4), 569--89. 33.

Bernecker, K., and Job, V. (2020). Too exhausted to go to bed: Implicit
theories about willpower and stress predict bedtime

procrastination. British Journal of Psychology, 111(1), 126--47. 34. See
experiment 4 in Savani, K., and Job, V. (2017). Reverse egodepletion:
Acts of self-control can improve subsequent performance in Indian
cultural contexts. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113(4),
589. 35. Sieber, V., FlÃ¼ckiger, L., Mata, J., Bernecker, K., and Job, V.
(2019). Autonomous goal striving promotes a nonlimited theory about
willpower. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 45(8),
1295--1307. 36. Klinger, J.A., Scholer, A.A., Hui, C.M., and Molden,
D.C. (2018). Effortful experiences of self-control foster lay theories
that self-control is limited. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
78, 1--13. 37. Haimovitz, K., Dweck, C.S., and Walton, G.M. (2020).
Preschoolers find ways to resist temptation after learning that
willpower can be energizing. Developmental Science, 23(3), e12905. 38.
On Williams's ritual: Serena Williams sings Flashdance theme to keep her
calm on court. Sky News, 12 July 2015.
https://www.skysports.com/tennis/news/32498/9910795/serenawilliams-sings-flashdance-theme-to-keep-her-calm-on-court.
On Dr Seuss and Beethoven: Weinstein, E. (2018). Ten superstitions of
writers and artists. Paris Review, 13 April.
https://www.theparisreview.org/blog/2018/04/13/ten-superstitions-ofwriters-and-artists.
On Williams, Farrell and BeyoncÃ©: Brooks, A.W., Schroeder, J., Risen,
J.L., Gino, F., Galinsky, A.D., Norton, M.I., and Schweitzer, M.E.
(2016). Don't stop believing: Rituals improve performance by decreasing
anxiety. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 137,
71--85. See also: Hobson, N.M., Schroeder, J., Risen, J.L., Xygalatas,
D., and Inzlicht, M. (2018). The psychology of rituals: An integrative
review and process-based framework. Personality and Social Psychology
Review, 22(3), 260--84. 39. Lonsdale, C., and Tam, J.T. (2008). On the
temporal and behavioural consistency of pre-performance routines: An
intra-individual analysis

of elite basketball players' free throw shooting accuracy. Journal of
Sports Sciences, 26(3), 259--66. 40. Damisch, L., Stoberock, B., and
Mussweiler, T. (2010). Keep your fingers crossed! How superstition
improves performance. Psychological Science, 21(7), 1014--20. 41.
Friese, M., Schweizer, L., Arnoux, A., Sutter, F., and WÃ¤nke, M. (2014).
Personal prayer counteracts self-control depletion. Consciousness and
Cognition, 29, 90--5. 42. Rounding, K., Lee, A., Jacobson, J.A., and Ji,
L.J. (2012). Religion replenishes self-control. Psychological science,
23(6), 635--42. 43. Brooks, A.W., Schroeder, J., Risen, J.L., Gino, F.,
Galinsky, A.D., Norton, M.I., and Schweitzer, M.E. (2016). Don't stop
believing: Rituals improve performance by decreasing anxiety.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 137, 71--85. 44.
Tian, A.D., Schroeder, J., HÃ¤ubl, G., Risen, J.L., Norton, M.I., and
Gino, F. (2018). Enacting rituals to improve self-control. Journal of
Personality and Social Psychology, 114(6), 851.

CHAPTER 9: Untapped genius 1.

In the scientific literature, the school is known as Oak School, but an
article in Discover magazine revealed the true location: Ellison, K.
(2015). Being honest about the Pygmalion effect. Discover, 29 October.
https://www.discovermagazine.com/mind/being-honest-about-thepygmalion-effect.

2.  

Rosenthal, R., and Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the Classroom:
Teacher Expectation and Pupils' Intellectual Development, 85--93. New
York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

3.  

Rosenthal, R., and Jacobson, L. (1966). Teachers' expectancies:
Determinants of pupils' IQ gains. Psychological Reports, 19(1), 115--18.

4.

See, for instance: Rudebeck, S.R., Bor, D., Ormond, A., O'Reilly, J.X.,
and Lee, A.C. (2012). A potential spatial working memory training task
to improve both episodic memory and fluid intelligence. PLoS One, 7(11),
e50431.

5.  

Boot, W.R., Simons, D.J., Stothart, C., and Stutts, C. (2013). The
pervasive problem with placebos in psychology: Why active control groups
are not sufficient to rule out placebo effects. Perspectives on
Psychological Science, 8(4), 445--54.

6.  

Foroughi, C.K., Monfort, S.S., Paczynski, M., McKnight, P.E., and
Greenwood, P.M. (2016). Placebo effects in cognitive training.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(27), 7470--4.

7.  

See also: Jaeggi, S.M., Buschkuehl, M., Shah, P., and Jonides, J.
(2014). The role of individual differences in cognitive training and
transfer. Memory and Cognition, 42(3), 464--80; Miller, E.M., Walton,
G.M., Dweck, C.S., Job, V., Trzesniewski, K.H., and McClure, S.M.
(2012). Theories of will-power affect sustained learning. PLoS One,
7(6), e38680.

8.  

Turi, Z., BjÃ¸rkedal, E., Gunkel, L., Antal, A., Paulus, W., and Mittner,
M. (2018). Evidence for cognitive placebo and nocebo effects in healthy
individuals. Scientific Reports, 8(1), 1--14; Fassi, L., and Kadosh,
R.C. (2020). Is it all in our head? When subjective beliefs about
receiving an intervention are better predictors of experimental results
than the intervention itself. bioRxiv.
https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.12.06.411850v1.abstrac t.

9.  

How drinking vodka makes you more creative. The Week, 16 February 2012.
https://theweek.com/articles/478116/how-drinking-vodkamakes-more-creative.

10. Lipnicki, D.M., and Byrne, D.G. (2005). Thinking on your back:
    Solving anagrams faster when supine than when standing. Cognitive
    Brain Research, 24(3), 719--22.

11.

Lapp, W.M., Collins, R.L., and Izzo, C.V. (1994). On the enhancement of
creativity by alcohol: Pharmacology or expectation? American Journal of
Psychology, 173--206.

12. Rozenkrantz, L., Mayo, A.E., Ilan, T., Hart, Y., Noy, L., and
    Alon, U. (2017). Placebo can enhance creativity. PLoS One, 12(9),
    e0182466. See also: Weinberger, A.B., Iyer, H., and Green, A.E.
    (2016). Conscious augmentation of creative state enhances 'real'
    creativity in open-ended analogical reasoning. PLoS One, e0150773.
13. 

Weger, U.W., and Loughnan, S. (2013). Rapid communication: Mobilizing
unused resources: Using the placebo concept to enhance cognitive
performance. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 66(1), 23--8.

14. 

Autin, F., and Croizet, J.C. (2012). Improving working memory efficiency
by reframing metacognitive interpretation of task difficulty. Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 141(4), 610. See also: Oyserman, D.,
Elmore, K., Novin, S., Fisher, O., and Smith, G.C. (2018). Guiding
people to interpret their experienced difficulty as importance
highlights their academic possibilities and improves their academic
performance. Frontiers in Psychology, 9, 781.

15. Rosenthal addresses some of the common criticisms in the following
    paper: Rosenthal, R. (1987). Pygmalion effects: Existence,
    magnitude, and social importance. Educational Researcher, 16(9),
    37--40. See also: De Boer, H., Bosker, R.J., and van der Werf, M.P.
    (2010). Sustainability of teacher expectation bias effects on
    long-term student performance. Journal of Educational Psychology,
    102(1), 168. For a modern review see: Timmermans, A.C., Rubie-Davies
    C.M., and Rjosk, C. (2018) Pygmalion's 50th anniversary: The state
    of the art in teacher expectation research. Educational Research and
    Evaluation, 24(3--5), 91--8.
16. Szumski, G., and Karwowski, M. (2019). Exploring the Pygmalion
    effect: The role of teacher expectations, academic self-concept, and

class context in students' math achievement. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 59, 101787. See the following for a more critical review,
which nevertheless finds that self-fulfilling prophecies are meaningful
(and particularly high in the military): Jussim, L. (2017). PrÃ©cis of
social perception and social reality: Why accuracy dominates bias and
self-fulfilling prophecy. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 40. 17.
Sorhagen, N.S. (2013). Early teacher expectations disproportionately
affect poor children's high school performance. Journal of Educational
Psychology, 105(2), 465. 18. Eden, D., and Shani, A.B. (1982). Pygmalion
goes to boot camp: Expectancy, leadership, and trainee performance.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 67(2), 194. 19. The effect size of the
IDF study, and the average effect size across industries, can be found
in the following paper: McNatt, D.B. (2000). Ancient Pygmalion joins
contemporary management: A meta-analysis of the result. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 85(2), 314. For a further discussion of Pygmalion
effects in the workplace, see: Whiteley, P., Sy, T., and Johnson, S.K.
(2012). Leaders' conceptions of followers: Implications for naturally
occurring Pygmalion effects. Leadership Quarterly, 23(5), 822--34; and
Avolio, B.J., Reichard, R.J., Hannah, S.T., Walumbwa, F.O., and Chan, A.
(2009). A meta-analytic review of leadership impact research:
Experimental and quasi-experimental studies. Leadership Quarterly,
20(5), 764--84. 20. Brophy, J.E., and Good, T.L. (1970). Teachers'
communication of differential expectations for children's classroom
performance: Some behavioral data. Journal of Educational Psychology,
61(5), 365. 21. Rubie-Davies, C.M. (2007). Classroom interactions:
Exploring the practices of high- and low-expectation teachers. British
Journal of Educational Psychology, 77(2), 289--306. For a comprehensive
review, see: Wang, S., Rubie-Davies, C.M., and Meissel, K. (2018). A

systematic review of the teacher expectation literature over the past 30
years. Educational Research and Evaluation, 24(3--5), 124--79. 22.
Rosenthal, R., and Jacobson, L.F. (1968). Teacher expectations for the
disadvantaged. Scientific American 218(4), 19--23. 23. As the following
review explains, recent research shows that teacher expectations are
stable over time: Timmermans, A.C., Rubie-Davies C.M., and Rjosk, C.
(2018) Pygmalion's 50th anniversary: The state of the art in teacher
expectation research. Educational Research and Evaluation, 24(3--5),
91--8. 24. Angelou, M. (2020). I know why the caged bird sings, 83.
London: Folio Society. 25.

The teachers who changed Oprah's life. (1989).
https://www.oprah.com/oprahshow/the-teachers-who-changed-oprahslife/all.

26. Coughlan, S. (2016). Stephen Hawking remembers best teacher. BBC
    News, 8 March. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35754759.
27. 

Talamas, S.N., Mavor, K.I., and Perrett, D.I. (2016). Blinded by beauty:
Attractiveness bias and accurate perceptions of academic performance.
PLoS One, 11(2), e0148284. The authors make a direct connection to the
expectation effect: 'Perceptions of conscientiousness, intelligence and
academic performance may play a vital role in the classroom environment
and in the success of a child's education.'

28. See, for example: Todorov, A., Mandisodza, A.N., Goren, A., and
    Hall, C.C. (2005). Inferences of competence from faces predict
    election outcomes. Science, 308(5728), 1623--6; Moore, F.R.,
    Filippou, D., and Perrett, D.I. (2011). Intelligence and
    attractiveness in the face: Beyond the attractiveness halo effect.
    Journal of Evolutionary Psychology, 9(3), 205--17.
29. See JÃ¦ger, M.M. (2011). 'A thing of beauty is a joy forever'?
    Returns to physical attractiveness over the life course. Social
    Forces, 89(3), 983--

1003; Frevert, T.K., and Walker, L.S. (2014). Physical attractiveness
and social status. Sociology Compass, 8(3), 313--23. 30.

Clifford, M.M., and Walster, E. (1973). The effect of physical
attractiveness on teacher expectations. Sociology of Education, 248--58;
Bauldry, S., Shanahan, M.J., Russo, R., Roberts, B.W., and Damian, R.
(2016). Attractiveness compensates for low status background in the
prediction of educational attainment. PLoS One, 11(6), e0155313.

31. Frieze, I.H., Olson, J.E., and Russell, J. (1991). Attractiveness
    and income for men and women in management 1. Journal of Applied
    Social Psychology, 21(13), 1039--57. For a more in-depth discussion,
    see: Toledano, E. (2013). May the best (looking) man win: The
    unconscious role of attractiveness in employment decisions. Cornell
    HR Review. http://digitalcommons.ilr.cornell.edu/chrr/48.
32. Mayew, W.J., Parsons, C.A., and Venkatachalam, M. (2013). Voice
    pitch and the labor market success of male chief executive officers.
    Evolution and Human Behavior, 34(4), 243--8. Additional information,
    such as Skinner's earnings, comes from supplementary material
    attached to the paper, and an interview I conducted with William
    Mayew for the following video: Does the way you speak reveal how
    much you earn? BBC Worklife.
    https://www.bbc.com/worklife/article/20180605-does-the-way-youspeak-give-away-how-much-you-earn.
33. Wang, S., Rubie-Davies, C.M., and Meissel, K. (2018). A systematic
    review of the teacher expectation literature over the past 30 years.
    Educational Research and Evaluation, 24(3--5), 124--79; Sorhagen,
    N.S. (2013). Early teacher expectations disproportionately affect
    poor children's high school performance. Journal of Educational
    Psychology, 105(2), 465.
34. 

Jamil, F.M., Larsen, R.A., and Hamre, B.K. (2018). Exploring
longitudinal changes in teacher expectancy effects on children's

mathematics achievement. Journal for Research in Mathematics Education,
49(1), 57--90. 35. Agirdag, O. (2018). The impact of school SES
composition on science achievement and achievement growth: Mediating
role of teachers' teach-ability culture. Educational Research and
Evaluation, 24(3--5), 264--76. 36. There has been a debate over the
importance of stereotype threat, with some failed attempts to replicate
the phenomenon. Proponents, however, argue that there have been
methodological issues with some of those replications and that the
evidence for the existence of stereotype threat in many high-stakes
situations is robust. Bolstering this argument, a recent meta-analysis
confirmed that measures to reduce stereotype threat significantly boost
performance among the people who would be at risk. For further
information, see: Nussbaum, D. (2018). The replicability issue and
stereo-type threat research. Medium, 1 February.
https://medium.com/@davenuss79/thereplicability-issue-and-stereotype-threat-research-a988d6f8b080;
and Liu, S., Liu, P., Wang, M., and Zhang, B. (2020). Effectiveness of
stereotype threat interventions: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
Applied Psychology. doi: 10.1037/apl0000770. 37. Quoted in: Ellison, K.
(2015). Being honest about the Pygmalion effect. Discover, 29 October.
https://www.discovermagazine.com/mind/being-honest-about-thepygmalion-effect.
38. Rubie-Davies, C.M., Peterson, E.R., Sibley, C.G., and Rosenthal, R.
(2015). A teacher expectation intervention: Modelling the practices of
high expectation teachers. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 40,
72--85. The data was re-analysed in the following paper, which gives the
28 per cent improvement quoted in this paragraph: Rubie-Davies, C.M.,
and Rosenthal, R. (2016). Intervening in teachers' expectations: A
random effects meta-analytic approach to examining the

effectiveness of an intervention. Learning and Individual Differences,
50, 83--92. 39. De Boer, H., Timmermans, A.C., and van der Werf, M.P.
(2018). The effects of teacher expectation interventions on teachers'
expectations and student achievement: Narrative review and
meta-analysis. Educational Research and Evaluation, 24(3--5), 180--200.
40. John-Henderson, N.A., Rheinschmidt, M.L., and Mendoza-Denton, R.
(2015). Cytokine responses and math performance: The role of stereotype
threat and anxiety reappraisals. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology, 56, 203--6. Similar benefits can be seen for poorer students
who might find examinations particularly stressful: Rozek, C.S.,
Ramirez, G., Fine, R.D., and Beilock, S.L. (2019). Reducing
socioeconomic disparities in the STEM pipeline through student emotion
regulation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 116(5),
1553--8. See also: Liu, S., Liu, P., Wang, M., and Zhang, B. (2020).
Effectiveness of stereotype threat interventions: A metaanalytic review.
Journal of Applied Psychology. doi: 10.1037/apl0000770. 41. The paper
explicitly links it to research into expectation and stress. Brady,
S.T., Reeves, S.L., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Cook, J.E.,
Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . and Cohen, G.L. (2016). The psychology of the
affirmed learner: Spontaneous self-affirmation in the face of stress.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 108(3), 353. 42.

Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., and Schimel, J. (2006). Combating
stereotype threat: The effect of self-affirmation on women's
intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
42(2), 236--43.

43. Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L.E., Finkelstein, N.D., Pollock, S.J.,
    Cohen, G.L., and Ito, T.A. (2010). Reducing the gender achievement
    gap in college science: A classroom study of values affirmation.
    Science, 330(6008), 1234--7. Data on the gender gap taken from graph
    and

supplementary material available
www.sciencemag.org/cgi/content/full/330/6008/1234/DC1. 44.

here:

Hadden, I.R., Easterbrook, M.J., Nieuwenhuis, M., Fox, K.J., and Dolan,
P. (2020). Self-affirmation reduces the socioeconomic attainment gap in
schools in England. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 90(2),
517--36.

45. Cohen, G.L., Garcia, J., Apfel, N., and Master, A. (2006). Reducing
    the racial achievement gap: A social-psychological intervention.
    Science, 313(5791), 1307--10; Cohen, G.L., Garcia, J.,
    Purdie-Vaughns, V., Apfel, N., and Brzustoski, P. (2009). Recursive
    processes in selfaffirmation: Intervening to close the minority
    achievement gap. Science, 324(5925), 400--3.
46. Goyer, J.P., Garcia, J., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Binning, K.R., Cook,
    J.E., Reeves, S.L., . . . and Cohen, G.L. (2017). Self-affirmation
    facilitates minority middle schoolers' progress along college
    trajectories. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
    114(29), 7594--9. See also: Sherman, D.K., Hartson, K.A., Binning,
    K.R., Purdie-Vaughns, V., Garcia, J., Taborsky-Barba, S., . . . and
    Cohen, G.L. (2013). Deflecting the trajectory and changing the
    narrative: How selfaffirmation affects academic performance and
    motivation under identity threat. Journal of Personality and Social
    Psychology, 104(4), 591. See the following for a summary of these
    studies on racial differences: Walton, G.M., and Wilson, T.D.
    (2018). Wise interventions: Psychological remedies for social and
    personal problems. Psychological Review, 125(5), 617.
47. For a meta-analysis of self-affirmation interventions, see: Liu, S.,
    Liu, P., Wang, M., and Zhang, B. (2020). Effectiveness of stereotype
    threat interventions: A meta-analytic review. Journal of Applied
    Psychology. For a description of the virtuous cycle, see: Cohen,
    G.L., and Sherman, D.K. (2014). The psychology of change:
    Self-affirmation and social

psychological intervention. Annual Review of Psychology, 65(1), 333--
71. 48. Liu, S., Liu, P., Wang, M., and Zhang, B. (2020). Effectiveness
of stereotype threat interventions: A meta-analytic review. Journal of
Applied Psychology. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1037/apl0000770.

CHAPTER 10: The super-agers 1.

Gagliardi, S. (2018). Sanremo 2018. Huffpost, 6 February.
https://www.huffingtonpost.it/entry/sanremo-2018-paddy-jones-ballaa-83-anni-e-lascia-tutti-a-bocca-aperta-questanno-sanremo-lo-vincelei-la-vecchia-che-balla-e-come-la-scimmia-digabbani_it_5cc1ef3ee4b0aa856c9ea862.

2.  

Yaqoob, J. (2014). Simon Cowell: Controversial salsa-dancing granny can
win Britain's Got Talent -- and she reminds me of mum. Mirror, 12 April.
https://www.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/britains-talent-paddy-nicosimon-3406432.

3.  

This may sound controversial, but it's the conclusion of many papers,
such as: Stewart, T.L., Chipperfield, J.G., Perry, R.P., and Weiner, B.
(2012). Attributing illness to 'old age': Consequences of a
self-directed stereotype for health and mortality. Psychology and
Health, 27(8), 881-- 97.

4.  

The experiment is described in depth in: Langer, E.J. (2009). Counter
Clockwise: Mindful Health and the Power of Possibility. New York:
Ballantine. Further details, including a discussion of future work, come
from: Pagnini, F., Cavalera, C., Volpato, E., Comazzi, B., Riboni, F.V.,
Valota, C., . . . and Langer, E. (2019). Ageing as a mindset: A study
protocol to rejuvenate older adults with a counterclockwise
psychological intervention. BMJ Open, 9(7), e030411.

5.

Levy, B.R., Slade, M.D., Kunkel, S.R., and Kasl, S.V. (2002). Longevity
increased by positive self-perceptions of aging. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83(2), 261.

6.  

Levy, B.R., Zonderman, A.B., Slade, M.D., and Ferrucci, L. (2009). Age
stereotypes held earlier in life predict cardiovascular events in later
life. Psychological Science, 20(3), 296--8.

7.  

Levy, B.R., Ferrucci, L., Zonderman, A.B., Slade, M.D., Troncoso, J.,
and Resnick, S.M. (2016). A culture--brain link: Negative age
stereotypes predict Alzheimer's disease biomarkers. Psychology and
Aging, 31(1), 82.

8.  

Levy, B.R., Slade, M.D., Pietrzak, R.H., and Ferrucci, L. (2018).
Positive age beliefs protect against dementia even among elders with
high-risk gene. PLoS One, 13(2), e0191004.

9.  

Levy, B.R., Slade, M.D., Kunkel, S.R., and Kasl, S.V. (2002). Longevity
increased by positive self-perceptions of aging. Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 83(2), 261.

10. 

Kuper, H., and Marmot, M. (2003). Intimations of mortality: Perceived
age of leaving middle age as a predictor of future health outcomes
within the Whitehall II study. Age and Ageing, 32(2), 178-- 84. There is
also experimental evidence for a short-term effect here: people are
affected by ageist TV ads, but only if they identify as being of the
same generation as the actors: Westerhof, G.J., Harink, K., Van Selm,
M., Strick, M., and Van Baaren, R. (2010). Filling a missing link: The
influence of portrayals of older characters in television commercials on
the memory performance of older adults. Ageing and Society, 30(5), 897.

11. Stephan, Y., Sutin, A.R., and Terracciano, A. (2016). Feeling older
    and risk of hospitalization: Evidence from three longitudinal
    cohorts. Health Psychology, 35(6), 634; Stephan, Y., Caudroit, J.,
    Jaconelli, A., and Terracciano, A. (2014). Subjective age and
    cognitive functioning:

A 10-year prospective study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry,
22(11), 1180--7. 12. Mock, S.E., and Eibach, R.P. (2011). Aging
attitudes moderate the effect of subjective age on psychological
well-being: Evidence from a 10-year longitudinal study. Psychology and
Aging, 26(4), 979. See the following papers for an elaboration of the
link between subjective ageing, psychological wellbeing and physical
health: Stephan, Y., Chalabaev, A., Kotter-GrÃ¼hn, D., and Jaconelli, A.
(2013). 'Feeling younger, being stronger': An experimental study of
subjective age and physical functioning among older adults. Journals of
Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences, 68(1),
1--7; Westerhof, G.J., Miche, M., Brothers, A.F., Barrett, A.E., Diehl,
M., Montepare, J.M., . . . and Wurm, S. (2014). The influence of
subjective aging on health and longevity: A meta-analysis of
longitudinal data. Psychology and Aging, 29(4), 793; Wurm, S., and
Westerhof, G.J. (2015). Longitudinal research on subjective aging,
health, and longevity: Current evidence and new directions for research.
Annual Review of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 35(1), 145--65;
Terracciano, A., Stephan, Y., Aschwanden, D., Lee, J.H., Sesker, A.A.,
Strickhouser, J.E., . . . and Sutin, A.R. (2021). Changes in subjective
age during COVID-19. Gerontologist, 61(1), 13--22. 13. Davies, C.
(2010). Martin Amis in new row over 'euthanasia booths'. Guardian, 24
January.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/jan/24/martin-amiseuthanasia-booths-alzheimers;
https://www.manchester.ac.uk/discover/news/writing-is-not-for-theold-says-amis-yes-it-is-says-james.
14.

'Martin Amis always had a fear and loathing of ageing'. Evening
Standard, 13 April 2012.
https://www.standard.co.uk/news/martin-amisalways-had-a-fear-and-loathing-of-ageing-6791926.html

15. Rosenbaum, R. (2012). Martin Amis contemplates evil. Smithsonian.
https://www.smithsonianmag.com/arts-culture/martin-amiscontemplates-evil-17857756.
16. Higgins, C. (2009). Martin Amis on ageing. Guardian, 24 January.
https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/sep/29/martin-amis-thepregnant-widow.
17. Levy, B. (2009). Stereotype embodiment: A psychosocial approach to
aging. Current Directions in Psychological Science, 18(6), 332--6. 18.
Touron, D.R. (2015). Memory avoidance by older adults: When 'old dogs'
won't perform their 'new tricks'. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 24(3), 170--6. 19. Robertson, D.A., King-Kallimanis, B.L., and
Kenny, R.A. (2016). Negative perceptions of aging predict longitudinal
decline in cognitive function. Psychology and Aging, 31(1), 71; Jordano,
M.L., and Touron, D.R. (2017). Stereotype threat as a trigger of
mind-wandering in older adults. Psychology and Aging, 32(3), 307. 20.
Westerhof, G.J., Harink, K., Van Selm, M., Strick, M., and Van Baaren,
R. (2010). Filling a missing link: The influence of portrayals of older
characters in television commercials on the memory performance of older
adults. Ageing and Society, 30(5), 897. 21. Robertson, D.A., Savva,
G.M., King-Kallimanis, B.L., and Kenny, R.A. (2015). Negative
perceptions of aging and decline in walking speed: A self-fulfilling
prophecy. PLoS One, 10(4), e0123260. 22. Levy, B.R., and Slade,
M.D.Â (2019). Positive views of aging reduce risk of developing
later-life obesity. Preventive Medicine Reports, 13, 196--98. 23.
Stewart, T.L., Chipperfield, J.G., Perry, R.P., and Weiner, B. (2012).
Attributing illness to 'old age': Consequences of a self-directed
stereotype for health and mortality. Psychology and Health, 27(8), 881--
97. 24. See, for instance, Levy, B.R., Ryall, A.L., Pilver, C.E.,
Sheridan, P.L., Wei, J.Y., and Hausdorff, J.M. (2008). Influence of
African American

elders' age stereotypes on their cardiovascular response to stress.
Anxiety, Stress, and Coping, 21(1), 85--93; Weiss, D. (2018). On the
inevitability of aging: Essentialist beliefs moderate the impact of
negative age stereotypes on older adults' memory performance and
physiological reactivity. Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 73(6),
925-- 33. 25. Levy, B.R., Moffat, S., Resnick, S.M., Slade, M.D., and
Ferrucci, L. (2016). Buffer against cumulative stress: Positive age
self-stereotypes predict lower cortisol across 30 years. GeroPsych: The
Journal of Gerontopsychology and Geriatric Psychiatry, 29(3), 141--6.
26. Levy, B.R., and Bavishi, A. (2018). Survival advantage mechanism:
Inflammation as a mediator of positive self-perceptions of aging on
longevity. Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 73(3), 409--12. 27.
https://www.newscientist.com/term/telomeres. See also: Levitin, D.
(2020) The Changing Mind, 325. London: Penguin Life. 28. Pietrzak, R.H.,
Zhu, Y., Slade, M.D., Qi, Q., Krystal, J.H., Southwick, S.M., and Levy,
B.R. (2016). Negative age stereotypes' association with accelerated
cellular aging: Evidence from two cohorts of older adults. Journal of
the American Geriatrics Society, 64(11), e228. 29. Tamman, A.J.,
Montalvo-Ortiz, J.L., Southwick, S.M., Krystal, J.H., Levy, B.R., and
Pietrzak, R.H. (2019). Accelerated DNA methylation aging in US military
veterans: Results from the National Health and Resilience in Veterans
Study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 27(5), 528--32. 30.

Levy, B.R., Slade, M.D., Pietrzak, R.H., and Ferrucci, L. (2018).
Positive age beliefs protect against dementia even among elders with
high-risk gene. PLoS One, 13(2), e0191004.

31. Callaway, E. (2010). Telomerase reverses ageing process. Nature, 28
    November.
    https://www.nature.com/news/2010/101128/full/news.2010.635.html;
    Ledford, H. (2020). Reversal of biological clock restores vision in
    old

mice. Nature, 2 December.
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586020-03403-0?
fbclid=IwAR2hB3VaqEpokcSQwoGkG5W6Jjfprw90pKfTz_A4zav2V7 xkrNYlMnTs06w.
32.

Knechtle, B., Jastrzebski, Z., Rosemann, T., and Nikolaidis, P.T.
(2019). Pacing during and physiological response after a 12-hour
ultramarathon in a 95-year-old male runner. Frontiers in Physiology, 9,
1875.

33. Cited in this review paper: Lepers, R., and Stapley, P.J. (2016).
    Master athletes are extending the limits of human endurance.
    Frontiers in Physiology, 7, 613.
34. Ibid.
35. Harvey-Wood, H. (2000). Obituary: Penelope Fitzgerald. Guardian, 3
    May.
    https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/may/03/guardianobituaries.bo
    oks.
36. 

Wood, J. (2014). Late bloom. New Yorker, 17 November.
https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/11/24/late-bloom.

37. 

Sotheby's (2020). Getting to know Picasso ceramics.
https://www.sothebys.com/en/articles/picasso-ceramics-7-things-youneed-to-know.

38. 

'In pictures: Matisse's cut-outs'. BBC News, 7 October 2013.
https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/in-pictures-24402817.

39. Weiss, D. (2018). On the inevitability of aging: Essentialist
    beliefs moderate the impact of negative age stereotypes on older
    adults' memory performance and physiological reactivity. Journals of
    Gerontology: Series B, 73(6), 925--33.
40. 

Shimizu, A. (2019). For Hiromu Inada, an 86-year-old ironman triathlete,
age really is just a number. Japan Times, 5 April:
https://www.japantimes.co.jp/life/2019/04/05/lifestyle/hiromu-inada86-year-old-ironman-triathlete-age-really-just-number/.

41.

Office for National Statistics (2018). Living longer: how our population
is changing and why it matters.
https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/ageing/articles/livinglongerhowo
urpopulationischangingandwhyitmatters/2018-08-13#how-do-changesin-the-uk-population-compare-with-the-rest-of-the-world.

42. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/dementia.
43. 

Kaeberlein, M. (2018). How healthy is the healthspan concept?
GeroScience, 40(4), 361--4.

44. 

Levy, B.R., Pilver, C., Chung, P.H., and Slade, M.D.Â (2014). Subliminal
strengthening: Improving older individuals' physical function over time
with an implicit-age-stereotype intervention. Psychological Science,
25(12), 2127--35.

45. See the 'Discussion' section of the following paper: Robertson,
    D.A., King-Kallimanis, B.L., and Kenny, R.A. (2016). Negative
    perceptions of aging predict longitudinal decline in cognitive
    function. Psychology and Aging, 31(1), 71--81.
46. Sarkisian, C.A., Prohaska, T.R., Davis, C., and Weiner, B. (2007).
    Pilot test of an attribution retraining intervention to raise
    walking levels in sedentary older adults. Journal of the American
    Geriatrics Society, 55(11), 1842--6.
47. See, for instance: Stephan, Y., Chalabaev, A., Kotter-GrÃ¼hn, D., and
    Jaconelli, A. (2013). 'Feeling younger, being stronger': An
    experimental study of subjective age and physical functioning among
    older adults. Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological
    Sciences and Social Sciences, 68(1), 1--7; Brothers, A., and
    Diehl, M. (2017). Feasibility and efficacy of the AgingPLUS Program:
    Changing views on aging to increase physical activity. Journal of
    Aging and Physical Activity, 25(3), 402--11; Nehrkorn-Bailey, A.,
    Forsyth, G., Braun, B., Burke, K., and Diehl, M. (2020). Improving
    hand-grip strength and blood pressure in adults: Results from an
    AgingPLUS pilot study.

Innovation in Aging, 4 (Suppl 1), 587; Wolff, J.K., Warner, L.M.,
Ziegelmann, J.P., and Wurm, S. (2014). What do targeting positive views
on ageing add to a physical activity intervention in older adults?
Results from a randomised controlled trial. Psychology and Health,
29(8), 915--32; Beyer, A.K., Wolff, J.K., Freiberger, E., and Wurm, S.
(2019). Are self-perceptions of ageing modifiable? Examination of an
exercise programme with vs.Â without a self-perceptions of
ageingintervention for older adults. Psychology and Health, 34(6),
661--76. 48. I have written about this research previously: Robson, D.
(2017). The amazing fertility of the older mind. BBC Future, 28 August.
http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20170828-the-amazing-fertility-ofthe-older-mind.
49.

https://www.tuttitalia.it/sardegna/73-nuoro/statistiche/popolazioneandamento-demografico.

50. 

Kirchgaessner, S. (2016). Ethical questions raised in search for
Sardinian centenarians' secrets. Guardian, 12 August.
https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/12/ethical-questionsraised-in-search-for-sardinian-centenarians-secrets;
https://www.bluezones.com/exploration/sardinia-italy.

51. Ruby, J.G., Wright, K.M., Rand, K.A., Kermany, A., Noto, K., Curtis,
    D., . . . and Ball, C. (2018). Estimates of the heritability of
    human longevity are substantially inflated due to assortative
    mating. Genetics, 210(3), 1109--24.
52. 

My short documentary on this subject can be found at:
https://www.bbc.com/reel/playlist/elixir-of-life?vpid=p08blgc4.

53. North, M.S., and Fiske, S.T. (2015). Modern attitudes toward older
    adults in the aging world: A cross-cultural meta-analysis.
    Psychological Bulletin, 141(5), 993.
54. Levy, B.R. (2017). Age-stereotype paradox: Opportunity for social
    change. Gerontologist, 57 (Suppl 2), S118--S126.

Epilogue 1.

Anzilotti, E. (2017). This hospital bridges traditional medicine with
Hmong spirituality -- and gets results. Fast Company.
https://www.fastcompany.com/3068680/this-hospital-bridgestraditional-medicine-with-hmong-spirtuality-and-gets-results.

2.  

Quoted in Colucci-D'Amato, L., Bonavita, V., and Di Porzio, U. (2006).
The end of the central dogma of neurobiology: Stem cells and
neurogenesis in adult CNS. Neurological Sciences, 27(4), 266--70.

3.  

Schroder, H.S., Kneeland, E.T., Silverman, A.L., Beard, C., and
BjÃ¶rgvinsson, T. (2019). Beliefs about the malleability of anxiety and
general emotions and their relation to treatment outcomes in acute
psychiatric treatment. Cognitive Therapy and Research, 43(2), 312--23.

4.  

Burnette, J.L. (2010). Implicit theories of body weight: Entity beliefs
can weigh you down. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36(3),
410--22; Burnette, J.L., and Finkel, E.J. (2012). Buffering against
weight gain following dieting setbacks: An implicit theory intervention.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48(3), 721--5; Burnette,
J.L., Knouse, L.E., Vavra, D.T., O'Boyle, E., and Brooks, M.A.Â (2020).
Growth mindsets and psychological distress: A metaanalysis. Clinical
Psychology Review, 77, 101816.

5.  

See the supplemental material to: Yeager, D.S., Johnson, R., Spitzer,
B.J., Trzesniewski, K.H., Powers, J., and Dweck, C.S. (2014). The
farreaching effects of believing people can change: Implicit theories of
personality shape stress, health, and achievement during adolescence.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 106(6), 867.

6.  

Kross, E., and Ayduk, O. (2017). Self-distancing: Theory, research, and
current directions. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 55,
81--136.

7.  

Streamer, L., Seery, M.D., Kondrak, C.L., Lamarche, V.M., and Saltsman,
T.L. (2017). Not I, but she: The beneficial effects of self-

distancing on challenge/threat cardiovascular responses. Journal of
Experimental Social Psychology, 70, 235--41. 8.

Diedrich, A., Hofmann, S.G., Cuijpers, P., and Berking, M. (2016).
Self-compassion enhances the efficacy of explicit cognitive reappraisal
as an emotion regulation strategy in individuals with major depressive
disorder. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 82, 1--10. OceanofPDF.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The Expectation Effect has grown from the generosity of many people.
Thanks first to my agent, Carrie Plitt, for her enthusiasm at my initial
idea, her astute and tactful feedback through its many iterations, and
for her passion throughout its development. I'm also indebted to the
rest of the team at Felicity Bryan Associates, and to ZoÃ« Pagnamenta in
New York for finding a home for the book in the USA. I'm enormously
grateful to my two editors, Simon Thorogood at Canongate and Conor
Mintzer at Henry Holt for their wisdom and kindness -- it's been a joy
to work with you both. Thanks also to my copyeditors, Debs Warner and
Helen Carr, for saving me from numerous infelicities -- and to the
production, marketing, publicity and sales teams at Canongate and at
Holt, particularly Vicki Rutherford, Catryn Silbersack and Lucy Zhou. I
will be eternally indebted to the scientists whose work I have cited.
Thanks especially to all the researchers who took the time to talk me
through their work on mindset and expectation. In alphabetical order:
Moshe Bar, Andy Clark, Luana Colloca, Alia Crum, Grace Giles, Suzanne
Higgs, Jeremy Jamieson, Veronika Job, Johannes Laferton, Kari Leibowitz,
Becca Levy, Iris Mauss, Timothy Noakes, Keith Petrie, Christine
RubieDavies, Anil Seth and Jon Stone. Thanks also to Paddy Jones for
sharing her life story with me.

My initial conception of The Expectation Effect came from an article
commissioned by Kate Douglas at New Scientist. Thank for you for
accepting my pitch, shaping the story, and setting the ball rolling.
Richard Fisher provided early feedback on some particularly troublesome
chapters -- your comments helped me to see the wood for the trees. And
my regular catch-ups with Melissa Hogenboom offered the perfect pep talk
when I was feeling frustrated or demotivated, and made the writing
process so much less lonely. Thanks to my friends and colleagues,
including Sally Adee, Lindsay Baker, Amy Charles, Eileen and Peter
Davies, Kerry Daynes, Stephen Dowling, Natasha and Sam Fenwick, Philippa
Fogarty, Simon Frantz, Alison George, Zaria Gorvett, Richard Gray,
Christian Jarrett, Catherine de Lange, Rebecca Laurence, Fiona
Macdonald, Damiano Mirigliano, Will Park, Emma and Sam Partington, Jo
Perry, Mithu Storoni, Neil and Lauren Sullivan, Ian Tucker, Meredith
Turits, Gaia Vince, James Wallman, Richard Webb and Clare Wilson. I owe
more than I can describe to my parents, Margaret and Albert. Thanks most
of all to Robert Davies for your support in every step of this journey,
and every other part of my life. I could not have written this book
without you. OceanofPDF.com

IMAGE PERMISSIONS

p.Â 12: Cow illusion. From McCrone, J. (1991). The Ape That Spoke:
Language and the Evolution of the Human Mind. New York: William Morrow &
Company. p.Â 13: Dog, high contrast, unreadable. Courtesy of Nava Rubin.
From: Ludmer, R., Dudai, Y., & Rubin, N. (2011). Uncovering camouflage:
amygdala activation predicts long-term memory of induced perceptual
insight. Neuron, 69(5), 1002--14. p.Â 14: Duck/rabbit. From Fliegende
BlÃ¤tter, 23 October 1892. p.Â 29: Dog, standard greyscale. Courtesy of
Nava Rubin. From: Ludmer, R., Dudai, Y., & Rubin, N. (2011). Uncovering
camouflage: amygdala activation predicts long-term memory of induced
perceptual insight. Neuron, 69(5), 1002--14. p.Â 110: Change in arm
strength. Based on: Yao, W. X., Ranganathan, V. K., Allexandre, D.,
Siemionow, V., & Yue, G. H. (2013). Kinesthetic imagery training of
forceful muscle contractions increases brain signal and muscle strength.
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 7, 561. p.Â 122: Hunger after 'tasty'
and 'healthy' choc bar. Based on: Finkelstein, S. R., & Fishbach, A.
(2010). When healthy food makes you hungry. Journal of Consumer
Research, 37(3), 357--67.

p.Â 199: Self-affirmation reduces gender difference in spatial reasoning.
Based on: Martens, A., Johns, M., Greenberg, J., & Schimel, J. (2006).
Combating stereotype threat: The effect of self-affirmation on women's
intellectual performance. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
42(2), 236--43. p.Â 200: Self-affirmation reduces gender difference in
physics performance. Based on: Miyake, A., Kost-Smith, L.E.,
Finkelstein, N.D., Pollock, S.J., Cohen, G.L., & Ito, T.A. (2010).
Reducing the gender achievement gap in college science: A classroom
study of values affirmation. Science, 330(6008), 1234--7. p.Â 210:
Effects of age beliefs on dementia incidence. Based on: Levy, B.R.,
Slade, M.D., Pietrzak, R.H., & Ferrucci, L. (2018). Positive age beliefs
protect against dementia even among elders with high-risk gene. PLoS
One, 13(2), e0191004. OceanofPDF.com

INDEX

9/11 attacks ref1 Aborigines ref1, ref2, ref3 acupuncture ref1--ref2
Adams, John ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 Adams, John Quincy ref1 addiction
ref1--ref2 Adler, Shelley ref1, ref2 advertising ref1--ref2 aerobic
capacity ref1--ref2 ageing ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7,
ref8--ref9, ref10 and creativity ref1--ref2 and fitness ref1--ref2,
ref3--ref4 and Sardinia ref1--ref2 and self-distancing ref1 and
stereotypes ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 alcohol ref1 allergies ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6; see also hay fever altitude ref1--ref2

Alzheimer's disease ref1--ref2, ref3 American Psychological Association
ref1 Amis, Martin ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 amnesia ref1--ref2, ref3
amphetamines ref1 Amundsen, Roald ref1 anaemia ref1 Angelou, Maya ref1,
ref2 anger ref1--ref2 anxiety ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6,
ref7--ref8 and expectation effect ref1--ref2 and placebo effect ref1 and
reframing ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7, ref8 and sleep
ref1--ref2 and superstition ref1 appearance ref1--ref2, ref3 appetite
ref1--ref2 arachnophobia ref1, ref2 Arctic explorers ref1 arterial
stents ref1--ref2 asthma ref1, ref2, ref3 athletes see exercise; sport
Bannister, Roger ref1 Bar, Moshe ref1--ref2 Baumeister, Roy ref1--ref2,
ref3 Beecher, Henry ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 Beethoven, Ludwig van
ref1--ref2 beliefs see cultural beliefs; expectation effects

Bell, Alexander Graham ref1 Benedetti, Fabrizio ref1--ref2 Bennett, Gary
ref1, ref2 BeyoncÃ© ref1 biases ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5 blood
pressure ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6 bone pointing ref1, ref2
brain, the ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4 and age ref1 and exercise ref1--ref2,
ref3 and FNDs ref1--ref2 and gender ref1 and hypothalamus ref1,
ref2--ref3 and hysterical strength ref1--ref2 and injury ref1 and mirror
system ref1--ref2, ref3 and rewiring ref1--ref2 and stress ref1 and
training ref1--ref2 see also expectation effects; mental reserves
Branson, Richard ref1 breathing ref1 Brooks, Alison Wood ref1 Buddhism
ref1 Byrne, Rhonda: The Secret ref1 caffeine ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4
cancer ref1--ref2, ref3 Capote, Truman ref1

cardiovascular disease ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5 and age ref1 and
exercise ref1 and food ref1 and stress ref1--ref2 and surgery ref1--ref2
Carnegie, Dale ref1 Carvalho, ClÃ¡udia ref1--ref2 catastrophising
ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 catecholamines ref1 children ref1, ref2--ref3,
ref4--ref5, ref6 and teachers ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6,
ref7--ref8 cholecystokinin (CCK) ref1 class ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4,
ref5--ref6 clinical trials ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4 Clinton, Bill ref1
coeliac disease ref1 cognitive bias modification ref1--ref2 Colloca,
Luana ref1 Colombia ref1 common cold ref1, ref2 concentration ref1,
ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6, ref7--ref8 and age ref1 and education
ref1--ref2 and superstition ref1 and work ref1--ref2 conditioning
ref1--ref2, ref3 confirmation bias ref1

Corkin, Suzanne ref1 cortisol ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4 Covid-19 pandemic
ref1, ref2, ref3 creativity ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 Crichton,
Fiona ref1 Crum, Alia ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7 cultural
beliefs ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6--ref7 dab tsog ref1--ref2
dancing manias ref1, ref2 Darnall, Beth ref1 death ref1--ref2,
ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7--ref8, ref9 dementia ref1--ref2, ref3,
ref4--ref5 depression ref1--ref2 deprivation mindset ref1, ref2--ref3
diabetes ref1 dieting ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6 discipline see
self-control Don't Worry clubs ref1, ref2 dopamine ref1, ref2, ref3
doping ref1--ref2 drones ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 drug discovery ref1
Dweck, Carol ref1 education see exams; teachers ego depletion ref1--ref2
electro-sensitivity ref1 Eltroxin ref1

emotion ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 empathy ref1, ref2 environment ref1--ref2
epilepsy ref1--ref2 epinephrine ref1--ref2 exams ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4,
ref5--ref6, ref7 exercise ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6,
ref7--ref8, ref9--ref10, ref11--ref12 and age ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and
exhaustion ref1--ref2 and invisible ref1--ref2 and visualisation
ref1--ref2 exhaustion ref1--ref2, ref3; see also fatigue expectation
effects ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7--ref8, ref9--ref10,
ref11--ref12, ref13--ref14 and age ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6,
ref7--ref8 and anxiety ref1--ref2 and biases ref1--ref2 and death
ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and exercise ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6
and food ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and gender ref1--ref2 and hallucination
ref1--ref2 and innovation ref1--ref2 and intelligence ref1--ref2,
ref3--ref4 and judgement ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 and mental
reserves ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and poverty ref1--ref2 and psychology
ref1--ref2 and senses ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4

and sleep ref1--ref2 and teachers ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and vision
ref1, ref2--ref3 see also placebo effect exposure therapy ref1, ref2
facial tics ref1 Farrell, Suzanne ref1 fatigue ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4
fight-or-flight response ref1, ref2, ref3 finasteride ref1 fitness see
exercise Fitzgerald, Penelope ref1--ref2 fixed mindset ref1 flu virus
ref1 FND see functional neurological disorder food ref1, ref2--ref3,
ref4--ref5 and diet ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and France ref1--ref2 and
gluten ref1--ref2 and labelling ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5 and liquids
ref1--ref2 and memory ref1--ref2 and nocebo effect ref1 and presentation
ref1--ref2 Foroughi, Cyrus ref1--ref2 Framingham (MA) ref1--ref2 Freud,
Sigmund ref1, ref2 functional neurological disorder (FND) ref1--ref2

gender ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7--ref8 genetics ref1,
ref2--ref3, ref4 ghrelin ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 Gilbert, Elizabeth: Eat,
Pray, Love ref1 Giles, Grace ref1 GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) ref1 glucose
ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5, ref6 and mental reserves ref1, ref2, ref3,
ref4 gluten ref1--ref2 gratitude journals ref1 grief ref1--ref2 growth
mindset ref1 guilt ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4 Haimovitz, Kyla ref1
hallucinations ref1, ref2--ref3 halo effect ref1--ref2 happiness
ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 Hassel, Sverre Helge ref1 Havana syndrome
ref1--ref2 Hawking, Stephen ref1, ref2 hay fever ref1, ref2--ref3
healing response ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7, ref8--ref9
hearing ref1, ref2, ref3 heart, the see cardiovascular disease Hebben,
Nancy ref1 Helmholtz, Hermann von ref1--ref2, ref3 Hemingway, Ernest
ref1 Higgs, Suzanne ref1, ref2, ref3

Hinduism ref1 Hmong people ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6 hotel
cleaners ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 HPV vaccination ref1 Huffington,
Arianna ref1 hunger ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 hypochondria ref1
hysterical strength ref1--ref2 immunological system ref1; see also
allergies Inada, Hiromu ref1, ref2, ref3 injury ref1, ref2 innoculation
see vaccination insomnia ref1, ref2--ref3 intelligence ref1, ref2--ref3,
ref4--ref5 invisible exercise ref1--ref2 IQ ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4
Jacobson, Lenore ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6--ref7 Pygmalion in
the Classroom ref1--ref2, ref3 Jainism ref1 James, William ref1--ref2,
ref3 Jamieson, Jeremy ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7, ref8
Jefferson, Thomas ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7--ref8 Job,
Veronika ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 Jobs, Steve ref1 Jones, Paddy
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6--ref7 judgement ref1--ref2,
ref3--ref4 King, Billie Jean ref1--ref2

Kipchoge, Eliud ref1 Kirby, Jack ref1 Knechtle, Beat ref1 knowledge
ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 Kornacki, Alec ref1 Kross, Ethan ref1 Laferton,
Johannes ref1--ref2, ref3 Langer, Ellen ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5,
ref6 learning ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 Leibowitz, Kari ref1--ref2 Levy,
Becca ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5, ref6, ref7 London Gatwick Airport
drones ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 Mackenzie, John Noland ref1--ref2, ref3
marketing ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 mass psychogenic illness
ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7 Matisse, Henri ref1 Mauss, Iris
ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 Mayew, William ref1 Mazzoni, Giuliana ref1--ref2
Meador, Clifton ref1 media ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7,
ref8 memory ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7, ref8--ref9 mental
reserves ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7 METS (metabolic
equivalents) ref1--ref2 micro-illusions ref1--ref2 Milton, G. W. ref1,
ref2 mirror system ref1--ref2, ref3

Molaison, Henry ref1--ref2 monkeys ref1--ref2, ref3 Monroe, James
ref1--ref2 Montes, Jeff ref1 Morales-Quezada, Leon ref1--ref2 Morris,
Jeremy ref1 Morton, R. Hugh ref1--ref2 Mosso, Angelo ref1--ref2, ref3,
ref4 motion sickness ref1 muscles ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6,
ref7, ref8--ref9 Nabokov, Vladimir ref1 Nadal, Rafael ref1 negative
thoughts ref1--ref2 nervous system ref1, ref2 neuroplasticity ref1 New
Zealand ref1 Nin, AnaÃ¯s: Seduction of the Minotaur ref1 Noakes, Timothy
ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4 nocebo effect ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6,
ref7 and death ref1--ref2 and gluten ref1--ref2 and social contagion
ref1, ref2--ref3 Notre Dame Cathedral (Paris) ref1 Nurmi, Paavo ref1
Nurofen ref1--ref2 Obama, Barack ref1, ref2 obesity see weight

open-label placebos ref1--ref2, ref3 opioids ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4,
ref5, ref6 Ovid: Metamorphoses ref1 oxygen ref1--ref2 pain ref1,
ref2--ref3 and nocebo effect ref1--ref2, ref3 and placebo effect ref1,
ref2--ref3, ref4, ref5--ref6, ref7--ref8, ref9--ref10 and reframing
ref1, ref2 panic see anxiety paranormal ref1--ref2 Parker, Dorothy: The
Little Hours ref1 Parkinson's disease ref1, ref2, ref3 Parris, Betty
ref1 Pavlov, Ivan ref1 Personal Zen ref1--ref2, ref3 Petrie, Keith ref1,
ref2 Phelps, Michael ref1 phobias ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4 Picasso, Pablo
ref1 placebo effect ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and food ref1 and knowledge
ref1--ref2 and sleeping pills ref1 and sport ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and
statins ref1 and vaccination ref1 see also nocebo effect positron
emission tomography (PET) ref1

poverty ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 pre-menstrual syndrome
ref1--ref2 prediction machine see expectation effects prejudice ref1,
ref2--ref3 Prinstein, Mitch ref1 problem solving ref1 Psy-Heart
ref1--ref2 psychogenics see mass psychogenic illness psychosomatic
effects ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4 public speaking ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5 Pygmalion effect ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5 race ref1, ref2 RamÃ³n
y Cajal, Santiago ref1 reappraisal see reframing reframing ref1--ref2,
ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7 and anxiety ref1--ref2 and food ref1--ref2
and mental reserves ref1--ref2 and sleep ref1--ref2 and teachers
ref1--ref2 religion ref1, ref2--ref3 Rief, Winfried ref1 Riggs, Bobby
ref1 Rippon, Gina ref1, ref2 rituals ref1--ref2; see also Hmong people
Rizzolatti, Giacomo ref1, ref2 Rosenthal, Robert ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4,
ref5--ref6, ref7--ref8 Pygmalion in the Classroom ref1--ref2, ref3

Rubie-Davies, Christine ref1, ref2--ref3 Rubin, James ref1 Rubio, Marco
ref1--ref2 St Aubyn, Edward ref1 Salem witch trials ref1, ref2 Sardinian
centenarians ref1--ref2 Savani, Krishna ref1, ref2 self-affirmation
ref1--ref2, ref3 self-compassion ref1--ref2 self-control ref1--ref2,
ref3--ref4, ref5--ref6 self-distancing ref1--ref2 self-fulfilling
prophecies ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 and age ref1 and anxiety
ref1--ref2 and food ref1, ref2 Selye, Hans ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4,
ref5--ref6 senses see hearing; smell; taste; touch; vision Sestu, Dr
Raffaele ref1 Seth, Anil ref1 Seurat, Georges ref1 Seuss, Dr ref1
Seward, Thomas ref1 shamans ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 Shaw, George Bernard:
Pygmalion ref1, ref2--ref3 side effects ref1, ref2, ref3 and nocebo
effect ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7 and statins ref1--ref2,
ref3 significant events ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4

Skinner, James ref1 sleep ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4, ref5 and paralysis
ref1--ref2 smell ref1--ref2 social contagion ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4; see
also mass psychogenic illness social media ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5
Sorhagen, Nicole ref1--ref2 Spartanburg (SC) ref1 spatial awareness
ref1, ref2--ref3 sport ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6 and age
ref1--ref2 and anxiety ref1--ref2 and superstition ref1, ref2 and
visualisation ref1--ref2 see also exercise statins ref1--ref2, ref3
Steel, Danielle ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 stereotypes ref1--ref2, ref3,
ref4--ref5, ref6, ref7--ref8 and age ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4, ref5, ref6
stigma ref1, ref2, ref3 Stone, Jon ref1--ref2 Strawberries with Sugar
(Morangos com Acucar) (soap opera) ref1, ref2, ref3 stress ref1, ref2,
ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7 and age ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5 and
social contagion ref1 see also anxiety Stricker, Albert ref1--ref2, ref3
Stroop test ref1, ref2

Sudden Unexpected Nocturnal Death Syndrome ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 sugar
see glucose superstition ref1--ref2 surgery ref1, ref2, ref3--ref4,
ref5--ref6 Tamir, Maya ref1--ref2 taste ref1--ref2 teachers ref1,
ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7, ref8, ref9, ref10 and bias
ref1--ref2 and reframing ref1--ref2 technology ref1--ref2 telomeres
ref1--ref2 temptation see willpower top-down effects ref1--ref2 touch
ref1--ref2 Tour de France ref1--ref2, ref3 Trier Social Stress Test
ref1, ref2 Ullrich, Jan ref1 unconscious inference ref1 United States of
America (USA) ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and anxiety ref1--ref2 and food
ref1 and mass psychogenic illness ref1--ref2, ref3--ref4 and race ref1,
ref2 US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ref1, ref2, ref3
vaccination ref1--ref2 Virenque, Richard ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4 vision
ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5, ref6--ref7

visualisation ref1, ref2, ref3, ref4, ref5 and sport ref1--ref2, ref3
see also hallucinations VO2 max ref1 Voet, Willy ref1--ref2 voice pitch
ref1 Waller-Bridge, Phoebe ref1 weight ref1--ref2, ref3, ref4--ref5,
ref6--ref7, ref8 and dieting ref1--ref2 and poverty ref1--ref2 Weiss,
David ref1--ref2 Westerhof, Gerben ref1 Williams, Abigail ref1 Williams,
Serena ref1 willpower ref1, ref2--ref3, ref4--ref5 and education
ref1--ref2 and rituals ref1, ref2--ref3 and work ref1--ref2 wind turbine
syndrome ref1 Winfrey, Oprah ref1, ref2 Wulf, Gabriele ref1 yoga ref1,
ref2, ref3 Zahrt, Octavia ref1, ref2 Zuckerberg, Mark ref1
OceanofPDF.com

'Inspiring' Guardian

'Fascinating . . . erudite' Maria Popova

OceanofPDF.com


